Saving the Appearances
A Study in
Idolatry
by Owen Barfield
A brilliant reinterpretation of man's relation to nature and
God in the age of physical science, harbinger book ho4*
SAVING THE APPEARANCES
Saving the Appearances
A Study in Idolatry
by
OWEN BARFIELD
A Harbinger Book
Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc. New York
Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 65-23538
Printed in the United States of America
To
MY BROTHER

FOREWORD
My warm thanks are due to several of my
friends for the interest they have taken in this book; particularly to my brother Dr. R. H.
Barfield (to whom it is dedicated), Mr. T. A.
Barfield, Mr. and Mrs. Charles Davy, Sir
George Rostrevor Hamilton and Professor
C. S. Lewis, all of whom have favoured me
with thoughtful comments and practical suggestions, which I have used freely; above all to Dr. A. P. Shepherd for wise aid and counsel
with my first draft of the earlier chapters on
the table between us.

CONTENTS
introduction page II
i. the rainbow 15
ii. collective representations 19
iii. figuration and thinking 22
iv. participation 28 v. pre-history 36
vi. original participation 40
vii. appearance and hypothesis 46
viii. technology and truth 53
ix. an evolution of idols 58 x. the evolution of phenomena 65
xi. medieval environment 71
xii. some changes 79
xiii. the texture of medieval thought 84
xiv. before and after the scientific 92
revolution
xv. the graeco-roman age (mind and 96
motion)
XVI. ISRAEL 107
XVII. THE DEVELOPMENT OF MEANING Il6
XVIII. THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE 122
Contents
XIX. SYMPTOMS OF ICONOCLASM page 126
XX. FINAL PARTICIPATION 133
XXI. SAVING THE APPEARANCES 142
XXII. SPACE TIME AND WISDOM 148
XXIII. RELIGION I56
XXIV. THE INCARNATION OF THE WORD 167
XXV. THE MYSTERY OF THE KINGDOM 174
INDEX 187
INTRODUCTION
There may be times when what is most needed is, not so much a new discovery or a new idea as a different 'slant'; I mean a comparatively slight readjustment in our way oflooking at the things and ideas on which attention is already fixed.
Draw a rectangular glass box in perspective—not too
precise perspective (for the receding lines must be kept
parallel, instead of converging)—and look at it. It has a front
and a back, a top and a bottom. But slide your hand across
it in the required direction and look again: you may find
that what you thought was the inside ofthe top has become
its outside, while the outside of the front wall has changed
to the inside of the back wall, and vice versa. The visual
readjustment was slight, but the effect on the drawing has
been far from slight, for the box has not only turned inside
out but is also lying at quite a different angle.
The book which follows has been written in the belief
that it might be possible to slide a sort ofhand across a good
many of the things and ideas upon which the attention of
western humanity has been concentrated for the last two or
three hundred years, and upon which the attention of the
East is rapidly becoming fixed in the same way. The helping
'hand' which it has been sought to apply in this way is, simply, a sustained acceptance by the reader of the relation
assumed by physical science to subsist between human consciousness on the one hand and, on the other, the familiar
world of which that consciousness is aware. n
Introduction
Physical science has for a long time stressed the enormous
difference between what it investigates as the actual struc- ture of the universe, including the earth, and the phenomena, or appearances, which are presented by that structure to normal human consciousness. In tune with this, most
philosophy—at all events since Kant—has heavily emphasized the participation of man's own mind in the creation, or evocation, of these phenomena. The first three short
chapters are largely devoted to reminding the reader of that
difference and that participation.
About this conception of the relation between man and
nature, which is wholly undisputed outside academic
philosophy and largely undisputed within it, two things are noticeable; though they do not appear as yet to have been
very widely noticed. One is an omission and the other an
assumption.
In the first place, undisputed though it remains, it is (if
we except a certain school of genetic psychology, now very
much out of fashion) always left out of account in our
approach to any subject outside the sphere ofphysics—such
subjects, for example, as the history ofthe earth, the history
of language, the history of thought. In the second place, it
is invariably assumed that, whatever the truth may be about
the psychological nexus between man and nature, it is an unchanging one and is the same now as it was when men
first appeared on earth.
In this book it is suggested that the assumption arose in
the first place through clearly traceable historical causes; that the evidence is in favour ofregarding it as illusory; and
that its persistence in spite of that evidence is largely due
to the omission.
As to the omission: having established the gulf which
yawns between the atomic physical structure of nature and
the appearances of the familiar world, it is of course possible, it is certainly usual—if we are physicists, to continue
undisturbed with our investigations of the unappearing
atomic structure, and, if we are philosophers, to leave it at 12
Introduction
that, being content with the metaphysical curiosity we have
produced. It is usual; but it is not really necessary to do so. We could, if we chose, take it seriously; we could keep the
gulf steadily in sight, instead of instantly forgetting all about it again, and see what effect that has on our knowledge of other things, such as the evolution of nature and
of man himself. Nor does this seem an unreasonable undertaking, since these are both matters, and the relation between
them is a matter, to which the participation mentioned four
paragraphs back must be at least relevant.
The greater part of this book consists, in fact, of a rudimentary attempt to remedy the omission. But this involves, as already indicated, challenging the assumption;
and a good deal of attention has been devoted to that aspect
also. The result—and really the substance of the book—is a
sort of outline sketch, with one or two parts completed in
greater detail, for a history of human consciousness; particularly the consciousness of western humanity during the
last three thousand years or so. Finally, the consequences which flow from abandoning
the assumption are found to be very far-reaching; and the
last three chapters are concerned, theologically, with the
bearing of 'participation'—viewed now as an historical
process—upon the origin, the predicament, and the destiny
of man.

THE RAINBOW
Look at a rainbow. While it lasts, it is, or appears to be, a great arc of many colours occupying a position out there in
space. It touches the horizon between that chimney and that
tree; a line drawn from the sun behind you and passing
through your head would pierce the centre of the circle of
which it is part. And now, before it fades, recollect all you
have ever been told about the rainbow and its causes, and
ask yourself the question Is it really there? You know, from memory, that if there were a hillside three or four miles nearer than the present horizon, the rainbow would come to earth in front ofand not behind it; that,
ifyou walked to the place where the rainbow ends, or seems
to end, it would certainly not be 'there'. In a word, reflection
will assure you that the rainbow is the outcome of the sun, the raindrops and your own vision.
When I ask ofan intangible appearance or representation,
Is it really there? I usually mean, Is it there independently of
my vision? Would it still be there, for instance, if I shut my
eyes—ifI moved towards or away from it. Ifthis is what you
also mean by 'really there', you will be tempted to add that
the raindrops and the sun are really there, but the rainbow is not.Does it follow that, as soon as anybody sees a rainbow,
there 'is' one, or, in other words, that there is no difference
between an hallucination or a madman's dream ofa rainbow
(perhaps on a clear day) and an actual rainbow? Certainly
The Rainbow
not. You were not the only one to see that rainbow. You
had a friend with you. (I forbear asking ifyou both saw 'the same' rainbow, because this is a book about history rather
than metaphysics, and these introductory chapters are merely intended to clear away certain misconceptions.)
Moreover, through the medium of language, you are well aware that thousands of others have seen rainbows in
showery weather; but you have never heard ofany sane per- son claiming to have seen one on a sunless or a cloudless day.
Therefore, ifa man tells you he sees a rainbow on a cloudless
day, then, even if you are convinced that he means what he
says, and is not simply lying, you will confidently affirm
that the rainbow he sees is 'not there'. In short, as far as being really there or not is concerned,
the practical difference between a dream or hallucination of
a rainbow and an actual rainbow is that, although each is a representation or appearance (that is, something which I perceive to be there), the second is a shared or collective representation.
Now look at a tree. It is very different from a rainbow. If
you approach it, it will still be 'there'. Moreover, in this case, you can do more than look at it. You can hear the noise its leaves make in the wind. You can perhaps smell it. You can
certainly touch it. Your senses combine to assure you that it
is composed ofwhat is called solid matter. Accord to the tree the same treatment that you accorded to the rainbow.
Recollect all you have been told about matter and its ulti- mate structure and ask yourself if the tree is 'really there'. I am far from affirming dogmatically that the atoms, electrons, nuclei, etc., of which wood, and all matter, is said to
be composed, are particular and identifiable objects like
drops of rain. But if the 'particles' (as I will here call them
for convenience) are there, and are all that is there, then,
since the 'particles' are no more like the thing I call a tree than the raindrops are like the thing I call a rainbow, it follows, I think, that—just as a rainbow is the outcome of
the raindrops and my vision—so, a tree is the outcome of
The Rainbow
the particles and my vision and my other sense-perceptions.
Whatever the particles themselves may be thought to be,
the tree, as such, is a representation. And the difference, for
me, between a tree and a complete hallucination of a tree is the same as the difference between a rainbow and an hallucination ofa rainbow. In other words, a tree which is 'really
there' is a collective representation. The fact that a dream
tree differs in kind from a real tree, and that it is just silly to try and mix them up, is indeed rather literally a matter of
'common sense'. This background ofparticles is of course presumed in the
case of raindrops themselves, no less than in that of trees. The relation, raindrops: rainbow, is a picture or analogy, not
an instance, of the relation, particles: representation.
Or again, ifanyone likes to press the argument still further
and maintain that what is true ofthe drops must also be true
of the particles themselves, and that there is 'no such thing
as an extra-mental reality', I shall not quarrel with him, but
I shall leave him severely alone; because, as I say, this is not
a book about metaphysics, and I have no desire to demonstrate that trees or rainbows—or particles—are not 'really
there'—a proposition which perhaps has not much meaning.
This book is not being written because the author desires to put forward a theory ofperception, but because it seems to him that certain wide consequences flowing from the
hastily expanded sciences of the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries, and in particular their physics, have not been
sufficiently considered in building up the general twentiethcentury picture of the nature of the universe and of the
history of the earth and man. A better term than 'particles' would possibly be 'the unrepresented', since anything particular which amounts to
a representation will always attract further physical analysis.
Moreover, the atoms, protons and electrons of modern
physics are now perhaps more generally regarded, not as particles, but as notional models or symbols of an unknown
supersensible or subsensible base. All I seek to establish in
The Rainbow
these opening paragraphs is, that, whatever may be thought
about the 'unrepresented' background of our perceptions,
the familiar world which we see and know around us—the
blue sky with white clouds in it, the noise of a waterfall or
a motor-bus, the shapes of flowers and their scent, the
gesture and utterance of animals and the faces of our friends —the world too, which (apart from the special inquiry of
physics) experts of all kinds methodically investigate—is a system of collective representations. The time comes when
one must either accept this as the truth about the world or
reject the theories of physics as an elaborate delusion. We
cannot have it both ways.
II COLLECTIVE REPRESENTATIONS
A representation is something I perceive to be there. By
premising that the everyday world is a system of collective
representations, it may be thought that we blur the distinction between the fancied and the actual or, following the
everyday use oflanguage, between the apparently there and
the really there. But this is not so. It only seems to be so because of the very great emphasis which—especially in the
last three or four hundred years—the Western Mind has
come to lay on the ingredient of spatial depth in the total complex of its perception. I shall return to this later. As to what is meant by 'collective'—any discrepancy
between my representations and those of my fellow men
raises a presumption of unreality and calls for explanation.
If, however, the explanation is satisfactory; if, for instance,
it turns out that the discrepancy was due, not to my hallucination, but to their myopia or their dullness, it is likely to
be accepted; and then my representation may itself end by
becoming collective.
It is, however, not necessary to maintain that collectivity
is the only test for distinguishing between a representation
and a collective representation (though, to creatures for
whom insanity is round the corner, it is often likely to be
the crucial one).
I am hit violently on the head and, in the same moment,
perceive a bright light to be there. Later on I reflect that the
light was 'not really there'. Even if I had lived all my life on
Collective Representations
a desert island where there was no-one to compare notes
with, I might do as much. No doubt I should learn by experience to distinguish the first kind of light from the more
practicable light of day or the thunderbolt, and should soon
give up hitting myself on the head at sunset when I needed
light to go on working by. In both cases I perceive light,
but the various criteria of difference between them—duration, for instance, and a sharp physical pain, which the one
involves and the other does not, are not difficult to apprehend.
What is required, is not to go on stressing the resemblance
between collective representations and private representations, but to remember, when we leave the world of everyday for the discipline of any strict inquiry, that, if the
particles, or the unrepresented, are in fact all that is independently there, then the world we all accept as real is in fact a system of collective representations.
Perception takes place by means of sense-organs, though
the ingredient in it of sensation, experienced as such, varies
oreatly as between the different senses. In touch I suppose we
)me nearest to sensation without perception; in sight to srception without sensation. But the two most important
lings to remember about perception are these : first, that we
lust not confuse the percept with its cause. I do not hear
tidulating molecules of air; the name of what I hear is \und. I do not touch a moving system ofwaves or ofatoms
Id electrons with relatively vast empty spaces between
iem; the name of what I touch is matter. Second, I do not
trceive any thing with my sense-organs alone, but with a
feat part of my whole human being. Thus, I may say, osely, that I 'hear a thrush singing'. But in strict truth all that I ever merely 'hear'—all that I ever hear simply by
virtue of having ears—is sound. When I 'hear a thrush singing', I am hearing, not with my ears alone, but with all sorts of other things like mental habits, memory, imagination,
feeling and (to the extent at least that the act of attention
involves it) will. Of a man who merely heard in the first 20
Collective Representations
sense, it could meaningfully be said that 'having ears' (i.e. not being deaf) 'he heard not'.
I do not think either ofthese two maxims depends on any
particular theory of the nature of perception. They are true
for any theory ofperception I ever heard of—with the possible exception of Bishop Berkeley's. 1 They are true,
whether we accept the Aristotelian and medieval conception
of form and matter, or the Kantian doctrine of the forms of
perception, or the theory of specific sense-energy, or the
'primary imagination' of Coleridge, or the phenomenology
that underlies Existentialism, or some wholly unphilosophical system ofphysiology and psychology. On almost any
received theory of perception the familiar world—that is, the world which is apprehended, not through instruments
and inference, but simply—is for the most part dependent
upon the percipient.
1 Cf. p. 38.
Ill FIGURATION AND THINKING
In the conversion of raindrops into a rainbow, or (if you
prefer it) the production of a rainbow out of them, the eye
plays a no less indispensable part than the sunlight—or than
the drops themselves. In the same way, for the conversion
of the unrepresented into a representation, at least one sentient organism is as much a sine qua non as the unrepresented
itself; and for the conversion of the unrepresented into
representations even remotely resembling our everyday
world, at least one nervous system organized about a spinal
cord culminating in a brain, is equally indispensable. The
rainbow analogy does not imply, nor is it intended to
suggest, that the solid globe is as insubstantial as a rainbow.
The solid globe is solid. The rainbow is not. Only it is important to know what we mean by solidity. More than
that, it is necessary to remember what we meant by solidity
in one context, when we go on to use the word or think the
thing in another.
It is easy to appreciate that there is no such thing as an
unseen rainbow. It is not so easy to grasp that there is no
such thing as an unheard noise. Or rather it is easy to grasp,
but difficult to keep hold of. And this is still more the case, when we come to the sense of touch. Obvious as it may be
to reflection that a system of waves or quanta or discrete
particles is no more like solid matter than waves of air are
like sound, or raindrops like a rainbow, it is not particularly
easy to grasp, and it is almost impossible to keep in mind,
Figuration and Thinking
that there is no such thing as unfelt solidity. 1 It is much more
convenient, when we are listening for example to the geologist, to forget what we learnt about matter from the chemist
and the physicist. But it really will not do. We cannot go on
for ever having it both ways.
It may be expedient at this point to examine a little further
the collective representations and our thinking about them.
And it is clearly of little use to begin by asking what they
are; since they are everything that is obvious. They are, for
instance, the desk I am writing at, the noise of a door being
opened downstairs, a Union Jack, an altar in a Church, the
smell of coffee, a totem pole, the view from Malvern Hills,
and the bit of brain-tissue that is being dissected before a group of students in a hospital laboratory. Some of them
we can manipulate, as the lecturer is doing, and as I do when
I move the desk. Some of them we cannot. What is important here is that there are, broadly speaking, three different
things that we can do with all of them; or, alternatively,
they are related to the mind in three different ways.
First, we can simply contemplate or experience them—as when I simply look at the view, or encounter the smell. The
whole impression appears then to be given to me in the
representation itself. For I am not, or I am not very often, aware of smelling an unidentified smell and then thinking,
'That is coffee!' It appears to me, and appears instantly, that
I smell coffee—though, in fact, I can no more merely smell
'coffee' than I can merely hear 'a thrush singing'. This immediate impression or experience of a familiar world has
already been mentioned in Chapter II. It is important to be
clear about it. It is plainly the result of an activity of some
sort in me, however little I may recollect any such activity.
1 'The thermometer is below freezing point, the pipe is cracked, and no
water comes out of the tap. I know nothing about physics or chemistry; but
surely I can say that there is solid ice in the pipe!' Certainly you can; and if there was salt in the water, you can say that there is solid, white ice in the pipe. I am
only pointing out that the solidity you are talking about involves your fancied touch, just as the whiteness involves your fancied glance. Only it is harder to remember.
Figuration and Thinking
When a lady complained to Whistler that she did not see the world he painted, he is said to have replied: 'No, ma'am,
but don't you wish you could?' Both Whistler and the lady were really referring to that activity—which in Whistler's
case was intenser than the lady's. Ought it to be called a
'mental' activity? Whatever it ought to be called, it really
is the percipient's own contribution to the representation.
It is all that in the representation which is not sensation. For,
as the organs of sense are required to convert the unrepresented ('particles') into sensations for us, so something is required in us to convert sensations into 'things'. It is this something that I mean. And it will avoid confusion if I purposely choose an unfamiliar and little-used word and
call it, at the risk of infelicity, figuration.
Let me repeat it. On the assumption that the world whose
existence is independent of our sensation and perception
consists solely of 'particles', two operations are necessary
(and whether they are successive or simultaneous is of no
consequence), in order to produce the familiar world we
know. First, the sense-organs must be related to the particles
in such a way as to give rise to sensations; and secondly,
those mere sensations must be combined and constructed by
the percipient mind into the recognizable and nameable
objects we call 'things'. It is this work ofconstruction which
will here be called figuration.
Now whether or no figuration is a mental activity, that
is, a kind of thinking, it is clearly not, or it is not characteristically, a thinking about. The second thing, therefore, that
we can do with the representations is to think about them.
Here, as before, we remain unconscious ofthe intimate rela- tion which they in fact have, as representations, with our own organisms and minds. Or rather, more unconscious
than before. For now our very attitude is, to treat them as independent of ourselves; to accept their 'outness' as self- evidently given; and to speculate about or to investigate
their relations with each other. One could perhaps name this process 'theorizing' or 'theoretical thinking', since it is 24
Figuration and Thinking
exactly what is done in most places where science is pursued,
whether it be botany, medicine, metallurgy, zoology or any
other. But I do not think the term is wide enough. The kind
of thing I mean covers other studies as well—a good deal
ofhistory, for instance. Nor need it be systematic. There are very few children who do not do a little of it. Moreover,
if a common word is chosen, there is the same danger of
confusion arising from its occasional use with a less precise
intention. Therefore, at the like hazard as before, I propose
to call this particular kind of thinking alpha-thinking.
Thirdly, we can think about the nature of collective
representations as such, and therefore about their relation to our own minds. We can think about perceiving and we can
think about thinking. We can do, in fact, the kind of thinking which I am trying to do at the moment, and which you
will be doing if you think I am right and also if you think I am wrong. This is part of the province of one or two
sciences such as physiology and psychology, and of course
it is also part of the province of philosophy. It has been
called reflection or reflective thinking. But for the same
reasons as before, I shall reject the simpler and more elegant
term and call it beta-thinking.
It should be particularly noted that the distinction here
made between alpha-thinking and beta-thinking is not one between two different kinds of thinking, such as for instance
that which is sometimes made between analytical thinking
on the one hand and synthetic or imaginative thinking on
the other. It is purely a distinction of subject-matters.
The three operations—-figuration, alpha-thinking and beta- thinking—are clearly distinguishable from one another; but
that is not to say that they are divided by impassable barriers
at the points where they mutually approach. Indeed the
reverse is true. Moreover they may affect each other by
reciprocal influence. In the history of the theory of colour,
for instance, colour began by being regarded as a primary
quality of the coloured object and was later transferred to
the status of a 'secondary' quality dependent on the be25
Figuration and Thinking
holder. Here we can detect the interaction ofalpha-thinking
and beta-thinking; and again in the whole influence which
experimental science has exerted on philosophy in the last two or three hundred years. This book, on the other hand,
will be more concerned with the interaction between
figuration and alpha-thinking.
That the former of these affects, and largely determines,
the latter hardly needs saying; since the primary product of
figuration is the actual subject-matter of most alpha-thinking. That the converse may sometimes also be true, and
further, that the borderline between the one and the other
is sometimes quite impossible to determine—this is less obvious. Yet a little serious reflection (that is, a little betathinking) makes it apparent enough.
Recall for a moment the familiar jingle from Sylvie and
Bruno, with its persistent refrain of 'he thought he saw'
followed by 'he found it was'
:
He thought he saw a Banker s Clerk
Descending from the bus,
He looked again, andfound it was A hippopotamus.
etc., etc. This is of course only a very improbable instance of an
experience which, in itself, is quite common, especially
with those among our representations (and they form the
overwhelming majority) which reach us through the sense of sight alone. When we mistake one representation, that is to say one thing, for another, so that there is a transition
from an 1 thought I saw' to an 1 found it was', it is often
very difficult indeed to say whether there is first a figuration
(based, let us say, on incomplete sensation) and then another
and different figuration, producing a different representation; or whether there is one and the same representation,
veiled from us at first by some incorrect alpha-thinking,
which is subsequently discarded as inapplicable. In the particular case of a puzzled man trying to descry an object
Figuration and Thinking
spotted far off at sea, it feels more like the latter. Often it feels much more like the former. We have made the mistake
before we are aware of having done any thinking at all. Anyone who wishes to investigate this further should
attend carefully to the sort ofmistakes we are apt to make on
awaking abruptly from deep sleep in a darkened room;
especially if it happens to be a strange room. Either way we
must conclude that figuration, whether or no it is a kind of
thinking, is something which easily and imperceptibly
passes over into thinking, and into which thinking easily and
imperceptibly passes over. For in both cases there was a representation; otherwise I should not have been deceived.
And if the first representation was the result of incorrect
thinking, then thinking can do something very much like
what figuration does. Alternatively, if it was the result of
figuration alone, then the very fact that figuration can 'make a mistake' suggests that it has a good deal in common
with thinking.
IV
PARTICIPATION
In the last few decades this whole question of the figurative make-up of collective representations and the theoretical confusion between what I have called figuration and
what I have called alpha-thinking has been implicitly
raised by certain anthropologists. Putting it in a nutshell,
they have suggested, by the whole manner oftheir approach
to the workings of the 'primitive' mind, the question: Can
there be such a thing as,
* They thought they saw?'
Of course, two people can make the same momentary
mistake about the identity of an imperfectly seen object.
But, as we saw in Chapter II, the generally accepted
criterion of the difference between 1 thought I saw' and 'I found it was' is, that the former is a private, the latter a
collective representation. How, then, if the 'they' are a whole tribe or population? If the 'mistake' is not a momentary but a permanent one? If it is passed down for centuries
from generation to generation? If, in fact, it is never followed
by a 'they found it was'? The difficulty is, that then the
'mistake' is itself a collective representation. And yet for
ourselves, as we saw, it is precisely the collectivity of our
representations which is the accepted test of their reality. It
is this which convinces us that they are not mistakes or
hallucinations. Why not then also for them—the primitive
tribe? But this is to go too fast. The earlier anthropologists assumed as a matter of course
that the primitive peoples who still survive in various parts
Participation
of the earth perceive and think in the same way as we do—
but that they think incorrectly. The assumption which
underlies their whole approach to the subject is effectively
epitomized in two sentences from Tylor's Primitive Culture,
first published in 1871:
It was no spontaneous fancy but the reasonable inference that effects are due to causes, which led the rude
men ofolden days to people with such ethereal phantoms
their own houses and haunts and the vast earth and sky
beyond. Spirits are personified causes. This theory of an 'inferring' followed by a 'peopling',
which is usually called 'animism', but which Durkheim
prefers to call 'naturism', is moreover, according to LevyBruhl, especially typical of the English school of anthropology, and he attributes this, rightly or wrongly, to the
influence of Herbert Spencer, who assumed so readily that
all things evolve from simple to complex. Be that as it may,
the theory is attacked by the twentieth-century anthropologists to whom I have referred. They deny the 'inferring'
and question the 'peopling'. Levy-Bruhl himself, for instance,
insists, in the light of the evidence, that to ask how the
primitive mind would 'explain' this or that natural phenomenon is a wrongly formulated question. The explanation
is implied in the collective representations themselves.
When we find a primitive mind incapable ofgrasping what
is to us the self-evident law of contradiction, it is absurd to
imagine such a mind thinking in terms of cause and effect,
and of inference from the one to the other. Rather we are in contact with a different kind of thinking and a different
kind of perceiving altogether. Levy-Bruhl describes this 'prelogical mentality', which he says is: essentially synthetic. By this I mean that the syntheses
which compose it do not imply previous analyses of
which the result has been registered in definite concepts,
as is the case with those in which logical thought operates.
Participation
In other words, the connecting links of the representations are given, as a rule, in the representations themselves. This is also found to be a more satisfactory and convincing
approach to the phenomenon of totemism, which involves
the most inexplicable and, to us, nonsensical identifications
and distinctions. To make no class-distinction between the sun and a white cockatoo, but to feel instantly and sharply
a world of difference between both of these natural phenomena and a black cockatoo is, it is felt, a state of mind at which it would be difficult to arrive by inference. The ele- ments which the totem-conscious mind selects out of the
whole representation for attention, are often very very
different from those which we select. Often, for instance, it
is not much interested in the distinction between animate
and inanimate (including artificial) objects.
Almost everything that we see therein (i.e. in a being
or object or natural phenomenon) escapes their attention or is a matter of indifference to them. On the other hand
they see many things of which we are unconscious.
This leads Levy-Bruhl to the conclusion that 'Primitives see with eyes like ours, but they do not perceive with the same
minds'. And he adds:
It is not correct to maintain, as is frequently done, that
primitives associate occult powers, magic properties, a kind of soul or vital principle with all the objects which
affect their senses or strike the imagination, and that their
perceptions are surcharged with animistic beliefs. It is not
a question of association. The mystic properties with
which things are imbued form an integral part of the
idea to the primitive who views it as a synthetic whole.
It is at a later stage of social evolution that what we call a natural phenomenon tends to become the sole content of
perception to the exclusion of other elements which then assume the aspect of beliefs, and finally appear super30
Participation
stitions. But as long as this 'dissociation' does not take
place, perception remains an undifferentiated whole.
It may be questioned whether the epithet 'mystic', as it
is used here, and in the expression 'participation mystique'
which is especially associated with the name ofLevy-Bruhl,
adds effectively to his meaning. Elsewhere he has defined
the precise significance which he intends by it, and I shall revert to this shortly. What is important is the concept of
participation. The principal reason which Levy-Bruhl,
Durkheim and others assign for the fact that primitives 'do
not perceive with the same minds' as ours, is, that in the act of perception, they are not detached, as we are, from the
representations. For us the only connection of which we are conscious is the external one through the senses. Not so for
them. Thus, for Levy-Bruhl:
The collective representations and interconnections
which constitute such a (primitive) mentality are governed by the law of participation and in so far they
take but little account of the law of contradiction.
He speaks of 'a veritable symbiosis . . . between the totemic
group and its totem' and tells us that, if we seek to penetrate
their mental processes, 'We must understand "the same" by
virtue, not of the law of identity, but of the law of participation'.
Durkheim seeks to carry much further the bearing of
anthropological inquiry on the origin and evolution of
abstract thought. He affirms, for instance, that the identification of persons and individual phenomena with totems
violates the principle of contradiction only as predication1 does in our own thinking. The root or predecessor of
predication is to be found in 'the use oftotemic emblems by
clans to express and communicate collective representations'.
1 Predication may be unconventionally, but not really inaccurately, defined as, 'Whatever is done by the word is in such a sentence as: a horse is an animal; the earth is a planet
. See also p. 99. 31
Participation
We shall see that this same expression and communication
are to-day the function of language. 'Participation' begins by
being an activity, and essentially a communal or social acti- vity. It takes place in rites and initiation ceremonies resulting
in
collective mental states of extreme emotional intensity,
in which representation is as yet undifferentiated from the
movements and actions which make the communion
towards which it tends a reality to the group. Their
participation in it is so effectively lived that it is not yet
properly imagined.
This stage is not only pre-logical, but also pre-mythical. It
is anterior to collective representations themselves, as I have
been using the term. Thus, the first development Durkheim
traces is from symbiosis or active participation (where the
individual feels he is the totem) 1 to collective representations
of the totemic type (where the individual feels that his
ancestors were the totem, that he will be when he dies, etc.).
From this symbolic apprehension he then arrives at the
duality, with which we are more familiar, of ideas on the one hand and numinous religion on the other.
This extra-sensory participation of the percipient in the
representation involves a similar link between the representations themselves, and of course between one percipient
and another. 'Mana' or 'waken' (which we can only translate by abstract terms like 'totemic principle', 'life principle' or—since it is present also in inanimate objects—'being') is anterior to the individuality of persons and objects; these
(says Durkheim) are rather apprehended by the very primi1 Anyone who finds it difficult to form any conception of participation, that is, of self and not-self identified in the same moment of experience, should reflect on that whole peculiar realm of semi-subjectivity which still leads a precarious existence under the name of 'instinct'—or on those 'irresi- stible' impulses, on which psychiatrists are inclined to dwell. Many of us know
what panic feels like, and ordinary men are proud of their sexual vigour or ashamed ofthe lack ofit, although the act is readily acknowledged in retrospect to be at least as much something that is done to, or with, them by an invisible force of nature, as something they themselves veritably do. 32
Participation
tive as 'stopping-places of mana\ It is, incidentally, here
that he finds the prototype of the idea o£force, which played
such a prominent part in the physical science of the nineteenth century. And in emphasizing the 'religious origin' of
this idea he points out, rather appositely, that Comte re- garded the notion of force as a superstition, which was
destined to disappear from science—as indeed it has shown
marked signs of doing, since Durkheim's book was
published.
I hope I have not misrepresented either ofthe two anthropologists from whom I have quoted rather freely. The more
so, as I cannot pause to consider the adverse criticism which
Levy-Bruhl in particular has aroused. (I doubt if it was his case that all primitives invariably think in the prelogical way.
It is certainly not mine.) If I have drawn heavily on these
two writers, I have done so by way of illustration rather
than argument. It is not very difficult to see what they
mean and, by seeing what they mean, the reader may
possibly be helped to see what i" mean.
Collective representations do not imply a collective unity
distinct from the individuals comprising the social group.
On the other hand their existence does not derive from the
individual. In these two respects they may be compared to
language. Like the words of a language, they are common
to the members of a given social group, and are transmitted
from one generation to another, developing and changing
only gradually in the process.
Moreover it is impossible to draw a very precise line
between representations and beliefs about representations,
or, in the terms I have been using, between figuration and
alpha-thinking. All collective representations involve figuration and therefore, iffiguration is a kind ofthinking, involve
'thought'. But in addition to this nearly all of them involve
elements which are actually apprehended as thought, or imagined, rather than as perceived. It was this presumably
which persuaded Levy-Bruhl to add the word 'mystic' to his 'participation'. He uses it, he says, 'in the strictly
Participation
defined sense in which "mystic" implies belief in forces and
influences and actions, which though imperceptible to
sense, are nevertheless real'. When I see a stone fall to the ground, do I 'believe' that
it is drawn by the force, or the law, of gravity? When I use the telephone, do I 'believe' that my correspondent's voice
is recorded and reproduced by an invisible called 'electri- city'? Or are both these thoughts immediately experienced
in my representation? Or is one so and not the other? The
exact point at which a piece of alpha-thinking has slipped
into and become an integral part of the representation is hard to determine and may clearly differ somewhat between
individuals ofthe same social group and for the same individual at different times. It is continually happening, while
we are growing up, especially while we are learning to speak. I say I 'hear a thrush singing outside my window'.
But do I? He is invisible, and it might perhaps be a blackbird; I have begun the business of thinking and believing
already ! The same thing happens to a lifelong birdwatcher.
He does no thinking at all. He recognizes. He hears a thrush
singing. For him alpha-thinking has become figuration.
To sum up what has been said in this chapter: Anthropology began by assuming as a matter of course that primitive
peoples perceive the same phenomena as we do and on that
assumption investigated their beliefs about these phenomena.
Now however some anthropologists have begun to point
out that the difference between the primitive outlook and
ours begins at an earlier stage. It is not only a different
alpha-thinking but a different figuration, with which we
have to do, and therefore the phenomena are treated as collective representations produced by that different figuration. It is further maintained by some of them that the most
striking difference between primitive figuration and ours is, that the primitive involves 'participation', that is, an awareness which we no longer have, of an extra-sensory link
between the percipient and the representations. This involves, not only that we think differently, but that the
Participation
phenomena (collective representations) themselves are different. The first three chapters were devoted to reminding the
reader that we do, in fact, still participate in the phenomena,
though for the most part we do so unconsciously. We can only remind ourselves ofthat participation by beta-thinking
and we forget it again as soon as we leave off. This is the
fundamental difference, not only between their thinking
and ours, but also between their phenomena and ours. It remains to consider how ours, which are genetically the
later, have come to pass. The quotations from Levy-Bruhl in this chapter are mainly to be found in Les Fonctions Mentales dans les Societes Inferieures (English Translation: How
Natives Think). The quotations from Durkheim are all taken from The
Elementary Forms of the Religious Life.
V
PRE-HISTORY
A history of the 'world', as distinct from a history of the
unrepresented, must clearly be a history of phenomena;
that is, of collective representations. But before this part of
the subject is approached, it will be well to consider briefly
the bearing of this truth on what is sometimes called prehistory. I mean, in particular, the history ofthe earth before
the appearance on it of human beings.
When particles of rain, rays of light and our watching
eyes are appropriately disposed, we see a rainbow. In the same way, given the existence of the particles and the presence of human beings on the earth, there arise collective
representations, or in other words the phenomena which we
call 'nature'. When dealing with times in which these conditions were present, therefore, it is quite reasonable to
describe and investigate nature scientifically, not only in the manner of physics, but also in the manner of the sciences
whose field of study is the past as well as the present, such
as geology, ecology, zoology, and to do this as ifthe phenomena were wholly independent of man's sensory and
psychological participation. It is not necessarily misleading
to do so, and it has proved to be of great practical use. It is however not sufficiently realized that different considerations apply to any description, in familiar terms, of natural
events and processes deemed to have taken place before the
appearance of human life on the earth.
It may of course be contended (though I should not like
Pre-history
the task) that some animals enjoy representations suffi- ciently coherent to set up a phenomenal whole, which
could be called 'a world' or 'nature'. But this does not really
assist much. For, although animals appeared on earth before
man, it is certainly not their world or nature which geology,
for instance, describes; and even so there remains the whole
vast panorama of pre-history which is assumed to have
preceded the emergence on this planet of sentient life of any
description.
Yet by combining, say, biology and geology and omitting
physics and physiology, such descriptions are continually
offered to us and form, I suppose, a recognized part of the
education of most children to-day. It can do no harm to
recall occasionally that the prehistoric evolution of the
earth, as it is described for example in the early chapters of
H. G. Wells's Outline ofHistory, was not merely never seen.
It never occurred. Something no doubt occurred, and what
is really being propounded by such popular writers, and,
so far as I am aware, by the text-books on which they rely,
is this. That at that time the unrepresented was behaving in
such a way that, //human beings with the collective representations characteristic of the last few centuries of western
civilization had been there, the things described would also have been there.
This is not quite the same thing. It needs, I should have
thought, to be considered in connection with another fact,
namely, that when attention is expressly directed to the
history ofthe unrepresented (as in calculations of the age of
the earth based on radio-activity), it is invariably assumed
that the behaviour ofthe unrepresented has remained fundamentally unchanged. Moreover (and this is, to my mind,
more important), for those hypothetical 'human beings
with collective representations characteristic of the last few
centuries of western civilization' we might choose to substitute other human beings—those, for instance, who lived one or two or three or more thousand years ago. We
should then have to write a different pre-history altogether.
Pre-history
And we are not entitled to assume without inquiry that, as an indirect means of suggesting the truth about prehistoric goings-on in the unrepresented, such an alternative
'model' would be any less efficient than the one we have in
fact chosen. It might be very much more so. As these consequences may be startling enough to the
reader to cause him to reject them, even though he has so far followed me with sympathy, I will, at the risk of repeating
myself, put as clearly as I can the alternatives to accepting
them. Ifwe refuse to accept them, we can adopt one ofthree
courses, to each of which there are, to me, insuperable
objections. We can adopt a sort of super-naive realism,
rejecting all the rigmarole of physics, physiology and psychology with the healthy instinct of Dr. Johnson kicking
his stone. 'Nature is nature, and the earth is the earth, and
always has been since it all began/ This may do for the
present moment, but for a scientifically reconstructed prehistoric past it is open to the objection that, if we are going
to reject the reasoned inferences ofone set ofscientists, there seems no particular reason why we should accept those of
another. Or we can resort frankly to 'double-think'. We
can think that what physics tells us is true, is true when we
are studying physics, and untrue when we are studying
something else. The objections to this course are obvious to me, and will be equally so to some of my readers. There are those who will nevertheless continue to adopt it. This book
is addressed to the others. Lastly we can adopt a Berkeleyan
view ofphenomena. For Berkeley held that, not merely the
unrepresented, but the representations as such, are sustained
by God in the absence of human beings. This involves the,
for me, too difficult corollary that, out of all the wide
variety of collective representations which are found even
to-day over the face of the earth, and the still wider variety
which history unrolls before us, God has chosen for His
delight the particular set shared by Western man in the last few centuries.
It does not ofcourse necessarily follow that all the current
Pre-history
descriptions ofpre-history are absurd. Even if the usual way
of recording what, in the absence of man, was going on in
the unrepresented must be criticised as a dubious extrapolation, the descriptions may still, as I have suggested, be
valuable, not as actual descriptions, but as notional 'models'.
What is important is, to remember that that is all they are. (Especially will this be the case, if we should ever have to
assess the merits of this approach against those of any other
possible way of acquiring knowledge of the pre-historic
past.) For their nature is that ofartificial imagery. And when
the nature and limitations of artificial images are forgotten,
they become idols. Francis Bacon declared that the medieval
approach to reality was under the spell of four different
sorts of idols, which he called 'idols of the cave', 'idols of
the tribe' and so forth. In the same way, these images of
what was going on in the unrepresented in the pre-historic
past may be called 'idols of the study'. At least that is what
they are, if their nature and limitations are forgotten. And
I am not sure that as yet these have even been noticed.
It is, however, not only these purely theoretical or academic idols with which this book is concerned.
VI
ORIGINAL PARTICIPATION
It is characteristic of our phenomena—indeed it is this,
above all, which distinguishes them from those of the past —that our participation in them, and therefore also their
representational nature, is excluded from our immediate
awareness. It is consequently always ignored by our 'common sense' and sometimes denied even in theory. For this reason it will be best to begin the brief series of observations
which I want to make upon the history of phenomena
—
that is, the history of the familiar world—from the present
day, and to work backwards from there to the remoter past.
Our first step, then, is to trace the last stage of this development, which has led up to the collective representations
with which we are familiar to-day.
Participation is the extra-sensory relation between man
and the phenomena. It was shown in Chapter III that the
existence of phenomena depends on it. Actual participation
is therefore as much a fact in our case as in that ofprimitive man. But we have also seen that we are unaware, whereas
the primitive mind is aware of it. This primitive awareness,
however, is obviously not the theoretical kind which we can
still arrive at by beta-thinking. For that presupposes some
acquaintance with the findings of modern physics and
physiology and can only be applied to the kind of collective
representations that go with this. The primitive kind of
participation is indeed not theoretical at all, inasmuch as it
is given in immediate experience. Let us distinguish it from
Original Participation
ours by calling it 'original' participation. It would however
be cumbersome to add the epithet every time the word is used and I propose very often to omit it, having first made
it plain here and now that by 'participation' I shall mean
original participation, unless the context otherwise requires.
There is another difference between sophisticated and
primitive participation. Hitherto we have spoken of representations and of the unrepresented; but we have said nothing
of any 'represented'. This raises the question whether
representation was the proper word to use at all, or whether
it is merely misleading. If an appearance can properly be
called a representation, it will certainly be a representation
of something. Just as 'the particles', then (the name here
chosen for all that is conceived to exist independently of
consciousness), have also been called the unrepresented, so, whatever is correlative to the appearances or representations
will here be called the represented. This is of course a mere
name, and gives as yet no clue to the nature ofwhat is meant.
I hope that further light will be thrown upon it, gradually,
as we proceed. Meanwhile I must use the name, leaving the
reader to make up his mind, ambulando, whether it was
justified or not. We have seen that a very large part of the collective
representations is found by beta-thinking to have been
contributed by the percipient's own activity. Beta-thinking
therefore inevitably assumes that a very large part of their
correlative, the represented, is to be found 'within' ourselves.
Consequently if our participation, having been first understood and accepted, by beta-thinking, as a fact, should then
become a conscious experience, it would have to take the
form of conscious (instead of, as now, unconscious) figuration. This is because for us, the represented is conceived as within our percipient selves; and it is only the unrepresented
physical base ('particles') which we conceive of as without.
Not so for primitives. For them the represented, too, is conceived as outside, so that there is no question of conscious
figuration. It may also sometimes be detected within, but it 41
Original Participation
is detected primarily without. The human soul may be one of the 'stopping-places' for tnana, but what differentiates the
primitive mind from ours is, that it conceives itself to be
only one of those stopping-places and not necessarily the
most significant. The essence of original participation is that
there stands behind the phenomena, and on the other side of
them from me, a represented which is of the same nature as me. Whether it is called 'mana', or by the names of many
gods and demons, or God the Father, or the spirit world,
it is of the same nature as the perceiving self, inasmuch as it
is not mechanical or accidental, but psychic and voluntary.
I have here assumed that what Levy-Bruhl and Durkheim
.
and their followers say about contemporary primitive man
is substantially correct; and it seems to me likely to be so.
1 But whether or not it is correct for contemporary primitive
man, it is certainly true of historically early man. All the
evidence from etymology and elsewhere goes to show that
the further back we penetrate into the past of human consciousness, the more mythical in their nature do the representations become. Moreover there is no evidence to the
contrary. I shall say something later on of the testimony
borne by etymology. Here it must suffice to affirm cate- gorically that, for the nineteenth-century fantasy of early
man first gazing, with his mind tabula rasa, at natural
phenomena like ours, then seeking to explain them with
thoughts like ours, and then by a process of inference
'peopling' them with the 'aery phantoms' of mythology,
there just is not any single shred of evidence whatever.
I do not mean, by using the word 'fantasy', to imply contempt. If great scholars like Max Miiller and Sir James
Frazer, in seeking for the historical origins of myth, made
the same mistake as the early anthropologists, it will, I hope,
become apparent in the course of this and the ensuing
chapters how inevitable it was that they should do so. Today, on the other hand, partly thanks to their work, any
1 Compare, more recently, the last two talks in The Institutions of Primitive
Society (A series of Broadcast Talks). Blackwell. 1954. 42
Original Participation
little man, provided he is not hopelessly prejudiced, can convince himself of the contrary. The point is, not to find someone to turn up our noses at, but to grasp the fact that
alpha-thinking, when men first began to exercise it, had to be directed upon that kind of collective representation
(namely the participated kind) and not on collective representations resembling ours, which (as we shall see) are a
later product of that very alpha-thinking.
For alpha-thinking, as I have defined it, is a thinking
about collective representations. But when we think 'about'
anything, we must necessarily be aware of ourselves (that
is, of the self which is doing the thinking) as sharply and
clearly detached from the thing thought about. It follows
that alpha-thinking involves pro tanto absence of participation. It is in fact the very nature and aim of pure alphathinking to exclude participation. When, therefore, it is directed, as it has to be to start with, on phenomena determined by original participation, then, at first simply by
being alpha-thinking, and at a later stage deliberately, it seeks to destroy that participation. The more so because (as
we shall also see), participation renders the phenomena less predictable and less calculable.
The history of alpha-thinking accordingly includes the
history of science, as the term has hitherto been understood,
and reaches its culmination in a system of thought which
only interests itselfin phenomena to the extent that they can be grasped as independent of consciousness. This culmination appears to have been reached about the close of the
nineteenth century. For, along with the recent tendency of
physics to implicate the observer again in the phenomena,
there goes the tendency of physicists to give up alphathinking about phenomena and occupy themselves, as mathematicians, only with the unrepresented.
Systematic alpha-thinking appears to have begun with
astronomy. Whether this was because the movements ofthe
heavenly bodies display a regularity which is mostly lacking
in sublunary phenomena, and which wouM be the %st
Original Participation
therefore to attract the attention of minds beginning for the
first time to interest themselves in regularity, or whether it was for some other reason, we need not consider. Astronomy is generally regarded as the doyen of the sciences, and
a glance at its history from Greek times to the present day
or thereabouts will afford some insight into the development
of that exact thinking about phenomena which is called
science and the effect of that development on the collective
representations of Western man. I say from Greek times
because, although the Egyptians and Chaldeans appear to
have kept astronomical records over a very long period, we
know nothing of any avowedly speculative thought earlier than the Greeks either on this or on any other subject.
That the collective representations to which this speculative thought was applied were of the kind already indicated, i.e. participated, is obvious enough. Apart from
speculative thought, it would never have occurred to an
ancient Greek to doubt that the heavenly bodies and their
spheres were in one way or another representations of
divine beings. Such a doubt was, in fact, voiced occasionally—simply because the Greek mind was of such an incorrigibly speculative nature that there was very little that
did not occur to it—as a purely notional possibility. But the
point is that, in the early days of alpha-thinking, any such
notion was a secondary speculation, and rather a wild one,
about collective representations whose character made the
contrary, 'representational', view seem the obvious one. The systematic alpha-thinking exercised only by the
thoughtful few is applied to the phenomena, that is, to collective representations which they share with the many.
And we are left in no doubt by Plato's Dialogues, and by
the whole language and literature of Greece, what these, in
general, were like. There it was the materialist who looked
like a Berkeley, and the Greek equivalent of Dr. Johnson
would return from speculation to common sense, not by
kicking a stone, but by appealing to collective representations made obvious by his upbringing, by the language he
Original Participation
spoke and heard spoken all around him, and by the active
cults which were his daily matter of fact experience. Even
the atoms of Democritus were, of course, not atoms, as the
word has been understood in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries. They were imagined as components of mind no
less than of matter. In other words they were the only sort of atoms which alpha-thinking about participated phenomena could present to itself for the purpose of speculation.
It is in this light that we must approach, if we wish to
understand them, not only the speculations of Plato, and
Aristotle, for instance, on the nature of the stars and planets,
but also the meanings of common words like vovs (nous)
and Xoyos (logos), and the whole apparatus of language by
which they expressed these speculations. If we are content
to translate, and to think, 'mind' for vovs and 'reason' or 'word' for Xoyos, we are in continual danger of surreptitiously substituting our own phenomena for those which
they were in fact dealing with. It is not only that they speculated on whether the planets were 'visible gods' or only
images of the gods, as statues are; on the nature of the Fifth
Essence and its relation to the earthly elements; on the
Anima Mundi; on whether or not the Aether, which is the
substance of the spheres, has a soul, etc. The very meanings
ofthe incidental words with the help of which they did the
speculating, implied participation ofsome sort. Whereas the
words into which we struggle to translate them imply the
reverse. Some examples of these words will be considered
in a later chapter, when it will be seen that original participation survived in an attenuated form even into the
Middle Ages.
It may remove the risk of misunderstanding if I mention
at this early stage that it is no part ofthe object ofthis book
to advocate a return to original participation.
VII
APPEARANCE AND HYPOTHESIS
According to Plato there were three stages, or degrees of
knowledge. The first and lowest amounted to no more than
observation. Since all that we perceive is continually
changing, coming into being and passing away, this kind of
'knowledge' grasps nothing permanent and nothing therefore which can properly be called 'truth'. At the opposite
pole, the highest degree—which is the only one that can
properly be called knowledge—is wholly extra-sensory. It is the contemplation by pure intelligence of the divine ideas,
and above all of the Supreme Good. The union of these
two, that is, ofpure intelligence and sense-knowledge, gives
rise to an intermediate mental activity, which Plato stigmatized as 'bastard'—although he insisted on all his pupils
studying it as a preparation and a means to the true knowledge. This intermediate activity was geometry; or, as we
should now say, mathematics.
These three degrees of knowledge corresponded with
three different levels of astronomy. The astronomy of observation merely records the movements of the stars, the
sun, the moon and the planets, without attempting to account for them or reduce them to any system. From this we can rise to the second astronomy, which seeks to account
for the apparently arbitrary movement of, for instance, the
planets by supposing regular geometrical patterns to underlie
them. By the exercise of this celestial geometry we can
render ourselves capable ofrising eventually to the third and
Appearance and Hypothesis
highest, that is, to the only true knowledge; which is an unobscured participation in the divine Mind, or Word,
itself. The real wisdom, as distinct from its not wholly un- worthy outcome in the permanent truths of geometry,
manifests itself only to him who participates in however
slight a degree in the pure and divine Intelligence. This intelligent participation, the privilege of philosophy and in
the last resort ofinitiation, was not mystical. For mystical experience is essentially other than ordinary experience. But the
Platonic or Aristotelian participation, which was true knowledge, was simply the half-conscious participation of every
man (the participation by virtue of which he was a man)
cleared of the gross and bewildering mutability which is plastered over it by the other approach, through the senses. Plato further laid it down orally, as we learn from later astronomers, that the science ofastronomy proper lay within
the middle one of these three spheres of knowledge. In the
first place the 'phaenomena', or 'appearances', that is the
apparent movements of the heavenly bodies, could be
watched by observation. In the third place the true knowledge, since it was acquainted with the divine spirits who
ensouled or guided the heavenly bodies, had already laid
down certain fundamental principles, not derived from
observation. It was for the science of astronomy, in the
second place, to 'save' the 'appearances', that is, the apparent
movements of the heavenly bodies, and particularly of sun, moon and planets, which were the most difficult to account
for, by devising hypothetical patterns of movement, which
would account for the appearances without infringing the
fundamental principles. Later on, I shall say something of
the 'mental-spatial' experience which claimed to determine
the nature of movement out of the nature of pure thought.
It appears as a mere confusion to the alpha-thinking of today (though that, too, is beginning to talk without appreciable discomfort of 'space-time'). Here it must suffice to
record that the prescribed movements were, among other
requirements, perfect circles at a constant speed.
Appearance and Hypothesis
There is perhaps more of physics than of astronomy in
Aristotle's De Caelo, but, as far as the three stages of knowledge and the fundamental principles just referred to are concerned, he was substantially in accord with Plato.
The 'phaenomena' ofwhich the astronomy of Greece and
ofthe dark and middle ages spoke, were of course not quite
what we to-day mean by 'phenomena', a word which, outside philosophy, has come to be practically synonymous
with 'objects' and 'events'. The middle voice of the Greek
verb suggests neither wholly 'what is perceived, from
within themselves, by men' nor wholly 'what, from without, forces itself on man's senses', but something between
the two. This is also fairly suggested by the English word
'appearances', which is generally used in translating the once hard-worked phrase odj^eiv ra (jxuvofieva—'to save the
appearances'. This phrase, used by Simplicius in his sixth
century Commentary on Aristotle's De Caelo, continued to dominate astronomy down to the time of Copernicus.
When we hear of 'saving appearances' to-day, we are apt
to think of a society hostess at a dinner party where something has gone wrong in the kitchen. It was not so in the
seventeenth century. Although he spoke of God's laughter,
Milton was not /n'mseZ/laughing at the astronomers when he
wrote in the Eighth book of Paradise Lost: Or if they list to try
Conjecture, he his fabric of the heavens
Hath left to their disputes, perhaps to move
His laughter at their quaint opinions wide
Hereafter, when they come to model heaven,
And calculate the stars; how they will wield
The mighty frame; how build, unbuild, contrive,
To save appearances; how gird the sphere
With centric and eccentric scribbled o'er,
Cycle and epicycle, orb in orb. Nor was he suggesting that desperate expedients were being
resorted to, in order to 'save' (in the sense of rescuing) the
Appearance and Hypothesis
Ptolemaic system—which, incidentally, he had made the
framework of his own poem. He was introducing a learned
cliche. The same passage from Simplicius contains the Greek
verb from which we derive the word 'hypothesis'. The
spheres and orbits by which the appearances were to be
saved were normally 'hypotheses' in the strict sense of the
word, that is, assumptions made for the purpose of a particular argument and by the same token not posited as true. A brief digression on the almost lost distinction between the
word 'hypothesis' and the word 'theory' may not be amiss
here. The Greek word Oecopla (theoria) meant 'contemplation' and is the term used in Aristotle's psychology to designate the moment of fully conscious participation, in
which the soul's potential knowledge (its ordinary state)
becomes actual, so that man can at last claim to be 'awake'.
This is no guide to its present, or even recent meaning, but
it does emphasize the difference between a proposition
which it is hoped may turn out to be true, and a proposition,
the truth or untruth of which is irrelevant. The geometrical
paths and movements devised for the planets were, in the
minds of those who invented them, hypotheses in the latter sense. They were arrangements—devices—for saving the
appearances; and the Greek and medieval astronomers were
not at all disturbed by the fact that the same appearances
could be saved by two or more quite different hypotheses,
such as an eccentric or an epicycle or, particularly in the
case of Venus and Mercury, by supposed revolution round
the earth or supposed revolution round the sun. All that
mattered was, which was the simplest and the most convenient for practical purposes; for neither of them had any
essential part in truth or knowledge.
Unless we realize, with the help of a little historical
excavation of this kind, what from the epistemological
point ofview astronomy then signified and had signified for
about two thousand years, we shall not understand the real significance of Copernicus and Galileo. The popular view
Appearance and Hypothesis
is, that Copernicus 'discovered' that the earth moves round
the sun. Actually the hypothesis that the earth revolves round
the sun is at least as old as the third century B.C., when it was
advanced by Aristarchus of Samos, and he was neither the
only, nor probably the first astronomer to think of it. Copernicus himself knew this. Secondly it is generally
believed that the Church tried to keep the discovery dark.
Actually Copernicus did not himself want to publish his
De Revolutionibus Orbium, and was only eventually prevailed on to do so by the importunity of two eminent
Churchmen.
The real turning-point in the history ofastronomy and of
science in general was something else altogether. It took
place when Copernicus (probably—it cannot be regarded as certain) began to think, and others, like Kepler and Galileo,
began to affirm that the heliocentric hypothesis not only
saved the appearances, but was physically true. It was this, this novel idea that the Copernican (and therefore any
other) hypothesis might not be a hypothesis at all but the
ultimate truth, that was almost enough in itselfto constitute
the 'scientific revolution', ofwhich Professor Butterfield has
written:
it outshines everything since the rise of Christianity and
reduces the Renaissance and Reformation to the rank of mere episodes, mere internal displacements, within the
system of medieval Christendom.1 When the ordinary man hears that the Church told
Galileo that he might teach Copernicanism as a hypothesis
which saved all the celestial phenomena satisfactorily, but
'not as being the truth', he laughs. But this was really how
Ptolemaic astronomy had been taught! In its actual place in
history it was not a casuistical quibble; it was the refusal
(unjustified it may be) to allow the introduction of a new
and momentous doctrine. It was not simply a new theory
ofthe nature ofthe celestial movements that was feared, but
1 Origins of Modem Science. Bell. 1949. Macmillan. 195 1. 50
Appearance and Hypothesis
a new theory of the nature of theory; namely, that, if a hypothesis saves all the appearances, it is identical with
truth. 1 Geometry, applied to motion, produces the machine.
Years ago the Arabs had used the Ptolemaic hypothesis, to
make machines or models of the planetary system purely
for the purpose of calculation. Our collective representations were born when men began to take the models, whether
geometrical or mechanical, literally. The machine is geometry in motion, and the new picture of the heavens as a
real machine, was made possible by parallel developments
in physics, where the new theory of inertia (in its early
form of 'impetus') assumed, for the first time in the history
of the world, that bodies can go on moving indefinitely
without an animate or psychic 'mover'. It was soon to be
stamped indelibly on men's imaginations by the circumstance of their being ever more and more surrounded by
actual artificial machinery on earth. The whole point of a machine is, that, for as long as it goes on moving, it 'goes
on by itself without man's participation. To the extent
therefore that the phenomena are experienced as machine,
they are believed to exist independently of man, not to be participated and therefore not to be in the nature of
representations. We have seen that all these beliefs are
fallacious. All this is not of course to say that science to-day conceives of nature as a machine, or even on a mechanical
model. It is to say that the ordinary man has been doing just
that for long enough to deprive the phenomena of those
last representational overtones—'last enchantments', as Matthew Arnold called them—which still informed them
in the Middle Ages, and to eliminate from them the last traces of original participation. In doing so he has produced
1 Cf. Aquinas, Summa, ia. Qu. 32. a. 1 ad 2. The other view was assumed by
Ptolemy himself (Almagest, Bk. Ill, chaps, ii and iv; Bk. XIII, chap. ii). In the time of Copernicus it was still the official view, though not undisputed. See
also Note at the end of this Chapter.
Appearance and Hypothesis
the mechanomorphic collective representations which constitute the Western world to-day.
The reader who wishes to verify, or investigate further, the argument of this Chapter, should consult P. Duhem's Le Systlme du Monde. Histoire des doctrines costnologiques de Platon a Copernic. Paris 191 3-1 7. This monumental work,
which combines German thoroughness with French lucidity, was unfortunately never finished. The author had completed five (out of, I believe, eight) volumes before his death. The latest part of the period defined in the
sub-title is, however, covered briefly in a series of articles by Duhem printed
in Annates de Philosophie Chretienne (Apl.-Sept. 1908) under the title 27o6£etv
tol <f>cuv6[Ji€va. Essai sur la Notion de Theorie Physique de Platon a Galilee. Le Systlme du Monde also gives a full historical account of refinements into which it would have been disproportionate for me to enter, such as the opposition of the more literal-minded Arabian astronomers to the Ptolemaic
hypotheses (on the ground of their ^compatibility with Aristotelian physics)
and the epistemological distinction, at one time sharply emphasized, between
the subject-matter of physics (sublunary phenomena) and astronomy (celestial phenomena).
See also Aquinas and Kant by Gavin Ardley. Longmans Green & Co. 1950.
VIII
TECHNOLOGY AND TRUTH
We have just distinguished between the actual doctrines
of modern science and the collective representations to which the growth of science has contributed. Thus, on the one hand attention may be directed to the history of alphathinking itself—what is ordinarily called the history of
thought or the history ofideas. On the other hand it may be
turned to the effects of an alpha-thinking which has continued long and widely enough to pass over into figuration,
and be, as it were, smitten into the representations themselves; that is part of the history of consciousness, and of the
collective representations which are its correlative. Now
although my subject is not the doctrines of science, but
rather the collective representations, which have been so deeply affected by the doctrines of science, it may be well
to pause here for a moment and consider the relation of
scientific theories to truth and knowledge.
What is the view taken by scientists themselves of that
relation? The answer is not very clear. And it is a good deal
less clear to-day than it was a generation ago. The limited
scope of all scientific inquiry is to-day often emphasized
rather strongly by those engaged in it. So much so, that
when we have heard them on the subject, we are sometimes
left with the feeling that we ought to look on all scientific theories as mere 'hypotheses' in the sense ofthe Platonic and
medieval astronomers, and that it is wrong to take any of
them with the 'literalness' that embroiled Galileo with the
Technology and Truth
Church. They are at best, we are assured, the mathematical
formulae which up to the time of writing have been found
the simplest and most convenient for—well, for saving the
appearances. In physics in particular there is a marked tendency to treat almost as an enfant terrible anyone who takes
the models literally enough to refer to them in any context
outside that of physical inquiry itself. 1 It would seem to
follow from this that, as Plato and the astronomers believed,
scientific hypotheses have no direct relation to the real nature of things.
On the other hand I find something equivocal in the
public utterances of the spokesmen of science. For the same
ones who have just been stressing this unpretentious view of
scientific theory will frequently let drop some such phrase
as 'some day we may know'—or even 'we now know'
—
when speaking, not of some particular hypothesis, but of
quite general conclusions about the nature ofuniverse, earth or man. Moreover, if the occasion is a formal one, we often
get some reference to the history of science, in terms of
'advancing the frontiers of knowledge', and so forth. All
this indicates a very different conception of science and
strongly suggests to the audience that modern science, so
far from being disentitled to claim the status of knowledge,
is the only reliable knowledge available to us. At the least,
it suggests that the findings of any particular science are not
merely tools for the application and further pursuit of that
science, but have some sort of absolute validity.
Perhaps the confusion is at present unavoidable, but let us at least be clear that it is a confusion between two quite
incompatible views. Let us see, for instance, what conse- quences flow from adopting the first view, namely, that
scientific theories are simply hypotheses to save the appearances. This can best be done with the help of a grotesquely
over-simplified analogy. But first let me make the bearing
of the analogy clear. It will contrast two different sorts of
1 Anyone, it has been said, may ask questions concerning wave-mechanics;
but only cads talk about 'ether*
!
Technology and Truth
'knowledge', both of which, in the analogy, depend on
alpha-thinking; but it will illustrate the difference between a 'knowledge' which does depend on alpha-thinking and a
different kind of knowledge altogether which does not. Plato and Aristotle, and others, as we have seen, taught that
there was such a knowledge and that it was accessible only
to participation. But it is not necessary to believe this in
order to understand the analogy.
Take a clever boy, who knows nothing about the principle of internal combustion or the inside of an engine, and
leave him inside a motor-car, first telling him to move the
various knobs, switches and levers about and see what
happens. If no disaster supervenes, he will end by finding
himself able to drive the car. It will then be true to say that
he knows how to drive the car; but untrue to say that he
knows the car. As to that, the most we could say would be
that he has an 'operative' knowledge of it—because for
operation all that is required is a good empirical acquaintance with the dashboard and the pedals. Whatever we say,
it is obvious that what he has is very different from the
knowledge of someone else, who has studied mechanics,
internal combustion and the construction of motor-cars,
though he has perhaps never driven a car in his life, and is perhaps too nervous to try. Now whether or no there is another kind ofknowledge ofnature, which corresponds to 'engine-knowledge' in the analogy, it seems that, if the first view of the nature of scientific theory is accepted, the kind of
knowledge aimed at by science must be, in effect, what I will call 'dashboard-knowledge'.
Francis Bacon, whose startlingly original mind was so
influential in bringing about the scientific revolution, was
very frank about this. Not only did he maintain that knowledge was to be valued for the power it gives man over
nature; but he practically made success in this aim a part of
his definition of knowledge. The key words he uses to distinguish the knowledge he exalts from the knowledge
pursued by the Schoolmen are 'fruit' and 'operation'. In 55
Technology and Truth
other words, not only 'science' but knowledge itself, that
is, the only knowledge that is not mere trifling, is, for him
—
technology. Knowledge (for which Bacon, when he wrote
in Latin, of course used the word scientia) is that which
enables us to make nature do our bidding.
I think it must be acknowledged that the 'idea' which
stands behind the particular kind of knowledge which we
have come to call 'science' is 'dashboard-knowledge'. I mean only that that is its mode of 'knowing'. I do not of
course mean that the motive by which the great scientists have been inspired has been the desire for power. The
analogy is admittedly a crude one. For, while the dashboard
of even the most expensive and up-to-date car is a comparatively simple affair, nature's 'dashboard'—that is, her
exterior, accessible to the senses and the reason—is of such
a marvellous and intricate complexity that many a man has
counted his life well spent in mastering a tiny corner of it. If however it is acknowledged, what follows? If science
is merely technology, if the theories of physics in particular are mere hypotheses to save the appearances, with no necessary relation to ultimate truth, then—well, in the first place, one hopes that the car will not break down. But, in the
second place, it might be argued that they should be consistently treated as such. It might be said that the theories of
physics should be reserved for the purposes of physics and
left out of sight altogether, when we are thinking about
anything else—about the nature of perception, for instance.
This would remove the foundation from under the first part ofthis book. But it would also have so many other, and
such startling consequences, that I am not seriously alarmed.
For, in the first place, we could not limit the new and
more hypothetical way of thinking to nuclear, or recent
physics. The laws of gravity, for example, and of inertia,
must go the same way as the electrons, as far as any ultimate
validity is concerned. Secondly, you cannot really isolate one science from others in this way, nor is it the practice to do so. One has only to think ofthe effects ofphysical theory,
Technology and Truth
treated as fact, on the sciences of medicine and astronomy
as exemplified in radio-therapy and astrophysics. Thirdly,
and most important of all for my purposes, the hypotheses
do in fact, get into the collective representations;1 many of
them are, and others soon may be, implicit in the very
'nature' which surrounds us, and therefore in the world in
which I have to write. And lastly the withdrawal from
'participation', which alpha-thinking has brought about,
has its advantages. The vagaries of confusion and savagery
in the tribes in which anthropology finds participation most
conspicuously surviving to-day, though they may well not
be very reliable guides to its ancient quality among other
peoples who have long since abandoned it, do nevertheless
remind us of the sins of commission in thought, feeling and
action of which original participation is capable. Whatever
sins of omission alpha-thinking may be guilty of, we owe
to it, up to now, our independence, much of our security, our psychological integrity and perhaps our very existence
as individuals. When Prospero renounced his last enchantments and set sail for civilization, Ariel, it is true, remained
with Caliban—but so did Setebos.
Apart from all this, there is one conclusive reason why, in
spite of the technological slant of natural science, our betathinking is bound to begin with the assumption that alphathinking has a valid relation to truth. With collective re- presentations like ours, what else can we do? Where else can we start from? If the physical theory ofan unrepresented
base has some such validity, so much the better. Ifnot—even
if it amounts to positive error—the way out may still lie through and not back. The best way of escape from deeprooted error has often proved to be, to pursue it to its logical conclusion, that is, to go on taking it seriously and
see what follows. Only we must be consistent. We must
take it really seriously. We must give up double-think. For
inconsistent and slovenly thought can abide indefinitely in error without any feeling of discomfort.
1 Cf. pp. 51 and 53. 57
IX
AN EVOLUTION OF IDOLS
It is the common opinion that, whereas we see nature
pretty much as she really is, primitive man sees and archaic or early man saw her all awry through the veil of a complicated system of fancies and beliefs. If, however, the
general conclusions of Chapter IV are accepted, it is clear
that, whether or no archaic man saw nature awry, what he saw was not primarily determined by beliefs. On the other
hand it was suggested in Chapter VII that what we see is so determined. If I am right therefore, there is indeed a contrast between primitive and modern consciousness and that
contrast is connected with beliefs, but in exactly the opposite way to what is generally supposed. Precisely what
beliefs about phenomena have been widely and confidently
and long enough held to become actually part ofa representation, is, as I have said, a matter on which opinions may
well differ in any particular case. But, whether they are part
of our collective representations or not, it is a fact that there
are certain beliefs not only about the structure, but also about the history, of the phenomena surrounding them,
which are widely, indeed almost universally, shared by
civilized men in this second half of the twentieth century.
There are also beliefs, only a little less confidently and a
little less universally held, about the history of consciousness. As both these sets of beliefs run sharply counter to
a good deal of what I have said and intend to say on
the same subject, it will be well to give some indication
An Evolution of Idols
of how and why these (in my view) mistaken beliefs arose. But first ofall, one more brief digression on the subject of
science. Most of what I have said about it has connoted the
experimental and practical category. Whether the theories
of physics and astronomy, for instance, are truths or approximate truths, or whether they are mere hypotheses to save the appearances, the impressive thing about them is that they work. We predict the result of an experiment, we
make the experiment, with all adequate safeguards, and the
prediction is verified. In the case ofastronomy, although we
cannot experiment, we can still predict and, in doing so,
test the efficiency of our hypotheses.
They predict many years ahead eclipses of the sun and
moon; they specify the day, the hour and the extent; and
their reckoning is correct—the events follow their
predictions; they have discovered and recorded rules, by
which it can be foretold in what year, in what month of
the year, on what day of the month, at what hour of the
day, in what part of their light the sun and moon are to be eclipsed; and what is foretold occurs. These words are of course not less, but much more true of
the Copernican and Newtonian hypotheses of to-day than
they were of the Ptolemaic and contemporary hypotheses
to which St. Augustine was referring when he wrote them
in his Confessions1 at about the end ofthe fourth century a.d.
By their 'fruits', as Bacon would have said, we know them.
But there are to-day, alongside the practical and experimental sciences, a number of others which are, it seems to me, in a much less happy position. I suppose a large part of
astrophysics, for example, to be unverifiable by any prediction or experiment; but I am concerned here more with
sciences such as palaeontology and a good part of geology
and zoology, whose subject-matter is the past, which
naturally cannot be predicted and is not either susceptible of
1 Bk. V, ch. iii. 59
An Evolution of Idols
experiment. Here we cannot say, with Bacon, 'never mind
what those tedious old fools, the Schoolmen, meant by
"knowledge"; does it deliver the goods?'. For the only
goods to be delivered are—knowledge. There is no 'operation', no 'fruit' and no empirical test of accuracy. If their hypotheses are not also the actual truth, they are nothing.
It seems to me that the only thing which such purely
theoretical sciences really have in common with those at the
technological end of the scale, is the healthy discipline, the
open-minded attitude to fact which is, or should be, common to all whose object is knowledge, and which has itself become so much better understood and acknowledged as a
result of the systematic pursuit of empirical science. But it also seems to me that they have in fact borrowed very much
more than this. They have for instance accepted many of
the hypotheses of sister sciences as established facts, according to them the same status in the construction of their
theories as to their own first-hand observation. In this connection I have already pointed out in Chapter V that they
have accepted some of these hypotheses, while choosing to
ignore others. They have moreover borrowed halfthe vocabulary of hypothesis and empirical verification and are deeply coloured by the technological mode of knowledge
which that implies, though it is really quite inappropriate to them. It is almost as if they expected dashboard-knowledge
to tell us how the engine was made. I believe this to be one of the reasons, though not the most important one, for the
hypothetical picture of the evolution of the earth and man
which began at about the end of the eighteenth century to
fasten itself on men's minds and which is to-day regarded by
ordinary men (as are all but the most recent and avowedly
tentative of scientific hypotheses) as palpable fact; which
indeed, it may be argued, has become part oftheir collective
representations.
At the beginning of the eighteenth century the variety of
natural species was normally attributed by the botany and
zoology of the day to supernatural and instantaneous crea- 60
An Evolution of Idols
tion. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries witnessed the
almost total disappearance of this tradition, reflected as it was in the elaborately classifying botany of Linnaeus, in
favour of a gradual 'evolution'. In the record of the rocks
and the dovetailed panorama of organic nature, history and
science together gradually divined the vestiges ofa different, a 'natural' kind of creation, and one that was the reverse of
instantaneous. Nature herself came to be seen as a process in
time and the individual phenomena at any moment, instead
of being fixed and parallel shapes repeated and repeated
since creation's day, were cross-sections of their own
development and metamorphosis. They could be truly
grasped only by looking before and after. A consideration of
the incidental effect of this on our whole conception of the
significance of history, and indeed of time itself, must be
deferred to a later chapter. Suffice it here to say that the upheaval was all the greater—indeed it amounted in the end to something like an explosion—because it came at a time
when the mind of Europe was perhaps more disinclined to look forward than at any time in its history. The backwardlooking mood of the Revival of Learning had not yet died
away and most men were much less concerned with the
shape ofthings to come than with the greatness and wisdom
of the ancient Greeks and Romans and the virtues of the
noble savage, corrupted (it was held) by the advance of
civilization.
In this chapter we are concerned with the form which the
hypothesis ultimately took and its effect on the collective
representations. This was naturally determined to a large
extent by the existing representations to which it was
applied. What were the phenomena of nature at the time
when the new doctrine began to take effect, and particularly
at the Darwinian moment in the middle of the nineteenth
century? They were objects. They were unparticipated to a degree which has never been surpassed before or since. The
habit, begun by the scientific revolution, of regarding the
mechanical model constructed by alpha-thinking as the
An Evolution of Idols
actual and exclusive structure of the universe, had sunk
right into them. Hardy's rustics may indeed remind us that
change did not proceed everywhere at the same rate even in
the English-speaking world; but for townsmen at least
—
in a world which was already rapidly and is now more
rapidly still becoming totally urbanized—the last flicker of
medieval participation had died away. Matter and force were enough. There was as yet no thought of an unrepresented base; for if the particles kept growing smaller and
smaller, there would always be bigger and better glasses to
see them through. The collapse ofthe mechanical model was
not yet in sight, nor had any of those other factors which
have since contributed to the passing of the dead-centre
of 'literalness'—idealist philosophies, genetic psychology,
psycho-analysis—as yet begun to take effect. Consequently
there was as yet no dawning apprehension that the phenomena of the familiar world may be 'representations' in the
final sense of being the mental construct of the observer.
Literalness reigned supreme.
What then had alpha-thinking achieved at precisely this point in the history of the West? It had temporarily set up
the appearances ofthe familiar world (which the same thinking, pursued a little farther—pursued to the point which I have called 'beta'—discovers to be so inextricably involved
with man himself) as things wholly independent of man. It had clothed them with the independence and extrinsicality
of the unrepresented itself. But a representation, which is collectively mistaken for an ultimate—ought not to be
called a representation. It is an idol. Thus the phenomena
themselves are idols, when they are imagined as enjoying
that independence of human perception which can in fact only pertain to the unrepresented. If that is, for the most
part, what our collective representations are to-day, it is even more certainly what they were in the second halfofthe
nineteenth century. And it was to these collective representations that the evolutionists had to apply their alphathinking, just as it was to the quite different representations
An Evolution of Idols
oftheir own contemporaries that Plato and Aristotle had to apply theirs. Is it to be wondered at that the evolution which
the former have depicted is not a real evolution of phenomena at all, but, as was pointed out in Chapter V, a facti- tious extrapolation—an evolution of 'idols of the study'?
I am speaking of course of the form which the theory
finally took, not of the concept of evolution itself. That is factual enough. The record ofthe rocks is a script containing
stored memories of earth's past. It is only a question ofhow
the script is to be read. A touch of that participation which
still linked the Greeks, and even the medieval observer with
his phenomena, might well have led to a very different interpretation—as it did in the case of Goethe, who had that
touch. But for the generality of men, participation was
dead; the only link with the phenomena was through the
senses; and they could no longer conceive of any manner in
which either growth itself or the metamorphoses of individual and special growth, could be determined from within.
The appearances were idols. They had no 'within'. Therefore the evolution which had produced them could only be
conceived mechanomorphically as a series of impacts of
idols on other idols. If the impulse to construe as process the record of the
rocks and the vestiges of creation apparent in the natural
order had come either a little earlier, before participation
had faded, or a little later, when the iconoclasm implicit in
physical analysis—and in the beta-thinking to which it can
give rise—had really begun to work, man might have read
there the story of the coming into being, pari passu, of his
world and his own consciousness. As it was, all that palaeontology could take over from the experimental sciences, such
as astronomy and physics, was the idols which these latter had so far succeeded in creating. Working with these, it attempted moreover to adopt the orthodox 'geometrizing'
tradition of those sciences with a slavishness that led, in one
instance at least, to results whose absurdity is only just
beginning to dawn on us. 63
An Evolution of Idols
There is no more striking example than the Darwinian
theory ofthat borrowing from the experimental by the nonexperimental sciences, to which I referred at the beginning
of this chapter. It was found that the appearances on earth so much lack the regularity of the appearances in the sky that no systematic hypothesis will fit them. But astronomy and
physics had taught men that the business ofscience is to find
hypotheses to save the appearances. By a hypothesis, then,
these earthly appearances must be saved; and saved they were by the hypothesis of—chance variation. Now the concept of chance is precisely what a hypothesis is devised to save us from. Chance, in fact, = no hypothesis. Yet so hypnotic, at this moment in history, was the influence of the
idols and ofthe special mode ofthought which had begotten
them, that only a few—and their voices soon died away
—
were troubled by the fact that the impressive vocabulary of
technological investigation was actually being used to
denote its breakdown; as though, because it is something
we can do with ourselves in the water, drowning should be
included as one of the different ways of swimming.
THE EVOLUTION OF PHENOMENA
I shall have succeeded very poorly with the opening
chapters ofthis book, if I have not succeeded in making one
thing plain. It is only necessary to take the first feeble step
towards a renewal of participation—that is, the bare
acknowledgement in beta-thinking that phenomena are
collective representations—in order to see that the actual
evolution of the earth we know must have been at the same
time an evolution of consciousness. For consciousness is correlative to phenomenon. Any other picture we may form
of evolution amounts to no more than a symbolical way of
depicting changes in the unrepresented. Yet curiously
enough, as already observed, this latter kind of evolution is just what is assumed not to have taken place. We look at a
fossil-bearing rock and prove how things have changed by
describing appearances which can never have appeared,
unless there was at the same time consciousness. We fix the date of those appearances, and exclude the possibility
of consciousness, by measuring the radio-active content
of the rock, on the footing that the behaviour of the
unrepresented has remained unchanged for millions of
years.
By treating the phenomena of nature as objects wholly
extrinsic to man, with an origin and evolution of their own
independent of man's evolution and origin, and then by
endeavouring to deal with these objects as astronomy deals
with the celestial appearances or physics with the particles,
The Evolution of Phenomena
nineteenth-century science, and nineteenth-century speculation, succeeded in imprinting on the minds and imaginations of men their picture of an evolution of idols. One
result of this has been to distort very violently our conception of the evolution of human consciousness. Or rather it has caused us virtually to deny such an evolution in the face
of what must otherwise have been accepted as unmistakable
evidence.
For the biological picture ofevolution was imprinted, no
less deeply than on other men's, on the minds of those
scholars—etymologists , mythologists , anthropologists
—
who made it their business to study the human past, and it was accepted by them, not as speculation or hypothesis, but
as established fact. It was the given framework into which
they had to fit any theory they chose to form. It was treated
as part of the appearances they were setting out to save. Consequently, in their endeavours to explain the mind of
early or of primitive man, they set him down, in fancy, in
front of phenomena identical with their own, but with his
mind tabula rasa, and supposed the origin of human consciousness to lie in his first efforts to speculate about those
phenomena. In this way was evolved the doctrine of
'animism', according to which the fancy of primitive man
had 'peopled' nature with spirits. Now, in order that nature
may be peopled with spirits, nature must first be devoid of
spirit; but this caused the scholars no difficulty, because they never supposed the possibility of any other kind of nature.
The development of human consciousness was thus presented as a history of alpha-thinking beginning from zero and applied always to the same phenomena, at first in the
form of erroneous beliefs about them and, as time went on,
in the form of more and more correct and scientific beliefs. In short, the evolution ofhuman consciousness was reduced
to a bare history of ideas. No doubt the history of consciousness does include the story ofany number oferroneous
beliefs, but the erroneous beliefs of human beings about
phenomena are neither the most interesting nor the most
The Evolution of Phenomena
important thing about the human beings or about the
phenomena.
It may be objected that what I have recounted in the last three chapters is itself very like a history of ideas and
beliefs. This is quite true. It had to be what it was, because
I wished to begin by showing how our present collective
representations arose, and it is just a fact that these are determined by ideas and beliefs rather than—as is the case with
participating consciousness—productive of them. At the same time it does raise an important question. Granted that
for the past two or three thousand years the process of
evolution has consisted in the gradual ousting of participation by alpha-thinking, is even the history ofalpha-thinking
itselfjust a history of thought in the ordinary sense, or can we also detect in it the subliminal working of an evolutionary process? A history of thought, as such, amounts to
a dialectical or syllogistic process, the thoughts of one age
arising discursively out of, challenging, and modifying the
thoughts and discoveries of the previous one. Is this all we
mean by the history of alpha-thinking?
The evidence points in the opposite direction. Many
indications suggest that, in addition to the dialectical history
of ideas, there are forces at work beneath the threshold of
argument in the evolution even of modern consciousness.
Go far enough back and it is obvious. The comparatively
sudden appearance, after millennia of static civilizations of
the oriental type, of the people or the impulse which eventually flowered in- the cultures of the Aryan nations can hardly have been due to the impact of notion on notion.
And the same is true of the abrupt emergence at a certain
point in history of vociferously speculative thought among
the Greeks. Still more remarkable is the historically unfathered impulse of the Jewish nation to set about eliminating participation by quite other methods than those of
alpha-thinking. Suddenly, and as it were without warning,
we are confronted by a fierce and warlike nation, for whom
it is a paramount moral obligation to refrain from the parti67
The Evolution of Phenomena
cipatory heathen cults by which they were surrounded on
all sides; for whom moreover precisely that moral obligation is conceived as the very foundation ofthe race, the very
marrow of its being. We owe to the Jews the pejorative
significance in the word idol. The representative images, the
totemic eidola, which ritually focused the participation of
the surrounding Gentile nations, are either condemned by
their prophets as evil, or denied as unrealities; as when the
Psalmist sings:
Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of mens
hands.
They have mouths, and speak not: eyes have they and see not. They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, and smell not. They have hands, and handle not; feet have they, and walk
not: neither speak they through their throat. To this I shall return later. But even when we come to the last seven-leagued step in
the development of our modern mechanomorphic consciousness, which occurred at a time when alpha-thinking was already far advanced, we are forced to the same conclusion. Why should the scientific revolution have occurred
when it did, and at no other time, although men had been
busy saving the appearances by abstract hypotheses for cen- tury after century? We might be tempted to answer this question by saying that it came when alpha-thinking had
succeeded in developing more efficient instruments ofobservation, so that observation of the phenomena themselves
became at last a viable and more attractive alternative to the
traditional medieval practice of merely glossing Aristotle.
The scientific revolution, it is often suggested, came about
because men began at last to look at nature for themselves
and see what happened; and we are referred to Galileo's
telescope and Jupiter's moons. But this will hardly suffice. For although post-Copernican astronomy certainly was
based on more and better first-hand observation than the old
astronomy, yet in the case ofphysics, as Professor Butterfield
The Evolution of Phenomena
has pointed out, it was the other way about. A very long
step—and a very difficult one—was taken in the final ousting
of participation, when the Aristotelian and medieval doctrine that all bodies come to rest, unless they are kept in
motion by a 'mover', was at last abandoned. Yet if we base our hypotheses on the behaviour of the bodies we actually
see in motion, this is the only conclusion we can possibly
come to. The theory of 'impetus', which later developed
into the concept of 'inertia', requires, not observation, but
the abstract, geometrizing supposition, never realized in
practice—at least on earth—of bodies moving through a
gravity-free, frictionless vacuum. In this case therefore the
change of outlook—and there could hardly be a more
significant one—must have been hindered rather than
helped by observation.
No. Although alpha-thinking is itself dialectical, I do not
think it can be convincingly maintained that the historical
development of alpha-thinking is a purely dialectical process. The evidence in such matters is naturally not ofthe sort that can be measured with a slide-rule or broken with a hammer, but it does not require all that fineness of perception to discern behind the evolution of consciousness the
operation of forces beneath its threshold. There is some
internal evidence, too. Men concerned with the development of any branch of thought, if they happen also to be
acutely conscious of the workings of their own minds, are sometimes surprised at the ease and the force with which
ideas tending in a certain direction have come into them.
They have been known to speak, not without a kind of
bewilderment, of certain thoughts being 'in the air'. The
following passage from the Autobiography of John Stuart
Mill appears to record just such an experience:
What thus impressed me was the chapter in which
Bentham passed judgment on the common modes of
reasoning in morals and legislation, deduced from phrases
like 'law of nature', 'right reason', 'the moral sense',
The Evolution of Phenomena
'natural rectitude', and the like and characterized them
as dogmatism in disguise, imposing its sentiments upon
others under cover ofsounding expressions which convey
no reason for the sentiment, but set up the sentiment as
its own reason. . . . The feeling rushed upon me, that all previous moralists were superseded, and that here indeed was the commencement of a new era in thought.
The italics are mine, but the sentiments are those of that
least excitable of men, John Stuart Mill. I quote them only
because of the strong feeling I had, when I read them, that
here, where one would most of all expect the development
of thought to be simply the process of its own discourse,
something else was going on underneath it. "We must defer
until nearer the end any consideration of what that something may be.
XI
MEDIEVAL ENVIRONMENT
"When the distinction has been appreciated between (i) an imputed evolution ofsome wholly 'objective', and therefore
wholly unrepresented base, (2) a fancied evolution of idols,
and (3) the actual evolution of phenomena (including, as that does, a correlative evolution of consciousness), we may
be compelled to revise some of our ideas on the amount of
time required for the process. It follows, for instance, from
what was said in Chapter V, that the period during which
the phenomenal earth has been evolving is probably much
shorter than is now generally assumed. Another consequence
is, that evolutionary changes are not purely biological, and
that they are not limited to pre-history, but can be detected even in the relatively recent period for which historical
records, or indications of some sort, are still available to us. They include changes subtler in their nature and observable over a different time-scale altogether, changes measurable
by centuries rather than millennia, and by millennia rather
than aeons.
It has already been suggested that the last of these changes
occupied only the three or four hundred years which
divide our own epoch from the one which preceded the
scientific revolution. For this suggestion was implied
throughout, in the attempt which was made in Chapters VI
and VII to trace the coming into being ofour own collective
representations. It is now the task of this book to demonstrate in rather more detail, if that be possible, that the men
7i
Medieval Environment
of the middle ages, and their predecessors, did indeed live
in a different world from ours. The difficulties in the way of
such a demonstration are very great, because, as I have
pointed out, it is the very nature ofour own representations
that they are fixed, as a sort of idols to which all representative significance is denied, and which cannot therefore (so
it is felt) have altered merely with the alteration of human
consciousness. Since it is, for us, a matter of 'common
sense', if not of definition, that phenomena are wholly independent of consciousness, the impulse to ignore or explain
away any evidence to the contrary is almost irresistible. Yet, as with most inveterate prejudices, the reward of
overcoming it requites the exertion. The idols are tough and
hard to crack, but through the first real fissure we make in
them we find ourselves looking, how deeply, into a new
world ! If the eighteenth-century botanist, looking for the
first time through the old idols ofLinnaeus's fixed and timeless classification into the new perspective of biological
evolution, felt a sense of liberation and of light, it can have
been but a candle-flame compared with the first glimpse we
now get of the familiar world and human history lying
together, bathed in the light of the evolution of consciousness. That, in a colloquial or metaphorical sense, the man ofthe
middle ages lived in 'a different world' from ours, is obvious
enough from the record. Half an hour spent with the illu- minated manuscripts in the British Museum would be
enough to convince anyone of this, even if there were no
cathedrals, no Mystery plays, no frescoes, no heraldry, no
psychomachies, no Virgil legend, no Divine Comedy still surviving. But we have here not merely to notice the fact that medieval man expressed himselfin so different a manner
and in such different terms from those which are natural to
us, but to ask the question why he did so. Besides producing
representations in perception and memory, men reproduce
them in their language and art; it is, indeed, in this way that
the representations become collective. Through language
Medieval Environment
and traditional art we come without effort to share in the
collective representations of our own age and our own
community. But where we are concerned with those of an
alien or a vanished community, we cannot bring ourselves
to the point of sharing them without making an unwonted
effort. We have to try to experience them as vitally as ifthey were ours—but our own keep on getting in the way.
The first obvious impression which the art and literature
of the Middle Ages make upon us is one of 'quaintness'
—
that quaintness which disgusted the eighteenth and fasci- nated the nineteenth century. If we go farther and ask in
what this quaintness consists, I think we shall find that it arises, above all, from their combining and, as we should
say, confusing two ways of approaching phenomena; ways
which we are accustomed to regard as quite distinct from
one another. These are the literal, on the one hand, and the
symbolic or metaphorical, on the other. In their art, for
instance, they felt none of the awkwardness we do about
representing invisible or spiritual events and circumstances
by material means. The same human figures, costumes,
artefacts, etc., could be used in the same picture or carving
as literal reproductions of the physical world and as representations of a spiritual world. A farm cart would do for
Elijah's fiery chariot on its way up to heaven—and look at any fresco of the Last Judgment.
In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries men who
wanted to paint or sculpt an angel, for instance, or a departed spirit, felt obliged to supply him with a special,
unearthly costume—often rather like a nightgown. But then
there seemed nothing incongruous in using the garments of
every day. Certainly, in both periods, angels were often
represented with wings, but this really only emphasizes the
difference—for they would add wings to the ordinary
human figure ordinarily attired, whereas it would clearly be
aesthetically impossible and theologically a joke in bad taste to attach wings to a lounge suit. It may be suggested that
there is a very simple explanation, namely that lounge suits 73
Medieval Environment
are 'prosaic', whereas armour, tabards and hose are not. But
this is no explanation at all, unless we can also say what we
mean by 'prosaic', and therefore why our clothes are prosaic,
whereas medieval clothes were not. If we cannot, then we
are merely left with another form of the same statement. A
prosaic object, in other words, is a non-representational one;
and our clothes are prosaic, because our minds are literal.
It is very important to realize that, when it is said that the
man of medieval and earlier times confused the literal and
symbolical approach, what is meant is, that he confused or
rather combined the two states of mind which we to-day mean by those words. Indeed, we shall find throughout that
the main difficulty that prevents us from breaking through
the idols to the actuality of history, that is, to the evolution
ofconsciousness, lies in the fact that we go on using the same words without realizing how their meanings have shifted.
Thus, exceptional men did sometimes distinguish between
the literal and the symbolical use ofwords and images before
the scientific revolution. On the question of hell, for instance, John Scotus Erigena distinguished in the seventh
century between the symbol and the symbolized or the
representation and the represented, emphasizing that the
sufferings of hell are purely spiritual, and that they are described physically for the benefit of simple understandings.
The point I am making is that, precisely to those simple
understandings, the 'physical' and 'literal' themselves were
not what 'physical' and''literal' are to us. Rather, the phenomena themselves carried the sort of multiple significance
which we to-day only find in symbols. Accordingly, the
issue, in a given case, between a literal and a symbolical
interpretation, though it could be raised, had not the same
sharpness as of contradictories. Later, as the representations
hardened into idols, the distinction between the two grew
sharper and sharper until, in the nineteenth century, the
strain of a 'literal' interpretation became intolerable even to
simple understandings, and the notion of, for instance, a
'physical' hell was decisively rejected as an impossible super74
Medieval Environment
stition. And so indeed it is, ifby 'physical' we mean the idols
of which our physical world to-day consists. 'Who now
believes,' inquired F. C. Conybeare in 1910, 'in a God who
has a right and a left hand?' 1 When the 'things' of the physical world have become
idols, then indeed the literal interpretation excludes the
symbolical, and vice versa. But where every thing is a representation, at least half-consciously experienced as such,
there is as yet no such contradiction. For a representation
experienced as such is neither literal nor symbolical; or, alternatively, it is both at the same time. Nothing is easier
for us, than to grasp a purely literal meaning; and if we are capable at all ofgrasping, in addition, a symbolical or 'fancy'
meaning, as we do in poetry, we are in no danger of confusing the one with the other.2 Before the scientific revolution, on the other hand, it was the concept of the 'merely
literal' that was difficult. And therefore the writer who is referred to as Dionysius the Areopagite, and Thomas
Aquinas and others after him, emphasized the importance of
using the humblest and most banal images, as symbols for
purely spiritual truths or beings. For only in this way could
a representation be safely polarized into symbol and
symbolized, into literal and metaphorical.
We have seen that phenomena are experienced collectively as representations, and not as idols, where there is a survival of participation. In attempting to show that, right
down to the period which ended with the scientific revolution, there was such a survival, I can do no more than give
a few selected indications. The reader must go elsewhere for a full and detailed account of the medieval outlook.
Since participation is a way of experiencing the world in
immediacy, and not a system of ideas about experience, or about the world, we obviously shall not find any contemporary description of it. When we come to contemporary
1 Myth, Magic and Morals.
2 The meaning, for instance, of the word garden in the line: There is a garden in herface, is unlikely to be mistaken for the literal meaning.
Medieval Environment
philosophy and theories ofknowledge, we shall indeed find
explicit reference to participation, but for the moment we are concerned with the ordinary man's experience and not with
what philosophers thought about that experience. Contemporary books were written, and contemporary science was
expounded, for people assumed to share the collective
representations of the writer, and accordingly our evidence
must be sought more often in what is implied or assumed
than in what is actually affirmed. We can only reconstruct
the collective representations of another age obliquely.
Let us make the attempt for a moment. Let us try to place
ourselves inside the skin of a medieval 'man in the street',
and imagine ourselves looking out at the world through his
eyes and thinking about it—not speculating, but thinking
ordinary habitual thoughts—with his mind. We are not
concerned with what he believed as an obligation of faith or a point of doctrine remote from experience. We are concerned with the sort of thing he took for granted.
To begin with, we will look at the sky. We do not see it as empty space, for we know very well that a vacuum is something that nature does not allow, any more than she
allows bodies to fall upwards. If it is daytime, we see the air
filled with light proceeding from a living sun, rather as our own flesh is filled with blood proceeding from a living
heart. If it is night-time, we do not merely see a plain,
homogeneous vault pricked with separate points oflight, but
a regional, qualitative sky, from which first of all the different sections of the great zodiacal belt, and secondly the
planets and the moon (each ofwhich is embedded in its own
revolving crystal sphere) are raying down their complex
influences upon the earth, its metals, its plants, its animals
and its men and women, including ourselves. We take it for granted that those invisible spheres are giving forth an
inaudible music—the spheres, not the individual stars (as
Shakespeare's Lorenzo instructed Jessica, much later, when
the representation had already begun to turn into a vague
superstition). As to the planets themselves, without being
Medieval Environment
specially interested in astrology, we know very well that
growing things are specially beholden to the moon, that
gold and silver draw their virtue from sun and moon
respectively, copper from Venus, iron from Mars, lead
from Saturn. And that our own health and temperament
are joined by invisible threads to these heavenly bodies we
are looking at. We probably do not spend any time thinking
about these extra-sensory links between ourselves and the
phenomena. We merely take them for granted.
We turn our eyes on the sea—and at once we are aware
that we are looking at one ofthe four elements, ofwhich all things on earth are composed, including our own bodies.
We take it for granted that these elements have invisible
constituents, for, as to that part of them which is incorporated in our own bodies, we experience them inwardly
as the four 'humours' which go to make up our temperament. (To-day we still catch the lingering echo of this participation, when Shakespeare makes Mark Antony say
of Brutus:
. . . The elements
So mixed in him, that Nature might stand up
And say to all the world, This was a man.)
Earth, Water, Air and Fire are part of ourselves, and we of
them. And through them also the stars are linked with our
inner being, for each constellated Sign of the Zodiac is specially related to one of the four elements, and each
element therefore to three Signs.
A stone falls to the ground—we see it seeking the centre
of the earth, moved by something much more like desire
than what we to-day call gravity. We prick our finger and
a drop of red blood appears. We look at the blood . . . but
for the moment I will not pursue this any further. The
reader who is at all acquainted with the productions of the
medieval mind, its alchemy, its medicine, its herb-lore, its bestiaries, and so forth, can do it better for himself. For the
reader who is not so acquainted there are the libraries
—
Medieval Environment
better still, there are those inexhaustible encyclopaedias in
stone, the cathedral carvings.
Whatever their religious or philosophical beliefs, men of
the same community in the same period share a certain
background-picture of the world and their relation to it. In our own age—whether we believe our consciousness to be
a soul ensconced in a body, like a ghost in a machine, or some inextricable psychosomatic mixture—when we think
casually, we think of that consciousness as situated at some
point in space, which has no special relation to the universe
as a whole, and is certainly nowhere near its centre. Even
those who achieve the intellectual contortionism of denying
that there is such a thing as consciousness, feel that this denial comes from inside their own skins. Whatever it is that we ought to call our 'selves', our bones carry it about
like porters. This was not the background picture before the
scientific revolution. The background picture then was of
man as a microcosm within the macrocosm. It is clear that
he did not feel himself isolated by his skin from the world
outside him to quite the same extent as we do. He was
integrated or mortised into it, each different part of him
being united to a different part of it by some invisible
thread. In his relation to his environment, the man of the
middle ages was rather less like an island, rather more like an embryo, than we are.
XII
SOME CHANGES
In the first chapter of this book it was pointed out that our collective representations compose, not only the world
of everyday experience, but also the world which (apart
from the special case of physics) is investigated by the
sciences. Science did not, of course, begin with the scientific revolution. But in the time before that had done its work,
the world with which science had to deal was not that of
our own day, but a world of the kind sketched in the last chapter. If, to take only one instance, we look at the theories
concerning the blood and its circulation which prevailed
before Harvey, we can at once see from their whole
character that they represent the application of alphathinking to representations quite other than our own. The
background-picture of man as microcosm at the centre of
the world as macrocosm was more than a backgroundpicture for science. There, and in particular in their chemistry, which we should now call alchemy, that picture became explicit as theory. And where it was not explicit, it was still implied. But it went further than this. Just as for us evolution, for instance, besides being both a backgroundpicture and an explicit theory, has spread itself as a way of
thinking, far beyond the confines of biology; or as mechanism has passed from physics into chemistry and
physiology; so the medieval background-picture, of a reciprocal participation between man and the elements by
which he was surrounded, influenced other sciences besides
Some Changes
alchemy. Thus, in medicine, the heart was the central organ,
occupying something the same position in the microcosm
of man, as did man himself in the macrocosm. It drew the
blood into itself, in order to replenish it with pneuma or
Vital spirits', after which the blood passed ofits own motion
back again into the system of the body. Instead of a circulation, there were two different kinds of blood; the arterial,
whose function has just been described, and which contained those vital spirits to which we still unknowingly
refer when we speak of 'high' or 'low' spirits; and the
venous, which flowed back and forth in the veins, conveying nourishment.
We saw in Chapter IV that anthropologists have been
particularly struck by the difference between those features
which we ourselves select for attention out of the whole
representation, and the features which a participating consciousness selects. This seems to be well exemplified in the
case of blood, as it appeared and was known before the
seventeenth century. The medieval mind was not particularly interested in the mechanical part of the representation; on the other hand, it was much more vividly aware than we
are of a qualitative difference between arterial blood and
venous blood. Are we sure we are justified in ruling out the
possibility that participated venous blood and participated
arterial blood really are two different kinds of fluid? It is indeed remarkable that earlier still, and down to the time of
Galen, it was thought that the arteries did not contain blood
at all, but only air. Harvey, on the other hand, was definitely interested in
the mechanism of the heart—even to the extent of talking of
the heart as 'a piece of machinery in which, though one
wheel gives motion to another, yet all the wheels seem to move simultaneously'. This enabled him ultimately to demonstrate the circulation ofthe blood. And his discovery,
like many of the discoveries made in the non-mechanical
sciences, had two clearly traceable consequences. On the one
hand, it corrected a number of palpable mechanical errors 80
Some Changes —for instance, the belief that air passed directly from the
lungs to the heart, and that the blood flowed both ways
through the veins. On the other hand, it contributed towards the bringing about of an exclusively mechanomorphic view of both blood and heart.
The second consequence took effect only gradually.
Harvey himself still assumed the presence ofvital spirits and
he retained enough participating consciousness to write
with enthusiasm on the subject of the heart as the central
organ—like a sort of sun—of the human body. The like
enthusiasm is observable in Copernicus writing of the
'macrocosmic' sun; and it is clear that a relation between the
two was assumed by both men. For Harvey's discovery of
the circulation of the blood was based, quite consciously,
upon two Aristotelian and medieval doctrines, namely,
the participating and formal relation between macrocosm
and microcosm to which I have already referred in this chapter, and the 'perfection' of circular motion to which I referred earlier in the book. Thus, the ousting of participation is not a logical consequence of a more accurate observation of the mechanical element in any representation; it
is a practical one. If we are present at a church service,
where a censer is swinging, we may either attend to the
whole representation or we may select for attention the
actual movement to and fro of the censer. In the latter case, if we are a Galileo, 1 we may discover the law ofthe pendulum. It is a good thing to discover the law ofthe pendulum.
It is not such a good thing to lose, for that reason, all interest
in, and ultimately even perception of, the incense whose
savour it was the whole purpose of the pendulum to release. Participation ceases to be conscious precisely because we
cease to attend to it. But, as already pointed out, participation does not cease to be a fact because it ceases to be
conscious. It merely ceases to be what I have called 'original'
participation.
1 Actually it was not a censer, but a lamp in the Cathedral of Pisa which he was watching.
Some Changes
From a slightly different point of view, all this could be
expressed by saying that words like blood and heart have
shifted their meanings. In maintaining this, I shall of course be accused of confusing the word with the thing. But this
is a fallacy. The real confusion lies hidden in the indictment.
It is indeed possible, when thinking of the relation between
words and things, to forget what 'things', that is phenomena, are; namely, that they are collective representations
and, as such, correlative to human consciousness. But those
who decline to adopt this expedient, will find it impossible
to sever the 'thing' by a sort of surgical operation from its name. The relation between collective representations and
language is of the most intimate nature; and if charges of
muddled thinking are to be brought, I do not hesitate to say
that the boot is on the other leg. Those who insist that
words and things are in two mutually exclusive categories
of reality are simply confusing the phenomena with the
particles. They are trying to think about the former as though they were the latter. Whereas, by definition, it is only the unrepresented which is independent of collective
human consciousness and therefore of human language.
The word blood is a particularly striking example of such
a shift of meaning, since it is a substance with which, as it swings to and fro from heart and lung at the centre to
visible complexion and sensitive skin at the periphery, we
can still in some measure feel ourselves to be united by an
extra-sensory link. We can, for example, both feel within
ourselves and see through the curtain of another's flesh how
instantly it answers to fear and shame. Thus, we still participate 'originally' in our own blood up to the very moment
when it becomes phenomenal by being shed. From that
moment on, we abandon it to the mechanomorphism which
characterizes all our phenomena. For us—that is, for our
casual awareness, though not for our scientific concepts
—
there are really two kinds ofblood: the shed and the unshed;
rather as for Galen there were two kinds of blood, the venous and the arterial. Both of Galen's were participated;
Some Changes
whereas only one of ours is. We refer to what remains of
that participation when we speak, with a psychological
intention, of 'bad blood' or 'hot blood'. We no longer
distinguish where he did. We do distinguish where he did
not, polarizing the old meaning of blood into two, a metaphorical and a literal one. And our medicine interests itself almost exclusively in the literal one, that is, in the idol.
XIII
THE TEXTURE OF MEDIEVAL THOUGHT
Once the fact of participation is granted, the connection
between words and things must, we have seen, be admitted
to be at any time a very much closer one than the last two
or three centuries have assumed. Conscious participation,
moreover, will be aware of that connection; and original
participation was conscious. It is only if we approach it in
this light that we can hope to understand the extreme preoccupation of medieval learning with words—and with
grammar, dialectic, rhetoric, logic and all that has to do
with words. For words—and particularly nouns—were not
then, and could not then be regarded as mere words. I was
taught in my first class at school to recite aloud with the
rest of the class: 'A noun is the name of anything/ and the
philosophers, from Plotinus to Aquinas, were wont to treat
at the same time of words and things under the inclusive
topic of 'names'. Thus, Dionysius in his De Divinis Nominibus, and Aquinas in the 13 th Quaestio ofPart I ofthe Summa
('concerning the names of God') and in the little treatise De Natura Verbi Intellectus and elsewhere, are both concerned, not with philology but with epistemology and
metaphysics.
In the last two chapters I have said a little of the world as
it was for the common man and a little of the world as it was for science immediately before the scientific revolution.
Now I am to say a little of the world as it was shown forth
in philosophy. In all cases the plan ofthis book as well as the
The Texture of Medieval Thought
time at my disposal both for study and for writing, have
determined that that little must be a very little indeed. I am
only too well aware that a whole book, instead of a chapter,
would not be too much to give to the philosophy alone of
that lost world. Once again, it is a lost world—although the
whole purpose of this book is to show that its spiritual
wealth can be, and indeed, if incalculable disaster is to be
avoided, must be regained. No good can come of any
attempt to hark back to the original participation from
which it sprang.
That lost world, then, was a world in which both phenomenon and name were felt as representations. On the one hand 'the word conceived in the mind is representative of
the whole of that which is realized in thought' (Verbum
igitur in mente conceptum est repraesentativum omnis ejus quod
actu intelligitur). 1 But on the other hand the phenomenon
itself only achieves full reality (actus) in the moment of
being 'named' by man; that is, when that in nature which it represents is united with that in man which the name represents. Such naming, however, need not involve vocal
utterance. For the name or word is not mere sound, or mere
ink. For Aquinas, as for Augustine, there are, anterior to the
uttered word, the intellect-word, the heart-word and the
memory-word (verbum intellectus, verbum cordis, verbum
memoriae). The human word proceeds from the memory,
as the Divine Word proceeds from the Father.2 Proceeds
from it, yet remains one with it. For the world is the thought
of God realized through His Word. Thus, the Divine Word
is also forma exemplarisf the phenomena are its representations; as the human word is the representation of intellectus in actu. But, once again, the phenomenon itself only
achieves its full reality (actus) in being named or thought by
man; for thinking in act is the thing thought, in act; just as the senses in act, are the things sensed, in act. (Intellectus in
1 Summa Theologica, ia, Qu. 34, a. 3.
2 De Differentia Divini Verbi et Humani; De Natura Verbi Intellectus, etc.
3 Summa, ia, Qu. 3, a. 8, ad 2. 85
The Texture of Medieval Thought
actu est intelligibile in actu; sicut sensus in actu est sensibile in
actu. 1 And elsewhere St. Thomas expressly ratifies the
dictum of Aristotle in his De Anima, that 'the soul is in a manner all things' : (Anima est quodammodo omnia).2 It is against a background of thoughts like these, and of
the collective representations on which they were based,
that we must see the medieval conception of the Seven
Liberal Arts, with Grammar at their head, followed immediately by Rhetoric and Dialectic. To learn about the
true nature of words was at the same time to learn about the
true nature of things. And it was the only way. We may
reflect how the meaning ofthe word grammar itself has been
polarized, since the scientific revolution, into the study of
'mere' words, on the one hand, and, on the other, into the
half-magical gramarye, which altered its form to glamour and was useful for a season to the poets, before it was debased.
One may reflect also on the frequent appearances made by
Grammar and the other liberal arts, as persons, in medieval
allegory, and how easily and naturally they mingle there
with the strange figure of the Goddess Natura—at once so
like and so unlike the Persephone of Greek mythology.
This might easily lead us into a consideration of allegory
itself—a literary form which is so little to our taste, and yet was so popular and all-pervasive in the Middle Ages. Is it not clear that we find allegory desiccated precisely because,
for us, mere words are themselves desiccated—or rather
because, for us, words are 'mere'? For us, the characters in an allegory are 'personified abstractions', but for the man
of the Middle Ages Grammar or Rhetoric, Mercy or
'Daunger', were real to begin with, simply because they were
'names'. And names could be representations, in much the same solid-feeling way as things were. For this very reason we are in some danger of confusing
their allegory with the 'symbolism' in which we ourselves
are again beginning to be interested, or at least ofjudging
them by the same standards. This is an error. Symbolism
1 Ibid., ia, Qu. 12, a. 2. 3.
2 Ibid., ia, Qu. 14, a. I. 86
The Texture of Medieval Thought
often expresses itself in language, as so much else does,
though it can also express itself through other media. Yet
the essence of symbolism is, not that words or names, as such, but that things or events themselves, are apprehended
as representations. But this, as we have seen, is the normal
way of apprehension for a participating consciousness. Our
'symbolical' therefore is an approximation to, or a variant
of, their 'literal'. Even when they got down to the bedrock
ofliteral, they still experienced that rock as a representation.
And so Aquinas, in dealing with the use of language in
Holy Scripture, first divides its meaning into literal and
spiritual and then subsumes the allegorical (and certain other)
interpretations under the heading of spiritual. But when he comes to the sensus parabolicus (which is our 'symbolical') he
includes it in the literal (sub literali continetur). When, for
example, in the Bible, 'the right arm of God' is spoken of,
'It is not the figure, but the figured which is the literal meaning'. 1 All this will bear some meditation.
Indeed, to understand how the word 'literal' has changed
its meaning is to understand the heart ofthe matter. For our
problem is, precisely, to transport ourselves into the interior
of minds, for which the ordinary way of looking at, and of
thinking about, phenomena, was to look at and to think
about them as appearances—representations. For which,
therefore, knowledge was defined, not as the devising of
hypotheses, but as an act of union with the represented behind the representation. And it is only by reconstructing in
imagination, and not just in theory, the nature of the representations they confronted that we can hope really to understand the mode of their thinking. If we approach it from
this end, instead of, as is usual, by way of our own representations and our own consequent distortions of the then
meanings of their terms, then the Scholastic terminology
does indeed spring into life for us—form and matter, actus and potentia, species, essence, existence, the active and the
passive intelligence, and the rest. We must forget all about
1 Sutnma, ia, Qu. I, a. 10, ad 3. 87
The Texture of Medieval Thought
our 'laws of nature', those interposed, spectral hypotheses,
before we can understand the 'forms' of medieval scholasticism. For the forms determined the appearances, not as laws
do, but rather as a soul determines a body; and indeed the
animal and human soul was defmed as the 'form' of the
body. We must forget all about causality, as we understand
it, if we want to understand how the form was also causa
exemplaris. But there is not anything to forget, for we have
not even a transmuted survival, ofthat actus: potentia polarity,
which was the very life-blood of Scholastic thought, central
in its heart and manifest, through its capillaries, at all points
of its surface organism. Being is potential existence; existence actualizes being. Yet, in the universe, actus precedes
potentia; for out of potentiality a subject cannot be brought
except by a being that is actual. The being of God is wholly
actual, and is at the same time His existence; but, for creatures, it is only their existence which actualizes—actualizes
not their own being, but the being of God, which they
participate. Everywhere around us we must see creatures in a state ofpotentia being raised to actus: and yet, behind the
appearances, the actus is already there. What is the intellectual soul but the potentiality of determining the species of
things? And what are the phenomena themselves? Actually
the likenesses or representations of all sorts of 'species'— but
potentially (that is, in the condition described as in potentia)
immaterial in the soul itself. 1 Phenomena and mind in
perpetual interplay, with 'species' hovering somewhere
between them as the moment in which the one becomes the
other
—
Anima enim quasi transformata est in rem per speciem}
'Knowledge', for such a consciousness, was conceived of
as the perfection or completion of the 'naming' process of
thought. In ordinary thinking or speaking, as in perception,
the participation was a half-conscious process. But knowledge was an actual union with the represented behind the
representation. 'The knowledge of things that are, is the
1 Ibid., i a, Qu. 79, a 4, ad 4.
2 Aquinas, De Natura Verbi Intellectus. 88
The Texture of Medieval Thought
things', {Cognitio eorum, quae sunt, ea, quae sunt, est) wrote
John Scotus Erigena in the seventh century, quoting Dionysius. 'Nothing', wrote Aquinas, 'is known except truth
—
which is the same as being.' (nihil enim scitur nisi verum, quod cum ente convertitur) 1 Or, as a mean between potentia and
actus, it was the process of actualization of the soul's potentiality to become what it contemplated, and thus, a stage on
its journey back to God. God's own knowledge was alike
the cause of all things and identical with His substance, and
man participated in the being of God. Indeed, it was only
by virtue of that participation that he could claim to have
any being.
Now, participation, as an actual experience, is only to be
won for our islanded consciousness of to-day by special
exertion. It is a matter, not of theorizing, but of 'imagination' in the genial or creative sense of the word, and therefore our first glimpse of it is commonly an aesthetic experi- ence ofsome sort, derived from poetry or painting. And yet
this experience, so foreign to our habit, is one which we
positively must acquire and apply before we can hope to understand the thought of any philosopher earlier than the
scientific revolution. Without it we shall not really understand what they mean when they use the commonest terms —species and genus, form and matter, subject and accident, cause and effect. Instead, we shall clumsily substitute a meaning of our own. In the work of Thomas Aquinas, in
particular, the word participate or participation occurs almost
on every page, and a whole book could be written—indeed one has been written2—on the uses he makes of it. It is not
a technical term ofphilosophy and he is no more concerned
to define it than a modern philosopher would be, to define
some such common tool of his thought as, say, the word
compare. Only in one passage, from the whole of his voluminous works, according to M. Geiger, did he feel it neces1 Summa, ia, Qu. I, a I, 2.
2 L.-B. Geiger, La Participation dans la Philosophic de S. Thomas d'Aquin.
Paris, 1942. 89
The Texture of Medieval Thought
sary to indicate its meaning, and this he did principally by
illustrating it. Thus, after telling us that the species participates the genus, and the subject the accident, that matter
participates form and effect participates cause, he gives us a glimpse of what all these participations signify to him, by
adding: 'Suppose we say that air participates the light ofthe
sun, because it does not receive it in that clarity in which it
is in the sun/1 At one end of the scale the subject participates its predicate2
; at the other end, a formal or hierarchical participation
per similitudinem was the foundation of the whole structure
of the universe; for all creatures were in a greater or lesser degree images or representations, or 'names' of God, and
their likeness or unlikeness did not merely measure, but was
the nearer or more distant emanation of His Being and
Goodness in them. It was a spiritual structure, and much of
it lay beyond the world of appearance altogether. Angels,
for example, are not simply the subject of a separate work,
or a separate chapter of the Summa, but occur everywhere
in it and are as likely to be referred to in a purely epistemological, as in a cosmological, context.
It will be well to point out here that, if I have concentrated on one particular medieval philosopher, rather than
attempted a conspectus of the whole field of medieval
philosophy or theories ofknowledge, it is because that is the
method which a history of consciousness, as distinct from a history of ideas, must adopt. It must attempt to penetrate
into the very texture and activity of thought, rather than to
collate conclusions. It is concerned, semantically, with the
way in which words are used rather than with the product
of discourse. Expressed in terms oflogic, its business is more
with the proposition than with the syllogism and more
with the term than with the proposition. Therefore it must
particularize. It must choose some one, or at best a few
points, for its penetration. It is a question of making the best
choice, and to me the best choice seemed to be the language
1 De HebdomadibuSy cap. 2. 2 Cf. p. 31. 90
The Texture of Medieval Thought
and thought of Thomas Aquinas. I could probably have
found more sensational illustrations of participation in, for
example, Erigena or Albertus. For the Arabians, participation—with a particular intellectual emphasis—was so complete as practically to exclude individual human identity. I should, I think, have found fewer illustrations among the
Nominalists, but they can fairly be regarded as forerunners
of the scientific revolution, in whom the decline of participation cast its shadow before. Moreover, in the mind of
Aquinas, with his enormous erudition, the whole corpus of
medieval thought is in a manner recapitulated; and he is as sober as he is profound.
XIV
BEFORE AND AFTER THE SCIENTIFIC
REVOLUTION
For medieval man, then, the universe was a kind of theophany, in which he participated at different levels, in being,
in thinking, in speaking or naming, and in knowing. And
then—the evolutionary change began. Not, of course, at any given moment, but with anticipations, localized delays,
individual differences. But no beginning is instantaneous
—
otherwise the very word 'begin' would be unnecessary and
indeed meaningless. We need not pay too much attention
to those historians who cautiously refuse to detect any process in history, because it is difficult to divide into periods, or because the periods are difficult to date precisely. The
same objections apply to the process of growth from child
to man. We should rather remind them that, if there is no
process, there is in fact no such thing as history at all, so that
they themselves must be regarded as mere chroniclers and
antiquarians—a limitation which I cannot fancy they would
relish. Moreover, the mental image, which they transfer to
history, of a formless process determined by the chance
impact of events, is itself, as we saw in Chapter IX, a product of the idolatry of the age of literalness. However this may be, and whatever chronological limits
we choose to assign to it, a change there certainly was.
Professor Butterfield has commented well on it: through changes in the habitual use of words, certain
things in the natural philosophy of Aristotle had now
Before and After the Scientific Revolution
acquired a coarsened meaning or were actually misunderstood. It may not be easy to say why such a thing should
have happened, but men unconsciously betray the fact that a certain Aristotelian thesis simply has no meaning
for them any longer—they just cannot think of the stars and heavenly bodies as things without weight even when
the books tells them to do so. Francis Bacon seems unable
to say anything except that it is obvious that these
heavenly bodies have weight, like any other kind of
matter which we meet in our experience. Bacon says, furthermore, that he is unable to imagine the planets as nailed to crystalline spheres; and the whole idea only seems more absurd to him if the spheres in question are supposed to be made of that liquid, aethereal kind ofsubstance which Aristotle had in mind. Between the idea of
a stone aspiring to reach its natural place at the centre of
the universe—and rushing more fervently as it came
nearer home—and the idea of a stone accelerating its descent under the constant force of gravity, there is an
intellectual transition which involves a change in men's
feeling for matter. 1 We have seen that this change in men's feeling for matter
is merely one aspect of a much deeper and more fundamental change. And the change in men's feeling for the
nature of words and of thought was no whit less marked.
Thus, the polarity of actus and potentia had carried perhaps
half the weight of the philosophical thought ofthe Western
mind through all the centuries that elapsed between Aristotle and Aquinas. A medieval philosopher would not have
put the argument as I was obliged to do, when I said in
Chapter III that there is 'no such thing' as unfelt solidity,
just as there is no such thing as an unseen rainbow. He
would have said that both the unseen rainbow and the unfelt matter are in potentia. Yet this polarity, taken for granted
for more than a thousand years by some of the acutest
1 Origins of Modern Science, p. 104. 93
Before and After the Scientific Revolution
intellects the world has ever known—this polarity has
become, for Bacon, a 'frigida distinctio'—mere words!
Again, in the Novum Organum he tells men bluntly that they
ought not to think of 'forms' any more. They are really
more like laws'.
It may be that nothing really exists except individual
bodies, which produce real motion according to law; in
science it is just that law, and the inquiry, discovery and
explanation of it, which are the fundamental requisite
both for the knowledge and for the control of Nature.
And it is that law and its 'clauses', which J mean when I use (chiefly because of its current prevalence and familiarity) the word 'forms'.1 Causa exemplaris is gone, in other words, and mechanical
causality and the idols are already in sight.
If, with the help of some time-machine working in reverse, a man of the Middle Ages could be suddenly trans- ported into the skin of a man of the twentieth century,
seeing through our eyes and with our 'figuration' the objects
we see, I think he would feel like a child who looks for the
first time at a photograph through the ingenious magic ofa stereoscope. 'Oh!' he would say, 'look how they stand outV
We must not forget that in his time perspective had not yet
been discovered, nor underrate the significance of this. True, it is no more than a device for pictorially representing
depth, and separateness, in space. But how comes it that the
device had never been discovered before—or, if discovered, never adopted? There were plenty ofskilled artists, and they
would certainly have hit upon it soon enough if depth in
space had characterized the collective representations they
wish to reproduce, as it characterizes ours. They did not need
it. Before the scientific revolution the world was more like a garment men wore about them than a stage on which
they moved. In such a world the convention of perspective was unnecessary. To such a world other conventions of
1 Novum Organum, II, 2. Author's translation. 94
Before and After the Scientific Revolution
visual reproduction, such as the nimbus and the halo, were
as appropriate as to ours 'they are not. It was as if the observers were themselves in the picture. Compared with us, they felt themselves and the objects around them and the
words that expressed those objects, immersed together in
something like a clear lake of—what shall we say?—of
'meaning', if you choose. It seems the most adequate word.
Aquinas's verbum intellectus was tanquam speculum, in quo res cernitur1 —'like a mirror in which the object is discerned\
It happened that, at a time when I was studying the De
Natura Verbi Intellectus, with that peculiar mixture of perplexity and delight which Thomas's sentences arouse, when
his thinking is at its intensest and tersest, I had the good fortune to receive from a friend the gift ofa volume ofhis own
poems. It seemed to me then, and it still seems to me now,
that in one of them he has managed, without setting out to do so, to convey more vividly than I could ever hope to do,
the qualitative difference between a participating outlook
on the world, and our own. I therefore conclude my
chapter with it. REFLECTION
When hill, tree, cloud, those shadowy forms
Ascending heaven are seen, Their mindless beauty Ifrom far
Admire, a gulf between;
Yet in the untroubled river when
Their true ideas Ifind,
That river, joined in trance with me,
Becomes my second mind.2
1 De Natura Verbi Intellectus.
2 George Rostrevor Hamilton. The Carved Stone. Heinemann. 1952.
XV
THE GRAECO-ROMAN AGE
(MIND AND MOTION)
Earlier in this book, and particularly in Chapter X,
attention was drawn to the difference between a history of
thought or of ideas, on the one hand, and a history of consciousness on the other. I am ofcourse aware that the various
expressions of medieval thought which I have discussed in
the last two chapters are usually explained in quite a
different way. Where I have treated them as arising out of,
and betokening, a slightly different relation between the
mind of man and his phenomena—and that itselfas implying
slightly different phenomena—the ordinary view regards
them purely and simply as a different ideology superimposed on phenomena which were in all respects the same as our own. By tracing this ideology through a chain
ofindividual thinkers—Plato, Aristotle, the Neo-Platonists,
Galen, Isidore of Seville, Vincent de Beauvais, Martianus
Capella and others—the medieval outlook is presented as a
stage in the history of (largely erroneous) ideas.
Now one outstanding thinker does, of course, pass on his
ideas to others, and especially so in an age when books are few and hard to come by. There is, therefore, also a valid
and significant history of ideas as such. But the irreconcilable conflict between the two approaches—if what we are seeking is a fundamentally adequate history of the human
mind—becomes especially apparent when we look back, as I endeavoured to do in the last chapter, on the ideas which
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
the Western mind has formed in the past about this very
question, of its own relation to the phenomena, or in other
words, when we survey its theories of knowledge. We
must, then, make our choice. The whole basis of epistemology from Aristotle to Aquinas assumed participation,
and the problem was merely the precise manner in which
that participation operated. We can either conclude that
this persistent assumption was a piece of elaborate self- deception, which just happened to last, not only from
Aristotle but from the beginnings ofhuman thought down
to the fifteenth or sixteenth century a.d., or we can assume
that there really was participation. I should find the second
hypothesis the less fantastic of the two, even if it were not
necessary, on other and quite unhistorical grounds (as I have
suggested that it is), to accept participation as the permanent
ground of our collective representations.
It is to me rather too flattering a view to take of the
philosophers, not excepting even Aristotle, to regard them
as the efficient and sufficient causes of collective representations shared by the greater part of Western Humanity for
nearly twenty centuries. From the point ofview ofa history
of consciousness, their writings are rather landmarks to indicate the nature of that consciousness, inasmuch as they
represent the human mind in its most wakeful state. At the same time, owing to the subtle link between thinking and
figuration, and to the part played by language in evoking
and sustaining the collective representations, they are by no
means without causal significance. On either view, whether
we choose to treat the history of the mind as a history of
ideology or as a history of consciousness, we shall find that
the continuity between Greek and medieval epistemology
is far more striking than the break; and again, on either
view, the language and the thought of Plato and Aristotle are the twin strands about which that continuity clusters. For the history of the mind—above all, when it is treated
as a history of consciousness—the periods into which it is most convenient and most significant to divide the past
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
history of mankind, will not be those familiar ones which
are adapted to a more superficial record. From the former
point of view, the Graeco-Roman period is seen as extending, practically unbroken, to the end of the Middle Ages.
And beyond it; for the scientific revolution took some three
or four centuries to accomplish completely, and participation died not suddenly but by inches. It survived, for
example, in chemistry longer than in the other sciences and,
after it had vanished altogether, not only from the sciences
but from the collective representations of the educated, or
at least the urbanized part of mankind, its echo continued
to survive in their habitual use oflanguage for the purposes
of thought. It is indeed only in our own time that we are witnessing its eviction from that final stronghold.
We have already seen that logical predication was based
by Aquinas on participation. Is it not apparent to reflection,
that the validity of alpha-thinking, in so far as it is based on
logic, rests on that very participation which it tends, by its operation, to destroy? We can continue to apprehend
phenomena as participating one another, in a way which
renders logical predication meaningful, only as long as we
continue to apprehend them as participated by ourselves.
When that ceases, they become idols, and idols do not participate one another. Nor are they connected in any necessary
way with their names. They are simply 'there'. Accordingly,
the names cannot meaningfully be predicated ofeach other.
In the logic of, for instance, John Stuart Mill, a certain
residue of participation is still tacitly assumed. Where that
has finally vanished and idolatry is total, species, genus and
the rest of them vanish, as realities. Thus, early in the
twentieth century, formal logic begins to boggle much
more heavily at the notion of predication, and really to feel
the difficulty of distinguishing it from an assertion of
numerical identity. Sooner or later a Wittgenstein or an Ayer inevitably arises, convinced that all predication must
be either false or tautologous—a state of mind which was
playfully foreshadowed by Plato more than two thousand
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
years ago in his dialogue, The Sophist. To this point of
view, the belief that in the act of predication the mind is operating, not only on words but on things themselves, can only appear as a kind of survival of totemism. And that
is indeed what it is, if for 'totemism' we substitute 'participation'. 1 The aim of the three preceding chapters was, to characterize the collective representations of the period immediately preceding the scientific revolution, in the particular
respect in which they differed most from our own. They
were mainly illustrated from the close of that period in
what are called the Middle Ages; but most ofwhat was said
applies with equal or greater force to the Graeco-Roman
age proper, in which the period began. As far as participation is concerned, the difference between medieval and
Greek thought is one of degree rather than of kind; and I shall limit myself to a very few observations on the latter. In the first place, there are strong indications in the Greek
language and elsewhere, apart altogether from philosophy,
that the participation of the ordinary man was a livelier and more immediate experience. The gods and naturespirits of Greek mythology, and, in particular, the whole
Dionysian element in the cults, linked man and nature in a unity which for a very good reason could not, as we shall
see, and did not survive the impact ofChristianity. But apart
from religion, if we are attentive to the nuances ofthe Greek
language, we shall find many signs of a living participation
in nature—especially perhaps the nature of man's own
bodily processes—of which we to-day know next to no1 Cf. pp. 31 and 90. Very shortly, the difficulty about predication out of
which logical positivism etc. arose is the following: If I say a horse is an animal, then (a) if by the word animal I mean something more, or less, or other than
horse, I have told a he; but (b) if I do not mean by the word animal something more, or less, or other than horse, I have said almost nothing. For I might as well have said a horse is a horse. Hence the attempts we are now witnessing to replace the traditional logic based on predication by a new logic, in which
symbols of algebraic precision refer to 'atomic' facts and events having no vestige of connection with the symbols and no hierarchical relation to each other. 99
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
thing. I feel, moreover, that the superlative quality of
Greek sculpture at its height must be attributed to that participation, rather than to any mere excellence in the craft of
meticulous imitation.
At the philosophical level, we may reflect from this point
of view on the very title of that work of Aristotle from
which Aquinas quotes more freely than from any other. In
English it is On the Soul; in Latin De Anima; but in Greek it
is IJepl fax?}?, and ^xi {psyche) was in Greek the word for
'life' as well as for 'soul'. Again, there is a sinewy quality
in Aristotle's voSsr 77-007x1*0$' and vovz TrafhfriKo* (nous poieti- cus and nous patheticus), which has already faded some- what from their Latin equivalents intellectus agens and intel- lects possibilis. The nous of which Aristotle spoke and
thought was clearly less subjective than Aquinas's intellectus;
and when he deals with the problem of perception, he
polarizes not merely the mind, but the world itself, without
explanation or apology, into the two verbs Troielv and
rraaxeiv (poiein and paschein) ('to do' and 'to suffer'). In the psychological and epistemological contexts in which he
employs them, these two words alone are as untranslatable
as the mentality which they reveal is remote from our own.
It is, for instance, not possible to equate them with the
Aristotelian 'matter' and 'form', though matter is certainly
passive and form active. For, in the process of perception
(he tells us) it is the percept which is active and the perceiving organism which is passive. The organ of perception is potentially what the percept already is actually; it 'suffers' something unlike itself, but in doing so becomes like what
it suffers. The actualization (evipyeia) of percept and of
perception are one and the same thing. When we come to
thinking, on the other hand, as distinct from perceiving,
while it is the passive mind (nous patheticus) which gives us our subjectivity, it is the active mind (nous poieticus) which
is operative in the act of knowing. The soul is poiein to the
body's paschein; but soul and body together are (except in
the act of knowing) nous patheticus. Alike in perceiving and
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
in thinking, there is an active and a passive movement, and
in both cases the second is the field for the activity of the
first. All these complex movements, which are the very stuff
of human nature, may be conceived of as potential knowledge; actual knowledge occurs when man becomes wakefully aware of them; for then (vov? yiyverai Svaora1
. . . to 8 avro eOTiv 77 kclt evepyeiav imcrTrjiJLr] rcS rrpayixarLS 2 mind
becomes what it thinks and may be said to know itself. If this kind of psychology was really as tenuous, finedrawn and obscure—or, to use Bacon's word, as 'frigid'
—
as it seems to most people to-day, it is difficult to explain
why, for so many centuries, so many people found it exciting. The true explanation is, once more, that we have lost half the meanings of the key-words in which it is expressed.
Above all, with the disappearance of participation, words
to do with thinking and perceiving and words to do with
movement and space have parted company. Aristotle's
poiein and paschein were for him, not the insubstantial, semimystical abstractions which we make of them, when we
translate them 'active principle' and 'passive principle'. They
were, at the same time, respectively, kivzZv and KiveloQai—
'To-move', and 'To-be-moved'. Locomotion or traction was for the Greek philosophers only one kind of movement,
which included also, change, growth and decay; and the
kinesis, to which Aristotle refers in so many different contexts, was simply not what we mean by 'movement' at all, who think of it as the bare change of position of an idol
in Newtonian space.
Ifwe would gain some idea, not only ofwhat 'movement'
meant before the scientific revolution, but also of that, to
us, either foolish or baffling tendency to connect pure
thought somehow with space, which we have already observed in the case ofPlato's astronomy, we shall find it more
pronounced and explicit in the thought of Plato and his
predecessors than in that of Aristotle and his successors. In
1 Aristotle, De Anima, Bk. Ill, Ch. iv.
2 Ibid., Bk. Ill, Ch. vii. 101
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
the Theaetetus, for instance, Plato tells us that for Heraclitus
and his followers poiein and paschein (let me now call them
action and passion) were the two primary kinds of kinesis,
and that it is out of them that sense-perception arises. Each
of the two was again subdivided into swift and slow. What
we call 'the object' was slow action and what we call the
'subject' slow passion; while what we call the 'quality' ofthe
object was swift action, and what we call 'sensation', swift
passion. It is with such images in our minds that we should
read Plato himself, when he maintains elsewhere that
through perception we share or participate (koiv<x>v€Zv) in
the process of coming into being (ycWo^). It is with such
images in our minds that we should seek to interpret, if we
really wish to enter it, the thought of Aristotle and the
philosophy and science of the Middle Ages in which so much of that thought lived on. As to the relation between thought and space, it is almost
sufficient to read the Timaeus—which, incidentally, was the
principal channel through which the thinking ofPlato and his
predecessors was known to the Middle Ages. In this dialogue,
Plato describes the world as 'a moving image ofeternity'. It
is however not simply a matter of a few revealing uses of
key-words, though of these there are enough and to spare:
as when he tells us that of the seven different kinds of
movement, movement in a circle is ^ ttc/h vovv kcu <f>p6v7)(jiv fiaXurra ofoa—'the one that has most to do with mind and
understanding', or again, that by contemplating the undisturbed revolutions (776/010801) of mind in the heavens we
may make use ofthem for the revolutions of our own intellect, which, though disturbed, are nevertheless akin to the
former. It is rather that the whole development and
structure of thought in the dialogue is such that celestial astronomy and metaphysics are inextricably one. In the
metaphysical discussion of the problem of the one and the
many, of identity and difference (which Plato here names
same and other), the abstract notion of sameness is indistinguishable from 'the Circle of the Same' (namely the cele102
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
stial equator), and the abstract notion of difference is indistinguishable from 'the Circle of the Other' (namely the
Ecliptic, where the planets wander and change).
We have already seen that even in the Middle Ages man's
experience ofspace was clearly different from our own, and
the old tendency to experience as one what we now distinguish absolutely as 'mind', on the one hand, and 'space' on
the other, still finds an echo in the Divine Comedy, especially
when in the ioth Canto of the Paradiso Dante refers to the
celestial revolutions as: Quanto per mente o per loco si gira.1 The impression we get, however, is that it was by then al- ready a good deal nearer to our own than the Greek experience. It is interesting in this connection to observe how
Aristotle selects for criticism precisely that astronomical
metaphysics to which I have just referred, maintaining that
the oneness, or self-identity of nous ought not to be conceived spatially (Kara to fjudyedof) but only numerically,
and that accordingly the Circles ofwhich Plato speaks in the
Timaeus must be ruled out when we are treating ofpsychology. The proper movement of a circle is revolution; but
the proper movement of mind, he insists, is—thinking.
This detachment of the idea of thought, first from the idea
of movement in space, and then from the idea ofmovement
of any sort, must have been no small feat. It was the beginning of true beta-thinking.
Here we may well pause for a moment to refer back to
Harvey's discovery ofthe circulation ofthe blood. It will be
remembered from Chapter XII that this was based on the
perfection of circular motion and on the formal relation
between microcosm and macrocosm. Here then is a striking
example ofthe diminishing experience ofparticipation. First the great circles of the macrocosm are abstracted by Aristotle from the movement of mind and conceived as more
purely spatial, and then, much later, this very abstraction
1 Whatsoever revolves through mind or space. 103
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
facilitates a mechanomorphic conception of the movement
of the blood. Later still, this conception of the blood plays
its part in obliterating from consciousness the whole relation
of microcosm to macrocosm on which it was based.
Although Aristotle was the pupil ofPlato, there are many
good reasons for treating the former as beginning a new
epoch, and the latter as closing an old one, while not forgetting that all such exact limitations of period have about
them something artificial and arbitrary. At some point a thing ceases to be flower and becomes fruit; but who shall say exactly when? In Raphael's fresco of the School of
Athens in the Vatican, the two figures of Plato and Aristotle
stand side by side, the one with raised hand pointing upwards to the heavens, the other pointing earthward down a
flight ofsteps. If, in imagination, we take our stand between
the two, we can indeed look forward, through the thinking
which found expression in Aristotle, to the collective representations of the Western world which were to take their course, through the so-called dark and middle ages, down
to the scientific revolution and beyond. "While through the
other, through the star-and-space-involved thinking of
Plato, we may peer backward into the collective representations of the East and of the past. The cosmogony of Plato was still in the Pythagorean stream, and the tradition that
Pythagoras visited India, whether in itself it be legendary
or historical, is a convenient expression ofa process which is apparent from internal evidence. It is many years now since
Max Miiller pointed to a number of coincidences between
the philosophy of Plato and the Upanishads, among them
the concept of reincarnation, but added that he thought any
actual contact unlikely. But if what has been said in this book (particularly Chapter X) is correct, the progress of
ideas has been as much, or more, a function ofthe evolution
ofconsciousness than its vehicle. That is, ofconsciousness and
its correlative, the phenomena or collective representations.
Accordingly, that evolution is much less dependent on contacts or communications than has generally been supposed.
The Graeco-Roman Age (Mind and Motion)
When we consider, as is here being attempted, the evolution of consciousness as the progressive decline of participation, the emergence of the Greek from the ancient
oriental outlook is a fact which we can contemplate without
being unduly troubled by the absence of biographical details about Pythagoras. Anyone who has struggled for a few
pages with the Vedas in translation, will know that in their
language the entanglement of subject and object, of psychology and natural history, of divine and human, of word
and thing, is such as to render the thought virtually unintelligible to a modern reader—though of course he can make
some kind of 'sense' ofit by paraphrazing it into moralizing
abstractions ofhis own. To take only one instance, the word
Namarupa, or 'name-form', takes us back straight away to a
stage of consciousness at which that surgical operation, to which I referred in Chapter XII, whereby the thing is separated from its name, had not yet begun to be performed.
In the measure that man participates his phenomena, in that measure the name is the form, and the form is the name. At this point, however—that is, with the emergence of
Greek thought, so far as it was Platonically inclined, from
the hitherto almost wholly religious consciousness of the
Orient—I propose to end the movement of this book in the
direction of the past and turn its face once more toward the
present. To do otherwise would, in the first place, require an acquaintance with oriental languages which I do not
possess. But there is another reason. The kind of consciousness which I have hitherto attempted to depict, though
characterized by a participation which we lack, is at least, as it were, within sight of our own. We can—or so I have
thought—catch glimpses ofit which are describable, though
with difficulty, in the idol-infected language which the
scientific revolution has bequeathed to us. But to depict the
kind of consciousness which prevailed at still earlier periods
requires, it seems to me, a different method and a different
terminology. It may well also demand the extension of
historical imagination into a manner of clairvoyance. My
The Graeco-Rontan Age (Mind and Motion)
purpose is the humbler one of establishing, in the language
and imagery of everyday, the bare fact that there has been
an evolution of consciousness; and if that is possible at all,
it is possible within the limits of Pythagoras and Moses.
XVI
ISRAEL
*
We have been tracing the gradual disappearance of participation; and hitherto, save for a passing reference in
Chapter X, we have considered it only in relation to the
growth of that alpha-thinking which first began to play a predominant part in human consciousness with the emergence of Greek civilization from the Orient. But while this was going on, there was another force, quite independent
of it, at work in quite a different way to produce the same
result. This was the religious impulse of the Jewish nation.
And although the two impulses operated to produce the same result, there could hardly be a greater contrast than
that which we find between them.
Turn from an Attic chorus or a Platonic dialogue to, say, the 104th Psalm and you are at once in a different climate
of soul altogether. More than that, you are among different
representations.
Thou deckest thyself with light as it were with a garment;
and spreadest out the heavens like a curtain, we read in verse two, and for a moment we are inclined to feel that the
Psalmist, too, is experiencing the representations as representations, and the world as a theophany. But as we read on,
we are impressed more and more with the enormous difference between this world and the world either of Greek
or of medieval man. If we seek a parallel in Western litera- ture, we shall almost find it more readily in a later age when
participation had nearly vanished—Traherne perhaps, or 107
Israel even Walt Whitman. For here is not only no hint of
mythology, but no real suggestion of manifestation. Everything proclaims the glory of God, but nothing represents
Him. Nothing could be more beautiful, and nothing could
be less Platonic.
The high hills are a refuge for the wild goats; and so are the stony rocks for the conies, but it is not, we are made to
feel, by contemplating these phenomena that we shall rise to the contemplation of the invisible Divinity who brought
them into being. Here, too, the appearances are indeed
grounded in divinity; but they are not grounded in the same way. They are not appearances—still less, 'names'
—
o/God. They are things created by God. There is, in short,
nothing to suggest 'immanence', and everything to suggest
the contrary.
If, moreover, we review the Old Testament as a whole,
we shall scarcely find there suggested what we find assumed
by both Aristotle and Aquinas, namely, that knowledge of
God's creation can become knowledge of God. In the Old
Testament the relation of man to God is the only thing that
is of any importance at all, but it has nothing to do with
detailed knowledge—unless by that we mean a knowledge
of the moral law. Ofknowledge, as conscious participation
in the divine ground ofnature, and thus in the Spirit of God
Himself, we hear no whisper. The Jew could rejoice in the
appearances; but he was not curious about them. He was
not interested in them. He was, above all, detached from
them.
We have seen that, before the days of 'hypotheses to save
the appearances', knowledge was inconceivable except as a form of participation, and we cannot resist the conclusion
that this detachment from knowledge arose, in the case of
the Jews, not so much from any want of mental alertness as from a positive objection to participation as such. We can- not resist this conclusion because the whole history of the
race, from Exodus onwards, is the story of that chronic
objection.
Israel
Participation and the experience of phenomena as representations go hand in hand; and the experience of representations, as such, is closely linked with the making of images.
The children of Israel became a nation and began their
history in the moment when Moses, in the very heart ofthe
ancient Egyptian civilization, delivered to them those ten
commandments, which include the unheard-of injunction:
'Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image or any
likeness of anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the
earth beneath, or that is in the water under the earth/ This
is perhaps the unlikeliest thing that ever happened. As far as we know, in every other nation at that time there prevailed
unquestioned the participating consciousness which apprehends the phenomena as representations and naturally
expresses itself in making images. For the Jews, henceforward, any dealings with those nations were strictly forbidden. Everywhere throughout the world original participation was in full swing. For the Jews, from that moment
on, original participation, and anything smacking of it, became a deadly sin. And what is the Old Testament but
the tale of their long struggle against that very sin, their
repeated relapses and their final victory?
By the Jewish nation participation was even apprehended
as a kind ofincontinence; and it often involved incontinence
in the narrower sense. Call before your mind the picture of
Phinehas in Shittim, seizing a javelin in his right hand and
staying the general relapse into idolatry by transfixing his
compatriot in the very arms of the Midianitish woman
—
and you have a device which will serve well enough for
Israel's escutcheon; as Pallas Athene, new-born fully armed,
from the brain of Zeus, will serve as a device for the Greeks,
To be intensely aware ofparticipation is, for man, to feel the
centre of energy in himself identified with the energy of
which external nature is the image. Thus, in the religious
aspect, original participation has always tended to express
itself in cults of a phallic nature. The proper role played by
the phallic emblem, as image of man's participation in a 109
Israel
Nature apprehended (as later also in myth and poetry) as female, may be easily conceived. The degeneration of such
cults into orgiastic rites and excesses is equally easy—or, for
those with no understanding of participation, much easier —to imagine.
The brute acceptance of phenomena at their face value,
which was contemned by Plato, is paralleled, in the sphere
of the will, by the sensuality which seeks repose or self- extinction in the contacts of the senses, taken as ends in
themselves. Both are the passive 'expense' ofspirit, replacing
its active manifestation. Moreover, participating cults naturally cluster about man-made images; artificial representations evoke and focus the experience of nature as representation; the grove is rendered more numinous by
the idol in the grove. Thus the ritual avowal ofparticipation was closely associated with the worship of idols, and the
second commandment, already quoted, concludes with the
injunction: 'Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor
serve them.' Indeed the Jews were not only forbidden to
make images; they were not only forbidden to adore or to serve them; they were enjoined to destroy them: 'Ye shall destroy their altars, break their images and cut down their
groves/
Now in this book I have consistently applied the term
idol to the collective representations characteristic ofto-day;
I have even defined it, for my purposes, as 'a representation or image which is not experienced as such'. But the heathen
idols which the Jews reprobated were experienced as such;
they were participated. It may be felt, therefore, that the
term was ifl-chosen. The answer to this objection really lies in the book itself, taken as a whole—indeed it is the book;
but the following observations may not be out of place
here.
In a wider frame of reference than that hitherto adopted,
idolatry may be defined as the valuing ofimages or representations in the wrong way and for the wrong reasons; and an
idol, as an image so valued. More particularly, idolatry is no
Israel
the effective tendency to abstract the sense-content from the
whole representation and seek that for its own sake, trans- muting the admired image into a desired object. This
tendency seems always to have been latent in original participation and, if we could peer deep enough into the foundations of the world, we might find it written there that
alpha-thinking itself is one of the forms it takes—perhaps
the noblest, certainly the subtlest and most lasting form. At
all events, the word idol has long come to denote, not the
image as such (as the Greek eidolon originally did), but the
image on its way to becoming an object. It does not, therefore, seem to me to be stretching its meaning unduly to
extend it to images which have finished that journey.
Striking, as the Jews did, not only at the practice of
idolatry, but at the whole religion of the Gentiles centred
round it, their impulse was to destroy, not merely that
which participation may become, but participation itself. Original participation is, as pointed out in Chapter VI, the
sense that their stands behind the phenomena, and on the other side of them from man, a represented, which is of the same nature as man. It was against this that Israel's face was
set. The devotee in the presence of the totem feels himself
and the totem to be filled with the same 'mana'. They are, both of them, 'stopping-places for mana'. It was this state of affairs which Israel consciously arose to destroy. The
idols, their Psalmist insisted, were not filled with anything.
They were mere hollow pretences of life. They had no
'within'.
Their idols are silver and gold: even the work of mens
hands.
They have mouths; and speak not: eyes have they, and see not. They have ears, and hear not: noses have they, and smell not. They have hands, and handle not: feet have they, and walk
not: neither speak they through their throat. And, as to their representing anything ofthe same nature as man, he added ominously:
in
Israel
They that make them are like unto them: and so are all such
as put their trust in them.1 There is, accordingly, the deepest imaginable contrast
between the non-participation achieved by the children of
Israel under the leadership of Moses, and the non-participation achieved by the pagan and Christian West under the
influence of Aristotle, though the former accrued in the course of time to the latter. We will here consider three
special differences. In the first place, there were no geometrical or mechanical hypotheses to render the appearances
'idols' in the sense in which the word is used in this book.
If the children of Israel were enjoined not to worship 'the sun or the moon or any other star', it was because they were
tempted by the glory of these appearances to do that very
thing. They refrained because they were commanded to
refrain, not because they had been educated to see the
greater light and the less as a ball of gas and a ball of rock,
which just happened to be there. It was not, in other words,
a materialist non-participation. Secondly, their collective
representations were necessarily involved with and coloured
by their language, and the Ancient Hebrew tongue has a
vocally representational quality which far exceeds that ofany
European language living or dead. I shall return to this aspect in a subsequent chapter.
The third difference cannot be displayed in quite such a summary fashion. According to the Old Testament, shortly
before the Israelites took their departure from Egypt, the
name of the God of Israel was for the first time revealed to them through their representative Moses. And about this Name two things are to be particularly noted. It was re- garded as, for the most part, too holy to be communicable.
Thus, although in the Psalms, for instance, it will be found
written, where the word 'Lord' or 'God' is written in the
Authorized Version, yet, when it was read aloud, other names such as
' Adonai' (Lord) or 'Elohim' were (at all events
1 Ps. CXV. 112
Israel
by the third century B.C.) vocally substituted. The Name
itself was pronounced only by the priests in the Temple
when blessing the people or by the High Priest on the Day
of Atonement. Other precautions and uses emphasized and
preserved its ineffable quality.
Typographically, the Name is represented by four
Hebrew consonants. Etymologically, it represents a slight
modification of the Hebrew verb 'to be', which also signified 'to breathe'. In Exodus hi, 14—the first revelation—the
first person singular of this verb (yhyh) occurs twice, as a verb ('1 am that 1 am') and once as a noun ('Thus shalt thou
say unto the children of Israel, 1 am hath sent me unto
you.'). In the following verse the third person, yhwh
(perhaps the nearest equivalent in English sounds of the socalled 'Tetragrammaton'), 1 is substituted:
And God said moreover unto Moses, Thus shalt thou
say unto the children of Israel: 7\W God of your fathers,
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, hath sent me unto you: this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
The Hebrew word for 'Jew' is derived from the same
verb; so that a devout Jew could not name his race without
recalling, nor affirm his own existence without tending to
utter, the Tetragrammaton. Written, as all Hebrew words
were, without vowels, when any true child ofIsrael perused
the unspoken Name, ntrP must have seemed to come whispering up, as it were, from the depths of his own being!
That this, or something like it, was increasingly the case
is at least suggested by the 'progress' we note between the
account in Exodus hi of the experience of Moses and that
given in 1 Kings xix ofthe experience ofElijah on the occasions of their encounters with God. The Angel of the Lord
appeared to Moses in a flame of fire and out of the midst of
1 'Y* is here consonantal. The vowels in the traditional English form
Jehovah arise from the custom of inserting between the consonants of the Tetragrammaton the vowels appropriate to the words Elohim and Adonai. 113
Israel
a bush, and then the Lord Himself called to Moses out of
the midst of the same bush. But by the time of Elijah the
withdrawal of Israel from participation was already far advanced, and we are given, instead, in the well-known
verses, a crescendo of appearances, in each of which God
was not. And, behold, rttrP passed by, and a great and strong
wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks
before HIiT; but HTrP was not in the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but JlTrP was not in the earthquake:
And after the earthquake a fire, but HTrP was not in
the fire: and after the fire a still small voice . . . This ingathering withdrawal from participation, to which the Old Testament points, was clearly, then, a very
different matter from that ousting or suppression ofparticipation which alpha-thinking has subsequently accomplished
in the Western world. Indeed, it might with equal truth be
described as a concentration or centripetal deepening of
participation. As to the glories displayed in the 104th Psalm,
God was no longer in them; they were no longer His representations or 'names'. For He had now only one name
—
1 am—and that was participated by every being who had
eyes that saw and ears that heard and who spoke through
his throat. But it was incommunicable, because its participation by the particular selfwhich is at this moment uttering
it was an inseparable part ofits meaning. Everyone can call his idol 'God', and many do; but no being who speaks
through his throat can call a wholly other and outer Being
T.
Herein lay the mystery of the Divine Name. It was 'that name in which there is no participation between the
Creator and any thing else'. So wrote the renowned Jewish
Rabbi Maimonides in about the year 1190. And again:
All the names of the Creator which are found in books
are taken from his works, except one name, the Tetra114
Israel
grammaton, which is proper to him, and is therefore
called 'the name apart' (nomen separatum); because it signifies the substance of the Creator by pure signification,
in which there is no participation. His other glorious names do indeed signify by participation, because they
are taken from his works.1
1 Rabbi Moses ben Maimon. Moreh Nebuhim, (quoted by J. Drusius, a sixteenth-century scholar, in an essay on the Tetragrammaton).
XVII
THE DEVELOPMENT OF MEANING
In the course of this book many scattered references have
been made to words and language. It is desirable that some
attempt should now be made to draw the threads together.
When we are disputing about the proper meaning to be
attached to a particular word in a sentence, etymology is of
little use. Only children run to the dictionary to settle an argument. But if we would consider the nature of meaning,
and the relation between thought and things, we cannot
profitably dispense with etymology. It is long since men
gave up the notion that the variety of natural species and
the secrets of their relation to each other can be understood
apart from their history; but many thinkers still seek to
confine the science of language, as the Linnaeans once confined botany, within a sort of network of timeless abstractions. Method, for them, is another name for classification;
but that is a blind alley.
Now etymology depicts the process of language in time.
And it is a commonplace ofthe subject that, whatever word
we hit on, if we trace its meaning far enough back, we find
it apparently expressive of some tangible, or at all events,
perceptible object or some physical activity. Understanding once meant 'standing under', and abstractions like concept
and hypothesis merely disguise, in the garb of a dead language, a similarly humble origin. Even right and wrong are
said to have once meant 'straight' and 'sour'. In much more recent times we can observe the evolution
The Development of Meaning
of a great deal of the emotional and psychological meaning
in contemporary words out of an astrological, chemical, or
physiological past. Many people are aware, without turning
to a dictionary, ofwhat disposition, influence, melancholy, etc.,
used to mean, and I have already referred in Chapter XII to the fact that similar changes are still going on in the case of
such words as heart and blood. It would be in line with the
general process of etymological change if, in future, the
meaning of heart should become purely emotional, some
other word such as cardium being appropriated to the
physical organ.
Here and there, it is true, we may observe a change in the
opposite direction; and it is certainly striking that the most
abstract of all abstract terms
—
relation—should have become
capable of signifying a solid, three-dimensional aunt or
cousin. But these are the rare exceptions. Throughout the
recorded history of language the movement of meaning has
been from concrete to abstract.
I am here using the word 'abstract' in its broadest, and
admittedly vague, sense, to cover everything in the familiar
world we talk about, which is not, actually or theoretically,
accessible to the senses; everything which a nineteenth-century logician would have termed an 'attribute'; and which
some twentieth-century philosophers classify as a mere part
of speech. In this sense melancholy and a kind heart may be as much abstractions as concept and hypothesis—it depends how
we think of them. How we ought to think of them may be
disputed, and indeed I am engaged in disputing it. But it is enough for my present purpose that nearly everybody today thinks of them as divorced from the 'appearances' of
nature which are accessible to the senses—in a way which
nearly everybody before the scientific revolution did not.
Systematic reflection on the history of language hardly
began before the second half of the nineteenth century,
when idolatry, as we have seen, was already near its culminating point; and when it had already, as described in
Chapter IX, distorted the picture which men formed of the
The Development of Meaning
remote past. It was against this background, therefore, that
the philologists of the nineteenth century sought to account
for that unmistakable, semantic progress from concrete to
abstract—or from 'outer* to 'inner'—to which I have just
referred. In those circumstances, their answer to the problem was—metaphor. Before speech was invented, they said,
primitive man lived in a world, except for details, very
much like ours. His next step was to invent simple words
for the simple things he saw about him—trees and animals,
the sun and the moon, and so forth. And then, when his reason had evolved, and he found he needed words in
which to express his inner life, he used these simple words
again, but this time as metaphors. Herbert Spencer and Max
Miiller went further than this and added that, later on, men
made the mistake of taking their own metaphors literally;
and that this was the origin of mythology. Mythology, said
Miiller, is 'a disease of language'.
Of course, as time went on (they said), the metaphors
'faded'. We no longer call up any mental image of 'standing
beneath', when we use the word understand, or of a physical
'pressing out', when we speak of expressing a sentiment or an idea. The progress was assumed to be from the metaphor,
through the trope (which is a kind of moribund metaphor —as when we speak offollowing the thread ofan argument),
to the ordinary straightforward 'meaning'. But, whatever
meanings its words might bear to-day, language was considered historically as a tissue of faded or dead metaphors.
Now there is no doubt that in the last few centuries the
meanings of quite a number of the words with which we
endeavour to express psychological facts or opinions have
come into being in just this way—by deliberate transference
from the outer world to the inner. Emotion is probably an
example. But it is equally certain that the great majority
have not. If we look into them, we find that they point us back, not to metaphor, but to participation; whether, like
disposition, influence, and many others, through astrology, or whether, like temper and humour, through the old physio118
The Development of Meaning
logy, or whether, without being traceably connected with
any particular system of thought, in one way or another
they stem from a time before that exclusive disjunction
between outer and inner, which the term 'metaphor' presupposes. Such is the case with many of the oldest words in
the language—like heart and blood, to which I have already
referred. Moreover, many much more recent words, to which a simple metaphorical origin may be hastily attri- buted, will be found on closer examination to betray
similar birth-marks. Depression, for instance, would seem
at first sight to be in the same class as emotion. But the evidence collected by the Oxford Dictionary suggests that its psychological significance did not, in fact, originate in a
spatial metaphor (such as we use, when we speak of being
'on top ofthe world'), but as a literal discription of the state of the Vital spirits'.
Many years ago, in a book called Poetic Diction, I drew
attention to another fatal objection to this theory that words
which to-day have a mental or emotional content acquired
that content originally as a metaphorical extension of their
meaning. It is this. If we find language growing more and
more metaphorical, the further back we go into the past,
what possible justification can there be for assuming a still earlier time when it was not metaphorical at all? Thus, Max
Miiller postulated a 'metaphorical period', during which
the progress from literal to metaphorical meanings must
have taken place. But, what is this but a purely arbitrary
surmise? And is it not highly improbable? Why was such an assumption found necessary? Simply in order to make the
evidence presented by the history of language fit in some- how or other with that 'evolution of idols', to which I have
referred in Chapters V and IX.
It would take a very long time to trace all the influences
exerted by preconceptions of this nature on the theories
which men have formed about the origin and development
oflanguage, and even on lexicography itself. They are most
easily detected by the train of inconsistencies they have left 119
The Development of Meaning
in their wake. Take, for instance, the old philological teaching ofthe building up ofinflected and complex words from
simple 'roots' of speech. Some languages, among which
Hebrew is probably an outstanding example, are clearly
formed about a relatively small number of consonantgroups consisting of three or even two letters each. Here is the bare fact. But what we make of it is all too likely to
depend on the preconceptions with which we approach it. If we have preconceived a world in which the earliest speakers were surrounded by idols in all respects like our own, we shall treat these consonant-groups practically as 'words', and shall attribute to them meanings which were
wide because they were generalized from particulars. This
is what the philologists did; and it is particularly interesting
to watch Max Miiller relating this 'root' concept, as it was
presented in his time, to his theory of a 'metaphorical
period', to which I have already referred.
He invented a distinction between radical metaphor and
poetical metaphor.
I call it a radical metaphor when a root which means to shine is applied to form the names, not only of the fire or the sun, but of the spring of the year, the morning
light, the brightness of thought, or the joyous outburst
ofhymns ofpraise. Ancient languages are brimful ofsuch
metaphors, and under the microscope of the etymologist
almost every word discloses traces of its first metaphorical conception.
' From this we must distinguish poetical metaphor,
namely, when a noun or verb, ready made and assigned
to one definite object or action, is transferred poetically
to another object or action. For instance, when the rays
of the sun are called the hands or fingers of the sun.
1 The assumption is, that men had on their lips the roots and
in their minds the meanings, very much as we have words
and their meanings to-day, and then proceeded to 'apply'
1 Science of Language, p. 451. 120
The Development of Meaning
them to a varied selection of phenomena. But, as was
pointed out in the book already referred to, 1 this assumption
is inconsistent in two respects with all that we know of
primitive languages. Among very primitive and otherwise
almost wordless peoples very short words are exactly what
we do not find. Anthropologists tell us, instead, of the
'holophrase' or long, rambling conglomeration of sound
and meaning. Words grow longer, not shorter, the nearer we get to the end o£ our backward journey towards the
origin of speech. Secondly, a word meaning 'to shine' in
general, as distinct from any particular kind of shining, is the very thing which a primitive mind is incapable of
grasping. Indeed, much simpler generalizations, such as
'tree' —as distinct from a coconut-tree or a gum-tree—are equally beyond it. If, therefore, in any language the roots were there from the beginning, then, whatever else they
were, they cannot have been words devised by men for the
purpose of expressing general ideas.
I do not believe, then, that there is any such thing as a 'radical metaphor'. But I believe that reflection on the
working of metaphor may nevertheless be a good approach
to reflection on the nature of roots. For it is the peculiarity
of metaphorical language that, at first sight, it does often
resemble very closely the language of participation; though
upon closer examination its existence is seen to depend
precisely on the absence of participation.2 It is at all events
important to have made some such examination before we
approach the wider question of the nature and origin of
language.
1 Poetic Diction, 2nd Edition, Faber 1952. 2 Cf. p. 127.
XVIII
THE ORIGIN OF LANGUAGE
•
We have seen that, in the older doctrine of invented and
applied 'roots of speech', as pointing to the origin of language, and in the more recent one. of 'metaphor' as the
principal instrument of the growth of meaning, we are saddled with two notions, which are both of them inconsistent with the testimony oflanguage itself. If, on the other
hand, we approach the history of meaning free from all assumptions based on biological theories ofevolution; if we
take our stand simply on a faithful study of the nature of
language, then we shall not be seduced into any such arbitrary surmises. Instead, we shall be obliged to admit that
'metaphor' is a misleading concept to apply to any but the
later and more sophisticated stages of language. For all the
evidence points rather to that sort of 'polarization' of an
ancient unity into an outer and an inner meaning, which
was traced in Chapter XII. In other words, it points to the source of language in original participation—and, in doing
so, indicates the direction in which we must look for a true
understanding of those mysterious 'roots'. It is there, too,
that we may hope in the end to espy the historical function
of the word in determining the relation between thought
and things.
We have seen that the difference between what I have
called 'original' participation and the participation which
can be grasped to-day in beta-thinking is, above all, a
difference of direction. In the former, the represented is felt 122
The Origin of Language
to be on the other side of the phenomena from the perceiving self. At the same time, it is felt to be linked with, or
related to, that self otherwise than through the senses. The
self, so far as there yet is one, is still aware that it and the
phenomena derive from the same supersensible source. This kind of consciousness, then, is the subjective aspect of
that coming-into-being, pari passu, ofman and ofhis phenomena, which was referred to in Chapter X. Objectively, we
could only describe the earlier stages of this process as a time when man—not only as a body, but also as a soul
—
was a part of nature in a way which we to-day, of course, find it difficult to conceive. Subjectively, he could not yet
'call his soul his own'. The farther back we penetrate, the
more indistinguishable would his acts and utterances become from processes taking place in what has since become
'outer' nature.
It is conditions such as these which we must strive to
realize in imagination, if we would hope to understand the
'root' element in language. Speech did not arise as the
attempt of man to imitate, to master or to explain 'nature';
for speech and nature came into being along with one
another. Strictly speaking, only idolators can raise the
question of the 'origin of language'. For anyone else to do
so is like asking for the origin of origin. Roots are the echo
of nature herself sounding in man. Or rather, they are the
echo of what once sounded and fashioned in both of them
at the same time. And therefore it is, that they have always
fascinated those adventurous souls—such as Fabre d' Olivet,
Court de Gebelin or, in our own time, Herman Beckh, A. D.
Wadler and others—who have sought to explore that difficult and perplexing territory—devasted as it has been by ensuing
millennia ofcultural divergence and etymological accidents
—
the relation between the sounds oflanguage and its meanings.
The split between sound and meaning—for their relation
in any modern language is no more than vestigial—is one
aspect of the ever-widening gulf between outer and inner,
phenomenon and name, thing and thought, with which
The Origin of Language
this book is concerned. We have seen how that polarization
into man: nature, which was the means to man's self-consciousness, was exaggerated by the scientific revolution into an exclusive disjunction. It was still a polarity, so long as some image-consciousness, some participation survived. We
have seen also, in the preceding chapter, how the disjunction was deliberately purposed by the Jewish nation. I believe it will some day be realized that their mission was at the same
time to prepare humanity against the day when it should be
complete—that is, our own time.
The Hebrew language, through which (as we have seen)
the inwardness of the Divine Name was later revealed, is at the same time, according to some opinions, that one among
the ancient languages in which the roots preserve most
clearly (though still dimly enough) the old unity of sound
and meaning. If we try to think of these roots as 'words',
then we must think of words with a potential rather than an actual meaning. Certainly those who have any feeling
for sound-symbolism, and who wish to develop it, will be
well advised to ponder them. They may find, in the consonantal element in language, vestiges of those forces which
brought into being the external structure of nature, including the body of man; and, in the original vowel-sounds, the
expression of that inner life of feeling and memory which
constitutes his soul. It is the two together which have made
possible, by first physically and then verbally embodying it, his personal intelligence.
The objective of this book is, however, a limited one,
namely, to demonstrate on general grounds the necessity of
smashing the idols. It cannot, therefore, attempt to investigate in detail what sort ofknowledge may result from doing
so, and it would be quite beyond its scope to carry this
difficult subject any further. Suffice it to say that the Semitic
languages seem to point us back to the old unity of man and
nature, through the shapes of their sounds. We feel those
shapes not only as sounds, but also, in a manner, as gestures
of the speech-organs—and it is not so difficult to realize that
The Origin of Language
these gestures were once gestures made with the whole
body—once—when the body itself was not detached from
the rest ofnature after the solid manner ofto-day, when the
body itself was spoken even while it was speaking.
In an Aryan language, such as Greek, on the other hand,
where natural and mythological significances so easily meet
and mingle, we can feel more easily the nature of phenomenal—that is, imaginal—participation. The Aryan tongues
point to the same ancient unity as the Semitic—but they do
so through the quality of their meaning. Among the
speakers of both types of language, a few centuries before
the Christian era, a last faint echo of that unity appeared in
the form of tradition and doctrine. In the Sefer Yezirah, for instance, whose authorship was
traditionally assigned to Abraham, and which was perhaps
first committed to writing about a.d. 600, the account of
creation given in the Book of Genesis is expanded, and
related in considerable detail to the sounds and signs of a language at once divine and human. And the influence of
the Jewish doctrine of the Word of God, which was at the same time the source of the phenomenal world and the
incarnation of wisdom in man, is still clearly apparent in the
Book of Proverbs and in the apocryphal Ecclesiasticus and
Wisdom of Solomon. In the world of Greek thought the
development in a similar direction, and particularly by the
Stoic sect, of the logos of the Greek philosophers is better
known; and it is an old story how the two streams met in
Alexandria and united in a form which is probably best
exemplified in the writings of Philo Judaeus.
All things came into being through the Word. This
teaching of the creative Word, this last testimony to a crea- tion which was not a mere creation ofidols, and to an evolution which was not a mere evolution of idols, is one which
Christian thought, thanks to the opening verses of St. John's
Gospel, has never been able entirely to ignore, though it has
by now come near to doing so. But the significance of this must be deferred to a later chapter.
XIX
SYMPTOMS OF ICONOCLASM
We have seen that the theory of metaphor, as the means by which language originally acquired its 'inner' meanings,
is incorrect. But it is important to remember how it arose.
It arose because there is a close relation between language as
it is used by a participating consciousness and language as it
is used, at a later stage, metaphorically or symbolically.
When we use language metaphorically, we bring it about
of our own free will that an appearance means something
other than itself, and, usually, that a manifest 'means' an
unmanifest. We start with an idol, and we ourselves turn the
idol into a representation. We use the phenomenon as a 'name' for what is not phenomenal. And this, it will be
remembered, is just what is characteristic of participation.
Symbolism, as we saw in Chapter XI, is made possible by
the elimination of participation. But at the end of Chapter
XVI it was observed that in certain circumstances this may
give rise to a new kind of participation—one which could no longer be described as 'original'.
What then has occurred? If we rapidly review the whole
historical development of 'the word', we must say that, as soon as unconscious or subconscious organic processes have
been sufficiently polarized to give rise to phenomena on the one side and consciousness on the other, memory is made
possible. As consciousness develops into self-consciousness,
the remembered phenomena become detached or liberated
from their originals and so, as images, are in some measure
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
at man's disposal. The more thoroughly participation has
been eliminated, the more they are at the disposal of his imagination to employ as it chooses. If it chooses to impart
its own meaning, it is doing, pro tanto, with the remembered
phenomena what their Creator once did with the phenomena themselves. Thus there is a real analogy between
metaphorical usage and original participation; but it is one which can only be acknowledged at this high, or even
prophetic, level. It can only be acknowledged if the crude
conception of an evolution of idols, which has dominated
the last two centuries, is finally abandoned, or at all events
is enlightened by one more in line with the old teaching
of the Logos. There is a valid analogy if, but only if, we
admit that, in the course of the earth's history, something
like a Divine Word has been gradually clothing itself with the humanity it first gradually created—so that what
was first spoken by God may eventually be respoken by
man.
This granted, we can see how language, in the course of
its history, has indeed mediated the transformation of
phenomena into idols. But we can also see how, by reason ofthis very fact, within man the phenomena have gradually
ceased to operate as compulsive natural processes and have
become, instead, mere memory-images available for his
own creative 'speech'—using 'speech' now in the wide
sense of Aquinas's 'word'.
We should expect, accordingly, that, with the progressive
decrease ofparticipation throughout the Graeco-Roman, or
Aristotelian age, we should find a growing awareness
—
however faint—of this capacity of man for creative speech.
And we should expect to find a marked increase in that awareness after the scientific revolution. It is what we do
find. Let us take, for example, the Romantic theory of the
'creative imagination' and glance briefly at its previous
history. Premonitory hints of an attribution of 'creative'
power to man as artist or poet, appear as early as the first Christian century, with Dio Chrysostom. A century later 127
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
Philostratus maintained of the works of Pheidias and
Praxiteles, that: Imagination made them, and she is a better artist than
imitation; for where the one carves only what she has
seen, the other carves what she has not seen. By the third century Plotinus is maintaining that: If anyone disparages the arts on the ground that they
imitate nature, we must remind him that natural objects are themselves only imitations, and that the arts do not
simply imitate what they see but reascend to those principles (Aoyot) from which Nature herself is derived.
For Scaliger in the sixteenth century (who was closely fol- lowed by Sidney in his Apologiefor Poesie) the poet is one who 'maketh a new Nature and so maketh himself as it were a new God'.1 Coleridge's doctrine ofthe primary and secondary imagination, when it came, and the whole Romantic stress in
England and Germany on the 'creative' function of art and
poetry was, then, by no means a wholly new adventure in
thought. It was rather that the whole attitude to nature,
which it implied, had been rendered acceptable to a much
wider circle by the rapidly increasing idolatry of the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Something very
much like it had already been thought by a few. It became
almost a popular movement in a world beginning at last to
hunger for iconoclasm.
We have already had occasion to note the close relation
between the apprehension of images and the making of
'them. As long as nature herself continued to be apprehended
as image, it sufficed for the artist to imitate Nature. Inevitably, the life or spirit in the object lived on in his imitation,
ifit was a faithful one. For at the same time it could not help
1 This important little piece of history will be found most effectively summarized at the beginning of Bk. Ill of Professor C. S. Lewis's English Literature
in the Sixteenth Century. Clarendon Press, 1954. 128
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
being more than an imitation, inasmuch as the artist himself
participated the being of the object. But the imitation of an
idol is a purely technical process; which (as was quickly
discovered) is better done by photography. To-day an
artist cannot rely on the life inherent in the object he
imitates, any more than a poet can rely on the life inherent
in the words he uses. He has to draw the life forth from
within himself.
It is for the same reason that an ever-increasing importance came to be attached to the invented image and men
become more and more dissatisfied with imitations of
nature both in the practice and in the theory ofart. It is easy
to see how it came to be held that 'the truest poetry is the
most feigning'. For there is no doubt about where the life in an invented or fictitious image comes from. There can be no
'pathetic fallacy' there. What is peculiar to the Romantic
Movement—as, indeed, its very name recalls—is the further
reaction of this enthusiasm for fictitious and fabulous representations on the phenomena—on Nature herself. This is also what took the Romantic conception of art, properly
understood, a step beyond the Neo-platonic theory referred
to above. The Neo-platonic theory holds that man the
artist is, in some measure, a creator. The Romantic conception agrees—but goes further and returns him, in this capacity, to Nature herself. With what result? It is no longer simply that the arts 're- ascend to those principles from which nature herself is derived'. The 'principles' themselves have changed their venue. For we are told by the Romantic theory that we
must no longer look for the nature-spirits—for the Goddess
Natura—on the farther side of the appearances; we must
look for them within ourselves. Unbewusst der Freuden, die sie schenket,
Nie entziickt von ihrer Herrlichkeit,
Nie gewahr des Geistes, der sie lenket,
SeVge nur durch meine Seligkeit,
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
Fiihllos selbstfiir ihres Kunstlers Ehre,
Gleich dem toten Schlag der Pendeluhr,
Dient sie knechtisch dem Gesetz der Schwere,
Die entgbtterte Natur.1 Pan has shut up shop. But he has not retired from business;
he has merely gone indoors. Or, in the well-known words
of Coleridge:
We receive but what we give
And in our life alone does Nature live.2 It is again beyond the scope ofthis book to trace in detail the
way in which the origin of the Romantic response to
nature is exemplified in that association between Coleridge
and Wordsworth which gave rise to the Lyrical Ballads. It was the dejected author of the Ancient Mariner who grasped
the theory; but it was Wordsworth who actually wrote the
nature-poetry.
If nature is indeed 'dis-godded\ and yet we again begin
to experience her, as Wordsworth did—and as millions
have done since his time—no longer as dead but as alive; if
there is no 'represented' on the far side of the appearances,
and yet we begin to experience them once more as appearances, as representations—the question arises, of what are they representations? It was no doubt the difficulty of
answering this question which led Wordsworth to relapse
occasionally into that nostalgic hankering after original
participation, which is called pantheism—and from which
Coleridge was rendered immune by his acquaintance with
Kantian philosophy. We shall find somewhat the same
contrast, in this respect, between Goethe and Schiller.
It is because of its failure to answer this question that the
true, one might say the tremendous, impulse underlying the
1 From Schiller's Die Gotter Griechenlands: 'Unconscious of the joy she bestows, never transported by her own glory, never aware of the spirit that
directs her, blest only through my blessedness, without feeling even for the honour of her artist—as with the dead stroke of a clock's pendulum she
—
disgodded Nature—slavishly obeys the law of gravity.'
2 Ode to Dejection. 130
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
Romantic movement has never grown to maturity; and,
after adolescence, the alternative to maturity is puerility.
There is only one answer to the question. Henceforth, if
nature is to be experienced as representation, she will be
) experienced as representation of—Man. But what is Man?
Herein lies the direst possibility inherent in idolatry. It can empty of spirit—it has very nearly succeeded in doing so
—
not only nature, but also Man himself. For among all the
other idols is his own body. And it is part of the creed of
idolatry that, when we speak of Man, we mean only the
body of this or that man, or at most his finite personality,
which we are driven more and more to think an attribute of
his body.
Thus it is, that the great change which the evolution of
consciousness has brought about and the great lessons which
men had begun to learn have all been wrenched awry. We
had come at last to the point of realizing that art can no
longer be content with imitating the collective representations, now that these are themselves turning into idols. But,""\
instead of setting out to smash the idols, we have tamely
concluded that nothing can now be art which in any way
reminds us of nature—and even that practically anything
may be art, which does not. We have learned that art can
represent nothing but Man himself, and we have interpreted
that as meaning that art exists for the purpose of enabling
Mr. Smith to 'express his personality'. And all because we
have not learnt—though our very physics shouts it at us
—
that nature herself is the representation of Man.
Hence the riot of private and personal symbolisms into
which both art and poetry have degenerated. If I know that*l
nature herself is the system of my representations, I cannot I do otherwise than adopt a humbler and more responsible \ attitude to the representations of art and the metaphors of j poetry. For in the case of nature there is no danger of myj
fancying that she exists to express my personality. I know
in that case that what is meant, when I say she is my representation, is, that I stand, whether I like it or not, in—(I do
Symptoms of Iconoclasm
not love the expression, but I can find no defter one in
English) a 'directionally creator' relation to her. But I know
also that what so stands is not my poor temporal personality, but the Divine Name in the unfathomable depths behind it. And if I strive to produce a work of art, I cannot
then do otherwise than strive humbly to create more nearly
as that creates, and not as my idiosyncrasy wills. After all, there is warrant for it. At the beginning of the
first chapter I pointed to the phenomenon of the rainbow,
because it is especially easy there to realize the extent to which it is 'our' creation. But we know equally well that it
is not only the colours and curve of the rainbow which
proceed from the eye; it is not only 'Iris' who has gone
indoors; we know that light itself
—
as light (whatever we
may think about the particles) —proceeds from the same
source. Now for the Impressionist painters, this became a
real experience. They really painted nature in the light of
the eye, as no other painters had done before them. They
were striving to realize in consciousness the normally unconscious activity of 'figuration' itself. They did not imitate;
they expressed 'themselves'—inasmuch as they painted
f nature as the representation of Man. They will serve as a reminder—though they are not the only one—that the
rejection of original participation may mean, not the
destruction but the liberation of images.
XX
FINAL PARTICIPATION
I referred in Chapter XIII to symbolism as something in which we to-day are again becoming interested. There is no
respect in which the imaginative literature and drama of today differs more strikingly from that ofeven fifty years ago.
In those days there was an Ibsen, there was a Maeterlinck,
but nobody really understood what they were up to and
everyone was dubious and uncomfortable. Whereas to-day
every other writer strives to imply some sort of symbolized
content and, even if he does not, it is obligingly done for
him by confident critics who have read their Freud and
their Jung. It would be an interesting experiment to resuscitate a habitual reader of, say, the Times Literary Supplement in the 'nineties, to set him down before the second half
ofthe New Statesman in the 1950's, and to see what he made
of it. In mentioning Freud and Jung I have, of course, touched on the most startling phenomenon ofall. The unaccountable
rapidity with which a literal-minded generation developed
a sympathetic response to the psycho-analytical gnosis of
dream-imagery, and accepted the (one would have thought)
fantastic idea of an immaterial realm of 'the unconscious',
is another sign, in addition to those I instanced in Chapter
X, that the development of man's consciousness is an evolutionary as well as a dialectical process. Who could possibly
have foreseen it in the year of the Great Exhibition? Who
could have failed to deny the possibility of such a change,
Final Participation
ifit had been foretold to him? Possibly the greatest, possibly
the only lasting, value of psycho-analysis lies in its clinical aspect. It may or may not be so. But for the historian of
consciousness the most significant thing will always be the
way it 'caught on'; the number of its technical terms—and
still more the characters out of Greek mythology—which
had become household words even before the death of its founder. Pan, it seems, has not only not retired from business; he has not only gone indoors; he has hardly shut the
door, before we begin to hear him moving about inside.
Yet here again, as far as any extra-clinical value is concerned, the historian of the future will observe the fatally
blighting influence of the conventional idolatry. It never seems to have even occurred to Freud that an individual man's 'unconscious mind' could be anything but a 'somewhat' lodged inside the box of his bones. Representation, as a principle, is accepted by him as a matter of
course; inasmuch as a great variety of dream-imagery is interpreted as symbolizing particular physical functions.
From the perception that physical functions and organs are
themselves representations, he is, however, cut off by all the
assumptions of idolatry. Again, we have watched with
interest Jung developing his concept of a 'collective unconscious' of humanity as a whole, a concept which is inherently repugnant to the foundation of idolatry on which
he had to build it. Yet, because of that very idolatry, the
traditional myths and the archetypes which he tells us are the representations of the collective unconscious, are assumed by him to be, and always to have been, neatly
insulated from the world of nature with which, according
to their own account, they were mingled or united.
The psychological interpretation of mythology is, it is true, a long way nearer to an understanding ofparticipation
than the old 'personified causes' of Tylor and Frazer and
Lempriere's Classical Dictionary. But it is still a long way
off. In the last resort, when it actually comes up against the
nature-content of the myths, it still relies on the old anthro134
Final Participation
pological assumption of 'projection'. I believe it will seem / very strange to the historian of the future, that a literal-
\ minded generation began to accept the actuality of a / 'collective unconscious' before it could even admit the
possibility of a 'collective conscious'—in the shape of the
phenomenal world.
I do not, however, think it can be very long now before
this, too, is accepted; since it not only opens up possibilities
of new knowledge of which the need is being increasingly
felt, but also removes many inconsistencies in the contemporary picture of the world, which cannot fail to be noticed
more and more as time passes. Idolatry carries in it the seeds
of its own destruction. The reader will, for instance, recall the dilemma of 'pre-history' which was briefly touched on
in Chapter V. We have chosen to form a picture, based very
largely on modern physical science, of a phenomenal earth
existing for millions of years before the appearance of consciousness. The same physical science tells us that the phenomenal world is correlative to consciousness. The phenomena
attributed to these millions of years are therefore, in fact,
abstract models or 'idols ofthe study'. We may compromise
by calling them 'possible phenomena', implying thereby
that that was how the world would have looked, sounded,
smelt and felt, if there had been someone like ourselves
present. But if the only phenomena we know are collective
representations, and what is represented is the collective
unconscious, the awkward fact remains that it is highly
fanciful, if not absurd, to think of any unperceived process
in terms of potential phenomena, unless we also assume
an unconscious, ready to light up into actual phenomena at any moment of the process.
This of course applies not only to pre-history, but to all the imperceptible process assumed in our picture ofthe con- temporary world—the goings-on, for instance, at the bottom of the sea. But in the case of pre-history, we have
further to remember that it does not suffice to accept the
reality of a collective unconscious now. We have to accept
Final Participatian
that an unconscious, available to be represented, is at least coeval with any process describable in terms ofphenomena.
The employment of 'models' for the purpose of thinking
may be very well; for the purposes ofexposition it may even
be essential—as long as we know what we are doing and do
not turn the models into idols. And we shall know what we
are doing with pre-history, when we have firmly grasped
the fact that the phenomenal world arises from the relation
between a conscious and an unconscious and that evolution
is the story of the changes that relation has undergone and
is undergoing.
But it is not only for the study ofpre-history that it is all- important for us to realize this truth, that the phenomena
are collective representations of what can now properly be
called 'man's' unconscious. It is vital for the future of the
sciences, especially those at the other end of the scale from
the technological ones—those, in short, for which 'dashboard-knowledge' 1 is not enough. When, for instance, we
are dealing with living organisms, our whole approach, our whole possibility of grasping process as such, is hamstrung
by the lack ofjust such a concept of the potentially phenomenal and the actually phenomenal.
With the help of the Arabian schoolmen the Aristotelian
concept of 'potential' existence was gradually drained away
into the mere notional 'possibility' of being—into contingent
being. Thus, the word potentialis (itself a translation of the
vigorous Greek word from which we take our 'dynamic'
and 'dynamite') had been changed to possibilis before
Aquinas wrote, though his possibilis still meant more than our 'possible'. Since the scientific revolution, to ask whether
a thing 'is' or 'is not' is, for science, to ask whether it is or
is not a phenomenon—either experienced or extrapolated.
Francis Bacon, it will be remembered, found the distinction
between actus and potentia 'frigida distinctio'; and so it had
to be, while the phenomena were becoming, and will be as long as they remain, idols. But to-day, it is no longer open
1 Cf. P
. 55. 136
Final Participation
to anyone who regards the unconscious as more than a
fiction to contend that the concept of the potentially
phenomenal, that is, of potential existence, is too difficult for human minds to grasp.
Even so, merely grasping the concept will not take mankind very far. Beta-thinking can go thus far. It can convince
itself that, just as for original participation potential existence was something quite different from not-being, so, for the kind ofparticipation at which we have arrived to-day,
the potentially phenomenal is not the same as nothing. Let
us call the man-centred participation with which the opening chapters of this book were concerned final participation.
Beta-thinking, then, can convince itself of the fact of final participation. It can convince itself that we participate
the phenomena with the unconscious part of ourselves. But
that has no epistemological significance. It can only have
that to the extent that final participation is consciously
experienced. Perhaps (if we may already start using the old
terminology which we have just taken out of the refri- gerator) we may say that final participation must itself be
raised from potentiality to act. Are there any signs of such a development taking place?
We have seen, in the Romantic movement, and elsewhere,
symptoms of a kind of instinctive impulse towards iconoclasm. Are there any signs up to now of a systematic
approach to final participation? And what does such an approach involve?
It was pointed out in Chapter XIII that participation as an
actual experience is only to be won to-day by special exertion; that it is a matter, not oftheorizing, but ofimagination
in the genial or creative sense. A systematic approach towards final participation may therefore be expected to be an attempt to use imagination systematically. This was the
foundation of Goethe's scientific work. In his book on the
Metamorphosis of Plants and the associated writings descriptive ofhis method, as well as in the rest ofhis scientific work,
there is the germ of a systematic investigation of pheno137
Final Participation
mena by way of participation. For his Urpjlanze and
Urphdnomen are nothing more or less than potential phenomena perceived and studied as such. They are processes
grasped directly and not, as hitherto since the scientific revolution, hypotheses inferred from actual phenomena.
I have here used both the word 'scientific' and the word
'perceived' advisedly, though in such a context both of
them run counter to all the assumptions of the received
idolatry. It is a common objection that Goethe's method
ought not to be called 'scientific', because it was not purely
empirical; but that objection obviously cannot be raised
here without begging the whole argument of this book. As
to 'perceived'—we have seen that the major part of any
perceived phenomenon consists of our own 'figuration'.
Therefore, as imagination reaches the point of enhancing
figuration itself, hitherto unperceived parts of the whole
field of the phenomenon necessarily become perceptible.
Moreover, this conscious participation enhances perception
not only of present phenomena but also of the memoryimages derived from them. All this Goethe could not
prevail on his contemporaries to admit. Idolatry was too
all-powerful and there were then no premonitory signs, as there are to-day, of its collapse. No one, for instance, had
heard of 'the unconscious'.
For a student of the evolution of consciousness, it is particularly interesting that a man with the precise make-up
of Goethe should have appeared at that precise moment in
the history of the West. By the middle of the eighteenth
century, when he was born, original participation had virtually faded out, and Goethe himself was a thoroughly
modern man. Yet he showed from his earliest childhood
and retained all through his life an almost atavistically
strong remainder of it. It breathes through his poetry as the
peculiar Goethean attitude to Nature, who is felt as a living
being, almost as a personality, certainly as a 'thou' rather
than as an 'it' or an T. It is almost as if the Gods had purposely retained this sense in Goethe as a sort of seed-corn
Final Participation
out of which the beginnings of final participation could
peep, for the first time, on the world of science. Perhaps it was an instinctive understanding of this which made him so determined to keep clear of beta-thinking.
Mein kind, ich hab'es klug gemacht,
Ich hab
9 nie fiber das Denken gedacht. 1 For beta-thinking leads to final, by way of the inexorable
elimination of all original, participation. Consequently
Goethe was able to develop an elementary technique, but
unable, or unwilling, to erect a metaphysic, of final participation. The contrast in this respect between him and
Schiller, who knew his Kant and stood firm in the idolatry
of his contemporaries—especially as it appeared in a certain
conversation2 between the two on the subject of the
Urphdnomen—is illuminating and is in a manner, as I have
said, analogous to the contrast between Wordsworth and
Coleridge. There is, so far as I know, more of the historical
theory of participation in Schiller's poem Die Gotter Griechenlands (from which I have already quoted in Chapter
XIX) than in anything Goethe ever wrote. Yet Schiller
could not admit the practical possibility of final participation at all. He told Goethe that his Urphdnomen was no more
than an idea, a hypothesis; and the poem itself, after a magnificent account of the retreat of the Gods from nature
into man, has nothing more significant or prophetic to conclude with than the rather trite: Was unsterblich im Gesang soil leben Muss im Leben untergehen?
The significance of Goethe in the history of science will
be appreciated, as time passes, in the measure that idolatry
is overcome. His theory of colour, for instance, will always
1 'I have managed things cleverly, my boy: I have never thought about
thinking/ Zahme Xenien, vi.
2 Naturwissenschaftliche Schriften (Kiirschner-Ausgabe). Vol. i, p. 109; Appendices to the Metamorphosenlehre (Gluckliches Ereignis).
3 'What is to live immortal in song must go under in life.' 139
Final Participation
be heterodox as long as the phenomenon of light is simply
identified with the unrepresented 'particles'. But that significance, however great it may ultimately appear, grows
pale before the significance of Rudolf Steiner (i 861-1925)
who, in the early part of his life, studied and developed the
method ofGoethe. Unlike Goethe, however, Steiner did not
avoid beta-thinking. At the same time that he was editing
Goethe's scientific works in Weimar, he was writing his
book The Philosophy of Spiritual Activity, in which the
metaphysic of final participation is fully and lucidly set forth. Educated on 'the modern side' (as we should then
have said) at school and university, he was thoroughly at home with the idols and never relied on any relic oforiginal
participation there may have been in his composition to overcome them. It is in his work and that of his followers
that the reader should look for further signs of a development towards final participation in the field of science.
If a single example is sought, let it be the research now
going on in the domain of cancer. Cancer is a process of
generation, and once we admit the concept of the potentially phenomenal, we must see that generation is not a
transition from not-being to being, but a transition from
potential to phenomenal existence. Steiner's method, based
on perception of the potentially phenomenal, was to diag- nose a pre-cancerous condition ofthe blood, a condition not
yet detectable by physical symptoms, and thus to take the
disease at a stage where it answers better to treatment. This
is another way of saying that the method involves investigation of a part of the field of the whole phenomenon
named blood which, for a non-participating consciousness,
is excluded from it, not by empirical proof but rather (as
we saw in Chapter XII) by definition. He sought to apply
the same method to the discovery of remedies, and The
Society for Cancer Research founded by his followers is patiently continuing this difficult work at Arlesheim in
Switzerland. At the moment in which I am writing, however, more people are probably acquainted with the 'Bio140
Final Participation
dynamic' method in Agriculture than with the particular
example I have chosen.
The mind of Rudolf Steiner was of course not only
applied to the scientific sphere, and it was perhaps not even
the most important part of his work. He is, for instance, far more illuminating and, I would say, reliable on the subject
of language and its origin than Fabre d' Olivet and the
others I mentioned in Chapter XVIII. To say that he advocated, and practised, 'the systematic use of imagination' is to place so much emphasis on the mere beginning of what
he taught and did, that it is rather like saying that Dante
wrote a poem about a greyhound. Steiner showed that
imagination, and the final participation it leads to, involve,
unlike hypothetical thinking, the whole man—thought,
feeling, will, and character—and his own revelations were
clearly drawn from those further stages of participation
—
Inspiration and Intuition—to which the systematic use of
imagination may lead. Although the object with which this book was originally conceived was none other than to try
and remove one of the principal obstacles to contemporary
appreciation ofprecisely this man's teaching—the study and
use of which I believe to be crucial for the future of mankind—I shall here say no more of it. This is a study in
idolatry, not a study of Rudolf Steiner. 1
1 All the published works of Rudolf Steiner are obtainable in London,
either in English translation or in the original German, from: Rudolf Steiner Book Shop, 35 Park Road, N.W.i. or Rudolf Steiner Book
Centre, 54 Bloomsbury St., W.C.I.
XXI
SAVING THE APPEARANCES
It may be well, before proceeding further, to restate very
briefly what this book has so far endeavoured to establish. It has been sought to show firstly, that the evolution ofnature
is correlative to the evolution of consciousness; and,
secondly, that the evolution of consciousness hitherto can
best be understood as a more or less continuous progress
from a vague but immediate awareness of the 'meaning' of
phenomena towards an increasing preoccupation with the
phenomena themselves. The earlier awareness involved
experiencing the phenomena as representations; the latter preoccupation involves experiencing them, non-representationally, as objects in their own right, existing independently of human consciousness. This latter experience, in
its extreme form, I have called idolatry.
Idolatry is an ugly and emphatic word and it was deliberately chosen to emphasize certain ugly features, and still more certain ugly possibilities, inherent in the present situation. Not much has been said of the benefits—not only
material ones—which have been conferred on mankind by
this 'idolatry' and nothing, as yet, of the supreme benefit,
which will be dealt with in the final chapters. As to the
former, most people are so well aware ofthese benefits, and
they have been so often and so fully emphasized by others,
that I have thought it unnecessary to draw attention to them. But I will mention two at this point. In the first place,
together with the ability to experience phenomena as 142
Saving the Appearances
objects independent of human consciousness, there has
grown up our enormously improved power of grasping
them in exact and quantitative detail. (Indeed, it was by
shifting our attention to this detail that we gained that
ability.) With this has come the progressive elimination of
those errors and confusions in which alpha-thinking is inevitably entangled while, in its initial stages, it is still over- shadowed by participation; that is, the vague but immediate
awareness of 'meaning' already referred to. And with this again, has come the power of effective manipulation on
which our civilization, with its many works of mercy, is based. Surgery, for example, presupposes an acquaintance
with the human anatomy exact in the same mode that our knowledge of a machine is exact. Yet these practical considerations are not the only ones. Along with his idolatry, and because ofit, modern man has
found the possibility of an entirely new and very charming
emotional relation to nature. The devoted love which
thousands of naturalists, for example, have felt for some
aspect of nature to which they have been drawn, is not in
spite of, it is actually dependent on their experience of the
'appearances' as substantially independent of themselves.
The whole joy of it depends on its being an 'I—it' relation —oblivious, or contemptuous, of the teleological approach
which dominated Aristotle and the Middle Ages. The
happy bird-watcher does not say: 'Let's go and see what we
can learn about ourselves from nature'. He says: 'Let's go
and see what nature is doing, bless her!' Without idolatry
there would have been no Gilbert White, no Richard
Jefferies, no W. H. Hudson, no Lorenz. Nor is this emotional relation confined to the naturalists, professional and
amateur. They are merely the most striking example. The
possibility of a selfless and attentive love for birds, animals,
flowers, clouds, rocks, water, permeates the whole modern
mind, its science, its art, its poetry and its daily life. It is something which only a fool would be in a hurry to
sacrifice. 143
Saving the Appearances
On the other hand, precisely if we are not fools, our very
love of natural phenomena 'for their own sake' will be
enough to prevent us from hastily turning a blind eye on
any new light which can be shed, from any direction whatsoever, on their true nature. Above all will this be the case, if we feel them to be in danger. And if the appearances are,
as I have sought to establish, correlative to human consciousness and if human consciousness does not remain
unchanged but evolves, then the future of the appearances,
that is, of nature herself, must indeed depend on the direction which that evolution takes. Now in considering future possibilities there are, it has
been suggested, two opposing tendencies to be taken into
consideration. On the one hand, a further development in
the direction, and on the basis, of idolatry; involving in the
end the elimination of those last vestiges of original participation, which, as we saw in Chapter XV, survive in our
language and therefore in our collective representations.
On the other hand, there is the impulse, rudimentary as yet,
of the human imagination to substitute for original participation, a different kind of participation, which I have
called 'final'. This, we saw, is based on the acceptance
(mainly impulsive so far, but occasionally explicit) of the
fact that man himself now stands in a 'directionally creator
relation' 1 to the appearances. It would seem that the appearances are in danger from both quarters, and that they will
require 'saving', in a rather different sense of the term from
that used of old by Simplicius.
The plain fact is, that all the unity and coherence of
nature depends on participation of one kind or the other. If
therefore man succeeds in eliminating all original participation, without substituting any other, he will have done
nothing less than to eliminate all meaning and all coherence
from the cosmos. We have seen that here and there he is already beginning an attempt to eliminate meaning—that
is, a valid relation to nature—from his language, and there1 Cf. p. 132. 144
Saving the Appearances
with striking a blow at the very roots of his collective
representations. Less sensationally, but far more effectively
and over a much wider area, his science, with the progressive
disappearance of original participation, is losing its grip on
any principle of unity pervading nature as a whole and the
knowledge of nature. The hypothesis of chance has already
crept from the theory of evolution into the theory of the
physical foundation of the earth itself; but, more serious
perhaps than that, is the rapidly increasing 'fragmentation
of science' which occasionally attracts the attention of the
British Association. There is no 'science of sciences'; no
unity of knowledge. There is only an accelerating increase
in that pigeon-holed knowledge by individuals of more and
more about less and less, which, if persisted in indefinitely, can only lead mankind to a sort of 'idiocy' (in the original sense of the word)—a state of affairs, in which fewer and
fewer representations will be collective, and more and more
will be private, with the result that there will in the end be no means of communication between one intelligence and
another.
The second danger arises from final participation itself. Imagination is not, as some poets have thought, simply
synonymous with good. It may be either good or evil. As
long as art remained primarily mimetic, the evil which
imagination could do was limited by nature. Again, as long
as it was treated as an amusement, the evil which it could do
was limited in scope. But in an age when the connection
between imagination and figuration is beginning to be
dimly realized, when the fact of the directionally creator
relation is beginning to break through into consciousness,
both the good and the evil latent in the working of imagination begin to appear unlimited. We have seen in the
Romantic movement an instance of the way in which the
making of images may react on the collective representations. It is a fairly rudimentary instance, but even so it has
already gone beyond the dreams and responses of a leisured
few. The economic and social structure of Switzerland, for
Saving the Appearances
example, is noticeably affected by its tourist industry, and
that is due only in part to increased facilities of travel. It is due not less to the fact that (whatever may be said about
their 'particles') the mountains which twentieth-century man
sees are not the mountains which eighteenth-century man
saw.
It may be objected that this is a very small matter, and
that it will be a long time before the imagination of man
substantially alters those appearances of nature with which
his figuration supplies him. But then I am taking the long
view. Even so, we need not be too confident. Even if the
pace of change remained the same, one who is really sensitive to (for example) the difference between the medieval
collective representations and our own will be aware that,
without travelling any greater distance than we have come
since the fourteenth century, we could very well move forward into a chaotically empty or a fantastically hideous
world. But the pace of change has not remained the same. It has accelerated and is accelerating.
We should remember this, when appraising the aberrations of the formally representational arts. Of course, in so
far as these are due to affectation, they are ofno importance.
But in so far as they are genuine, they are genuine because
the artist has in some way or other experienced the world he
represents. And in so far as they are appreciated, they are appreciated by those who are themselves willing to make a move towards seeing the world in that way, and, ultimately
therefore, seeing that kind of world. We should remember
this, when we see pictures of a dog with six legs emerging
from a vegetable marrow or a woman with a motorbicycle substituted for her left breast. The systematic use of imagination, then, will be requisite
in the future, not only for the increase of knowledge, but
also for saving the appearances from chaos and inanity. Nor
need it involve any relinquishment of the ability which we
have won to experience and love nature as objective and
independent of ourselves. Indeed, it cannot involve that. 146
Saving the Appearances
For any such relinquishment would mean that what was
taking place was not an approach towards final participation
(which is the proper goal ofimagination) but an attempt to
revert to original participation (which is the goal of pantheism, of mediumism and of much so-called occultism).
To be able to experience the representations as idols, and then
to be able also to perform the act of figuration consciously,
so as to experience them as participated; that is imagination.
The extremity ofidolatry towards which we are moving
renders the attainment ofthis dual relation to nature a necessity for both art and science. The attempt to unite the voluntary creativity demanded by the one with the passive receptivity demanded by the other is the significance of Goethe's
contribution to the Western mind, as the achievement of it
is the significance of Rudolf Steiner's. It is perhaps still not
too late to attend to these portents. The appearances will be
'saved' only if, as men approach nearer and nearer to conscious figuration and realize that it is something which may
be affected by their choices, the final participation which is thus being thrust upon them is exercised with the profoundest sense of responsibility, with the deepest thankfulness
and piety towards the world as it was originally given to
them in original participation, and with a full understanding
of the momentous process of history, as it brings about the
emergence of the one from the other.
XXII
SPACE, TIME AND WISDOM
The Western type of consciousness may be said to have
begun, as we saw at the end of Chapter XV, with the emergence of Greek thought from the Orient. For the Western
outlook is based essentially on that turning ofman's attention to the phenomena, which in this book has been called alphathinking. This is sharply contrasted with the oriental impulse (still heard echoing on in Plato) to refrain from the
phenomena, to remain, as it were, in the bosom of the
Eternal, to disregard as irrelevant to man's true being, all that, in his experience, which is based on 'the contacts of the
senses'. Oriental philosophy, hardly distinguishable from
oriental theology, is based, above all, on a determination to regard the sense-world as Maya, or illusion. It was for this reason that, on its rediscovery in the nineteenth century, it made such a strong appeal to the few who were by then
becoming dimly aware that the enlightenment of the West
is based on idolatry. It is clear, however, that the way ofthe
West lies, not back but forward; not in withdrawal from
the contacts of the senses, but in their transformation and
redemption.
We have also seen that the rise and growth of alphathinking was associated with a change in man's experience
of space. It was with difficulty that movement, and particularly movement in a circle, was first wholly distinguished
from mental activity; and this applied especially to the celestial revolutions, which were approached in a way that
Space, Time and Wisdom
suggests that what we call space was conceived rather as a kind of unindividualized, all-enclosing continuum, or mental mobile, for which perhaps wisdom is the best modern
word we can find. Space, as a mindless, wisdomless, lifeless void, was not a common notion at any time before the
scientific revolution; thus at the close of Chapter XI we saw how the experience ofspace differed from our own, even as recently as medieval times. To the remnant ofparticipation
which then still survived, man, as microcosm, was placed at the centre ofthe macrocosm; but the point was, that he was
an organic centre. The spatial aspect of the relation was incidental. It is only when space itself has become an idol
—
when it has become simply the absence of phenomena, conceived in the phenomenal mode—that perspective takes the
place of participation. For the mode of vision which perspective reproduces, each pair of eyes is placed at the centre
of a purely spatial sphere, and any organic relation there
may be is incidental.
If therefore we should wish to revive in ourselves the
faculty of experiencing spatial form as representation, and
if we should wish to seek assistance in doing so, from the
past history of man, we shall do well to look backwards to the East, along the path that led through the Greeks to the
scientific revolution.
We have seen however that there is another line along
which we can also look back to the same source. In Chapter
XVI we saw that, long before the alpha-thinking of the
Greeks had begun its long task of eliminating participation
from human consciousness, the Jewish nation, with a different impulse and a more considered purpose, had initiated
the like process. In their case there was no question of turning their attention to the phenomenon for its own sake, or
at all. The killing out of participation was the end, in itself,
and imagery of all kinds was the quarry marked out for
destruction.
It has often been pointed out that we find reflected in the
early literature of the Jews an entirely new feeling for the
Space, Time and Wisdom
significance of history, and perhaps of time itself. It is in
their apocalypses that we first detect a conception ofhistory
as something which had a beginning and is moving towards an end. The apocalypses have even been pointed to as the
earliest example' ofsomething that could be called a doctrine
ofevolution. It has perhaps not been so often remarked that a peculiar sense of the significance and shape of time is also
reflected in the Hebrew language. Not only, for example,
does the Hebrew verb possess no present tense, as we
understand it in the Aryan languages; the past being used
for every moment up to the present, and the future for every
moment from the present on. Not only is this the case, but
the past and future are interchangeable in ways which it is difficult for us to understand. More than one Hebrew
grammarian, for instance, has declared that the past tense was used for prophecy and the future for history.
Once again we notice a sharp contrast with what had gone
before. The oriental conception of time was essentially
cyclic. The picture was one of eternal repetition rather than
of beginning, progress and end, and the path of the individual soul to the bosom of eternity was a backward path of
extrication from the wheels ofdesire in which it had allowed
/ itself to become involved. To reach, or to resume, the
} Supreme Identity with Brahma, with the Eternal, was the
l object and its achievement was a matter which lay directly
between the individual and the Eternal. The Semitic way,
on the other hand, was a way forward through history and
it was a way, shared indeed by the individual, but trodden
by the nation as a whole.
In a study such as this, which necessarily attempts to cover
a great deal of ground in a very short space, one should
beware of overstressing a resemblance to make a neat
parallel. But I think it is true to say that, just as by looking
back through the Greek mind, we bring to life the apprehension of form in space as an image or representation, so, by looking back through the Jewish mind, we bring to life the apprehension of form in time—that is, of events them150
Space, Time and Wisdom
selves, as images, whether of the past or future, or of a state of mind.
The second is a far more difficult achievement for us than
the first. But I believe that anyone who would well consider the way of experiencing Old Testament history,
which is implied in the Psalms and in the Jewish liturgy, and
then again in Christian art before the Reformation, would
understand what I mean. To immerse oneself in the medieval Mystery plays and in those sequences and parallels
between Old and New Testament, which are the very backbone, the essential formal principle of the Cathedral sculptures, is to feel that, in one most real sense, the Old Testament was lost with the Reformation.
For non-participating consciousness it is either, or. A
narrative is either a historical record, or a symbolical representation. It cannot be both; and the pre-figurings of the
New Testament in the Old, and the whole prophetic ele- ment in the Old Testament is now apt to be regarded as moonshine. In a parallel sphere, however—the life-history
ofthe individual man—it is already no longer taken quite so confidently for granted that the historical and the symbolical
are contradictories. In the nineteenth century it required the
powerful imagination ofaJohn Keats to perceive that 'every
man's life is a perpetual allegory'. In our own day the development of psychology alone has made this possible for
much more ordinary men. Though not many may agree
with him, a man is no longer regarded as a lunatic, who
divines that the things which happen to a person, and the
order in which they happen, may be as much a part ofhim
as his physical organism. And it seems to lie in the natural
order of things that, with the further increase of final participation, this perception should be extended to the biographies of nations and races, and of humanity as a whole.
All things considered, before we reject out of hand the
possibility ofany imaginal principle in time and the events of
history, we should do well to consider how we are getting on
with our own conception both of time and of space.
Space, Time and Wisdom
The concept ofspace as an unlimited or three-dimensional
void—a kind of extrapolated 'perspective'—which came in
with the disappearance of participation, is still of course the
ordinary man's concept. It held good for science, too, until
the end of the nineteenth century. The indications that it is now proving inadequate are so numerous that I do not need
to stress them. When, for instance, we are told that space
must be conceived as spherical, or asked to think in terms of
a 'space-time continuum', we can hardly avoid the conclusion
that the old, or rather the still young, 'idol' of infinity as a 'going on for ever', whether in space or time, is showing
unmistakable signs ofstrain. There seems to be a strong tendency, both in dealing with the periphery and in dealing
with the centre of the physical universe, to substitute what
are in effect thought-patterns for plausible and seriously
supposed spatial apparatus. Is not the rather hectic picture
of a universe expanding in all directions with almost infinite
rapidity, in essence a geometrical rather than a physical
notion? I am told at all events that it bears a marked resemblance to projective geometry. 'It appears,' said Lord
Russell, broadcasting in April 1955 on the death of
Einstein,
that the universe is of finite size, although unbounded.
(Do not attempt to understand this unless you have
studied non-Euclidean geometry.) It appears also that the
universe is continually getting bigger.
We turn from the periphery to the infinitesimal centre of
our 'perspectivized' space, and we hear the same voice in the same broadcast assuring us that: Nobody before quantum theory doubted that at any
given moment a particle is at some definite place and
moving with some definite velocity. This is no longer the
case. The more accurately you determine the place of a
particle, the less accurate will be its velocity; and the more
accurately you determine the velocity, the less accurate
Space, Time and Wisdom
will be its position. And the particle itself has become
something quite vague, not a nice little billiard ball as it used to be. When you think you have caught it, it produces a convincing alibi as a wave and not a particle. In
fact, you know only certain equations of which the
interpretation is obscure.
The reader will be aware that in this book I have called
that 'something quite vague' by the name either of 'the
particles' or of 'the unrepresented' and have then, for reasons given, largely dismissed it from consideration. This
is perhaps the place to say a final word about it. Physical
science postulates an unrepresented, as a something which
is independent ofour consciousness in a way, or to an extent
to which the phenomena are not. Our consciousness is, however, not independent of it; for it is in response to its stimulus that our senses and our figuration and thinking
together construct the phenomenal world. It has however
lately been growing apparent that all attempts to conceive
the unrepresented in terms of idol-matter in idol-space and
idol-time break down. Approaching it this way, we learn
only that by taking it up into mathematical equations we
can produce startling technological results. Two consequences seem to follow. Firstly, it would be
rash to assume that there is no other approach than the
mathematical one. Who can affirm, and on what evidence,
that we may not also learn to approach the unrepresented by
way of enhancing our figuration,1 so as to make it a conscious process, as well as by the path of mathematical hypothesis? For sensation and figuration are the—at present
unconscious—moment in which we actually meet the
unrepresented (or, at least, encounter its resistance) in
experience, as distinct from applying alpha-thinking to it afterwards. In this way we should gradually eliminate the
unrepresented by rendering it phenomenal. It, too, would
take its place among the collective representations. We
1 As Goethe did (c£ p. 138). 153
Space, Time and Wisdom
should then at least find out whether what I have said about
the phenomena can, or cannot, in the last resort be applied
to the (as yet) unrepresented also; that is to say, whether or no they are representations of the collective unconscious.
Certainly, the 'something quite vague' which can be coaxed
into producing an atomic explosion does not look much like a collective unconscious—but then neither did the represented,
which underlies the ordinary appearances, look like one
—
until we started thinking seriously about them.
Secondly, it would be rash to dismiss out of hand that
different, and essentially representational, conception oftime
and space, which I mentioned at the beginning of this chapter. Which of the two is the cul de sac and which is the
highway; whether it is more practical and straightforward,
and whether the human mind is likelier to get somewhere,
by thinking of man as surrounded by a cosmos or sphere of
wisdom; or by thinking that space is spherical and the
universe of finite size, although unbounded and getting
bigger, are questions which everyone will decide for himself. It is, at all events, the former conception (as the reader
will by now be aware) upon which the whole argument of
this book converges; and from now on I shall assume its validity.
We may think of the cosmic wisdom as related to the
appearances rather as, in men, the inner, unspoken word (the
verbum cordis, verbum intellectus, of which Aquinas wrote) is related to the word (vox) that is actually vocalized. At least
it is only on some such basis that we can ever hope to
understand such a phenomenon as the history and literature
of the Jews, or its culmination in Christianity, in a way
which does not simply cut us off from the accumulated
wisdom and insight of the past.
In Chapter XVI something was said ofthe part played by
the Jewish impulse in the development of the Western
world. If we would go farther and consider its place in the
whole history of man, we can, I believe, best do so by reflecting on the nature of memory. Just as, when a word is 154
Space, Time and Wisdom
formed or spoken, the original unity of the 'inner* word is polarized into a duality of outer and inner, that is, of sound
and meaning; so, when man himself was 'uttered', that is, created, the cosmic wisdom became polarized, in and
through him, into the duality ofappearance and intelligence,
representation and consciousness. But when creation has
become polarized into consciousness on the one side and
phenomena, or appearances, on the other, memory is made
possible, and begins to play an all-important part in the
process of evolution. For by means of his memory man
makes the outward appearances an inward experience. He
acquires his self-consciousness from them. When I experi- ence the phenomena in memory, I make them 'mine', not
now by virtue ofany original participation, but by my own
inner activity. It is from this activity in memory, it will be
recalled, that the human word, according to Aquinas,
'proceeds'. For, once the phenomena are 'mine', I can reproduce them in the form of words.
Thus, the human word, for Aquinas (as we saw in Chapter XIII), proceeds from the memory, as the Divine Word
proceeds from God the Father. We shall understand the
place of the Jews in the history of the earth, that is, of man
as a whole, when we see the Children of Israel occupying
the position in that history which memory occupies in the
composition of an individual man. The Jews, with their
language trailing vestiges of the world's Creator and their
special awareness of history, were the dawning memory in
the human race. They too tore the phenomena from their
setting of original participation and made them inward,
with intent to reutter them from within as word. They
cultivated the inwardness of the represented. They pinpointed participation to the Divine Name, the I am spoken
only from within, and it was the logic of their whole development that the cosmos ofwisdom should henceforth have
its perennial source, not without, and behind the appearances, but within the consciousness of man; not in front of
his senses and his figuration, but behind them.
XXIII
RELIGION
^WTien one ventures to speak, as I did in Chapter XIX, of
man standing 'in a directionally creator relation' to the
phenomena, it is clear that a theological issue is raised.
Religion is essentially an 'I-Thou' relation between man on
the one hand and the Creator ofman and ofhis phenomena, on the other. A man who cannot think of his Creator as a Being other than himself cannot be said to have a religion.
This is a truth of which modern theology, in its reaction
against the vague creative-evolutionism, which sometimes
passed muster as religion in the nineteenth century, is very
much and very healthily aware. Unfortunately, it is just on the interpretation and application of this all-important truth that our modern idolatry
has fastened its claws. For idolatry has coarsened the very
meaning of 'otherness'—the very way in which 'other' and
'same' can be thought. We have seen, in Chapter XIII, how
distinctions not determined by the senses were once concrete experiences, before they faded away into the 'frigidity'
of subjective ideas with the coming of the scientific revolution. We have seen, for instance, how Schiller was unable
to conceive that Goethe's Urphdnomen could be anything at
all, unless it was either a phenomenon perceivable by the
passive senses, or an abstract idea. So to the typical modern
mind, fixed firm in its idolatry, unless God is thought of as not merely other than itself, but other in the phenomenal
mode and after the manner in which the idols are other, God
must be merely an idea.
i 5 6
Religion
Yet this can be no more than a passing blindness. Once it was remembered, and some day it will be realized afresh,
that 'the soul is in a manner all things', God the Father is not
less, but more 'other' from me than are the phenomena. But,
ifI think ofHim as other in the same mode as the phenomena,
then I substitute an idol for Him; and if I then proceed to worship Him so thought of, then, whatever I may say about
it, in the secret recesses of my soul I am worshipping
—
perhaps some kind of guardian angel, certainly not my
Creator. In order to be sure of distinguishing him numerically from myself, and in the name of humility, I have dared
to think ofhim as an existence parallel with my own. Herein
lies the idolatry which infects contemporary religion.
We saw, in Chapter XVI, how the willed ousting of
participation, which was the paramount impulse, or obedience, of the Jews, could contribute to the same result as did the alpha-thinking of the Greeks and their successors. But we saw also how a waxing experience of the inwardness
of the Divine Name was the proper counter-pole to their
loss of original participation. We stopped short, however,
of the point where this experience was lost. By the time
Jesus was born the Divine Name had ceased to be spoken by
man in the Temple or elsewhere. The pharisees had made it the name of a Being exclusively objective, remote, inaccessible, infinitely superior to, yet imagined as existentially
parallel with man. Thus, the Jews had barely glimpsed, before they again lost sight of, that which is the opposite pole
to man's otherness from the I am, namely his supreme
identity with it. The fixing of such a gulf between God and man was not
fatal to religion so long as some measure of original participation remained. To a participating consciousness, apprehending the world and the word as image, many nouns are the names of the Creator ('non proprie sed per similitudinem') and the noun God is merely one ofthem. To a nonparticipating consciousness, apprehending the world as object, most nouns are the names ofidols and the noun God
Religion
can be no exception. 1 ) If the noun God were indeed the
Divine Name, it would not frequently appear in discourse
as the subject of easy and familiar sentences. Whereas, in
fact, it is long now since this liberty became almost the
recognized mark by which we distinguish the sermon from
other forms of utterance. The progressive loss of original
participation necessarily involves one of two alternatives,
either an ever-increasing experience of the inwardness ofthe
Divine Name and the Divine Presence—which is the reli- gious aspect of what I have called 'final participation'
—
or an ever-increasing idolatry, in religion as elsewhere.
This dilemma I believe to be the ultimate and innermost
significance ofProtestantism, the development ofwhich has
been roughly contemporary with that ofthe scientific revolution. For the idolatry of which I have just written is, of
course, not the whole story. In many corners, in many
movements, both within and without the established
churches, a new impulse towards final participation has
gathered strength, as men have attempted to make the
Pauline maxim: 'Not I, but Christ in me' a living experience.
'Though God be everywhere present,' wrote William Law
(author of the 'Serious Call'):
yet He is only present to thee in the deepest and most
central part of thy soul. Thy natural senses cannot possess
God, or unite thee to Him; nay, thy inward faculties of
Understanding, Will and Memory can only reach after God, but cannot be the place ofHis habitation in thee. But
there is a root or depth in thee, from whence all these
faculties come forth, as lines from a centre, or as branches
from the body ofthe tree. This depth is called the Centre,
the Fund or Bottom of the soul. This depth is the Unity,
the Eternity, I had almost said the Infinity of thy soul;
for it is so infinite that nothing can satisfy it, or give it any rest but the infinity of God.2
1 Cf. Aquinas. Summa la, qu. 13, a 9.
2 The Spirit of Prayer, Part I, ch. 2. 158
Religion
This, on the one side, and on the other that valiant attempt,
which began with the Reformation and ended in Fundamentalism, to understand and accept literally
—
and only
literally—the words of the Bible, precisely while their
meanings were being subtly drained away by idolatry
—
these are the opposite and complementary poles between
which Protestantism has hitherto revolved.
If this book has succeeded in showing anything, it has
shown that the only possible answer to the idolatry with
which all our thinking is to-day infected, is the acceptance
and conscious ensuing of that directionally creator relation to the phenomenal world, which we know to be a fact,
whether we like it or not. Is God's creation less aweinspiring because I know that the light, for instance, out of
which its visual substance is woven, streams forth from my
own eyes? 'Look upon the rainbow,' wrote the author of
Ecclesiasticus: Look upon the rainbow, and praise him that made it: very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof.
It compasseth the heavens about with a glorious circle,
and the hands of the most High have bended it. Do I echo these words less warmly, when I recollect that
ntrP is creating the rainbow through my eye$? When I know that to think otherwise is an illusion or a pretence?
Does piety depend on original participation? Ifso, one thing
is certain; there is no future for it. But fortunately it does
not. I did not create my eyes. And ifan understanding ofthe manner of my participation in the appearance of a rainbow
does not diminish my awe before its Creator, why should
that be the case with the other more palpable phenomena?
What but idolatry could ever make me suppose it was the
case? 'Let not your heart be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me.'
I did not create my eyes. But we saw at the beginning of
this book how, in order that the world of appearances may
arise, it is not enough for the senses alone to be added to the
Religion
unrepresented. That world depends no less on man's figuration; and, with that, also on his imagination. It is because
imagination participates the creative activity in this way
that it has itself been dimly felt to be, and described as, 'creative'. We saw in Chapter XXI how this means that the
future of the phenomenal world can no longer be regarded
as entirely independent of man's volition. This is the
difference between original and final participation.
This is also a conclusion from which piety may shrink.
We must then ask ourselves (apart altogether from our
obligation to accept the truth because it is true) whether we
ought to shrink from the notion that we are to share the
responsibility of maintaining an earth which it has already,
it seems, been given into our hands to destroy. Moreover,
has history any real significance unless, in the course of
it, the relation between creature and Creator is being
changed?
God's view is the view of mind as such, for it corre- sponds to the real structure of existence. The tendency of
any mind, in proportion as it overcomes its creaturely
limitations, must be to gravitate towards the divine
centre, and share the divine view of things. That is the
goal; it cannot be the starting-point.1 Has history any significance, unless we can apply these
words to the whole development of the mind of man?
Would it not be wiser, instead of shrinking, to recall the
words of St. Paul: For the earnest expectation of the creature waiteth for the manifestation of the sons of God—and the
German poet, Novalis's gloss: Man is the Messiah of nature?
On the other hand, it may be objected that all this talk of
the relation of man to the phenomenal world is cold stuff,
having little or nothing to do with religion, whose field is the soul and its salvation. But this 'watertight' attitude is itself a product of idolatry. What the Psalmist wrote of the
old idols is true no less of the idols ofthe twentieth century.
1 Austin Farrar, A Rebirth ofImages. Dacre Press. 1949. 160
Religion
'They that make them are like unto them/ The soul is in a manner all things, and the idols we create are built into the
souls of our children; who learn more and more to think of
themselves as objects among objects; who grow hollower
and hollower. In the long run we shall not be able to save
souls without saving the appearances, and it is an error fraught with the most terrible consequences to imagine that
we shall. Let us not, nevertheless, be unduly oppressed by the fear
oflosing all we are accustomed to, whether it be that delight
in a wholly independent world of nature of which I spoke
in Chapter XXI, or of some special brand of piety that
depends on it. But let us make no mistake as to the magnitude of the moral demand which is made on us. In that
respect there is no need for the moralist to worry. It is not
such cold stuff after all. The world offinal participation will
one day sparkle in the light of the eye as it never yet
sparkled early one morning in the original light of the sun. But the coming of this light presupposes a goodness of
heart and a steady furnace in the will, which have only not
been emphasized in this book, because they are not the
subject of it. The morality of imagination is subtle and deep and far- reaching—subtle above all, because imagination itself is still in its tender infancy. I have already pointed out that imagination and goodness are not synonymous. But I believe that,
if we are sensitive to it, we may divine in this age a very
close and special relation between them. This relation was
the guiding intuition ofthat great, confused spirit—the very
St. George of iconoclasm—William Blake, who held that
Imagination is the cardinal virtue, because the literalness which supports idolatry is the besetting sin, of the age
which is upon us. But we must walk warily here.
It is in the nature of the case that, if at any point in time
something like a new moral demand is made on humanity,
moral judgments grow for a time double and confused.
Thus, in Chapter XIX I spoke of certain 'symptoms of
Religion
iconoclasm', in the shape of a new willingness to apprehend
symbolically. If I now maintain that these have a moral
significance, and indeed a paramount moral significance, I am at once in the difficulty that the scale ofvalues I have set up not only does not correspond with the generally accepted
scale of Christian moral values, but appears to cut right
across it. There are plenty of people with a natural taste for
dream-psychology, or for art or literature of a symbolical
nature, for sacramentalism in religion, or for other things
whose meaning cannot be grasped without a movement of
the imagination, who are arrogant or self-centred or in
other ways no better than they should be. And conversely
there are prosaic, humdrum, literal souls before whose
courage and goodness we are abashed. It is not a happy task
to have to maintain that, from one point of view, and that an all-important one, the former must be accounted morally
superior. But then neither would it have been a happy task
to have to maintain, let us say, to a disciple of Rabbi Hillel,
that from one point of view and that an all-important one,
some ofthe more raffish members of St. Paul's congregation
at Corinth possessed the one thing needful which the Rabbi
lacked. The 'needful' virtue is that which combats the
besetting sin. And the besetting sin to-day is the sin of
literalness, 1 or idolatry. Relative moral values are not as simple as relative places in class at school. There is a tragedy
of progress.
And yet in neither case, perhaps, to a fine and sincere
moral intuition, is the apparent irrelevance as total as I have
just suggested. The relation between the mind and heart of
man is a delicate mystery, and hardness is catching. It will,
r
I believe, be found that there is a valid connection, at some
level however deep, between what I have called 'literalness'
1 It is at this point that I can most happily acknowledge the very real debt which my book owes to stimulus and enlightenment derived from the conversation and writings of my friend Mr. Roger Home. Indeed the recollection of his saeva indignatio on the subject of 'literalness' may well have been the
catalyst, without which a rather wayward collection of notes and ideas would
never have taken shape as a book at all. 162
Religion
and a certain hardness of heart. Listen attentively to the
response ofa dull or literal mind to what insistently presents
itself as allegory or symbol, and you may detect a certain
irritation, a faint, incipient aggressiveness in its refusal. Here I think is a deep-down moral gesture. You may, for
instance, hear the literal man object suspiciously that he is being 'got at'. And this is quite correct. He is. Just as he isj
being 'got at' by his unconscious through the symbolism of
his dreams. An attempt is being made, of which he is dimly
aware, to undermine his idols, and his feet are being invited on to the beginning ofthe long road, which in the end must
lead him to self-knowledge, with all the unacceptable
humiliations which that involves. Instinctively he does not
like it. He prefers to remain 'literal'. But of course he hardly
knows that he prefers it, since self-knowledge is the very
thing which he is avoiding.
We could pursue the matter further and instance, on the
positive side, a certain humble, tender receptiveness of heart
which is nourished by a deep and deepening imagination
and by the self-knowledge which that inevitably involves*
Perhaps this is what Blake had in mind, when he called
Imagination 'the Divine Body of the Lord Jesus, blessed for
ever'; but we have digressed too far already from the main
road.
One final word, however, before we leave the specifically
moral aspect behind us. It may be objected that however
true it may be, all that I have been saying is much too diffi- cult to have much to do with the religion of ordinary men.
This is not an objection which would have appealed to St. Augustine or the Fathers of the Church, but let us consider
it. In the first place, a great deal of the complexity of my
argument is due to the deep-seated error, with its conse- quently innumerable ramifications, which that argument
has sought to unravel. The movements of fingers disentangling a crumpled skein are complicated, but the final result is not complication. Secondly, from one point of
view God is always simple, as the light is simple, and the
Religion
simplest soul can turn to Him at whatever point it stands in
the matter ofeducation or wisdom. But from another, since
He is everywhere present, He must be at least as complicated
as the most complicated thing in His creation. God's view
is 'the view of mind as such'—and outside idolatry we can- not really separate His View' of creation from creation itself —except as the Persons of the Trinity are 'separate'.
There is, moreover, a topical application of this truth. In the industrial and urbanized civilization of to-day many of
the 'simple' minds which meet with indifference or with
indignant protest any suggestion of difficulty or complexity
in theology, are not so simple when it comes to tackling the
complexities of the phenomenal world in nature or machinery. The relation between the mind and heart of man is indeed a close and delicate one and any substantial cleft between the two is unhealthy and cannot long endure.
Hence, however the case may stand for the time being, or with a few individuals here and there, it is certain that the
mind of man as a whole cannot safely be left to occupy
itself with idols, while a moral, or even an adoring 'ghost in
the machine' responds to the otherness ofGod with love and
obedience and the cultivation of self-improvement.
There will be a revival of Christianity when it becomes
impossible to write a popular manual of science without
referring to the incarnation of the Word. It is these books,
not popular theology (however excellently and simply it is written, as to-day it often is) on which the mind of the
proletariat seizes as it awakens from its ancient peasantdreaming and peasant-wisdom. It is these—especially ifthey
are laced with Marxism—which the needy oriental student
in Bloomsbury devours and takes home with him; it is these
which up to now are the answering legacy of the West to the East, whence she once derived her religion. The hungry
sheep look up and are not fed. But Marxism forges ahead,
because the scientific outlook (which is in the blood of the
proletariat, because it is in the collective representations to which they are awakening) is part and parcel ofits message;
Religion
whereas to Christian doctrine, as now presented, it is at worst a stumbling-block and, at best, totally irrelevant.
I have tried to show in this book that it is in fact very far from irrelevant; inasmuch as the scientific revolution
marked a crucial stage in that evolution from original to
final participation, which is the progressive incarnation of
the Word. I have tried to show that the phenomena cannot
be understood in their true nature without an understanding
of precisely that evolution.
In a letter to The Times last year, concerning the evangelical mission of Dr. Graham, the Bishop of Plymouth
wrote:
. . . Our Lord constantly emphasized his healing
ministry to the whole man; ifhe is not Lord ofour minds,
he is not the saviour whom this generation, which is our immediate concern, so sorely needs.
I am persuaded that in our time the battle between the
powers ofgood and evil is pitched in man's mind even more
than in his heart, since it is known that the latter will ulti- mately follow the former. In the Christian doctrine of the
Trinity the Logos, or Word, is one of the three Persons.
The conception of a threefold nature in the Godhead is not,
however, peculiar to Christianity. It is to be found also in
oriental religions and is perhaps the formal principle underlying the whole complicated organism ofGreek mythology.
It is the depth of all theology. What is peculiar to Christianity is the nexus which that acknowledges between the
Second Person ofthe Trinity and a certain historical event in time. For the Christian, accordingly, religion can never be
simply the direct relation between his individual soul and
the eternal Trinity. As long as we ourselves are occupying
a standpoint in time, so long, interposed between the First and Third Persons, all history, in a manner, lies. Not to realize to the uttermost the otherness of God
from ourselves is to deny the Father. But equally, not to
strive to realize the sameness—to renege from the Supreme
Religion
Identity—is to deny the Holy Spirit. This, any deeply reli- gious man may feel, whatever terminology he may have
learnt to employ. To this a true Christian—or so it seems to
me—must add: In no way to relate the former with the past,
and the latter with the future of the world, is to seek to
deprive history, and perhaps time itself, of all religious
significance.
XXIV
THE INCARNATION OF THE WORD
W'hen we look back on past periods of history, we are often confronted with inconsistencies and blind spots in
human thinking, which to us are so palpable that we are almost astonished out ofbelief. We find it hard to credit the
inescapable fact that they remained, for decades or for centuries, completely invisible not only to the generality ofmen
but also to the choicest and wisest spirits ofthe age. Such are the Athenian emphasis on liberty—with the system of
slavery accepted as a matter of course; the notion that the
truth could be ascertained and justice done with the help
of trial by battle; the Calvinist doctrine of pre-election to
eternal damnation; the co-existence of a Christian ethic
with an economic doctrine of ruthless laissez-faire; and no
doubt there are other and better examples.
I believe that the blind-spot which posterity will find
most startling in the last hundred years or so of Western
civilization, is, that it had, on the one hand, a religion which
differed from all others in its acceptance of time, and of a particular point in time, as a cardinal element in its faith;
that it had, on the other hand, a picture in its mind of the
history ofthe earth and man as an evolutionary process; and
that it neither saw nor supposed any connection whatever
between the two.
I have offered my own explanation of this curiosity by
pointing, as I did in Chapter IX, to the heavy weight of
idolatry which rested on the Western mind at the time
The Incarnation of the Word
when the theory ofevolution first appeared. To this must be
added the marked reluctance of Christians to admit any sort of relation between their own religion and any religion
which preceded it, except the Jewish, and latterly not much
even with that. St. Augustine, it is true, affirmed that there
had always been one true religion and that after the Incarnation this was called Christianity. 1 But the general tendency
has been all the other way; and the study of comparative
religions, which is still hardly a hundred years old, met at
first, if any attempt was made to apply it to Christianity,
with the same implacable hostility, though it now shows
some signs of relenting. The loss of any participating experience of time may, I have suggested elsewhere, have
something to do with this. To idolatry an event is either historical or symbolical. It cannot be both. There was accor- dingly a great, and in the circumstances a not wholly unjustified, fear. If it were once admitted that, for example,
the Corn-god or the mystery religions had any significance
for Christianity, or led up to it in any way, Christianity
would itself promptly be assumed to be 'derived from' these
religions and would dissolve away into anthropology and
symbolism.
Whatever the explanation, the fact is very strange. When
the horizon of time expanded suddenly in the nineteenth
century, one would have expected those who accepted
evolution and remained Christians, to see the incarnation of
their Saviour as the culminating point of the history of the
earth—a turning-point oftime to which all at first led down
and from which all thereafter was to lead upward. Moreover, having regard to the antiquity now attributed to the
earth and man, one would have expected them to feel that
we are still very very near to that turning-point, indeed
hardly past it; that we hardly know as yet what the Incarnation means; for what is two thousand years in comparison
with the ages which preceded it? This is not in fact what is thought and felt by the relatively
1 Retractationes, I, xiii, 3. 168
The Incarnation of the Word
small number ofpeople who still believe in the Incarnation.
I have found that, when they are pressed to 'make sense', as
it were, of the ages which preceded the birth of Christ—in
which men also lived and died—the practice is to achieve it by postulating a retrospective effect of the Incarnation.
This is indeed to abandon an idol-notion and to accept a
participating or imaginal notion of time. But surely it also
involves a sudden and uneasy jump in thought from time to
eternity! 1 Such a leap cuts itself off, by refraining, from an
understanding of the phenomenal world and is thus more
appropriate to oriental and pre-Christian religion than to
the time-embracing religion of the West.
Look here upon this picture and on this ! The stumblingblocks will only disappear when we substitute for the false picture, in our minds, of an evolution of idols, that other
true picture of the evolution of phenomena. We have seen how original participation, which began as the unconscious
identity of man with his Creator, shrank, as his self-consciousness increased, and how this was associated with the
origin and development of language. We have seen how,
in the last few centuries B.C. it had contracted to a faint awareness of creative activity alike in nature and in man, to
which was given the name of the Logos or Word. And
then, we have seen (in Chapter XIX) the first faint premonitory symptoms of final participation appearing already in
the first centuries of our era. Between these two phases—if we meditated deeply
enough on the nature and development of meaning in
language—we could, if necessary, infer without other help,
that the turning-point of time must have occurred. We
could infer that the incarnation of the Word must have
culminated.
What in fact happened according to the record? In the
heart of that nation, whose whole impulse it had been to eliminate original participation, a man was born who
1 Deeply as I admire it, this would be my criticism of the theology of the
late Charles Williams. 169
The Incarnation of the Word
simultaneously identified himself with, and carefully distinguished himself from, the Creator of the world—whom he
called the Father. On the one hand: 'I am not alone, but I and the Father that sent me,' etc. On the other: 'I and the
Father are one/ etc. In one man the inwardness of the
Divine Name had been fully realized; the final participation, whereby man's Creator speaks from within man himself, had been accomplished. The Word had been made
flesh. In other men—though we have pointed to certain
(mainly trivial) premonitory symptoms—that conscious
realization has still barely begun to show itself. Except that
the tender shoot offinal participation has from the first been
acknowledged and protected by the Church in the institution of the Eucharist. For all who partake of the Eucharist
first acknowledge that the man who was born in Bethlehem was 'of one substance with the Father by whom all things were made'; and then they take that substance into themselves, together with its representations named bread and
wine. That is after all the heart of the matter. There was no
difficulty in understanding it, as long as enough of the old
participating consciousness survived. It was only as this faded, it was only as a 'substance' behind the appearances
gradually ceased to be an experience and dimmed to a
hypothesis or a credo, that the difficulties and doctrinal
disputes concerning trans-substantiation began to grow.
But, by the physical act of communion as such, men can only take the Divine substance, the 'Name apart' directly
into the unconscious part of themselves; by way of their
blood. And in this, as we saw in Chapter XII, we participate
in two ways—both outwardly as a mere appearance (and,
at present, therefore an idol) and inwardly by original participation. Thus, the relation between original and final participation in the Eucharistic act is, as we should expect,
in the utmost degree complex and mysterious. If we accept
at all the claims made by Christ Jesus concerning his own
mission, we must accept that he came to make possible in
The Incarnation of the Word
the course oftime the transition ofall men from original to
final participation; and we shall regard the institution of
the Eucharist as a preparation—a preparation (we shall not
forget) which has so far only been operant for the sidereally
paltry period ofnineteen hundred years or so. To speculate, in a theological or cosmological context, on
what might have been if things had gone otherwise, is from
one point of view absurd. It is certainly foolish, if not
blasphemous, to do so for the sake of doing so. But as a means to a better understanding of what has been and is, such speculation may be illuminating. The whole depth and
poignacy of Augustine's felix peccatum Adae!1 would be lost on anyone who was not prepared to suppose, even for an
instant, that Adam might not have fallen. With this end in view, then, we may permit ourselves to
ask what would have happened if the incarnation of the
Word had been understood at the time when it occurred; if Christ had been acknowledged instead of being crucified.
In fact, by the time the Event happened, the pharisaical
element in Jewish religion had apparently triumphed, balking the nation of the opportunity of fulfilling its destiny.
Instead of realizing the inwardness of the Divine Name—
a
consummation to which their whole history had been
leading—the Children ofIsrael had turned aside. The Name
had ceased to be uttered even by the priests in the temple,
and the Creator had been removed to an infinite external
distance, as a Being, omnipotent indeed, and infinitely
superior, but, in the way He was thought of, existentially
parallel with man himself.
Yet—so we may speculate—this need not have happened.
On the contrary, precisely the pharisees should hardly have
needed even reminding of their nation's destiny by the
Saviour's pregnant words; they should have leaped instantly into recognition of man's Creator speaking with the
voice and through the throat of a man. Logically there was
the possibility of a gentle, untragic transition from original
1 'Fortunate sin of Adam!'
The Incarnation of the Word
to final participation, the one maturing in proportion as the
other faded. Within the limits ofthis sort ofspeculation we
can even say that it was this which was 'intended'. For the
whole tenor ofthe Old Testament suggests that the imaginal
consciousness characteristic of original participation was
being destroyed, precisely in order that it might be reborn,
'The rejection of idolatry', writes Dr. Austin Farrar, 1 meant not the destruction but the liberation ofthe images.
Nowhere are the images in more vigour than in the Old
Testament, where they speak of God, but are not he . . . there is no historical study more significant than the
study of their transformation. Such a transformation
finds expression in the birth of Christianity; it is a visible
rebirth of images.
That rebirth, however, did not take place. The crucifixion
did.
Original participation fires the heart from a source outside
itself; the images enliven the heart. But in final participation —since the death and resurrection—the heart is fired from
within by the Christ; and it is for the heart to enliven the
images.
Once again, later—once perhaps, towards the close of the
Graeco-Roman, Aristotelian age—we can speculate on a similar possibility which was never realized. Once more, we
are made to feel, 'there was a chance' that the requisite
transition should be accomplished with relative smoothness
and without the loss being first experienced to the full. For
by that time there had appeared many Christened minds,
which were capable of holding together, as it were in tension, the non-representational religious consciousness
characteristic of the Jews and the representational consciousness derived from Greece and Rome. Dionysius the
Areopagite taught that God was at once 'anonymous' and
'polyonomous'—nameless and many-named. And his treatise on the Divine Names, to which I have already referred,
1 A Rebirth of Images. 172
The Incarnation of the Word
took deep hold of medieval thought. Aquinas's philosophy,
and in particular perhaps the two kinds of participation
which we find referred to in it (see Chapter XIII), seemed on the threshold of effecting the transition gently. For,
while his participation by composition (subject and predicate, form and matter) is specifically Aristotelian and looks
backward to original participation, his hierarchical participation per similitudinem, derived in part from Dionysius,
looks rather forward to the 'final' variety. And already,
before Aquinas's time, the startlingly sudden rise and
spread throughout Europe of a rich crop of legends of the
Holy Grail suggests an attempted uprush of the Eucharistic
mystery from a substantially unconscious to a substantially
conscious—and extra-sacerdotal—status. To do more than mention such things here would be to go too far. It is enough that the possibility, if such it was, was not realized. Instead, before final participation could be
said to have well begun, the collective representations, 'the images', were swept clean of the last vestige of original
participation by that intellectual pharisaism, begotten (but
again not necessarily so) of the scientific revolution.
It is time to return from the abstractions of what might
have been to the concrete reality of what has been and is.
XXV
THE MYSTERY OF THE KINGDOM
It was pointed out in Chapter XXIII that the attainment
by humanity of a new moral standpoint may mean doing
violence to moral judgments. Some violence is inevitable
when men are called on, in any sphere, not to correct their
previous ideas by removing some error, but actually to move forward to a new plane that includes, rather than
replaces, the old. In the moral sphere, what was until now
simply 'good', is seen for the first time no longer as an
absolute, but also as the enemy of a better—and yet it has
still also to be grasped as good. This 'tragedy of progress',
as I called it, is the source ofmost ofthe 'hard sayings' in the
Gospels. Consider for instance the parables of the labourers
in the vineyard, and of the prodigal son. Our deep-rooted
feeling for the goodness of justice and equity has to be
outraged, because we are being beckoned towards a position
directionally opposite to the usual one; because we are invited to see the earth, for a moment at all events, rather as
it must look from the sun; to experience the world of man
as the object of a huge, positive outpouring of love, in the
flood ofwhose radiance such trifles as merit and recompense
are mere irrelevancies.
Now there are no harder sayings to be found in The
Gospels than the group which deal with the use and purpose
of parabolic utterance. Take for instance the verses which
follow immediately after the parable of the sower in the
13th Chapter of St. Matthew (vv, 9-13):
The Mystery of the Kingdom
Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.
And the disciples came, and said unto him, Why
speakest thou unto them in parables?
He answered and said unto them, Because it is given
unto you to know the mysteries of the Kingdom of
Heaven, but to them it is not given.
For whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall j ^
have more abundance; but whosoever hath not, from
him shall be taken away, even that he hath.
Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they
seeing, see not; and hearing, they hear not, neither do
they understand.
Pausing there for a moment, it must be admitted that if
we try to accept all this just as it stands, 1 and without any
context or key to its meaning, then, to say that it 'does
violence' to moral judgments is an understatement. The
surface-meaning is not just severe, it is brutal. Nor is there
any substantial difference in that respect between the passage
quoted and the parallel passages in St. Mark iv, 9-12 and
St. Luke viii, 9-10. If we want to understand what was
really in the mind of the Speaker, we have to go deeper.
And first of all, we notice how it all leads up to a phrase
which contains a marked echo ofcertain passages in the Old
Testament:
Because they seeing, see not; and hearing, they hear
not, neither do they understand.
Such echoes are frequent in the reported sayings ofjesus and
1 1 take the Gospels as they stand, treating them (whenever they may have
been written) as valid records left by wise and deeply responsible men. A good
many ofthe arguments which have been advanced in favour ofdissecting them
will, I believe, disappear with the idolatry (as I have here ventured to call it) which now obstructs our penetration of their deeper meaning. Meanwhile,
those who may still prefer to followJiilicher, C. H. Dodd, Jeremias and others, in writing off Matthew 9-13 and the parallels in Mark and Luke as later interpretations added by the primitive church, may also care to ponder whether
the primitive church is likely to have understood rather more, or rather less, than the twentieth-century commentator of the actual content of this and
other parables.
The Mystery of the Kingdom
attention is often drawn to them in the margins ofannotated
Bibles. Clearly his whole diction was saturated with recollections of this nature, even when no precise allusion can be
fixed. The New Testament is, in a sense, latent in the language of the Old. In this case, however, in St. Matthew's
version of the discourse, the allusion to the Old Testament
is both precise and explicit. For Our Lord continues
immediately:
And in them is fulfilled the prophecy of Esaias, which
saith, By hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand;
and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive;
For this people's heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed: lest at any time they should see with their eyes, and hear with
their ears, and should understand with their heart and
should be converted and I should heal them.
To trace the reverberation to its source, it is not enough
simply to turn to the 6th Chapter ofIsaiah. Eyes that see not,
and ears that hear not—where have we met with them
before? In those verses from the 115th Psalm which I have
already quoted twice, in Chapters X and XVI. This Psalm was very familiar to Jewish ears. It is one of the six Hallel
psalms, obligatory at many feasts, and according to the
Jewish Encyclopedia would have been part ofthe 'hymn' that was sung by the Thirteen after the Last Supper. Moreover,
they are repeated almost verbatim in the 135th Psalm:
The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of
mens hands.
They have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they,
but they see not;
They have ears, but they hear not: neither is there any
breath in their mouths. They that make them are like unto
them: so is every one that trusteth in them.
Turn again to the book of Isaiah and read the 44th
Chapter, which is concerned mainly with idolatry:
The Mystery of the Kingdom
They that make a graven image are all ofthem vanity;
and their delectable things shall not profit ... he maketh
a god, even his graven image: he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and saith, Deliver
me; for thou art my god.
They have not known nor understood: for he hath shut
their eyes that they cannot see; and their hearts that they
cannot understand.
It will be clear that, in order to understand the enigmatic
words which, in the Synoptic Gospels, are interposed between the parable of the Sower and its interpretation, we
must hear sounding through them as an overtone both the
voice of the prophet Isaiah and the familiar voice of the
Psalmist inveighing against graven images. We cannot do
otherwise than read them as alluding to idolatry.
But to what kind of idolatry? It is quite impossible to assume that the primary idolatry—that is, the worship of
images as numinous—of which the Children of Israel had
once been guilty, was in the mind ofJesus. For how is it possible to fit any such allusion into the context? Moreover
that kind of idolatry was no longer a besetting sin; it was
one that had practically ceased to exist among the Jewish
people. Thus, Conder in his Outlines of the Life of Christ,
emphasizing the moral degeneracy which prevailed among
the Jews at the time of the Nativity, could write (my
italics): 'Idolatry excepted, the darkest pictures painted by the
Old Testament prophets of ancient Israel were realized.'
Something has already been said in Chapter XVI of two
different kinds of idolatry. It was not only the first and
obvious kind of which the Old Testament prophets were
aware. There are some twenty different Hebrew words
which have been rendered 'idol' or 'image' in the Authorized Version, and in addition to the presence of a false or filthy spirituality, it is clear that the Hebrew writers
associated with images the almost opposite notion of
emptiness or nothingness—the absence of any spirituality
The Mystery of the Kingdom
whatsoever. It is also clear from the passages already quoted
that it was this secondary view ofidols which was conceived
as likely to be transferred to the subjective state of the
idolator:
They that make them are like unto them; and so is every one that trusteth in them.
This subjective emptiness—which was perhaps also the
'wilderness' or 'lonely place' in which the Baptist is described as calling for 'repentance'—seems to be the psychic
condition which is brought about when the elimination of
participation has deprived the outer 'kingdom'—the outer
world of images, whether artificial or natural—of all spiritual substance, while the new kingdom within has not yet
begun to be realized. It is, as it were, the null point between
1 original and final participation.
The particular parable which Jesus related in this way to
idolatry was the parable of the Sower, but we are given to understand that what he said applied to all parables, and
indeed that the ability to 'know' this parable was a sort of
pre-condition for the understanding, or knowing, of any
other.
Know ye not this parable? And how then will ye know
all parables?1 What is it then about this particular parable—of the Sower —which called for this particular comment? Let us listen,
first of all, to the ringing cry with which the parable concludes:
Who hath ears to hear, let him hear!
That is not peculiar to this passage. It is even a phrase which
was used by other Rabbis as well as Jesus. But if we take the
trouble to examine all the occasions on which he used the
words, we shall find them always in association with the
teaching of 'the Kingdom' within, of the light, be it of
1 Mark iv, 13. 178
The Mystery of the Kingdom
candle or ofsun, that shines now from within, ofmovement
from within outward, as opposed to movement from without inward. And so here: the disciples are first told, 'Unto
you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven/ or, according to St. Mark,1 'Unto you it is given
to know the mystery ofthe Kingdom of God; but for them
that are without all things happen2 in parables.'
Then follows the interpretation, beginning with the one
brief, abrupt verse: The sower soweth the word.
The parable, then, was about the sowing of the word, the
Logos, in earthly soil. It was an attempt to awaken his
hearers to the realization that this seed was within their own
hearts and minds, and no longer in nature or anywhere
without. We have seen something of the change in the
nature of all imagery and representation, which takes place
with the transition from original to final participation. But
'transition' is a misleading word for the violent change in
the whole direction of human consciousness which, in the
last resort, this must involve. Henceforth the life of the ] image is to be drawn from within. The life of the image is I to be none other than the life of imagination. And it is of \ the very nature of imagination that it cannot be inculcated. There must be first of all the voluntary stirring from \ within. It must be, not indeed self-created, but certainly
j self-willed, or else—it is not imagination at all; and is therefore incapable of iconoclasm. Iconoclasm is made possible
by the seed of the Word stirring within us, as imagination.
From him that hath not this seed—of final participation
—
there shall be taken away, even that residue—of original
participation—that he hath.
1 Mark iv, n.
2 yiyverai. A.V. and R.V. have: 'Unto them that are without all things
are done in parables.' It could also, conceivably, have been translated 'all things
are made in parables', on the analogy ofthe clause in the Nicene Creed referred to on p. 170 ('by whom all things were made.'), where the same Greek verb is employed.
The Mystery of the Kingdom
Truly to grasp, or (if I may use the expression) 'twig'
what is meant by the word and its sowing, involves some
elementary grasp of, or feeling for, the nature of final participation, and therefore also of the nature of parabolic
utterance. It is only possible to those in whom the word,
however feebly, has already taken root. Conversely: to have no inkling whatever of what happens in the moment of
parabolic utterance is to be incapable of grasping, or 'knowing', any parable, any metaphor, any symbol, any
sacrament.
Therefore it is impossible that the main object which it is sought to achieve by parable should be helped by explanations. Only those in whom the seed has already sprouted, in
whom the stirring has taken place, can benefit by any
explanation. For them indeed it may help to turn the little they have into abundance. But for those who have as yet
made no voluntary inward motion in the direction of
iconoclasm, for those who have not suffered that change of
direction of the whole current of a man's being—the
metanoia, or turning about ofthe mind, for which the heart's
name is 'repentance'—explanations are of no avail. They
will merely substitute one sort of idol for another. The
interpretation itself will still need interpreting, and that
interpretation also they will inevitably misconstrue in
terms of their idolatry. This is in fact what has happened to the tremendous rubric: 'The sower soweth the word.' And
one can well imagine the reluctance with which Christ
launched it on the ocean of idolatrous misunderstanding,
where we still mostly fmd it to-day.
The sowing of the word is commonly assumed to be no more than a pictorial way of referring to preaching and
missionary activity. But how can this possibly be so? If this simple parallel is all that was intended, why are we warned
so solemnly that the power to grasp it pre-supposes access to
'the mystery of the kingdom'? Certainly the writer of St. Matthew's Gospel himself leaves us in no doubt of his convictions, namely, that both the springing to life in man of
The Mystery of the Kingdom
'the Word of the Kingdom' and its embodiment in parable were something to which Jewish history had always been
leading up. For later, in the same chapter, at the close of a
series of parables and similes intended to suggest the
Kingdom, he adds (alluding to the long, historical 78th
Psalm):
All these things spake Jesus unto the multitude in
parables; and without a parable spake he not unto
them;
That it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet saying, I will open my mouth in parables; I will
utter things which have been kept secret from the foundation of the world.1 If on the other hand what is pointed to as the sowing of
the word, is the coming of God himself into nature and
man; if what is hidden in this and the other parables and
mataphors concerning 'the kingdom' is the turning-point
of time itself, is the change-over to that directionally
creator relation which has already been referred to, then we
should expect what we in fact find. We should expect these
sayings to be the 'hardest' ofall, and we should expect them
to be connected with man's overcoming of idolatry
through the help of an invented or man-made imagery; for
that is the first, wavering step on the road that leads to
final participation.
Nobody can truly 'receive' such sayings who is without
some inkling of all that the word and the Incarnation ofthe
Word stand for in human evolution. This I have tried to describe in this book in the fuller and more precise perspective in which it can be seen to-day; but an understanding of
the essence ofit, in a different, older perspective—that is, in
Greek and Hebrew versions of a 'Logos' teaching—had
already become possible, as we have seen, before Christ
came to the earth. To this understanding he appealed in the
hard sayings.
1 Matthew xiii, 34 and 35. I8l
The Mystery of the Kingdom
Truly to imagine their effect on those of his followers
who had the understanding, we must have ears to hear; to
hear the Christ as the Representative of Humanity actually
speaking to the handful in Palestine long ago. We shall
recall, for instance, the great series of 'I am—' sayings in
St. John's Gospel: 'I am the way, the truth, and the life. . . /
'I am the light ofthe world "I and the Father are one . . .' and we shall reflect how near was the Aramaic dialect he
spoke to Hebrew—so that at each 1 am' the disciples must
almost have heard the Divine Name itself, man's Creator,
speaking through the throat of man; till they can hardly
have known whether he spoke to them or in them, whether
it was his voice which they heard or their own. Now the Jews, as we have seen, were not interested in
phenomena. They were interested in morality. And in their
civilization it was the world of morality, not the world of
nature, which thinking of the alpha type had been engaged
in converting from a fountain of life into a system of laws.
Our own idolatry, our mental and sensuous pharisaism, had
hardly yet arisen; it was the idolatry of moral pharisaism
which had first to be broken. We need not be surprised that
the other idolatry, always latent, is only becoming fully
apparent in our own day. Final participation is indeed the
mystery of the kingdom—of the kingdom that is to come
on earth, as it is in heaven—and we are still only on the
verge of its outer threshold. Two thousand years is a trifle of time compared with the ages which preceded the Incarnation. More than a thousand had to pass before the
Western Church reached even that premonitory inkling of
final participation which it expressed by adding the Filioque to the Creed, and acknowledging that the Holy Spirit proceeds from the Son as well as, originally, from the Father.
The ehmination of original participation involves a contraction of human consciousness from periphery to centre
(cf. Chapter XI)—a contraction from the cosmos of wisdom to something like a purely brain activity—but by the same token it involves an awakening. For we awake, out
The Mystery of the Kingdom
of universal—into self—consciousness. Now a process of
awakening can be retrospectively surveyed by the sleeper
only after his awakening is complete; for only then is he
free enough of his dreams to look back on and interpret
them. Thus, the possibility to look back over the history of
the world and achieve a full, waking picture of his own
gradual emergence from original participation, really only
arose for man with the culmination of idolatry in the
nineteenth century. He has not yet learned to make use of
it. As we do so, the story of that gradual emergence will lie outspread before us in a clearer and clearer light. And as the
mystery of the kingdom more and more unfolds itself, the
Church, nursing mother of the still barely nascent Christimpulse in men, must inevitably be faced with grievous
decisions. Nothing is easier than to criticize the Church out
of a sort of smug enlightenment. But in truth the difficulty
has been wellnigh insuperable of maintaining the indispensable firmness of continuity with past tradition, while at the same time the meanings of all her armoury of words were
being quietly melted away from within by an idolatry
which had grown up without reference to her. In the dry
husks that remain problems and dilemmas have swollen and
multiplied, which, as we have seen, simply did not exist
for the old participating consciousness that gave birth to the liturgy and the creeds.
For instance, a non-participating consciousness cannot
avoid distinguishing abruptly between the concept of'man', or 'mankind', or 'men in general' on the one hand and that
of 'a man'—an individual human spirit—on the other. This
difficulty did not arise to anything like the same extent as long as original participation survived. Therefore our predecessors were able, quite inwardly, to accept the sin of
Adam as being their original sin also. And therefore we are not—because, for us, Adam (if he existed) was after all
—
somebody else ! This has brought with it the loss ofthe whole
concept ofthe 'fallen' as an essential element in the make-up
The Mystery of the Kingdom
of human beings; which in its turn is responsible for the
devastating shallowness of so much contemporary ethics
and contemporary psychology.
With the doctrine of evolution the concept of 'man', as a thinkable entity, with a history behind him and a destiny
in front of him, made a first confused reappearance. But,
owing to the form which that doctrine took under the influence of the prevailing idolatry, this 'man' of evolution
has no inner unity with the spirit ofany particular individual
man alive on earth at any particular moment. When the
evolution of phenomena is substituted for our supposed
evolution of idols,1 it will, I believe, be seen without much
difficulty that the evolution of the individual human spirit
has always proceeded step by step with the evolution of
nature; and that both are indeed 'fallen*. The biological
evolution of the human race is, in fact, only one half ofthe
story; the other has still to be told. The awakened clarity of retrospect, to which I have
recently referred, will, I am persuaded, be obliged to recognize that the gradual emergence ofman from original participation amounts also to the gradual emergence of 'men*
from 'man'; that it is not just the cumulative history of the
race, but the biography, also, of each individual spirit. Nor
do I see how this can fail to involve the recognition of
individual prenatal existence—or rather existences. Some
understanding of this seems to have been common to most
men before the West emerged from the East, and began the
systematic ousting of original participation, about three
thousand years ago. A renewal ofthat lost insight will almost
certainly be one of the first steps to be taken by religion
through the rebirth in her of that cosmic wisdom, which is the source not only of the world ofappearances, but also of
man's changing relation to them.
I suspect that, for the Church, it will not be easy. It will
not be easy for the nursing mother to accept the possibility
that her charge has grown to need additional nourishment;
1 Cf. Chapters ix and x. 184
The Mystery of the Kingdom
or that revelation of the mystery of the kingdom was not
turned off at the tap when the New Testament canon was
closed, but is the work ofan earth-time. Such a step will not
be taken with ease; but in the end, if the Christ infuses my
whole man, mind as well as heart, the cosmos of wisdom,
with all its forgotten truths, will dwell in me whether I like
it or not; for Christ is the cosmic wisdom on its way from
original to final participation.
This book is a study in idolatry, and especially that last and greatest step in idolatry which we call the scientific revolution. In it I have drawn attention to the great benefits
which this revolution has brought about. I could have said
much more of this. Races which throughout the history of
the world have never had enough to eat are being fed, while
I write, by the great technocracy ofAmerica. I have alluded
also to the priceless gifts of accuracy and precision. Yet,
when the last balance comes to be struck between good and
evil, I do not believe it will be these things for which men
will remember the scientific revolution with thankfulness.Man, said J. P. Sartre, is a being who is condemned to freedom. That is one way oflooking at it. And it is the only way,
if man himself is nothing but a hollow idol. But if man is not hollow, but is the theatre on which participation has
died to rise again, then there is also another way oflooking
at it. If, in Christ, we participate finally the Spirit we once
participated originally; if, in so doing, we participate one
another—so that 'men' once more become also 'man'; if, in original participation, we were dreamers and unfree,
and if Christ is a Being who can be participated only in
vigilance and freedom, then what will chiefly be remembered about the scientific revolution will be the way in
which it scoured the appearances clean of the last traces of
spirit, freeing us from original, and for final, participation.
And if what it produced thereby was, as I have suggested, a world of idols, yet, as Augustine of old could contemplate
the greatest of evils and exclaim Felix peccatum! so we,
i8 5
The Mystery of the Kingdom
looking steadily on that world, and accepting the burden of
existential responsibility which final participation lays on
us, may yet be moved to add:
Felix eidolon!
'Peor and Baalim Forsake their temples dim . . / the other
name for original participation, in all its long-hidden, in
all its diluted forms, in science, in art and in religion, is, after all—paganism.
INDEX
Actual (see potential) 63, 65, 103, 122, 137, 139-40;
'alpha-thinking' (defined), 24-5 (defined), 25
angels, 73, 90, 113, 157 Blake, William, 161, 163 animism, 29 £, 66 blood, 79 £, 103, 117, 140, 170
anthropology, 28 f., 42, 57, 66, Brahma, 150
80, 121, 168 Butterfield, H., 50, 68, 92
'appearances', 47-8
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 5m., 75, Chance, 64, 92, 145 84 f., 97, 100, 108, 127, 136, chemistry, 23, 79 £, 98
155, I58n., 173 Christianity, 99, 154, 162, 164 £,
Arabians, 51, 52n., 91, 136 167 £, 174 £
Ardley, Gavin, 52n. Chrysostom, Dio, 127
Aristarchus of Samos, 50 Church, the, 158, 170, 183-4
Aristotle, and Aristotelianism, Coleridge, S. T., 21, 128, 130, 139
21, 45, 48, 52n., 55, 62, 68, 69, Copernicus, 48, 49 £, 59
81, 86, 92-3, 96 £, 108, 112, Court de Gebelin, 123
143, 173 Creed, the Nicene, 170, I79n. Arnold, Matthew, 51
art, 73, 89, 99-100, 127 £, 146, 151 Dante (see Divine Comedy)
astronomy, 43-4, 46 £, 59, 64-5, Darwin, 61, 64
101 £ Democritus, 45
Augustine, Saint, 59, 85, 163, 168, Dionysius the Areopagite, 75, 84,
171, 185 172, 173 Ayer, A. J., 98 Divine Comedy, the 72, 103, 141 Dodd, C. H., 175m
Bacon, Francis, 39, 55, 59, 93-4, Duhem, P., 52n.
101, 136 Durkheim, E., 29 £, 42
Beckh, H., 123 Berkeley, Bishop, 21, 38, 44 Ecclesiasticus, 125, 159
beta-thinking, 25, 35, 40, 41, 62, elements, the four, 77
Index
Elijah, 73, 113-14 157, 172, 179, 181; (invented),
Erigena, John Scotus, 74, 89, 91 129
etymology (see tf/so language), 42, imagination, 89, 127 £, 144-5,
66, 116 160-3, 179; (systematic), 137,
Eucharist, the, 170-1, 173 141, 146
imitation, 128-9, 131 Fabre d' Olivet, 123, 141 impetus (see inertia)
Fall, the 171, 183-5 Impressionist painters, 132
Farrer, Austin, 160, 172 inertia, 51, 69
figuration, 24 £, 41, 53, 94, 97, inspiration, 141
132, 137, 145-7, 153, 155, 160; instinct, 32n.
(defined), 24
force, 33, 34, 62
Frazer, J. G., 42, 134
Freud, Sigmund, 133-4
Fundamentalism, 159
Galen, 80, 82, 96
Galileo, 49-50, 53, 68, 81 Geiger, L-B., 89
geology, 23, 36, 59
geometry, 46 £, 51, 112, 152
Goethe, 62, 130, 137 £, 147, I53n.,
gravity, 34, 77, 93, 130
Hamilton, G. Rostrevor, 95
Harvey, William, 79 £, 103
heart, 79 £, 117, 119
Hebrew language, the, 112, 124, Kant, 12, 21, 130, 139
intelligence (active and passive),
87-8, 100
intuition, 141
Isaiah, 176-7
Isidore of Seville, 96
Israel (see also Jews), 107 £, 149-
5i, 177
Jefferies, Richard, 143
Jeremias,J., I75n. Jews, the (see also Israel, Old Test- ament), 67-8, 149, 154-5, 157,
168, 171-2, 176, 181 John the Baptist, 178
Johnson, Dr., 38, 44
Julicher, A., I75n. Jung, C. G., 133-4
150, 177
Heraclitus, 101
Hillel, Rabbi, 162
Home, R., i62n. Hudson, W. H., 143
'hypothesis' (and 'theory'), 49
Keats, John, 151 Kepler, 50
knowledge (see also truth), 46 £, 53 £, 88, 94, 97, 136, 145, 180
'Idol' and 'idolatry' (defined), IIO-II
'idols of the study', 39, 62, 135
image and images (see also meta- laws of nature, 94
phor, symbol, parable), 75, Levy-Bruhl, 29 £, 42
109 £, 128-9, 132, 145, 150, Lewis, C. S., 129m
Language (see also names, word),
16, 45, 72 £, 82, 97-8, 116 £,
122 £, 126-7, 141, H4, J 69;
(Hebrew: see Hebrewlanguage)
Law, William, 158
Index
light, 19, 161, 163, 178
Linnaeus, 72, 116
literal, and literalness, 51, 53, 62, 73 f., 83, 87, 92, 135, 159, 161-3
logic (see also predication), 90, 98
logical positivism, 99n.
logos, 45, 128 Logos, the, 127, 167 £, 179, 181 Lorenz, 143 Machines, 51, 80, 143 macrocosm (see microcosm)
Maimonides, 114
'mana/ 32-3, 42, in
Martianus Capella, 96
Marxism, 164
mathematics, 43, 46
matter, 16, 20, 173 'maya,' 148
meaning (see also language), n6f.,
142, 183 memory, 85, 126-7, 154-5 metaphor (see also parable, symbol), 73 £, 83, 118 f., 126, 181 microcosm and macrocosm, 77,
78 f., 103, 149
Mill, J. S., 69, 98
Milton, John, 48
mistakes, 27
models, 17, 38-9, 51, 54, 61-2,
135-6
morality, i$o-3, 174, 184
Moses, 106, 109, 112 f. movement, 69, 101 £, 148
Miiller, Matf, 42, 104, 118-20
myth and mythology, 42, 66> no,
118, 125, 134, 164
Name, the Divine, 112 £, 132,
155, 157-8, 170 names (see also language, word),
84, 88, 90, 98, 105, 108
'Natura,' 86, 129
Neo-Platonism (see also Plotinus),
96, 129
New Testament, 174 £
Newton, Isaac, 59, 101 Nominalism, 91
nous (see also intelligence), 45
Novalis, 160
Old Testament (see also Israel, Jews, Hebrew language), 112 £,
151, 172, 176-7
Pallas Athene, 109
pantheism, 130
parable, and parables (see also image, metaphor, symbol), 174 £
participation, 12-13, 28 £, and
throughout; (in Aquinas: 89 £)
'participation mystique/ 31, 33-4
Paul, Saint, 158, 160, 162
perspective, 94, 149, 152
'phaenomena/ 47-8
phallic cults, 109
pharisees, 157, 171 Philo Judaeus, 125
Philostratus, 128
Phinehas, 109
physics, 11-13, 17, 23, 33, 38, 40,
43, 51, 54, 56, 59, 63-4, 65, 145, 153 and elsewhere
piety, 160-1, 164
planets, 45, 49, 68, 76-7
Plato, 44, 45, 54, 55, 62, 96 £,
107, no, 148
Plotinus (see also Neo-Platonism)
84, 128
poetry, 75, 89, 127 £
potential (and actual), 49, 85 £,
92-3, 100 £, 124, 136 £
predication, 31, 90, 98-9, 173 prophecy, 151 Protestantism (see Reformation)
Index
Psalms, 68, 107 £, 151, 160, 176-7, 181 psychology, 12, 25, 38, 133 £,
151, 184
Ptolemy and Ptolemaic System,
49 f. Pythagoras, 104-6
Radio-activity, 37, 65
rainbow, 15 £, 22, 36, 93, 132, 159
recognizing, 34
Reformation, the, 151, 158-9
repentance, 178, 180
represented, the, 41, in, 122, 154-5 Romantic theory, 127 £, 137, 145
Russell, Bertrand, 152-3
Sartre, J. P., 185
Scaliger, 128
Schiller, 129-30, 139, 156
Science, 43, 51, 53 £, 59 £, 135,
145; and elsewhere
Scientific Revolution, the, 50, 68,
78, 79 £, 92 £, 98, 104-5, 124,
136, 149, 156, 158, 165, 173,
185; and elsewhere
Sepher Yezirah, 125 sermons, 158
Shakespeare, 76-7
Sidney, Sir Philip, 128 SimpUcius, 48-9, 144
solidity, 22, 23, 93
space, 19, 47, 94, 101 £, 148 £
speech (see language)
Spencer, Herbert, 29, 118
Steiner, Rudolf, 140-1, 147
surgery, 143
Sylvie and Bruno, 26
symbiosis, 32
symbols, and symbolism (see also
image, metaphor, parable), 73 £,
86 £, 131, 133 £, 162-3, 168
Tetragrammaton (see Divine
Name)
'theory' (and 'hypothesis'), 49
time, 61, 71, 150 £, 169
totem, and totemism, 23, 30, 31,
68,99,111
trans-substantiation, 170
Trinity, the, 164-6
truth (see also knowledge), 46 £, 53 £, 89
Tylor, E. B., 29, 134
Unconscious, the, 133 £, 154
unrepresented, the, 17, 37-8, 41,
43, 57, 62, 65, 71, 82, 140, 153,
159-60
Upanishads, 104
Vincent de Beauvais, 96
Wadler, A. D., 123 Wells, H. G., 37
Whistler, 24
White, Gilbert, 143
'wilderness,' 178
Williams, Charles, i69n. wisdom, 149, 154, 184-5 Wittgenstein, 98
word (see also etymology, language, names); (and collective representation), 32, 82; (and
name), 84, 86; (interior), 85,
127, 154; ('mere'), 82, 86; (as image), 157
Word, the (see also Logos), 85,
125, 127, 155, 164-6, 167 £
Wordsworth, William, 130, 139
Zodiac, 76-7
Saving the
Appearances
A Study in
Idolatry
Owen Barfield
Owen Barfield's books reflect his lifelong interest in the
relation between science and religion. In Saving the
Appearances he examines the disparity between normal
human consciousness and the mind of the scientist in comprehending the familiar phenomena — the appearances —
of the universe. Between the two modes of perceiving lies a form of participation for man which has far-reaching theological implications. Mr. Barfield has written an illuminating history of human thought, which provides the basis
for a challenging reinterpretation of man's relation to science and God.
''Barfield embodies the finest virtues of the English
thinker, a delightful and gracious style, a fully coherent
and logically forceful mode of thinking, and a mastery of
history/'
-Thomas J. J. Altizer, Journal of Bible and Religion
Owen Barfield was born in London in 1898. He is the
author of History in English Words, Poetic Diction,
Romanticism Comes of Age, Saving the Appearances,
Worlds Apart, and many articles. A lawyer by profession,
he has recently taught in the United States as a visiting
Professor of English, Philosophy, and Letters. a harbinger book Harcourt, Brace k World, Inc.

