
An Introduction to Sociolinguistics
Sociolinguistics is the study of the interaction between language and society. In 
this classic introductory work, Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson examine the role 
of language in a variety of social contexts, considering both how language works 
and how it can be used to signal and interpret various aspects of social identity. 
Divided into three parts, this book explains basic sociolinguistic concepts in the 
light of classic approaches, as well as introducing more recent research.
This sixth edition has been revised and updated throughout, using key concepts 
and examples to guide the reader through this fascinating area, including:
•	New material on gender, social media and online use of language, code-​
switching, and language policy
•	An updated companion website that is fully cross-​referenced within this book 
and features video and audio materials and links to useful websites
•	Revised examples and exercises that include new material from Asia and South 
America
•	Fully updated further reading and references sections
An Introduction to Sociolinguistics is an essential introductory text for all 
students of sociolinguistics and a splendid point of reference for students of 
English language studies, linguistics, and applied linguistics.
Janet Holmes is Emerita Professor of Linguistics and Associate Director of 
the Language in the Workplace Project at Victoria University of Wellington,  
New Zealand. She has published extensively in sociolinguistics, specialising in 
workplace discourse and language and gender. Her many books include Research 
Methods in Sociolinguistics: A Practical Guide, co-​edited with Kirk Hazen.
Nick Wilson is a Lecturer in Applied Linguistics at the University of Limerick, 
Ireland, and an honorary Senior Lecturer in Linguistics at Macquarie University, 
Australia. His published research focuses on how language is used in sports 
teams and his current research examines how people use swearing and taboo 
language in interaction.
 

LEARNING ABOUT LANGUAGE
Series Editors:
Brian Walker, Huddersfield University, UK; Willem Hollmann, Lancaster University, 
UK; and the late Geoffrey Leech, Lancaster University, UK
Series Consultant:
Mick Short, Lancaster University, UK
Learning about Language is an exciting and ambitious series of introductions to fun-
damental topics in language, linguistics and related areas. The books are designed 
for students of linguistics and those who are studying language as part of a wider 
course.
Also in this series:
Varieties of Modern English
An Introduction
Diane Davies
An Introduction to Psycholinguistics, Second Edition
Danny D. Steinberg and Natalia V. Sciarini
An Introduction to Cognitive Linguistics, Second Edition
Friedrich Ungerer and Hans-​Jorg Schmid
Analysing Sentences
An Introduction to English Syntax, Fourth Edition
Noel Burton-​Roberts
The History of Early English
An Activity-​based Approach
Keith Johnson
An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching, Revised Third Edition
Keith Johnson
The History of Late Modern Englishes
An Activity-​based Approach
Keith Johnson
Analysing Sentences
An Introduction to English Syntax, Fifth Edition
Noel Burton-​Roberts
An Introduction to Sociolinguistics, Sixth Edition
Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson
For more information about this series please visit: www.routledge.com/​series/​
PEALAL
 

An Introduction to 
Sociolinguistics
Sixth Edition
JANET HOLMES and NICK WILSON
 

Cover image: © Laura James / Bridgeman Images
Whilst every effort has been made to trace the owners of copyright material, in a few cases this has proved 
impossible, and we take this opportunity to offer our apologies to any copyright holders whose rights  
we may have unwittingly infringed. 
Sixth edition published 2022
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2022 Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson
The right of Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson to be identified as authors of this work has been  
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised  
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or  
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information  
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,  
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
First edition published by Pearson Education Ltd 1992
Fifth edition published by Routledge 2017
British Library Cataloguing-​in-​Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging-​in-​Publication Data
Names: Holmes, Janet, 1947– author. | Wilson, Nick (Sociolinguist), author. 
Title: An introduction to sociolinguistics / Janet Holmes and Nick Wilson. 
Description: Sixth edition. | Abingdon, Oxon; New York, NY: Routledge, 2022. | 
Series: Learning about language | Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2021040884 | ISBN 9780367421120 (hardback) | 
ISBN 9780367421106 (paperback) | ISBN 9780367821852 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Sociolinguistics. 
Classification: LCC P40 .H66 2022 | DDC 306.44–dc23/eng/20211118 
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021040884
ISBN: 978-​0-​367-​42112-​0 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-​0-​367-​42110-​6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-​0-​367-​82185-​2 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/​9780367821852
Typeset in Sabon
by Newgen Publishing UK
Access the online companion: www.routledge.com/​cw/​holmes
 

For Rob


vii
Contents
List of figures	
xi
List of maps	
xiii
List of tables	
xiv
Preface to sixth edition	
xv
Preface to fifth edition	
xvi
Preface to fourth edition	
xvii
Preface to third edition	
xviii
Preface to second edition	
xix
Preface to first edition	
xx
Authors’ acknowledgements	
xxii
The online companion	
xxiv
1	
What do sociolinguists study?
1
What is a sociolinguist?
1
Why do we say the same thing in different ways?
3
What are the different ways we say things?
4
Social factors, dimensions, and explanations
10
Part I: Multilingual speech communities	
21
2	
Language choice in multilingual communities	
23
Choosing your variety or code	
23
Diglossia	
32
Code-​switching or code-​mixing and translanguaging	
42
3	
Language maintenance and shift	
74
Language shift in different communities	
74
Language death and language loss	
82
Factors contributing to language shift	
85
How can a minority language be maintained?	
90
Language revival	
94
4	 Linguistic varieties and multilingual nations	
109
Vernacular languages	
110
Standard languages	
111
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS
viii
Lingua francas	
116
Pidgins and creoles	
120
5	
National languages, language policy, and language planning	
140
National and official languages	
142
Planning for a national official language	
148
Linguistic landscapes in social and political context	
157
The linguist’s role in language planning	
159
Acquisition planning	
167
Part II: Language variation: focus  
on users
183
6	
Regional and social dialects	
185
Regional variation	
186
Social variation	
195
Social dialects	
197
A note about methodology	
215
7	
Gender and age	
222
Gender-​exclusive speech differences: highly structured   
communities	
222
Gender-​preferential speech features: variantionist sociolinguistics	
227
Gender and social class	
228
Explanations for women’s linguistic behaviour	
231
Age-​graded features of speech	
242
Age and social dialect data	
245
Age grading and language change	
248
8	 Ethnicity and social networks	
258
Ethnicity	
258
Social networks	
271
9	
Language change	
287
Variation and change	
288
How do language changes spread?	
297
How do we study language change?	
302
Reasons for language change	
306
Interlude: identity in sociolinguistics	
329
Sociolinguistics and identity	
329
Indexicality	
331
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS
ix
Part III: Language variation: focus on uses
337
10	 Style, context, and register	
339
Addressee as an influence on style	
340
Accommodation theory	
347
Context, style, and social class	
353
Style in non-​English speaking societies	
364
Register	
370
11	 Speech functions, politeness, and cross-​cultural communication	
387
The functions of speech	
388
Identity construction: a more abstract function of interaction	
399
Politeness and address forms	
400
Linguistic politeness in different cultures	
411
12	 Gender, politeness, and stereotypes	
424
“Women’s language” and confidence	
424
Interaction	
436
Gossip	
442
The linguistic construction of gender identity	
446
The linguistic construction of sexuality	
449
Sexist language	
452
13	 Language, cognition, and culture	
470
Language and perception	
471
Whorf: the relationship between language and thought	
476
Linguistic categories and culture	
483
Discourse patterns and culture	
489
Language, social class, and cognition	
493
14	 Analysing discourse	
504
Pragmatics and politeness theory	
505
Ethnography of speaking	
515
Interactional sociolinguistics	
524
Conversation Analysis (CA)	
530
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA)	
542
Multimodal analysis	
552
15	 Attitudes and applications	
568
Attitudes to language	
568
Sociolinguistics and education	
588
Sociolinguistics and forensic linguistics	
596
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

CONTENTS
x
16	 Conclusion	
610
Sociolinguistic competence	
611
Dimensions of sociolinguistic analysis	
620
Sociolinguistic universals	
624
References	
629
Appendix: phonetic symbols	
664
Sociolinguistics: key words and concepts	
666
Index	
694
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xi
List of figures
2.1	 Appropriate code choice in different domains among the 
Portuguese community in London	
29
2.2	 Model of appropriate code choice in Bukavu	
67
3.1	 Dimensions for analysing language maintenance and shift	
97
4.1	 Inner, outer and expanding circles of English	
115
6.1	 Words for splinter in English dialects	
192
6.2	 Social and regional accent variation	
196
6.3	 Social and regional dialect variation	
198
6.4	 [h]‌-​dropping in Norwich and West Yorkshire social groups	
204
6.5	 Post-​vocalic [r]‌ in Reading and New York social groups	
207
6.6	 Vernacular present tense verb forms in Norwich and Detroit	
212
6.7	 Vernacular forms in three English towns	
214
7.1	 Vernacular [in] by gender and social group in Norwich	
229
7.2	 Glottalised [p]‌ in speech of Tyneside women and men from two  
social classes	
240
7.3	 Relationship between use of vernacular forms and age	
246
7.4	 Multiple negation in different age groups in two communities	
247
7.5	 Three vernacular features in girls’ and boys’ speech in three  
English towns	
249
7.6	 Frequency of like across four age groups in Toronto	
250
8.1	 Multiple negation in Black and white Detroit speech	
262
8.2	 An example of a social network	
273
8.3	 Negative concord for Jocks and Burnouts	
277
9.1	 The wave-​like spread of linguistic changes	
298
9.2	 A model of the spread of a vernacular change through  
two speech styles and three social groups	
299
9.3	 The progress of linguistic change	
300
9.4	 Distribution of DAR variants by speaker’s gender in apparent   
time	
313
9.5	 Overlapping S-​curves: French words ending in -​n affected by   
sound change	
323
I.1	 Indexicality, stereotypes and identity	
332
10.1	 Linguistic features of radio announcers’ speech on different   
stations	
344
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LIST OF FIGURES
xii
10.2	 Vernacular [in] for four social groups and four styles in Norwich	
359
10.3	 Post-​vocalic [r]‌ for range of social groups and five styles in  
New York	
361
10.4	 Intonation contour of a typical New Zealand race-​caller’s chant	
375
11.1	 Factors constraining the polite choice of address terms in  
British English	
403
11.2	 Māori formal greeting ritual	
414
 
 
 
 
 

xiii
List of maps
1.1	
Sauris, Italy	
8
2.1	
Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire)	
24
2.2	
Oberwart, Austria	
49
2.3	
Papua New Guinea	
52
3.1	
New Zealand	
80
3.2	
Census map of Welsh Language usage in 2015	
95
4.1a	 The Vaupes River and the borders with Columbia and Brazil	
118
4.1b	 The Negro and Amazon Rivers and surrounding countries	
118
4.2	
Papua New Guinea and the area of the Buang Tribe	
127
5.1	
South America	
141
5.2	
Central Africa	
150
5.3	
Timor-​Leste	
158
5.4	
Linguistic map of Quechua and Aymara in South America	
170
6.1	
Map of England showing distance between London and  
other cities	
214
7.1	
Colombia and Brazil	
223
7.2	
Japan	
226
8.1	
The Greater London Boroughs and West Midlands counties	
266
8.2	
Belfast	
272
9.1	
Ucieda, Spain	
310
9.2	
India and surrounding countries	
318
10.1	
Japan and North and South Korea	
365
10.2	
Java, Indonesia	
367
12.1	
Madagascar	
435
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xiv
List of tables
2.1	 Two linguistic repertoires in the Democratic Republic of the   
Congo (Zaire)	
25
2.2	 Domains of language use	
26
2.3	 Domains of language use in Paraguay	
27
2.4	 Relationship between diglossia and bilingualism	
37
2.5	 Polyglossia in Singapore	
39
3.1	 Choice of language in Oberwart	
78
4.1	 Comparison of verb forms in four languages	
123
4.2	 Tok Pisin forms	
129
5.1	 Steps in language planning	
149
6.1	 Two Javanese words at different stylistic levels	
200
6.2	 Percentage of vernacular [in] pronunciation for four  
social groups in speech communities in Britain, the USA  
and Australia	
205
6.3	 Percentage [l]‌-​deletion in two social classes in Montreal French	
210
6.4	 A sample of twenty by age and gender, with a quota of  
five people per cell	
215
7.1	 Vernacular pronunciation of standard [t]‌ in medial and  
final position in New Zealand English	
248
10.1	 Percentage of determiner deletion in British newspapers	
379
12.1	 Distribution of tag questions by function and gender of speaker	
433
12.2	 Average number of interruptions per interaction	
438
13.1	 Names for numbers 1–​6 and 10–​15 in four languages	
479
13.2	 Dyirbal noun classes	
483
13.3	 Kunwinjku kangaroo terms	
484
13.4	 Semantic categories of possession	
487
14.1	 Analysing a communicative event	
521
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

xv
Preface to sixth edition
The sixth edition of this textbook provides new concepts, examples and exercises, 
and expands the number of countries and languages discussed. As always, another 
edition provides an opportunity to respond to some of the valuable suggestions 
that readers and reviewers have provided since the last edition. Each chapter 
now includes a methodology section suggesting a range of ways in which you can 
collect data to deepen your understanding of the concepts and material discussed 
in the chapter. We have also provided readers with a greatly expanded array 
of online video illustrations, including YouTube videos, to illustrate concepts 
and linguistic features discussed in the book, as well as online resources, for 
both students and teachers, designed to assist with learning and understanding 
the material. Josh Wedlock has provided invaluable assistance with these. We 
have updated the references and recommended readings, and added material on 
translanguaging, memes, and identity construction, in particular. The glossary 
and the index have been updated. And, as usual, bearing in mind the needs of 
speakers of English as an additional language, we have tried to keep the language 
of this book as clear as possible.
We hope the new edition proves useful and that the amendments and additions 
increase the value of the book both for students and teachers.
Janet Holmes
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Nick Wilson
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
 

xvi
Preface to fifth edition
The fifth edition of this textbook introduces two innovations. First, Nick Wilson 
joins Janet Holmes as a co-​author. Second, as a result of Nick’s contribution this 
new edition provides readers with an online companion containing audio and 
visual material to illustrate concepts and linguistic features discussed in the book, 
as well as web-​based exercises designed to assist with learning and understanding 
the material. As always, another edition also provides an opportunity to respond 
to some of the valuable suggestions that readers and reviewers have provided 
since the last edition. We have added many new examples and exercises, updated 
the references and recommended readings, and added material on identity con-
struction and multimodality, in particular. We have also added some further 
sociolinguistic concepts, and expanded the discussion of material in a number of 
places. A greatly expanded glossary has also been provided. Finally, bearing in 
mind the needs of speakers of English as an additional language, we have tried to 
keep the language of this book as clear as possible.
We hope the new edition proves useful and that the amendments and additions 
increase the value of the book both for students and teachers.
Janet Holmes
Victoria University of Wellington, New Zealand
Nick Wilson
Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia
 

xvii
Preface to fourth edition
The fourth edition of my textbook has provided yet another opportunity to 
respond to some of the valuable suggestions that readers and reviewers have 
provided over the years. I have added many new examples and exercises, updated 
the references and recommended readings, and added material on koines and 
koineisation, linguistic landscapes, New Englishes, Multicultural London English, 
stylisation, language and sexuality, societal approaches to attitudes research, and 
forensic linguistics. I have also added some further sociolinguistic concepts, and 
expanded the discussion of material in a number of places.
A number of teachers have told me that they find this book useful for teaching 
sociolinguistics to students for whom English is an additional language. Since 
the book was written, inevitably, with an English-​speaking audience in mind, 
I encourage teachers to adapt the exercises to the situations of their students. 
However, bearing in mind the needs of speakers of English as an additional lan-
guage, I have tried to keep the language of this book as clear as possible.
I hope the new edition proves useful and that the amendments and additions 
increase the value of the book both for students and teachers.
Janet Holmes
Wellington, New Zealand
February 2012
 

xviii
Preface to third edition
The third edition of my textbook has provided a further opportunity to respond 
to some of the many valuable suggestions that readers have sent to me over the 
last ten years. I have added some new examples, updated the references and 
recommended readings once again, and in response to many requests I have 
added a new chapter on approaches to the analysis of discourse. I have also 
added some additional sociolinguistic concepts, and expanded the discussion of 
material in places.
This book uses many examples from a range of sources. When no explicit 
source is provided, the examples are based on my own experience, and especially 
on corpora of recorded materials that I have accumulated over many years of 
teaching and research. The examples are generally “cleaned up” and edited for 
presentation in this introductory book, but almost all are “authentic” in that 
I began from a genuine interaction.
A number of teachers have told me that they find this book useful for teaching 
sociolinguistics to students for whom English is an additional language. Since 
the book was written, inevitably, with an English-​speaking audience in mind, 
I encourage teachers to adapt the exercises to the situations of their students.
I hope the new chapter proves useful and that the amendments and additions 
increase the value of the book both for students and teachers.
Janet Holmes
Wellington, New Zealand
April 2007
 

xix
Preface to second edition
This second edition of my textbook has provided an opportunity to respond 
to some of the many kind suggestions and comments that readers have sent to 
me over the last ten years. I have corrected errors and clarified examples. I have 
expanded the text in places. I have updated the references and recommended 
readings. Thanks to the comments of a number of reviewers, I have also persuaded 
the publishers to accept a recommendation I made with the first edition, namely, 
to separate the exercises from their answers. In response to suggestions and 
requests, I have also added a number of substantial sections to the book, most 
obviously a new chapter on language, cognition and culture, and sections on 
social constructionism in the two chapters dealing with gender and language. 
I hope the amendments and additions increase the usefulness of the book both 
for students and teachers, as well as increasing its readability.
Janet Holmes
Wellington, New Zealand
June 2000
 

xx
Preface to first edition
This book has been written for people who have never heard of sociolinguistics, 
but who would like to know what it is. At the end of it, I hope they will not only 
know what sociolinguists do and why; they might also feel like reading further 
about some of the topics that have interested them.
Because my aim has been to share my love of the subject with newcomers, 
I have made some conscious decisions about the content which would have 
been different for more advanced students. In selecting examples, I have used a 
good deal of material from recent published research, but I have also used many 
examples which could perhaps be described as “classics”, in the sense that any 
sociolinguist will be familiar with them. These “tried and true” examples will 
be old friends if readers progress to further reading, and should help bridge the 
gap between this introductory text and more sophisticated sociolinguistic books. 
Though I have drawn on sociolinguistic research involving a wide variety of 
languages, I have used a large number of English examples too. English is likely 
to be a very familiar language for most of my readers, and I know from experi-
ence that some points will therefore be understood more quickly and thoroughly 
using an English ­example –​ at least for the initial encounter with a new concept.
I have assumed that my readers will be familiar with very basic grammat-
ical terms, but little more. The glossary at the end of the book defines more 
specialised grammatical terms which crop up in the text. Similarly, I have used 
a minimum of phonetic symbols in the text, but a sociolinguist cannot avoid 
talking about speech sounds, and phonetic symbols are the only really satis-
factory way of conveying different pronunciations. Appendix 1 describes the 
phonetic symbols I have used, with a gloss to help readers work out what they 
sound like.
Different people approach books differently. I have constructed this book 
on the assumption that most will read Part I before Part II, and Part II before  
Part III. The later chapters refer back to the earlier ones to some extent. However, 
readers who like a sense of the whole before dipping into the parts may find it 
helpful to read the first and the last chapters before trying the rest.
Finally, I am sure perceptive readers will be able to guess which are my own 
particular areas of interest within the broad area of sociolinguistics. I make no 
apology for that. But I hope that my enthusiasm for sociolinguistics as a whole 
 

PREFACE TO FIRST EDITION
xxi
also communicates itself, so that at least some readers will feel encouraged not 
only to pursue the subject further, but perhaps also to address some of the many 
questions about the relationship between language and society which still await 
answers.
Janet Holmes
Wellington, New Zealand
December 1990

xxii
Authors’ acknowledgements
We would like to express appreciation to the many colleagues and friends who 
have cheerfully answered our queries, provided us with material, checked our 
examples and assisted in a myriad of ways with the writing and revisions of 
this book. The list of those who have helped in some way includes at least 
the following: Andrew Barke, Laurie Bauer, Tim Beaglehole, Mike Bennett, 
Richard Benton, Mary Boyce, David Britain, Duncan Campbell, Jenny Cheshire, 
Jennifer Coates, Averil Coxhead, Terry Crowley, Shelley Dawson, Julia de Bres, 
Diana Eades, Viv Edwards, Susan Ehrlich, Caroline Everest, Jackie Ferry, Bob 
Good, Emily Greenbank, Richard Gwyn, Ray Harlow, Evan Hazenberg, Anke 
Hoffmann, Astrid Holster, Dick Hudson, Galumalemana Alfred Hunkin, Yushi 
Ito, Graeme Kennedy, Paul Kerswill, Brian King, Francisca Knarston, Chris Lane, 
Mariana Lazzarro Salazar, Uta Lenk, John Macalister, John Makeham, Caroline 
McGhie, Hadi Mirvahedi, Sofia Morrell, Brian Morris, Kazuyo Murata, Paul 
Nation, Matilda Neyland, John Newman, Puakea Nogelmeier, Bryer Oden, 
Kaya Oriyama, Harry Orsman, Martin Paviour-​Smith, Alastair Pennycook, Jesse 
Pirini, Caroline Quirk, Christopher Quirk, Rachel Quirk, Emmie Radford, Jo 
Radford, Luke Radford, John Read, Melanie Revis, Silvia Rey, Mary Roberts, 
Reuben Sanderson, Stephanie Schnurr, Mark Sebba, Donna Starks, Maria 
Stubbe, Yukako Sunaoshi, Ayman Tawalbeh, Vivien Trott, Clara Tuske, Maria 
Verivaki, Bernadette Vine, Matthew Vink, Jeffrey Waite, Elizabeth Warren, Paul 
Warren, Geirr Wiggen, Walt Wolfram and Teresa Wong. We apologise for inad-
vertent omissions. I am also very grateful to Meg Sloane who typed out many of 
the examples in the first edition, and to Miriam Meyerhoff and Rob Holmes who 
helped me construct a number of the figures and tables.
I must thank Laurie Bauer, Miriam Meyerhoff and Allan Bell, who each 
patiently read and helpfully commented on the earliest drafts of this book, and 
Anke Hoffmann who carefully proofread and commented on the second edition. 
The late and much missed Geoffrey Leech was a positive and encouraging editor 
who provided detailed comments and suggestions at every stage. Elizabeth 
Mann and Casey Mein were supportive publisher’s advisers from Pearson, and 
Helen Tredget, Lizzie Cox, Eleni Steck and Kelly Winter have provided won-
derful support from Routledge. For assistance with the revisions and additions 
in the fifth edition, we would like to express my grateful appreciation to Ewa 
 

Authors’ acknowledgements
xxiii
Kusmierczyk, Meredith Marra, Sharon Marsden, Melanie Revis, Bernadette 
Vine, and Jay Woodhams for a wide range of support and editorial assistance, 
and to Keely Kidner for excellent assistance with the glossary. For the sixth 
edition Louise Hake made valuable suggestions for additions to the glossary and 
we have also benefitted from the additional assistance of Josh Wedlock with the 
website, and Juliette MacIver and Matilda Neyland with proofreading. Thanks 
to the series editors for helpful feedback. Finally, as always, I thank Tony for his 
patience, good humour and support throughout the production and revision 
process.
Janet Holmes
The second edition of this textbook was used as a core sociolinguistics textbook 
when I was an undergraduate at Edinburgh, and I was very happy to join Janet 
in co-​authoring the fifth edition. Now we are onto a new edition, there are more 
people to thank. As before, I must thank Miriam Meyerhoff for being the one to 
introduce me to both sociolinguistics and to Janet.
In addition to those already named by Janet above, the following friends and 
colleagues have contributed by providing feedback and material for many of the 
new exercises in the previous edition and this one: Joe Blythe, Dorottya Cserző, 
Josh Dahmen, Mercedes Durham, Livia Gerber, Loy Lising, Benjamin Purser, 
Frances Rock, David Schőntal, Allie Severin, Jaspal Singh and Michael Willett. 
Thanks also to the sociolinguistics students I have taught over the past ten years 
for testing out so many of the exercises.
Finally, thanks to Fiona for her understanding, patience and support.
Nick Wilson

xxiv
The online companion
One of the features of this edition is an online companion, which is accessible 
through the Routledge website.
The online companion includes resources for learners and teachers, including 
links to websites, podcasts, and our YouTube channel, on which we post our own 
video content, as well as a curated playlist of videos for each chapter that exem-
plify the features that are referred to in this book. With certain exceptions, we do 
not specifically refer to any particular resource in the text of the book since the 
actual resources may change over time as new resources become available and 
in response to user feedback. This will also allow us to update and expand the 
online companion as a dynamic resource for students and teachers. When using 
the online companion, the resources are arranged by chapter to make it easy for 
you to find what you are looking for.
 
newgenprepdf

1
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-1
What is a sociolinguist?
Sociolinguists study the relationship between language and society. They are 
interested in explaining why we speak differently in different social contexts, 
and with identifying the social functions of language and the ways it is used 
to convey social meaning. Examining the way people use language in different 
social contexts provides a wealth of information about the way language works, 
as well as about the social relationships in a community, and how people convey 
and construct aspects of their social identity through their language. This book 
explores all these aspects of sociolinguistics.
Example 1
Ray:
Hi mum.
Mum:
Hi. You’re late.
Ray:
Yeah, that bastard Sootbucket kept us in again.
Mum:
Nana’s here.
Ray:
Oh sorry. Where is she?
Ray’s description of his teacher would have been expressed differently if he 
had realised his grandmother could hear him. The way people talk is influenced 
by the social context in which they are talking. It matters who can hear us and 
where we are talking, as well as how we are feeling. The same message may be 
expressed very differently to different people. We use different styles in different 
social contexts. Leaving school, Ray had run into the school principal.
Example 2
Ray:
Good afternoon, sir.
Principal: 
What are you doing here at this time?
Ray:
Mr Sutton kept us in, sir.
What do sociolinguists study?
1
 
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
2
This response indicated Ray’s awareness of the social factors which influ-
ence the choice of appropriate ways of speaking in different social contexts. 
Sociolinguistics is concerned with the relationship between language and the 
context in which it is used.
The conversation between Ray and his mother also illustrates the fact 
that language serves a range of functions. We use language to ask for and 
give people information. We use it to express indignation and annoyance, 
as well as admiration and respect. Often one utterance will simultaneously 
convey information and express feelings. Ray’s utterance Yeah, that bastard 
Sootbucket kept us in again not only tells his mother why he is late, his choice 
of words also tells her how he feels about the teacher concerned, and tells us 
something about his relationship with his mother (he can use words like bas-
tard talking to her), compared to his grandmother and the principal (to whom 
he uses sir). The way Ray expresses himself indicates that his relationship with 
his mother is an intimate and friendly one, rather than a formal, distant or 
respectful one.
Exercise 1
(a)	
Identify the words in ­examples 1 and 2 which suggest that Ray’s relationship with 
his mother is a friendly one compared to his relationship with the principal. What 
does this suggest about the social significance of choice of words?
(b)	
Ray greeted the principal with the words Good afternoon, sir. How do or did you 
greet your school principal? Would you use the same words to your father or 
mother? Would you use the same greeting to your best friend? Why (not)?
(c)	
Nicknames can express affection as well as dislike. What clues indicate that Ray is not 
feeling affectionate towards his teacher?
Answers at end of chapter
We also indicate aspects of our social identity through the way we talk. 
Our speech provides clues to others about who we are, where we come from 
and perhaps what kind of social experiences we have had. Written transcripts 
provide no auditory clues to readers, and ­examples 1 and 2 are also too short 
to provide reliable clues as to speaker gender or ethnicity, but we can make a 
reasonable guess at Ray’s age on the basis of his linguistic choices (he is prob-
ably in his early teens), as well as his social background. Later chapters will 
examine in some detail how we express different aspects of our social iden-
tity through our linguistic choices, as well as the ways in which we draw on 
our sociolinguistic knowledge to construct or enact a particular type of social 
identity.
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
3
Why do we say the same thing in 
different ways?
Example 3
Every afternoon my friend packs her bag and leaves her Cardiff office in 
southern Wales at about 5 o’clock. As she leaves, her business partner says 
goodbye Margaret (she replies goodbye Mike), her secretary says see you 
tomorrow (she replies bye Jill), and the caretaker says bye Mrs Walker (to 
which she responds goodbye Andy). As she arrives home she is greeted by 
hi mum from her daughter, Jenny, hello dear, have a good day? from her 
mother, and simply you’re late again! from her husband. Later in the evening 
the president of the local flower club calls to ask if she would like to join 
the club. Good evening, is that Mrs Billington? she asks. No, it’s Margaret 
Walker, but my husband’s name is David Billington, Margaret answers. 
What can I do for you? Finally, a friend calls Hello Meg, sut wyt ti?
My friend lives in a predominantly monolingual speech community and yet she 
has been called all sorts of names in the space of three hours. What’s more, 
none of them is deliberately insulting! If she had managed to embroil herself 
in an argument or a passionate encounter of a different kind, she might have 
been called a whole lot more names –​ some very nasty, some very nice! In most 
languages, there are many different ways of addressing people. What are the 
reasons for choosing a particular form?
Languages provide a variety of ways of saying the same thing –​ addressing 
and greeting others, describing things, or paying compliments. As ­examples 1 
and 2 illustrate, our final choices provide clues to social factors, such as the 
relationship between the people in the particular situation, and how the speaker 
feels about the person addressed. In ­example 3, Margaret’s mother’s choice 
of dear expresses her affectionate feelings towards Margaret. If she had been 
annoyed with her daughter, she might have used her full name Margaret, or 
not greeted her at all. Margaret’s friend’s use of sut wyt ti? (how are you?) as 
a greeting indicates her Welsh identity. The choice of one linguistic form rather 
than another is a useful clue to nonlinguistic information. Linguistic variation 
can provide social information.
Exercise 2
Make a list of all the names you are called by people who know you. For each name, note 
who uses it to you and when or where. Do some people call you by more than one name? 
What are the reasons why people choose one name rather than another for you?
Answers at end of chapter
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
4
Exercise 3
We often have different names for people when we are addressing them directly, as 
opposed to when we are referring to them in different contexts.
Note what you call your mother in different contexts:
(a)	
addressing her
(i)	
at home alone with her
(ii)	
on the telephone with friends listening
(iii)	 in a shop
(b)	
referring to her
(i)	
at home to another family member when she is present
(ii)	
at home to another family member when she isn’t present
(iii)	 to an acquaintance who doesn’t know her
(iv)	 to a sales assistant in a shop when she is present.
What influences your choice of address form and reference form in each of these contexts?
Answers at end of chapter
What are the different ways we say things?
Example 41
Sam: 
You seen our ’enry’s new ’ouse yet? It’s in ’alton you know.
Jim:
I have indeed. I could hardly miss it Sam. Your Henry now 
owns the biggest house in Halton.
The examples discussed so far have illustrated a range of social influences on 
language choice. But sociolinguists are also interested in the different types of 
linguistic variation used to express and reflect social factors. Vocabulary or word 
choice is one area of linguistic variation (e.g. that bastard Sootbucket vs. my 
teacher Mr Sutton, Margaret vs. dear). But linguistic variation occurs at other 
levels of linguistic analysis too: sounds, word-​structure (or morphology), and 
grammar (or syntax), as well as vocabulary. Within each of these linguistic levels, 
there is variation which offers the speaker a choice of ways of expression. They 
provide us with different linguistic styles for use in different social contexts. 
Choices may even involve different dialects of a language, or quite different 
languages, as we shall see.
In ­example 4, the most obvious linguistic variation involves pronunciation. 
Sam “drops his aitches” while Jim doesn’t. Just as vocabulary choices convey 
social information, so using different pronunciation conveys social information 
too. Sam is a coal-​miner and Jim is an old friend of Sam’s son, Henry. Jim is 
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
5
also the local MP and he has dropped in to see Sam on one of his regular visits 
from London where he now spends most of his time. The difference in Sam’s 
and Jim’s [h]‌-​dropping behaviour is the result of their different educations and 
occupations. In other words, despite their common regional origins they have 
different social backgrounds, and that is indicated by their speech.
Example 5
(a)	
Refuse should be deposited in the receptacle provided.
(b)	 Put your rubbish in the bin, Jilly.
(c)	
Please tender exact fare and state destination.
(d)	 Give me the right money and tell me where you’re going.
The sentences in ­example 5 illustrate language variation in grammar and 
vocabulary, two different levels of linguistic analysis. The first, (a), uses a passive 
grammatical structure should be deposited, for example, which avoids any 
mention of the people involved. By contrast, (b) uses an imperative verb form, 
put, a possessive pronoun, your, and an address form, Jilly. This utterance is 
much more direct and it specifies whose rubbish is the focus of the directive. 
Refuse, deposited and receptacle are all more formal and less frequent words 
than rubbish, put and bin. Both sentences express the same message or speech 
function: they give a directive. But they are not interchangeable. If your mother 
said (a) to you as you dropped a bit of paper on the floor, it is likely you would 
find it odd. You might assume she was being sarcastic or humorous, but you 
would not be likely to consider it a normal way of speaking to someone she 
knew well.
Exercise 4
(a)	
Identify the linguistic features which distinguish (c) and (d) in ­example 5 above. 
What levels of linguistic analysis does the variation involve?
(b)	
What nonlinguistic and social factors are likely to account for the different ways of 
saying the same thing, as illustrated in ­example 5?
Answers at end of chapter
Example 6
In northern Norway, there is a village, Hemnesberget, which has become 
famous among sociolinguists because the language used by the villagers was 
described in great detail by a Norwegian anthropologist, Jan-​Petter Blom, 
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
6
and an American sociolinguist, John Gumperz, in the late 1960s. Blom and 
Gumperz reported that the Hemnesberget villagers knew and used two dis-
tinct kinds of Norwegian: firstly, the local dialect, Ranamål (Rana is the dis-
trict, mål is the Norwegian word for language), and secondly, the standard 
dialect or standard Norwegian, Bokmål (literally book-​language). Bokmål 
was used by the teachers in school, it was the language of the textbooks and, 
after a little exposure, it was the kind of Norwegian that the pupils used to 
discuss school topics in school too. Bokmål was used in church services and 
sermons. It was used when people went into the local government offices to 
transact official business. It was used on radio and TV. And it was used to 
strangers and visitors from outside Hemnesberget. So, what did that leave 
for Ranamål?
Ranamål was the kind of Norwegian that people used to speak to their 
family, friends and neighbours most of the time. As the local dialect, it sig-
nalled membership in the local speech community. People used Ranamål to 
each other at breakfast, to local shopkeepers when buying their newspapers 
and vegetables, to the mechanic in the local garage, and to the local people 
they met in the street. A local person who used Bokmål to buy petrol would 
be regarded as “stuck up” or “putting on airs”.2
In ­example 6, the linguistic variation involves two dialects. In other words, 
it is not just a matter of pronunciation differences, or vocabulary choices, or 
grammatical variation. All these levels of linguistic analysis are involved in the 
variation noted. Ranamål, the local dialect, differs from Bokmål, the standard 
variety, in a number of quite specific ways. Each has its own pronunciation 
features: Ranamål, for instance, has a palatal nasal sound [ɲ] (as in Spanish 
señor), which Bokmål does not have. Each dialect has distinctive word-​forms or 
morphological features: the plural of the horses is hestene in Bokmål but hœstan 
in Ranamål. And there are other words which differ between the dialects too: the 
Bokmål word for she is hun, while it is ho in Ranamål; and the Bokmål word for 
something is noe, while the Ranamål word is nåkka.
The reasons why people chose Ranamål as opposed to Bokmål are similar 
to the reasons that lead people to select Meg as opposed to Mrs Billington in 
addressing a British woman. Factors such as who is being talked to, where, 
and for what reasons are important. There are also other factors which may 
be relevant, such as the topic of a discussion. This was clearly illustrated in 
Hemnesberget in the linguistic behaviour of university students who tended to 
switch dialect when they discussed certain topics. They generally used Ranamål 
in the village, like everyone else, when they came home during vacations, but 
when they began to discuss national politics with each other, Blom and Gumperz 
reported that they tended to switch unconsciously to Bokmål. The topic was 
one they associated with discussions outside the village in the standard dialect, 
and so they switched to the linguistic forms they would normally use to dis-
cuss it.

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
7
Hemnesberget in Norway
Source: Courtesy of Paul Kerswill.
The linguistic variation involved in Hemnesberget is not different in kind 
from the variation which distinguished Sam and Jim’s accents in ­example 4, or 
the choice of vocabulary and grammar in ­example 5; it is simply a matter of 
scale. And the reasons for the choice of one dialect rather than another involves 
similar social considerations –​ the participants, the social setting and the topic 
or purpose of the interaction.
Because of these similarities, sociolinguists use the term variety (or sometimes 
code) to refer to any set of linguistic forms which patterns according to social 
factors. Variety is a sociolinguistic term referring to language in context. A var-
iety is a set of linguistic forms used under specific social circumstances, i.e. with 
a distinctive social distribution. Variety is therefore a broad term which includes 
different accents, different linguistic styles, different dialects and even different 
languages which contrast with each other for social reasons. It has proved a 
very useful sociolinguistic term because it is linguistically neutral and covers all 
the different realisations of the abstract concept “language” in different social 
contexts.

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
8
Example 7
In a mountain village called Sauris, in north-​east Italy, a sociolinguist named 
Denison reported in 1971 that the adults were all trilingual. Before 1866, 
the village had been part of the Austrian empire, and its villagers all spoke 
German. In the late 1960s, they still used a German dialect in the home, and 
to neighbours and fellow villagers. They also used the regional language 
Friulian with people from the surrounding area outside the village, and the 
young men, in particular, tended to use it to each other in the pub. These 
men had gone to secondary school together in Ampezzo, a nearby town, and 
Friulian had become for them a language of friendship and solidarity. Italian 
was the language people used to talk to those from beyond the region, and 
for reading and writing. Because their village was now part of Italy, Italian 
was the language of the church and the school.
In ­example 7, the different linguistic varieties used in Sauris are distinct 
languages. They are distinguishable from each other in their sounds, their 
grammar and their vocabulary. Italians from outside the area would not be able 
to understand the German dialect, nor even the Friulian, although, like Italian, 
it is a Romance language. The varieties are also distinguishable by the way they 
are used –​ their social distribution is different. The local people select the appro-
priate variety for any particular interaction according to similar social factors 
to those identified in earlier examples: who they are talking to, in what kind of 
setting, and for what purposes. Using German in the pub is generally not appro-
priate, for example, though it has been done. One angry woman used German 
very effectively to berate her husband for ending up in the pub when he was 
Map 1.1  Sauris, Italy

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
9
supposed to be at the dairy with their milk, making cheese. Her use of German 
isolated him from his friends in the pub and emphasised her point that he was 
neglecting his domestic responsibilities. People may manipulate the norms to 
make a point –​ something we shall see more of in later chapters.
These examples illustrate the range of linguistic variation which can be observed 
in different speech communities. People may use different pronunciations, vocabu-
lary, grammar or styles of a language for different purposes. They may use different 
dialects of a language in different contexts. And in some communities, people 
select different languages according to the situation in which they are speaking.
In any community, the distinguishable varieties or codes which are available 
for use in different social contexts form a kind of repertoire of available options. 
The members of each community have their distinctive or verbal/​linguistic 
repertoires. In other words, in every community there is a range of varieties from 
which people select according to the context in which they are communicating. 
In monolingual communities these take the form of different styles and dialects.
In a small Lancashire village, my mother’s linguistic repertoire includes the 
styles of English she needs in the social contexts in which she operates. The way 
she talks to the woman selling bread in the baker’s shop is different from the  
way she talks to her bank manager, and that is different again from the way 
she talks to her grandchildren, and from the language she uses in church. In 
Malaysia, for similar reasons, a woman’s linguistic repertoire may include two 
varieties of English, two different dialects of Chinese and different styles within 
these, as well as standard or Bahasa Malay and a colloquial variety known as 
Bazaar Malay. As elsewhere, choosing the appropriate variety from this wide 
linguistic repertoire depends on social factors.
On the whole, people acquire their knowledge of varieties and how to use 
them appropriately in the same way that they acquire their knowledge of most 
other aspects of language –​ by extensive exposure and a process of osmosis. 
The Chinese Malaysian, like my Lancashire-​born mother, built up her linguistic 
repertoire by hearing the different varieties in use in the community she lives in. 
More formal varieties –​ and especially distinctive written varieties –​ may involve 
more conscious learning, but most varieties in a person’s linguistic repertoire are 
acquired with little conscious effort.
Exercise 5
How many varieties (languages, dialects, styles) do you use on a normal weekday?
Consider which variety you use:
•	 in your home
•	 at school/​college/​university
•	 at the shops
•	 in a coffee bar.
Do you ever use more than one variety in the same social context? If so, why?
These points are discussed further in ­chapter 2
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
10
Social factors, dimensions, and explanations
Social factors
In each of the examples discussed, certain social factors have been relevant 
in accounting for the particular variety of language used. Some social factors 
relate to the users of language –​ the participants; others relate to its uses –​ the 
social setting and function of the interaction. Who is talking to whom (e.g. 
wife–​husband, customer–​shopkeeper, boss–​worker) is important. The setting 
or social context (e.g. home, work, school) is generally a relevant factor too. 
The aim or purpose of the interaction (informative, social) may be relevant. 
And, in some cases, the topic has proved an influence on language choice. 
University students in countries which use English for tertiary education, such 
as Tanzania, Indonesia and Papua New Guinea, often find it easier to discuss 
their university subjects using English, for example, just as the students from 
Hemnesberget used standard Norwegian rather than the local dialect to dis-
cuss national politics.
Not all factors are relevant in any particular context, but they can be grouped 
in ways which are helpful. In any situation, linguistic choices generally indicate 
people’s awareness of the influence of one or more of the following components:
1	
The participants: who is speaking and who are they speaking to?
2	
The setting or social context of the interaction: where are they speaking?
3	
The topic: what is being talked about?
4	
The function: why are they speaking?
In this book, the focus is on speech, but the same questions can be asked 
about written communication, as ­example 5 illustrated. Throughout this book, 
these social factors will prove important in describing and analysing all kinds of 
interaction. They are basic components in sociolinguistic explanations of why 
we don’t all speak the same way, and why we don’t all speak in the same way 
all of the time.
Social dimensions
In addition to these components, it is useful to take account of four different 
dimensions for analysis which relate to the factors above and which have been 
only implicit in the discussion so far. These are:
1	
A social distance scale concerned with participant relationships.
2	
A status scale concerned with participant relationships.
3	
A formality scale relating to the setting or type of interaction.
4	
Two functional scales relating to the purposes or topic of interaction.
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
11
The solidarity–​social distance scale
Intimate_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​Distant
High solidarity                       Low solidarity
This scale is useful in emphasising that how well we know someone is a relevant 
factor in linguistic choice. In Wales, the choice between Meg and Mrs Billington 
involves consideration of this dimension, for instance. People’s choice of Ranamål 
vs. Bokmål in Hemnesberget, or German rather than Italian in Sauris, similarly 
indicates the speaker’s judgments about a relationship on this dimension.
The status scale
Superior         High status
Subordinate    Low status
This scale points to the relevance of relative status in some linguistic choices. The 
choice of sir by Ray in the first example, for instance, signalled Ray’s awareness 
that the school principal was of higher status and entitled to a respect term. 
Similarly, the name avoidance by her secretary and the use of Mrs by the care-
taker represented their ways of responding to the higher status of Margaret 
Walker-​Billington, while she called both of these people by their first names. 
Sam’s [h]‌-​dropping in ­example 4 signalled his membership of a group with rela-
tively low social status in the society as a whole, while the educationally and 
occupationally higher-​status Jim dropped none.
The formality scale
Formal      High formality
Informal    Low formality
This scale is useful in assessing the influence of the social setting or type of inter-
action on language choice. In a formal transaction such as one with the bank 
manager in his office, or at a ritual service in church, the language used will 
be influenced by the formality of the setting. For a friendly chat, people gen-
erally use colloquial language. In Hemnesberget, Bokmål was the language of 
school and government offices, and Ranamål was the language of the home. The 
written language of notices is often very formal and impersonal, as ­example 5 
illustrates. Often, degrees of formality are strongly influenced by solidarity and 
status relationships. But not always. A very formal setting, such as a law court, 
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
12
typically influences language choice regardless of the personal relationships 
between the speakers.
The referential and affective function scales
Referential
High                       Low
information​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​information
content                             content
Affective
Low                         High
affective—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​—​affective
content                      content
Though language serves many functions, the two functions identified in these 
scales are particularly pervasive and useful for analysis. Language can convey 
objective information of a referential kind; and it can also express how someone 
is feeling (an affective function). Ray’s utterance Yeah, that bastard Sootbucket 
kept us in again simultaneously expresses both information about why he is 
late, while also conveying his feelings about the teacher referred to. Gossip may 
provide a great deal of new referential information, while also clearly conveying 
how the speaker feels about those referred to. It is very common for utterances 
to work like this, though often one function will dominate. In general, the more 
referentially oriented an interaction is, the less it tends to express the feelings of 
the speaker. Radio broadcasts of the weather forecast tend to put the emphasis 
on information or the referential function, for instance. By contrast, interactions 
which are more concerned with expressing feelings often have little in the way 
of new information to communicate. Talk between neighbours over the fence at 
the weekend about the weather, for instance, is more likely to be mainly affective 
in function, and intended to convey goodwill towards the neighbour rather than 
important new information. The specific content of the conversation may recur 
every weekend with little variation.
These scales or dimensions for analysis will be referred to and illustrated fur-
ther in subsequent chapters. Together with the social components identified in 
the previous section, they provide a useful framework for discussing language in 
its social context in different speech communities, and for discussing the ways 
in which language is used and the uses it is put to.
Exercise 6
Answer the following two questions for each of utterances a, b, and c, below.
(i)	
What information does the utterance provide about the relationship between the 
people talking in the context of their talk?
(ii)	
What is the function of the utterance in the context? Does it convey primarily 
affective or referential information?
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
13
(a)	
Here is the forecast for the Wellington district until midnight Tuesday issued by the 
meteorological service at 6 o’clock on Monday evening. It will be rather cloudy 
overnight with some drizzle, becoming fine again on Tuesday morning. The outlook 
for Wednesday –​ a few morning showers then fine.
(b)	
Good morning little one –​ you had a good big sleep, didn’t you, pet?
(c)	
Excuse me, Mr Clayton. I’ve finished your letters, sir.
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 7
Your local walking club is discussing the preparations for their next weekend away. Using 
the four dimensions of sociolinguistic analysis proposed in this chapter, identify four lin-
guistic features likely to characterise their discussions in each of these situations:
(a)	
during an organised meeting in the club meeting room
(b)	
when they discuss the details over a drink in the local bar.
Exercise 8
How does the meaning of “social distancing”, a term introduced in relation to the corona-
virus COVID-​19, differ from the sociolinguistic concept of social distance?
Answer at end of chapter
Looking for explanations
Sociolinguists aim to describe sociolinguistic variation and, if possible, explain 
why it happens. Why, for example, should Ray describe a teacher differently 
when talking to his mother and when answering the school principal? Why 
do different people call my friend Margaret by different names? Why should a 
formal grammatical construction with formal vocabulary sound sarcastic when 
used by your mother?
In order to answer these questions, the first two steps which need to be 
taken are:
1	
to identify clearly the linguistic variation involved (e.g. vocabulary, sounds, 
grammatical constructions, styles, dialects, languages)
2	
to identify clearly the different social or nonlinguistic factors which lead 
speakers to use one form rather than another (e.g. features relating to 
participants, setting or function of the interaction).
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
14
Then we can begin to look for patterns which will help to formulate an 
explanation of why people use one set of forms in some contexts, but different 
forms in others. When the two sociolinguists Blom and Gumperz visited 
Hemnesberget, what did they ask? First of all, “what are the linguistic forms 
used in this village?” Secondly, “what are the social factors which lead people 
to use one set of forms rather than the other?” And finally, “can we explain 
why particular social factors lead to the use of one set of forms rather than 
another?”
In other words, the sociolinguist’s aim is to move towards a theory which 
provides a motivated account of the way language is used in a community, and 
of the choices people make when they use language.
The relationship between linguistic choices and the social contexts in which 
they are made is sometimes easiest to see when different languages are involved. 
The first part of this book focuses on multilingual speech communities and 
describes some of the ways in which social considerations affect language 
choice. But there is plenty of language variation in monolingual communities 
too, and it is just as socially meaningful. The second part of the book focuses 
on social features of the language user. It explores the range of social informa-
tion conveyed about participants by their linguistic choices within one language, 
as well as the way people use their knowledge of this information to construct 
different aspects of their social identity. In the third part, the focus shifts to the 
uses of language, and the influence on language of the social context in which it 
is used and the functions it expresses.
Exercise 9 For people who speak English as an additional language
Write a list of all the times that you used English yesterday. Then think about why you 
selected English rather than your mother tongue or first language. Which social factors 
were important in the selection of English? Are they all included in this chapter?
These issues are discussed further in ­chapter 2
Some guidelines for reading this book
This book has three parts and sixteen chapters. Though each part and each 
chapter can be read independently, there are advantages in following the order 
of chapters within each part. Concepts introduced in one chapter are re-​used 
in later chapters. So, for example, variety and linguistic repertoire, which were 
introduced in this chapter, will recur throughout the book. If, however, you 
encounter an unfamiliar term you can use the index and the Key words and 
concepts at the end of the book to find a definition. Happy reading.
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
15
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 1
Answer to ­exercise 1 (a)
Ray greets his mother with the friendly form hi, compared to the more distant 
and formal good afternoon used to the school principal. He uses mum –​ an 
address form which indicates that he gets on well with her. He could have used 
no address form at all. Note that he uses the respectful address form sir to the 
principal. Finally he refers to his teacher as that bastard and uses a nickname 
Sootbucket for him, an indication that he is treating his mother as an intimate. 
This contrasts with the way he refers to the teacher when talking to the prin-
cipal, when he uses Mr Sutton.
We choose our words carefully according to whom we are talking. Language 
choices convey information about the social relationships between people as 
well as about the topic of discussion. The kind of information which is relevant 
to language choice includes how well we know the other person and whether 
they are socially superior.
Answer to ­exercise 1 (b)
Most people greet friends and family differently from those they do not know 
so well, and from those who are in a superior relationship to them, such as 
the school principal or the boss at work. Often nicknames or endearments 
are used between people who know each other well (e.g. mornin’ sweetheart, 
hello love, hi Jono). When speaking to superiors, it is common to use a title 
plus last name (eg. Miss Firth, Mr Halliday, Dr Lee) or to avoid names and 
use only a formal greeting, such as good morning. The particular forms you 
use may vary from those suggested, but the general patterns described here 
should apply.
Answer to ­exercise 1 (c)
We cannot tell from the form Sootbucket alone whether Ray feels positive or 
negative about his teacher. In Western (and especially masculine) culture, it is 
common to use forms that appear superficially insulting to express friendli-
ness and affection. Even the preceding word bastard can be used in a friendly 
manner between good (usually male) friends in New Zealand and Australia. 
Hence the main clue to Ray’s feeling is the wider discourse which indicates he 
is clearly making a complaint and that he is not happy at the way he has been 
treated.
Answer to ­exercise 2
This is just an example of the kind of list you might make if you live in an 
English-​speaking Western monolingual community.
 
 
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
16
Name
Speaker
When/​where
Robert
grandparents
home, letters
teachers
school
doctor
surgery, hospital
mother
when annoyed
Robbie
mother, father
most of the time
Robbie-​Bob
mother
when feeling affectionate
Rob
friends, brother
most of the time
Bob
friends
outside home to annoy me
Robert Harris
parents
when very annoyed
Mr Harris
Strangers
letters, shops
Parents often call children by a variety of names depending on how they feel 
towards them. The person in the example above is called Robbie by his mother 
in most circumstances, but when she is annoyed with him she calls him Robert 
or even Robert Harris. Friends often have a range of names for each other too. 
Friends call him Rob most of the time, but Bob when they want to tease or 
annoy him.
In some cultures, people have one name which is used only in the family and 
another for use outside. In other cultures, people have a ceremonial name used 
only on very formal occasions. Marital status is sometimes relevant to the choice 
of address form (e.g. Miss vs. Mrs and the choice of surname).
Answer to ­exercise 3
Possible answers:
(a)	 addressing your mother
(i)	
at home alone with her: mum, mummy, mom, ma, Tess…
(ii)	 on the telephone with friends listening: mother, mater, Tess …
(iii)	 in a shop: mother, mum …
(b)	 referring to your mother
(i)	
at home to another family member when she is present: mum, 
mom …
(ii)	 at home to another family member when she isn’t present: the old lady, 
our mam …
(iii)	 to an acquaintance who doesn’t know her: my mum …
(iv)	 to a sales assistant in a shop when she is present: my mother….
In addressing and referring to your mother, the term you use may provide 
a clue to your social background, and may differ according to which country 
you live in. In England, for instance, some members of high social groups use 
mummy well beyond childhood, while others use mater or mama, especially 
in reference. Members of lower social groups sometimes use ma, especially for 
address. Some members of middle social groups use their mother’s first name in 
address, especially when they become adults. Some use her first name in referring 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
17
to her in front of others. In some families, mum changes to mother as she and 
the children grow older.
In general, the following factors are among those relevant in selecting appro-
priate terms of address: family norms of address between children and parents 
at different ages; audience (who is listening?); and social context (is it formal or 
public, or private and personal, for instance).
In reference, the relationship between the speaker and the addressee is also 
relevant, as well as how well they know the person being referred to.
Answer to ­exercise 4
(a)	 Vocabulary choices. Tender vs. give, state vs. tell, destination vs. where 
you’re going, exact vs. right. Use of please in (c).
Syntax. Both sentences use imperative structures, but the more formal 
verbs in (c) assist in avoiding the use of the personal pronouns 
me and you which occur in (d). The determiner is omitted before 
exact fare and destination, which increases the impersonality of the 
expression. These are both places where your could have occurred, 
for instance.
(b)	 The medium of expression is relevant since (a) and (c) are much more likely 
in writing than in speech. Written and spoken language differ in many spe-
cific ways. Whether spoken or written, sentences (a) and (c) are more formal 
and distancing. If they were spoken, they would be appropriate only in 
the most formal context, between strangers or people who did not know 
each other well, or where the speaker was far superior or more powerful 
than the addressee. Sentences (b) and (d) would be appropriate in speech 
in informal contexts. The address form in sentence (b) shows the speaker 
knows the addressee and suggests they know each other well. It could be 
seen as softening the directive, making it gentler.
Answer to ­exercise 6
(a)	 (i)   This is a recorded telephone message and therefore the speaker does not 
know the hearer. This is indicated by the absence of address term and 
the formal syntax.
(ii)  Its primary function is to provide referential information. It is not 
intended to provide information on how the speaker is feeling.
(b) (i)	 Despite the initial greeting good morning which can be used to strangers 
and acquaintances, the speaker clearly knows the addressee well. Two 
affectionate endearment terms are used (little one, pet). These are terms 
appropriately used downwards in status (e.g. mother to child, older 
person to younger, nurse to young patient). My grandson thought 
the person was speaking to a pet! So it is also worth noting that pet 
is a common endearment in certain regions, such as the northeast of 
England.
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
18
(ii)  The use of the tag form (didn’t you?) is an attempt to elicit a response. 
However, it is not a request for information –​ the answer is self-​evident 
since it is provided in the utterance itself. This is clearly an utterance 
with a high affective content.
(c) (i)	
The address forms (Mr Clayton, sir), as well as the initial phrase –​ an 
apology for interruption (Excuse me) –​ suggest this is an utterance from a 
subordinate to a superior and that the two do not know each other well.
(ii)	 The primary intention of this utterance appears to be to provide referen-
tial information. Note, however, that it might have other functions too 
if we knew more about the context. The secretary might be indirectly 
(and therefore politely) asking if s/​he might leave since s/​he has finished 
a particular task. Utterances often serve more than one function.
Answer to ­exercise 8
Despite using the word “social”, social distancing does not refer to the relative 
closeness of social relationships (how well you know someone), but rather to 
the physical distancing required to prevent the spread of disease. So it means 
keeping physical space between you and other people outside of your home, and 
reducing the number of times you come into close contact with others.
Concepts introduced
Throughout this book, the concepts will be listed in the order they occur in the 
chapter.
•	Style
•	Speech community
•	Linguistic (speech) variable
•	Dialect
•	Speech function
•	Variety/​code
•	Verbal/​linguistic repertoire
Notes
1	 Where possible, as in this example, for ease of reading we use conventional spelling to 
represent a particular pronunciation. However, the English spelling system is not suitable 
for representing many important sound contrasts, nor for representing the sounds of other 
languages. It will therefore be necessary to use phonetic symbols too. The symbols used 
for the sounds of English are described in the Appendix at the end of the book. For sounds 
from other languages we use symbols from the International Phonetic Alphabet which are 
also listed in the Appendix with a description of how they sound.
 
 
 

WHAT DO SOCIOLINGUISTS STUDY?
19
2	 It has been suggested that the distinction between Bokmål and Ranamål is not as clear as 
Blom and Gumperz claimed. See Mæhlum (1996). On a visit to Hemnesberget in 2005, 
Paul Kerswill, a social dialectologist who speaks Norwegian, confirmed this view. He also 
noted that while older people used some Bokmål forms in their dialect while speaking to 
him, young people used only dialect forms, perhaps to assert the importance of dialect as 
an indicator of regional identity, a topic discussed in later chapters.
References
Hemnesberget in ­example 6 is based on Blom and Gumperz (1972)
The Sauris community described in ­example 7 is based on Denison (1972)
Useful additional reading
These references provide more information on the topics discussed in this 
chapter. Though most are old, they are very good.
Hudson (1996): ­chapter 2
Saville-​Troike (2003): ­chapter 3
Trudgill (2009): ­chapter 1
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Multilingual speech communities
Part I
 


23
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-3
Choosing your variety or code
What is your linguistic repertoire?
Example 1
Kalala is 16 years old. He lives in Bukavu, an African city in the east of the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire) with a population that 
has rapidly grown through inward migration from other nearby countries 
such as Burundi and Rwanda. It is a multicultural, multilingual city with 
more people coming and going for work and business reasons than people 
who live there permanently. Over 40 groups speaking different languages 
can be found in the city. Kalala, like many of his friends, spends his days 
roaming the streets, stopping off periodically at regular meeting places in the 
marketplace, in the park, or at a friend’s house. During a normal day he uses 
at least three different varieties or codes, and sometimes more.
At home with his family Kalala speaks an informal style of Shi, his tribal lan-
guage, and he is familiar with the formal Shi used for weddings and funerals. 
He uses informal Shi in the marketplace when he deals with vendors from his 
own ethnic group. When he wants to communicate with people from a different 
tribal group, he uses the lingua franca of the area, Swahili. He learned standard 
(Zairean) Swahili at school, but the local marketplace variety is a little different. 
It has its own distinct linguistic features and even its own name –​ Kingwana. He 
uses Kingwana to younger children and to adults he meets in the streets, as well 
as to people in the marketplace. He listens to pop music in Lingala, although he 
doesn’t speak it or understand it.
Standard Swahili, one of the national languages, is the language used in 
Bukavu for most official transactions, despite the fact that French is the official 
language of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire). Kalala knows almost 
no French and, like most other people in Bukavu, he uses standard Swahili with 
officials in government offices when he has to fill in a form or pay a bill. He 
uses it when he tries for a job in a shop or an office, but there are very few 
Language choice in  
multilingual communities
2
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
24
jobs around. He spends most of his time with his friends, and with them he 
uses another variety or code called Indoubil. This variety is used among young 
people in Bukavu, regardless of their ethnic backgrounds or tribal affiliations. It 
is used like in-​group slang between young people in monolingual communities. 
Indoubil is based on Swahili, but it has developed into a distinct variety or code 
by drawing on languages like French, English and Italian –​ all languages which 
can be read or heard in the multilingual city of Bukavu.
If we list the varieties or codes he uses regularly, we find that Kalala’s linguistic  
repertoire includes three varieties of Swahili (standard Zairean, local Swahili or  
Kingwana, and Indoubil) and two varieties of his tribal language, Shi (a formal  
and an informal or casual style). The factors that lead Kalala to use one code  
rather than another are the kinds of social factors identified in the previous  
chapter as relevant to language choice in speech communities throughout the  
world. Characteristics of the users or participants are relevant. Kalala’s own  
Map 2.1  Bukavu, Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire)
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
25
linguistic repertoire and the repertoire of the person he is talking to are basic  
limiting factors, for instance.
Table 2.1 illustrates the possibilities for communication when Kalala wanted 
to talk to a soldier who had recently arrived in Bukavu with his unit. Since he 
and his addressee share only one code or variety, standard Swahili, there is not 
much choice if he wants to communicate referential content (as opposed to, 
say, insult, abuse or admiration, where any variety could convey the affective 
message).
Table 2.1  Two linguistic repertoires in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire)
Kalala’s linguistic repertoire
Addressee’s linguistic repertoire
Shi: informal style
  formal style
Rega: informal style
  formal style
Indoubil
Lingala
Kingwana
Standard Zairean Swahili
Standard Zairean Swahili
Source: Based on Goyvaerts, Naeyaert and Semikenke (1983); Goyvaerts (1988, 1996).
Exercise 1
(a)	
There are many degrees of “knowing” a language. Table 2.1 is a simplification since 
it does not take account of how well Kalala and his addressee know any particular 
variety.
		
Consider how well you know a language other than your mother tongue. How 
would you rate your knowledge? What factors are relevant to your assessment? Do 
these include social factors?
(b)	
Using the information provided in the section above, which varieties do you think 
Kalala will use to
(i)	
talk to his younger brother at home?
(ii)	
plan the morning’s activities with his best friend?
(iii)	 greet a stranger from a different tribe whom he met in the street?
Answers at end of chapter
Domains of language use
Example 2
’Anahina is a bilingual Tongan New Zealander living in Auckland. At 
home with her family, she uses Tongan almost exclusively for a wide range 
of topics. She often talks to her grandmother about Tongan customs, for 
instance. With her mother she exchanges gossip about Tongan friends and 
 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
26
relatives. Tongan is the language the family uses at mealtimes. They discuss 
what they have been doing, plan family outings and share information about 
Tongan social events. It is only with her older sisters that she uses some 
English when they are talking about school or doing their homework.
Certain social factors –​ who you are talking to, the social context of the talk, the 
function and topic of the discussion –​ turn out to be important in accounting for 
language choice in many different kinds of speech community. It has proved very 
useful, particularly when describing code choice in large speech communities, 
to look at “typical” interactions which involve these factors. We can imagine, 
for instance, a typical family interaction. It would be located in the setting of 
the home; the typical participants will obviously be family members; and typ-
ical topics would be family activities. ’Anahina’s family mealtime conversations, 
described in ­example 2, illustrate this pattern well. A number of such typical 
interactions have been identified as relevant in describing patterns of code 
choice in many speech communities. The concept of domains of language use, 
popularised by Joshua Fishman, an American sociolinguist, is useful for this pur-
pose. A domain involves typical interactions between typical participants in typ-
ical settings.
Table 2.2 describes five domains which can be identified in many communities.
Table 2.2  Domains of language use
Domain
Addressee
Setting
Topic
Variety/​Code
Family
Parent
Home
Planning a family party
—​—​—​—​—​
Friendship
Friend
Beach
How to play beach tennis
—​—​—​—​—​
Religion
Priest
Church
Choosing the Sunday liturgy
—​—​—​—​—​
Education
Teacher
School
Solving a maths problem
—​—​—​—​—​
Employment
Employer
Workplace
Applying for a promotion
—​—​—​—​—​
Source: Based on Fishman (1972: 22).
Exercise 2
(a)	
Fill in the column labelled variety/​code in table 2.2 for your speech community. 
If your community is monolingual, remember that the term “variety” includes 
different dialects and styles of language.
(b)	
Ask a bilingual friend or neighbour which languages they would use in the different 
domains. It is useful to guess in advance how they will answer and then check your 
predictions against their responses. When you are wrong, see if you can identify the 
reason for your error.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
27
If you do not know anyone who is bilingual, think of where you might meet people who 
are bilingual. In Wellington, New Zealand, students have found that bilingual people in 
local shops and takeaway bars are very interested in this topic, and are pleased to talk 
about their language use. You could consider asking a bilingual worker in a takeaway shop, 
a delicatessen or corner shop about their patterns of language use. But don’t ask when 
they are busy!
Example 3
In Paraguay, a small South American country, two languages are used –​ 
Spanish, the language of the colonisers, and Guaraní, the Native American 
Indigenous language. People in Paraguay are proud that they have their own 
language which distinguishes them from the rest of South America. Many 
rural Paraguayans are monolingual in Guaraní, but those who live in the 
cities are usually bilingual. They read Spanish literature, but they gossip in 
both Spanish and Guaraní.
A study by Joan Rubin in the 1960s identified complementary patterns of lan-
guage use in different domains. Urban bilingual Paraguayans selected different 
codes in different situations, and their use of Spanish and Guaraní fell into a 
pattern for different domains (see table 2.3). This was useful though it still leaves 
considerable areas of language use unspecified. When faced, for example, in the 
countryside by a woman in a long black skirt smoking a cigar, what language 
should you use? (The answer will be based on your predictions about her lin-
guistic repertoire.)
Table 2.3  Domains of language use in Paraguay
Domain
Addressee
Setting
Topic
Language
Family
Parent
Home
Planning a family party
Guaraní
Friendship
Friend
Café
Funny anecdote
Guaraní
Religion
Priest
Church
Choosing the Sunday liturgy
Spanish
Education
Teacher
Primary school
Telling a story
Guaraní
Education
Lecturer
University
Solving a maths problem
Spanish
Administration
Official
Office
Getting an import licence
Spanish
Source: This table was constructed from data provided in Rubin (1968).
Table 2.3 describes the situation about 60 years ago, and patterns of lan-
guage use have steadily changed in Paraguay, especially in the urban areas. The 
complementary patterns of language use identified by Joan Rubin in the 1960s 
have given way to much greater bilingualism in most domains in twenty-​first 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
28
century Paraguay. City dwellers use both Spanish and Guaraní in the home as 
well as in school, and some fear that Guaraní may eventually be displaced in 
urban areas.
Exercise 3
In Brittany, Maryon McDonald noted that on a farm where she stayed, the mother 
spoke Breton to the dog because it was farm dog, but she used (in her view) the more 
sophisticated language, French, to the cat because it was a pet. If you live in a multilingual 
speech community you might like to make notes on which language people use to their 
pets and why.
Modelling variety or code choice
Example 4
Maria is a teenager whose Portuguese parents came to London in the 1960s. 
She uses mainly Portuguese at home and to older people at the Portuguese 
Catholic church and community centre, but English is the appropriate var-
iety or code for her to use at school. She uses mostly English in her after-​
school job serving in a local café, though occasionally older customers greet 
her in Portuguese.
Domain is clearly a very general concept which draws on three important social 
factors in code choice –​ participants, setting and topic. It is useful for capturing 
broad generalisations about any speech community. Using information about 
the domains of use in a community, it is possible to draw a very simple model 
summarising the norms of language use for the community. This is often particu-
larly useful for bilingual and multilingual speech communities.
The information provided in ­example 4, for instance, identifies four domains 
and describes the variety or code appropriate to each.
Domain
Variety/​code
Home/​family
Portuguese
Church/​religion
Portuguese
Work/​employment
English
School/​education
English
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
29
This information can also be summarised in a diagram or model, as ­figure 2.1  
illustrates. While it obviously oversimplifies the complexity of bilingual inter-
action, nevertheless a model like this is useful in a number of ways. First, it forces  
us to be very clear about which domains and varieties are relevant to language  
choice. The model summarises what we know about the patterns of language use  
in the community. It is not an account of the choices a person must make or of  
the process they go through in selecting a code. It is simply a description of the  
community’s norms which can be altered or added to if we discover more infor-
mation. It would be possible, for instance, to add other domains after “school”,  
for instance, such as “the pub” or “the law court”.
A second reason why an explicit model is useful is that it provides a clear basis 
for comparing patterns of code choice in different speech communities. Models 
make it easy to compare the varieties appropriate in similar domains in different 
speech communities. And a model is also useful to a newcomer in a community 
as a summary of the appropriate patterns of code use in the community. A model 
describes which code or codes are usually selected for use in different situations. 
A model for Sauris, the Italian mountain community described in ­example 7 in 
­chapter 1, would show that Friulian is normally used to order a beer in the local 
bar. And in Bukavu, if you want to buy vegetables in the local marketplace at a 
reasonable price, a model would inform you that you need to know how to use 
Kingwana.
Figure 2.1  Appropriate code choice in different domains among the Portuguese 
community in London

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
30
Exercise 4 (a)
Consider ­example 2 above. What does it suggest about the limitations of a domain-​based 
approach to language choice?
Answer at end of chapter
Example 5
Oi Lin Tan, a 20-​year-​old Chinese Singaporean, uses several varieties regularly. 
At home she uses Cantonese to her mother and to her grandfather who lives 
with them. With her friends she generally uses Singapore English. She learned 
to understand Hokkien, another Chinese language, in the smaller shops and 
marketplace, but in large department stores she again uses Singapore English. 
At primary school she was taught for just over half the time in Mandarin 
Chinese, and so she often watches Channel 8, the Mandarin TV station, and 
she regularly reads a Chinese newspaper Liánhé Zǎobào, which is written 
in Mandarin Chinese. During the other part of the time at primary school 
she was taught in a formal variety of Singapore English. This is the code she 
uses when she has to deal with government officials, or when she applies for 
an office job during the university holidays. She went to an English-​medium 
secondary school and she is now studying geography and economics at an 
English-​medium university. Her textbooks are all in English.
Exercise 4 (b)
Although Oi Lin Tan uses Cantonese to her mother, she uses Singapore English to her 
sisters. She also uses Cantonese at the market to elderly Cantonese vegetable sellers. What 
factors might account for these code choices?
Answer at end of chapter
Other social factors affecting code choice
Though we have used domains as useful summaries of relevant social factors in 
the model provided above, it is often necessary to examine more specific social 
factors if a model is to be a useful description of code choices in a community. 
The components of a domain do not always fit with each other. They are not 
always “congruent”. In other words, within any domain, individual interactions 
may not be “typical” in the sense in which typical is used in the domain con-
cept. They may, nevertheless, be perfectly normal, and occur regularly. This is 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
31
illustrated by Oi Lin Tan’s use of Singapore English to her sisters as described 
in ­example 5. People may select a particular variety or code because it makes 
it easier to discuss a particular topic, regardless of where they are speaking. At 
home, people often discuss work or school, for instance, using the language 
associated with those domains, rather than the language of the family domain. 
Some describe this as “leakage”, suggesting it is in some way irregular –​ the code 
associated with one domain is leaking into another. In fact, it is quite normal and 
very common. Particular topics may regularly be discussed in one code rather 
than another, regardless of the setting or addressee.
The dimensions introduced in ­chapter 1 illustrate this point nicely. Any or all 
of them may be relevant in accounting for the choice of variety or code in a par-
ticular situation. When both participants share more than one variety, then other 
factors will contribute to the appropriate choice. The social distance dimension 
is relevant, for instance. How well do they know each other, i.e. what is the social 
distance between the participants? Are they strangers, friends, brothers? Kalala, 
for example, would use a different code to each.
The status relationship between people may be relevant in selecting the 
appropriate code. A high-​status official in Bukavu will be addressed in standard 
Swahili in many contexts. In Singapore, English is the most frequently selected 
code for official transactions, regardless of the speaker’s ethnicity. Social role 
may also be important and is often a factor contributing to status differences 
between people. Typical role relationships are teacher–​pupil, doctor–​patient, 
soldier–​civilian, priest–​parishioner and official–​citizen. The first-​named role is 
often the more statusful. You can no doubt think of many more examples of 
role pairs like these. The same person may be spoken to in a different code 
depending on whether they are acting as a teacher, as a parent or as a customer 
in the marketplace. In Bukavu, for instance, Mr Mukala, a teacher, insists on 
standard Swahili from his pupils, his wife uses Kongo, their tribal language, to 
talk to him, while in the marketplace he is addressed in Kingwana, the local 
variety of Swahili.
Features of the setting and the dimension of formality may also be important 
in selecting an appropriate variety or code. In church, at a formal ceremony, the 
appropriate variety will be different from that used afterwards in the church 
porch. The variety used for a formal radio lecture or a TED talk on the internet 
differs from that used for the adverts. In Paraguay, whether the interaction takes 
place in a rural as opposed to an urban setting is crucial to appropriate language 
choice. Other relevant factors relate to the social dimensions of formality and 
status: Spanish is the appropriate language for formal interactions.
Another important factor is the function or goal of the interaction. What 
is the language being used for? Is the speaker asking a favour or giving orders 
to someone? When Kalala applies for an office job he uses his “best” standard 
written Swahili on the application form, and his most formal style of standard 
Swahili at the interview. When he abuses his younger brother he uses Indoubil, 
the code in which his vocabulary of “insult” is most extensive. The function is 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
32
exclusively affective, and Kalala transmits his feelings effectively, despite the fact 
that his brother doesn’t understand much Indoubil yet.
So in describing the patterns of code use in particular communities, the rele-
vant social factors may not fit neatly into institutionalised domains. As we have 
seen, more specific social factors often need to be included, and a range of social 
dimensions may need to be considered too. The aim of any description is to 
represent the language patterns of the community accurately. If the model does 
not do that, it needs to be modified. The only limitation is one of usefulness. If 
a model gets too complicated and includes too many specific points, it loses its 
value as a method of capturing generalisations.
Exercise 5
Using the information provided in ­example 1, draw a diagram like that in ­figure 2.1 
summarising the factors relevant to code choice for Kalala in Bukavu.
Answer at end of chapter
Models can usefully go beyond the social factors summarised in the domain 
concept to take account of social dimensions such as social distance (stranger vs. 
friend), relative status or role (e.g. doctor–​patient), degrees of formality (formal 
wedding ceremony vs. lunchtime chat) and the function or goal of the inter-
action (e.g. getting a bargain). Nevertheless, because they are concerned to cap-
ture broad generalisations, there are obvious limits to the usefulness of such 
models in describing the complexities of language choice. Interactions where 
people switch between codes within a domain cannot always be captured even 
by diagrams which consider the relevance of topic or social dimensions such as 
formality and social distance. This kind of linguistic behaviour is better described 
by a more detailed analysis of particular interactions. This point is developed 
further in the section on code-​switching and mixing later in this chapter.
Before considering code-​switching, however, it is useful to relate the patterns 
described so far to the important sociolinguistic concept of diglossia.
Diglossia
A linguistic division of labour
Example 6
In Eggenwil, a small town in the Aargau canton of Switzerland, Silvia, a bank-​
teller, knows two very distinct varieties of German. One is the local Swiss 
German dialect of her canton which she uses in her everyday interactions. 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
33
The other is standard German which she learnt at school, and though she 
understands it very well indeed, she rarely uses it in interaction. Newspapers 
are written in standard German, and when she occasionally goes to hear 
a lecture at the university it may be in standard German. The national TV 
news is broadcast in standard German, but weather broadcasts now use dia-
lect. The sermons her mother listens to in church are generally in standard 
German too, though more radical clerics use Swiss German dialect. The 
novels Silvia reads also use standard German.
The pattern of code or variety choice in Eggenwil is one which has been described 
with the term diglossia. This term has been used both in a narrow sense and in 
a much broader sense and we describe both. In the narrow and original sense 
of the term, as defined by Charles Ferguson, diglossia has three crucial features:
1	 Two distinct varieties of the same language are used in the community, with 
one regarded as a high (or H) variety and the other a low (or L) variety.
2	 Each variety is used for quite distinct functions; H and L complement 
each other.
3	 No-​one uses the H variety in everyday conversation.
The situation in Eggenwil fits these three criteria for narrow or “classic” 
diglossia well. There are a number of other communities which Ferguson 
suggested also fit this narrow definition. Arabic-​speaking countries treat clas-
sical Arabic as their H variety and regional colloquial varieties as L varieties, 
though more recent research indicates that the situation is not as clear-​cut as 
Ferguson suggested. In Greece, until late last century there was an H variety 
Katharévousa, alongside an L variety, Dhimotiki, but Katharévousa has now 
disappeared (as described below). At one time, Latin was the H variety alongside 
daughter languages, such as Italian, French and Spanish, which had developed 
from its more colloquial form. These communities all satisfy the three criteria.
In these communities, while the two varieties are (or were) linguistically 
related, the relationship is closer in some cases than others. The degree of diffe-
rence in the pronunciation of H and L varies from place to place, for example. 
The sounds of Swiss German are quite different from those of standard German, 
while the pronunciation of Greek Katharévousa, when it was used, was much 
closer to Dhimotiki in pronunciation. The grammar of the two linguistically 
related varieties differs too. Often the grammar of H is morphologically more 
complicated. So standard German, for instance, uses more case markers on 
nouns and tense inflections on verbs than Swiss German; and standard French, 
the H variety in Haiti, uses more markers of number and gender on nouns than 
Haitian Creole, the L variety.
Most of the vocabulary of H and L is the same. But, not surprisingly since it 
is used in more formal domains, the H vocabulary includes many more formal 
and technical terms such as conservation and psychometric, while the L variety 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
34
has words for everyday objects such as saucepan and shoe. There are also some 
interesting paired items for frequently referred-​to concepts. Where standard 
German uses Kartoffel for potato and Dachboden for attic, Swiss German uses 
Härdopfel and Estrich. Where Katharévousa used ikía for house, Dhimotiki 
uses spiti.
We have some choices in English which give the flavour of these differences. 
Choosing between words like perused and read, or affluent and rich, for instance, 
or between expressions such as having finally despatched the missive vs. when 
I had posted the letter at last captures the kind of differences involved. But while 
either would be possible in written or spoken English, in most diglossia situ-
ations the H form would not occur in everyday conversation, and the L form 
would generally seem odd in writing.
Exercise 6
Fill in the following table on the basis of your predictions about when H will be used and 
when L will be used in diglossic communities.
H(igh) variety
L(ow) variety
Religion (sermon, prayers)
Literature (novels, non-​fiction)
Newspaper (editorial)
Broadcasting: TV news
Education (written material, lectures)
Education (lesson discussion)
Broadcasting: radio
Shopping
Gossiping
Answer at end of chapter
No-​one uses H for everyday interaction. In Arabic-​speaking countries, for 
instance, classical Arabic is revered as the language of the Koran. A modern 
version labelled Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) is taught in schools and is used 
for formal interactions and in writing. MSA also serves as a lingua franca among 
educated Arabs from different countries. For most everyday conversations in 
Arabic-​speaking countries people use their local colloquial variety. A friend of 
mine went to Morocco in the 1960s, having learned classical Arabic at univer-
sity in England. When he arrived and used his classical variety some people were 
very impressed. People generally respect and admire those who have mastered 
classical Arabic. But most of them couldn’t understand what he was saying. His 
colleagues warned him that he would be laughed at or regarded as sacrilegious if 
he went about trying to buy food in classical Arabic. It would be a bit like asking 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
35
for steaks at the butcher’s using Shakespearian English. He could have used MSA 
as an acceptable alternative, but that has only been described in recent decades.
Attitudes to H vs. L in a diglossia situation
Example 7
A century and a half ago a Swiss traveller in Haiti expressed his annoyance 
at the fond complacency with which the white creoles regarded their Patois. 
He was sharply answered by a creole, who declared: “There are a thousand 
things one dares not say in French, a thousand voluptuous images which one 
can hardly render successfully, which the Créole expresses or renders with 
infinite grace.”
Haiti has been described as another diglossic situation by some linguists, with 
French as the H variety and Haitian Creole as the L variety. As the quotation in 
­example 7 suggests, attitudes towards the two codes in a diglossia situation are 
complicated. People generally admire the H variety even when they can’t under-
stand it. Attitudes to it are usually very respectful. It has prestige in the sense of 
high status. These attitudes are reinforced by the fact that the H variety is the 
one which is described and “fixed”, or standardised, in grammar books and 
dictionaries. People generally do not think of the L variety as worth describing. 
However, attitudes to the L variety are varied and often ambivalent. In many 
parts of Switzerland, people are quite comfortable with their L variety and use it 
all the time –​ even to strangers.
Example 8
Penelope Eckert headed to southern France in the 1970s to study what she 
describes as “stigmatized peasant dialects”. She lived in St Pierre with a family 
that owned the local café, a centre for local gossip. She was in a perfect pos-
ition to record and describe features of the local dialect. But in addition to 
the linguistic description, her published research raised questions about the 
status of the vernacular alongside the standard language, French. She argued 
that diglossia is imposed from above by a dominant power and thus poses 
“a serious threat to the self-​image and solidarity of the community”. It will 
inevitably be regarded as inadequate, she claimed, since it cannot be used in 
domains associated with the dominant cultural values of the society.
This example presents a different perspective from the sentiments expressed 
in ­example 7, and from the apparent situation of the Swiss who use L without 
any suggestion of stigma. The explanation appears to lie in the imposition and 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
36
gradual infiltration of standard French into the rural community, and the local 
people’s initial lack of expertise in this H variety.
Another interesting issue is the way that existing speakers treat new speakers 
of the L variety in some areas. Researchers in south-​eastern France and western 
Switzerland, for example, found that people learning the local variety of 
Francoprovençal/​Arpitan were not viewed by community members as being 
genuine. L varieties are typically regarded as local languages and the question 
of language ownership is closely bound up with community identity, and not 
entirely open to outsiders. Ironically, the research demonstrated that though the 
new speakers value the status of the language highly, they are not considered to 
be authentic users by existing speakers.
In countries where the H variety is a language used in another country as a 
normal means of communication, and the L variety is used only locally, many 
people rate the L variety very low indeed. In Haiti, although both French and 
the Creole were declared national languages in the 1983 constitution, many still 
regard French, the H variety, as the only “real” language of the country. They 
ignore the existence of Haitian Creole, which in fact everyone uses at home and 
with friends for all their everyday interactions. On the other hand, the quota-
tion in ­example 7 suggests that even here the L variety is highly valued by some 
speakers. So while its very existence is denied by some, others may regard the L 
variety as the best means of expressing their real feelings.
Exercise 7
(a)	
Using the information provided above, summarise what you now know about the 
differences between H and L in diglossic communities.
(i)	
How are they linguistically related? Are they distinct languages or varieties of 
the same language?
(ii)	
How are they used in the community?
(iii)	 Which is used for conversation with family and friends?
(iv)	 How is each variety learned?
(v)	
Which has most prestige?
(vi)	 Which is codified in grammar books and dictionaries?
(vii)	 In which variety is literature usually written?
(b)	
Judged by these seven features would you say that Hemnesberget described in 
­example 6 in ­chapter 1 qualified as a diglossic community? Why (not)?
Answers at end of chapter
Diglossia with and without bilingualism
Diglossia is a characteristic of speech communities rather than individuals. 
Individuals may be bilingual. Societies or communities are diglossic. In other 
words, the term diglossia describes societal or institutionalised bilingualism, 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
37
where two varieties are required to cover all the community’s domains. There are 
some diglossic communities where there is very limited individual bilingualism. 
For example,  in Haiti more than 90% of the population is monolingual in 
Haitian Creole. Consequently, they cannot actively contribute in more formal 
domains.
Table 2.4 is one way of considering the range of potential relationships 
between diglossia and bilingualism. It is an idealised model, but it usefully iden-
tifies the extreme positions that are possible. If we restrict the terms diglossia 
and bilingualism to refer to different languages (rather than dialects or styles), 
then box 1 refers to a situation where the society is diglossic: two languages are 
required to cover the full range of domains, and (most) individuals are bilin-
gual. Those communities in Vanuatu where individuals speak the local village 
language (e.g. Erromangan, Aulua), as well as Bislama, the lingua franca of 
Vanuatu, would illustrate this box. Box 2 describes situations where individ-
uals are bilingual, but there is no community-​wide functional differentiation 
in the use of their languages. Many English-​speaking countries fit this descrip-
tion. Individuals may be bilingual in Australia, the USA, England and New 
Zealand, but their two languages are not used by the whole community in 
different domains.
Table 2.4  Relationship between diglossia and bilingualism
DIGLOSSIA
+​
−
BILINGUALISM
+​
1  Both diglossia and  
bilingualism
2  Bilingualism without 
diglossia
–​
3  Diglossia without  
bilingualism
4  Neither diglossia nor 
bilingualism
Source: Fishman (2003: 360).
Box 3 describes the situation of politically united groups where two languages 
are used for different functions, but by largely different speech communities. 
This is true for Haiti since most people are monolingual in Haitian Creole. This 
situation tends to characterise colonised countries with clear-​cut social class 
divisions: i.e. the elite speak one language and the lower classes use another (for 
example, the French-​speaking elite in nineteenth century Russia and in elev-
enth century Norman England). There will, of course, always be some bilingual 
individuals who act as go-​betweens, but the overall pattern is one of diglossia 
without bilingualism. Box 4 describes the situation of monolingual groups, and 
Fishman suggests this is typical of isolated ethnic communities where there is 
little contact with other linguistic groups. Iceland, especially before the twen-
tieth century, serves as an example of such a community, but there are also 
communities like this in places such as Papua New Guinea (PNG) and the 
Amazon basin.
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
38
The criteria which identify diglossic communities were initially interpreted 
very stringently, so that few communities qualified as diglossic. Soon, however, 
it became clear that some sociolinguists felt that the term could usefully be 
extended.
Extending the scope of diglossia
As table 2.4 suggests, the way H and L varieties of German function in places 
like Eggenwil is very similar to the ways in which distinct languages operate in 
other communities, such as Sauris in the Italian Alps. Each code or language is 
used in different situations from the other. In earlier decades in Paraguay, the 
domains where Guaraní was used were quite distinct from those where Spanish 
was appropriate. Because of this similarity, it was suggested that bilingual com-
munities like Sauris and Paraguay should also be considered as examples of 
diglossia. The term is here being used in a broader sense which gives most weight 
to feature or criterion (ii) –​ the complementary functions of two varieties or 
codes in a community. Features (i) and (iii) are dispensed with and the term 
diglossia is generalised to cover any situation where two languages are used 
for different functions in a speech community, especially where one language is 
used for H functions and the other for L functions. There is a division of labour 
between the languages.
Other features of the “classic” diglossia situations are also often relevant, but 
they are not regarded as crucial to the definition. So the H variety is generally 
the prestige variety, but people may also be attached to and admire the L var-
iety, as in Paraguay where people are typically proud of Guaraní. L is learned at 
home and the H variety in school, but some people may use H in the home too, 
as in Sauris where parents used Italian to children in order to prepare them for 
school. Literature is generally written in H rather than L, but there may be a rich 
oral literature in L. Though H has generally been standardised and codified in 
grammar books and dictionaries for centuries, L languages are also increasingly 
being codified and standardised.
Exercise 8
(a)	
Fill in the following table using the description of twentieth century Paraguayan 
patterns of language use outlined in ­example 3 and table 2.3 above as a basis for 
predicting which language is likely to be the main one associated with a particular 
domain.
Spanish
Guaraní
Religion
Literature
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
39
Spanish
Guaraní
Schooling
Broadcasting
Shopping
Gossiping
(b)	
Does twentieth century Paraguay qualify as a diglossic society if criterion (ii) is 
regarded as the only important one?
Answers at end of chapter
Polyglossia
Diglossic situations involve two contrasting varieties, H and L. Sometimes, how-
ever, a more sophisticated concept is needed to describe the functional distribu-
tion of different varieties in a community. People like Kalala in Bukavu use a 
number of different codes for different purposes. The term polyglossia has been 
used for situations like this where a community regularly uses more than three 
languages. Kalala’s linguistic repertoire described above in table 2.1 provides a 
nice example of polyglossic relationships.
Oi Lin Tan’s Cantonese-​speaking community in Singapore, described in 
­example 5, can similarly be described as polyglossic, but the relationships 
between the various codes or varieties are not at all straightforward. Table 2.5 
represents one way of describing them.
Table 2.5  Polyglossia in Singapore
H
L
Mandarin
Cantonese        Hokkien
Singapore English formal variety 
Singapore English informal variety
Both Mandarin and formal Singapore English can be considered H varieties 
alongside different L varieties. Mandarin functions as an H variety in rela-
tion to at least two L varieties, Hokkien and Cantonese. Informal Singapore 
English is an L variety alongside the more formal H variety. So for this speech 
community, there are two H varieties and a number of L varieties in a complex 
relationship.
Polyglossia is thus a useful term for describing situations where a number of 
distinct codes or varieties are used for clearly distinct purposes or in clearly dis-
tinguishable situations.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
40
Changes in a diglossia situation
Diglossia has been described as a stable situation. It is possible for two varieties to 
continue to exist side by side for centuries, as they have in Arabic-​speaking coun-
tries and in Haiti for example. Alternatively, one variety may gradually displace the 
other. Latin was ousted from its position as the H language in Europe, for instance, 
as the L varieties gradually expanded or leaked into more formal domains. England 
was diglossic (in the broad sense) after 1066 when the Normans were in control. 
French was the language of the court, administration, the legal system and high 
society in general. English was the language of the peasants in the fields and the 
streets. The following words provide an illustration of this relationship:
English
French
English
ox
boeuf
→
beef
sheep
mouton
→
mutton
calf
veau
→
veal
pig
porc
→
pork
The English calf becomes French veau as it moves from the farm to the dinner 
table. However, by the end of the fourteenth century, English had displaced 
French (while absorbing huge numbers of French words such as beef, mutton, 
veal and pork) so there were no longer domains in which French was the appro-
priate language to use. On the other hand, standard French, the H variety, is 
steadily displacing local dialects in many parts of rural France.
In Greece, the relationship between Dhimotiki (L) and Katharévousa (H) changed 
in the late twentieth century. At the turn of the century, the relative roles of the two 
varieties were still quite distinct. Katharévousa was regarded very highly and was 
the appropriate variety for serious speeches or writing. Dhimotiki was used for 
informal conversation. There was a language riot in Athens in 1901 when the New 
Testament was published in Dhimotiki. Many people felt it was totally unsuited 
for such a serious purpose. Subsequently, however, the choice of Katharévousa or 
Dhimotiki took on political significance. Katharévousa was the only official lan-
guage of Greece during the period from 1967 to 1974 when the right-​wing mili-
tary government was in power. In 1976, however, diglossia ended by law when the 
Athenian variety of Dhimotiki, labelled “the people’s language”, and officially New/​
Modern Greek, was adopted as the official language by the democratic government.
As mentioned above, attitudes to the H variety in a typical diglossia situ-
ation are usually respectful and admiring. The following quotation indicates 
how things in Greece changed. Katharévousa was denounced in the 1980s by a 
student leader as “the old-​fashioned medium of an educated elite . . . archaic and 
tediously demanding”, with “freakish diction . . . antiquated rhetorical devices 
and . . . insufferable verbosity”. By the 1990s, Katharévousa was no longer used 
in schools or even in school textbooks, and though traces of its influence may 
be found in very formal styles of Modern Greek, it has now largely disappeared.
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
41
Source: ©2016 Keely Kidner, reproduced by kind permission.
Finally, it is worth considering whether the term diglossia or perhaps polyglossia 
should be used to describe complementary code use in all communities. People in 
all speech communities use different varieties or codes in formal contexts, such as 
religious and legal ceremonies, as opposed to relaxed casual situations. In multi-
lingual situations, the codes selected are generally distinct languages, e.g. French 
or Swahili for formal situations vs. a vernacular tribal language such as Shi for 
casual interactions in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire). In predom-
inantly monolingual speech communities, such as those of many English-​speaking 
people in Britain or New Zealand, the contrasting codes are different styles of one 
language. As we shall see in later chapters, there are clearly identifiable linguistic 
differences between the more formal and the more colloquial styles of a language. 
But they are often a matter of degree. Nevertheless, there is a sense in which the 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
42
variety at the formal end of the scale could be regarded as an H variety, while the 
most casual variety could be labelled L.
Adopting this approach, the colloquial Māori used to talk to friends and 
family and in local shops in Māori townships in the early twentieth century 
could be described as the L variety. In addition, these communities made use of 
two H varieties. They used a formal variety of Māori for ceremonial purposes 
and for formal interaction on the marae (the formal meeting area). English was 
the other H variety. It was the language of the school, the government, the courts 
and for all official transactions with the Pākehā (non-​Māori New Zealanders). 
So, if we expand the concept of diglossia to encompass different contextual var-
ieties as well as distinct languages, the situation in these townships could be 
described as triglossic rather than diglossic.
Exercise 9
How can the following three dimensions be used to distinguish between H and L varieties 
in a diglossic speech community?
(i)	
Formality
(ii)	
Social distance
(iii)	 Social status
Answer at end of chapter
Code-​switching or code-​mixing and 
translanguaging
Participants, solidarity and status
Example 9
[The Māori is in italics. the translation is in small capitals.]
Sarah:	
I think everyone’s here except Mere.
John:	
She said she might be a bit late but actually I think that’s her 
arriving now.
Sarah:	
You’re right. Kia ora Mere. Haere mai. Kei te pehea koe?
                      [hi mere.     come in.   how are you?]
Mere:	
Kia ora e hoa. Kei te pai. Have you started yet?
      	
[hello my friend. i’m fine.]
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
43
People sometimes switch code within a domain or social situation. When there 
is some obvious change in the situation, such as the arrival of a new person, it 
is easy to explain the code-​switch. In ­example 9, Mere is Māori and although 
the rest of the meeting will be conducted in English, Sarah switches to Māori 
to greet her. The Māori greeting is an expression of solidarity. So, a code-​switch 
may be related to a particular participant or addressee. In a Polish family living 
in Lancashire in the 1950s, the family used Polish in the home. When the 
local English-​speaking priest called, however, everyone switched to English. In 
both of these cases the switch indicates a change in the social situation (situ-
ational code-​switching) and takes positive account of the presence of a new 
participant.
Source: DENNIS THE MENACE ©2021 North America Syndicate, Inc., and used by permission 
of Hank Ketcham Enterprises.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
44
A speaker may similarly switch to another language as a signal of group mem-
bership and shared ethnicity with an addressee (known as emblematic code-​
switching). Even speakers who are not very proficient in a second language may 
use brief phrases and words for this purpose. Scottish Highlanders who are not 
proficient speakers of Gaelic nevertheless express their identification with the 
local Gaelic speech community by using Gaelic tags and phrases interspersed 
with their English. Māori people often use Māori words and phrases in this way 
too, whether their knowledge of Māori is extensive or not. Such switches are 
often very short and they are made primarily for social reasons –​ to signal and 
actively construct the speaker’s ethnic identity and express solidarity with the 
addressee. Example 10 illustrates this.
Example 10
[translation is in small capitals.]
(a)	 Tamati:  Engari [so] now we turn to more important matters.
 	
(Switch between Māori and English)
(b)	 Ming:	
Confiscated by Customs, dà gài [probably]
 	
(Switch between English and Mandarin Chinese)
(c)	 A:	
Well I’m glad I met you. OK?
	
M:	
ándale pues [ok swell], and do come again. Mm?
 	
(Switch between Spanish and English)
In (a), Tamati uses a Māori tag at the beginning of his utterance while the 
Mandarin speaker in (b) uses a final tag. This kind of switching is sometimes 
called emblematic switching or tag switching. The switch is simply an inter-
jection or a linguistic tag in the other language which serves as an ethnic iden-
tity marker. The exchange in (c), for instance, occurred between two Mexican 
Americans or Chicanos in the USA. By using the Spanish tag, M signalled to 
A that she recognised the relevance of their shared ethnic background to their 
future relationship. The tag served as a solidarity marker between two minority 
ethnic group members whose previous conversation has been entirely in English.
Switches motivated by the speaker’s or addressee’s identity or the relationship 
between participants often express a move along the solidarity/​social distance 
dimension introduced in ­chapter 1. While ­example 10 (c) illustrates a tag con-
tributing to the construction of solidarity, switches can also distance a speaker 
from those they are talking to. In Pamaka, a village in Suriname, young people 
switch between their local community language, Pamaka, and Sranan Tongo, 
the language of Suriname urban centres. Pamaka is the usual language of inter-
action in the community, but young people often switch to Sranan Tongo to 
signal their sophistication and identification with modernity. In one conversa-
tion, two young women and a young man are discussing local music. While 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
45
the women use Pamaka, their community language, the young man deliberately 
switches to Sranan Tongo and avoids Pamaka. His language switch distances 
him from the other participants, while also signalling his alignment with the 
urban Western world.
A switch may also indicate a change in the other dimensions mentioned 
in  ­chapter 1, such as the status relations between people or the formality of 
their interaction. The examples above have illustrated that different kinds 
of relationships are often expressed or actively constructed through the use of 
different varieties or codes. More formal relationships, which sometimes involve 
status differences too, such as doctor–​patient or administrator–​client, often 
involve the H variety or code: e.g. Bokmål in Hemnesberget, Spanish in Paraguay 
and standard Swahili in Bukavu. Friendly relationships involving minimal social 
distance, such as neighbour or friend, generally involve an L code: e.g. Ranamål 
in Hemnesberget, Guaraní in Paraguay, and Indoubil, Kingwana or a tribal lan-
guage such as Shi in Bukavu.
In the little village of Hemnesberget (described in ­example 6 in ­chapter 1), 
Bokmål or standard Norwegian is the variety to use when you go to the tax 
office to sort out your tax forms. But the person you deal with there may also be 
your neighbour. The conversation might look like this.
Example 11
[bokmÅl is in small capitals. Ranamål in lower case.]
Jan:	
Hello Petter. How is your wife now?
Petter:	
Oh she’s much better thank you Jan. She’s out of hospital 
and convalescing well.
Jan:	
That’s good, I’m pleased to hear it. do you think you 
could help me with this pesky form? i am having a 
great deal of difficulty with it.
Petter:	
of course. give it here . . .
Nothing appears to change except the topic of discussion and with it the code. 
In fact the change of topic here symbolises a change in the relationship between 
the men. They switch from their roles as neighbours to their roles as bureau-
crat and member of the public. In other words, they switch from a personal 
interaction to a more formal transaction. This kind of role switch is commonly 
associated with a code-​switch in multilingual communities. Exactly the same 
kind of switching occurs in Beijing when a government administrator deals with 
a query from someone who comes from her hometown in Guangzhou. They 
begin sorting out their business in Mandarin, but when they realise they went to 
the same school they switch to Cantonese to exchange stories about the school 
and their teachers. And in shops in bilingual communities, salespeople often 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
46
switch to the language of their customers. In Strasbourg, for instance, a city in 
Eastern France, where French is the official language and Alsatian (a Germanic 
dialect) is the local variety which marks Alsatian identity, salespeople switch 
between the two varieties according to the preferred language of the shoppers 
they are serving.
Exercise 10
When people switch from one code to another for reasons which can be clearly identified, 
it is sometimes called situational code-​switching. If we knew the relevant situational or 
social factors in advance in such cases, we could usually predict the switches. Which code 
would you predict the speaker will switch from and which code will they switch to in the 
following situations, and why?
(a)	
A Hemnesberget resident chatting to a friend in the queue at the community admin-
istration office gets to the counter and speaks to the clerk.
(b)	
Three students from the Chinese province of Guangdong are sharing a flat together 
in London. They are discussing the ingredients of the stir-​fry vegetable dish they are 
cooking. One of them starts to discuss the chemical composition of the different 
ingredients.
Answers at end of chapter
Topic
Example 11 illustrated that people may switch code within a speech event to dis-
cuss a particular topic. Bilinguals often find it easier to discuss particular topics in 
one code rather than another. In Hemnesberget, Bokmål is the more appropriate 
variety for discussing a business matter. Topic relates to the function dimension 
introduced in ­chapter 1. For many bilinguals, certain kinds of referential con-
tent are more appropriately or more easily expressed in one language than the 
other, and so they employ referential code-​switching. Japanese war brides in the 
USA, for instance, found it easier to use Japanese for topics they associated with 
Japan such as “fish” and “New Year’s Day”. Chinese students from Guangzhou 
who are flatting together in an English-​speaking country tend to use Cantonese 
with each other, except to discuss their studies when they switch to English. This 
is partly because they have learned the vocabulary of economics or linguistics 
or physics in English, so they do not always know the words for capital for-
mation or morpheme or electron in Cantonese. But it goes further than simply 
borrowing words from English. They often switch to English for considerable 
stretches of speech. The technical topics are firmly associated with a particular 
code and the topic itself can trigger a switch to the appropriate code.
Another example of a referentially oriented code-​switch is when a speaker 
switches code to quote a person.
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
47
Example 12
A Māori person is recalling the visit of a respected elder to a nearby town.
[The Māori is in italics. the translation is in small capitals.]
That’s what he said in Blenheim. Ki a mātou Ngāti Porou, te Māoritanga i 
papi ake i te whenua. [we of the ngĀti porou tribe believe the origins 
of mĀoritanga are in the earth.] And those Blenheim people listened 
carefully to him too.
The switch involves just the words that the speaker is claiming the quoted 
person said. So the switch acts like a set of quotation marks. The speaker gives 
the impression –​ which may or may not be accurate –​ that these are the exact 
words the speaker used. A related reason for switching is to quote a proverb or a 
well-​known saying in another language, as illustrated in the following example.
Example 13
A group of Chinese students from Beijing are discussing Chinese customs.
[The Mandarin Chinese is in italics. the translation is in small 
capitals.]
Li:	
People here get divorced too easily. Like exchanging faulty goods. 
In China it’s not the same. Jià goǔ súi goǔ, jià jī súi jī. [if you 
have married a dog, you follow a dog, if you’ve married a 
chicken, you follow a chicken.]
The code-​switch corresponds exactly to the proverb being recited from 
Chinese. The similarity of quotation and proverb recitation is very clear. Both 
are referentially motivated switches in that the speaker wishes to be accurate –​ 
the exact words are important. But switches often serve several functions at 
once. In these examples, the switches not only emphasise the precise message 
content, they also signal ethnic identity. In other words, they have an affective as 
well as a referential function.
Switching for affective functions
In the twentieth century, the use of Jamaican Creole or Patois alongside standard 
English by those who belong to the African–​Caribbean or West Indian Black 
communities in Britain followed similar patterns to those described above for 
a range of multilingual and bilingual communities. At school, for instance, 
Black British children used Patois to their friends and standard English to their 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
48
teachers. (In the twenty-​first century, the varieties are less clearly distinguishable 
as we shall see in ­chapter 8, though the distinct functions remain the same.)
Example 14
Polly is a young Black British woman. She speaks standard English with a 
West Midlands accent, as well as Patois, a variety of Jamaican Creole, learned 
from her parents. On one occasion, a schoolteacher annoyed her intensely by 
criticising a story Polly had written about British West Indians. In particular, 
he corrected the use of Patois by one of her characters –​ something he knew 
nothing about. Her response was to abuse him in Patois, swearing at him 
only just below her breath. The effect was electrifying. He seemed terrified. 
He threatened to send her to the headmaster but in fact he didn’t, and she 
noted with satisfaction that he did not criticise her writing again.
Here, Polly’s switch to Patois is an example of affective code-​switiching: it 
was used to express affective rather than referential meaning. The teacher didn’t 
need to understand the words –​ he simply needed to get the affective message. In 
other contexts too, switching between Patois and standard English can achieve 
a range of interesting rhetorical effects. Just as the use of ethnic tags signalled 
ethnic group membership for speakers in the utterances in ­example 10, a switch 
from Patois to standard English with the local British regional pronunciation 
can signal a person’s identity as a West Midlander in a conversation where local 
regional values are relevant. In an argument with a West Indian from another 
area over the best soccer team, for instance, the use of the localised English 
accent can serve just this kind of function.
Example 15 demonstrates not only Polly’s code-​switching ability –​ it also 
illustrates her rhetorical skills.
Example 15
[Patois is written in italics.]
With Melanie right you have to say she speaks tri different sort of language 
when she wants to. Cos she speak half Patois, half English and when im 
ready im will come out wid, “I day and I bay and I ay this and I ay that. I 
day have it and I day know where it is” . . . And then she goes “Lord God, I 
so hot”. Now she’ll be sitting there right and she’ll go. “It’s hot isn’t it?”, you 
know, and you think which one is she going to grow up speaking?
This is not simply code-​switching for the purposes of accurate quotation. 
The Patois is being used here for amusement and dramatic effect. Melanie is 
being parodied and sent up. Polly is again using her ability in the two codes for 
affective purposes.
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
49
Many bilinguals and multilinguals are adept at exploiting the rhetorical possi-
bilities of their linguistic repertoires. Standard Norwegian is the language of the 
school, for instance, but while they are in class children may make rude remarks 
or jokes about the teacher in their local dialect. In Paraguay too, Guaraní, the L 
variety, is considered more appropriate for joking and humorous anecdotes. So, 
while discussing a serious political issue in Spanish a Paraguayan might switch 
to Guaraní with a humorous example or a witty aside. Fijian people switch from 
Fijian to Hindi for joking, and because Hindi is not normally used for commu-
nication between Fijians, just the switch itself is often considered to be amusing.
A language switch in the opposite direction, from the L to the H variety, is  
often used to express disapproval. So a person may code-​switch because they  
are angry.
Example 16
[The Hungarian and German are in italics. the translation is in small 
capitals.]
In the town of Oberwart two little Hungarian-​speaking children were 
playing in the woodshed and knocked over a carefully stacked pile of fire-
wood. Their grandfather walked in and said in Hungarian, the language he 
usually used to them:
Map 2.2  Oberwart, Austria
Source: Gal (1979).

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
50
Szo! ide dzüni! jeszt jerámunyi mind e kettüötök, no hát akkor!
[well come here! put all this away, both of you, well now.]
When they did not respond quickly enough he switched to (dialectal) German:
Kum her!
[come here!]
The same content is expressed first in Hungarian and then in German. 
The children in fact know only Hungarian so the reason for the switch is 
clearly not to convey referential content. In Oberwart, German is the lan-
guage of the school and officialdom. So in families where Hungarian is the 
usual language of the home, a switch to German is significant. In these homes 
Hungarian expresses friendship and solidarity, and a switch to German 
puts the addressee at a distance. German symbolises authority, and so by 
using German the grandfather emphasises his anger and disapproval of the 
children’s behaviour.
In a Chinese immigrant family in the north-​east of England, Chinese is the 
usual language of the home. When a mother switched to English to ask her son 
why he had not finished his homework, he recognised he was being indirectly 
told that he had better finish his homework before starting to play on the com-
puter. Example 17 illustrates a similar code-​switch between two different styles 
of English. Its purpose is similarly to reprimand a child and the switch involves 
a move from an intimate and friendly style to a formal style which distances the 
speaker from the addressee.
Example 17
Father:	
Tea’s ready Robbie.
	
	
(Robbie ignores him and carries on skate-​boarding.)
Father:	
Mr Robert Harris if you do not come in immediately there 
will be consequences which you will regret.
Exercise 11
Identify the linguistic features in ­example 17 which signal that Robbie’s father has switched 
code between his first and second utterance.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
51
Metaphorical switching
Example 18
At a village meeting among the Buang people in Papua New Guinea, Mr 
Rupa, the main village entrepreneur and “bigman”, is trying to persuade 
people who have put money into a village store to leave it there. This is a 
section from his skilful speech.
[Tok Pisin is in italics. Buang is not italicised.]
Ikamap trovel o wonem, mi ken stretim olgeta toktok. Orait. Pasin ke ken 
be, meni ti ken nyep la, su lok lam memba re, olo ba miting autim olgeta 
tok . . . moni ti ken nyep ega, rek mu su rek ogoko nam be, one moni 
rek, . . . moni ti ken bak stua lam vu Mambump re, m nzom agon. Orait, 
bihain, bihainim bilong wok long bisnis, orait, moni bilong stua bai ibekim 
olgeta ples.
English translation:
If any problem comes up, I will be able to settle all the arguments. OK. This 
is the way –​ the money that is there can’t go back to the shareholders, and 
the meeting brought up all these arguments . . . the money that’s there you 
won’t take back, your money will . . . this money from the bulk store will 
come back to Mambump, and we’ll hold on to it. Now later, if we continue 
these business activities, then the store money will be repaid to everyone.
In many of the examples discussed so far, the specific reason for a switch can be 
identified with reasonable confidence. Though it would not be possible to pre-
dict when a switch will occur without knowing what a speaker intended to say 
next, it is often possible to account for switches after they have occurred (i.e. 
post hoc). Example 18, however, moves switching into a different dimension. 
It is an example of what can be achieved by a really skilled bilingual. In this 
situation, there are no obvious explanatory factors accounting for the specific 
switches between Buang and Tok Pisin. No new person joined the audience at 
any point. There was no change in the setting or in the topic –​ “bisnis”. There 
are no quotations or even angry or humorous utterances. So what is the social 
meaning of these rapid switches?
By switching between codes with such rapidity the village bigman effectively  
draws on the different associations of the two codes. Buang is the local tribal  
language. By using it Mr Rupa is emphasising his membership of the Buang  
community –​ he belongs here and everyone knows him. He is using Buang to  
construct his local identity. But he is also a skilled businessman with contacts in  
the outside world of money and marketing. Mr Rupa’s use of Tok Pisin (“talk  
pidgin”), a creole which is a valuable lingua franca and an official language in  
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
52
PNG, emphasises this role of entrepreneur, as well as his superior knowledge  
and experience as a man of the wider world. His use of Tok Pisin constructs his  
professional identity as a businessman. Buang symbolises high solidarity, equal  
status and friendly feelings. Tok Pisin represents social distance, high status and  
the referential information of the business world. Mr Rupa is getting the best  
of both worlds. He is code-​switching for rhetorical reasons, drawing on the  
associations of both codes. This type of switching has sometimes been called  
metaphorical code-​switching. Each of the codes represents or symbolises a set  
of social meanings, and the speaker draws on the associations of each, just as  
people use metaphors to convey complex meanings. The term also reflects the  
fact that this kind of switching involves rhetorical skill. Skilful code-​switching  
operates like metaphor to enrich the communication.
Example 19
Alf is 55 years old and overweight. He is talking to a fellow Samoan at work 
about his attempt to go on a diet.
[The words originally spoken in Samoan are in SMALL CAPITALS.]
My doctor told me to go on a diet. She said I was overweight. So I tried. 
but it was so hard. i’d keep thinking about food all the time. Even 
when I was at work. And in bed at night i’d get desperate. i couldn’t 
get to sleep. So I’d get up and raid the fridge. then i’d feel guilty 
Map 2.3  Papua New Guinea

LANGUAGE CHOICE
53
and sick and when i woke up next day i would be so depressed 
because I had to start the diet all over again. The doctor wasn’t sympa-
thetic. She just shrugged and said “well it’s your funeral!”
In this example, the speaker draws on his two languages to express his 
ambivalent feelings about the topic he is discussing. Though there is no exact 
one-​to-​one correspondence, it is possible to see that in general personal feelings 
are expressed in Samoan while English provides some distance and objectivity 
about the topic. English is used for referential content such as My doctor told 
me to go on a diet, while Samoan expresses his shame and embarrassment (I’d 
get desperate/​I would be so depressed). Similarly, in Swiss Germany, people in 
internet chatrooms switch between Swiss German dialects and Standard German 
to indicate their attitudes to chat messages. The switches serve as a subtle means 
of conveying their approval or disagreement or ambivalence about previous 
messages.
Some people call the kind of rapid switching illustrated in the last few examples 
code-​mixing, but we prefer the term metaphorical code-​switching. Code-​mixing 
suggests the speaker is mixing up codes indiscriminately or perhaps because of 
incompetence, whereas the switches are very well motivated in relation to the 
symbolic or social meanings of the two codes. This kind of rapid switching is 
itself a specific sociolinguistic variety; it has been labeled a “fused lect”. It is 
a distinctive conversational style used among bilinguals and multilinguals –​ a 
rich additional linguistic resource available to them. By switching between two 
or more codes, the speakers convey affective meaning as well as information. 
“Code-​meshing” is another term which aims to capture the way in which codes 
are integrated or blended in this variety.
We have to recognise, then, that sometimes we simply can’t account for 
switches. Luxembourg is a multilingual nation where language switching is 
very common. Where people are equally fluent in three or more languages, 
it is often difficult to explain why they use one rather than another, even in 
writing.
Example 20
An agenda from a meeting in Luxembourg:
Translations [Language]
■  Procès-​verbal
Minutes [French]
■  Budget Anschaffungsetat
Acquisition budget [German]
■  Plan trimestriel
Quarterly plan [French]
■  Internet Präsenz
Internet presence [German]
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
54
Luxembourg has traditionally been regarded as triglossic, with German and 
French as H varieties and Lëtzebuergesch or Luxembourgish as the L variety. 
German and French are mostly used for written material in domains such as the 
media (e.g. newspapers), education (e.g. for acquiring literacy and in textbooks) 
and administration (e.g. official forms); and Luxembourgish is mostly used in 
speech contexts. But the boundaries are very permeable. In ­example 20, the 
agenda uses the two H varieties, while the discussion during the meeting was 
entirely in Luxembourgish. The participants were not able to explain the 
reasons for choosing French vs. German for particular items. Perhaps it was 
just a matter of the first word which came to mind for the fluent multilingual 
who drew up the agenda. Or perhaps the specific topics were associated with 
particular languages. Though sociolinguists like to try, it is not always possible 
to account for choices among languages in situations where the participants are 
all multilingual.
Lexical borrowing
Some switches in lexical borrowing can be accounted for by lack of vocabulary in 
a language. When speaking a second language, for instance, people will often use 
a term from their mother tongue or first language because they don’t know the 
appropriate word in their second language. These switches are triggered by lack 
of vocabulary. People may also borrow words from another language to express 
a concept or describe an object for which there is no obvious word available 
in the language they are using. Borrowing of this kind generally involves single 
words –​ mainly nouns –​ and it is motivated by lexical need. Lexical borrowing 
is very different from switching, where speakers have a genuine choice about 
which words or phrases they will use in which language.
Borrowings often differ from code-​switches in form too. Borrowed words are 
usually adapted to the speaker’s first language. They are pronounced and used 
grammatically as if they were part of the speaker’s first language. New Zealand 
English has borrowed the word mana from Māori, for instance. There is no 
exact equivalent to its meaning in English, although it is sometimes translated 
as meaning “prestige” or “high status”. It is pronounced [ma:nə] by most New 
Zealanders.1 The Māori pronunciation is quite different with a short a in both 
syllables. The word Māori is similarly adapted by many English speakers. They 
use an English diphthong [au] rather than a longer [a:o] sound, and some people 
pluralise the word by adding the English plural inflection s and talk of the 
Māoris. In the Māori language, the plural is not marked by an inflection on the 
noun. In some Indian languages, such as Marathi, Hindi and Telegu, English 
words adapted to the Indian sound system may be used to reduce formality. By 
contrast, people who are rapidly code-​switching –​ as opposed to borrowing the 
odd word –​ tend to switch completely between two linguistic systems –​ sounds, 
grammar and vocabulary.
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
55
Exercise 12
Where possible insert in the appropriate column an example number from this chapter 
which illustrates the relevant reason for switching.
Reasons for code-​switching
Example number  
from this chapter
Change in a feature of the domain or social situation
Setting
_​__​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Participant features
Addressee specification
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Ethnic identity marker
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Express solidarity
_​_​_​_​__​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Express social distance
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Assert social status
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Topic
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Quoting someone
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Proverb
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Aspect of the function or purpose of interaction
Add emphasis
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Add authority
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Express feelings (vs. describing facts)
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​
Can you add any further reasons for code-​switching?
Because there are several possible acceptable answers to this exercise, we have not supplied 
any one answer. You may find it interesting to discuss your answers with fellow students.
Exercise 13
Hip hop is associated with young people and with African American culture and rap 
music in particular. Often English hip hop expressions are borrowed into other languages, 
including terms like dis (to verbally attack or humiliate someone), crunk (good, fine), fly 
(awesome, cool) and wack (poor quality, inauthentic).
Have you heard any of these or similar expressions in your speech community?
If you want to read more about the languages of hip hop, see Terkourafi (2012).
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
56
Linguistic constraints
Sociolinguists who study the kind of rapid code-​switching described in the 
previous section have been interested in identifying not only the functions or 
meaning of switches, and the stylistic motivations for switches, but also the 
points at which switches occur in utterances. Some believe there are very gen-
eral rules for switching which apply to all switching behaviour regardless of the 
codes or varieties involved. They are searching for universal linguistic constraints 
on switching. It has been suggested, for example, that switches only occur within 
sentences (intra-​sentential code-​switching) at points where the grammars of both 
languages match each other. This is called the equivalence constraint. So you 
may only switch between an adjective and a noun if both languages use the same 
order for that adjective and noun, as illustrated in the following example.
Example 21
English
French
Possible switch point?
red boat
bateau rouge
NO
big house
grande maison
YES: i.e. big maison or grande house
Another suggestion is that there is always a matrix language frame (MLF) 
which imposes structural constraints on code-​switched utterances. So, for 
example, system morphemes (such as tense and aspect inflections) will always 
come from the matrix language; and the order in which morphemes may occur 
in code-​switched utterances will be determined by the MLF. The other language 
is called the “embedded language”. In ­example 22, the content words (the verb 
and the noun in capitals) are from English, the embedded language, but the 
system morphemes, the prefixes signalling negation, subject, person, number and 
gender, are from Swahili, the matrix language; and they occur in the order which 
is normal in Swahili.
Example 22
Leo si-​ku-​COME na-​BOOK z-​angu.
Today I didn’t come with my books.
With her research team, Shana Poplack, a leading Canadian sociolinguist, 
examined a corpus of 3.5 million words of spontaneous speech collected from 
120 French–​English bilinguals in the Ottawa capital area. Based on their ana-
lysis of tens of thousands of samples, they argue that people follow the linguistic 
constraint rules.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
57
Example 23
On lavait les planchers à la main tu sais, puis après ça on polishait avec 
notre fessier.
We’d wash the floors by hand, you know, and after that we’d polish with 
our butt.
Using ­example 23, Poplack points out that the English verb polish is provided 
with a syntactically appropriate French verb inflection -​ait. She asserts that tri-
lingual speakers of English, French and Vietnamese can switch three times within 
a sentence without violating the grammatical rules of any of the languages –​ 
though pronunciation is less predictable.
Other sociolinguists argue that it is unlikely that there are universal and 
absolute rules of this kind. It is more likely that these rules simply indicate the 
limited amount of data which has been examined so far. They also criticise the 
extreme complexity of some of the rules, and point to the large numbers of 
exceptions. These sociolinguists argue for greater attention to social, stylistic 
and contextual factors. The points at which people switch codes are likely to 
vary according to many different factors, such as which codes are involved, the 
functions of the particular switch and the level of proficiency in each code of 
the people switching. So, it is suggested, only very proficient bilinguals such as 
Mr Rupa will switch within sentences (intra-​sententially), whereas people who 
are less proficient will tend to switch at sentence boundaries (inter-​sentential 
code-​switching), or use only short, fixed phrases or tags in one language on 
the end of sentences in the other language, as illustrated in the utterances in 
­example 10.
The rules that are claimed to govern code-​switching are also challenged by 
evidence from the analysis of understudied Indigenous languages. In Australia, 
for example, many Aboriginal people speak both their traditional language 
and Kriol, a creole language formed with input from English and a variety of 
Aboriginal languages. (Creoles are discussed further in ­chapter 4). However, 
since Kriol often borrows words from the local language along with words of 
English origin, it can be hard to tell (both for speakers and researchers) which 
language is being spoken at any given time. Indeed, some researchers think that 
new mixed languages are currently forming. Example 24 shows a situation in 
which Jaru and Kriol are mixed in such a way that it is difficult to say which lan-
guage is being switched from or to. Because of this, researchers have suggested 
that we should consider this Mixed Jaru as a language in its own right rather 
than as an example of code-​switching. This demonstrates how code-​switching at 
an interactional level is part of the bigger picture of language change, a topic we 
discuss further in Part II.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
58
Example 24
Juanita is talking about one of her family’s regular fishing spots. In mixing 
Jaru and Kriol, she combines Jaru case morphology with a Kriol verbal 
frame. [The Jaru elements are marked in bold.]
1	 Juani:	 [wi  don   go yalu-​said, ]
 	 	
1pl.s do.neg go dist-​side
 	 	
we don't    go to that side
2  
→ wi go mʔ (.) murla-​said   ordriva-​nggawu 
indit.
 	 	
  1pl.s go      prox-​side   Ord.River-​
all tag
 	 	
  we go to this side to the Ord River, innit.
3  
(.)
4 Nabaj: [mmh.]
 	 	
ctok
   
mmh.
5 Nida: 
[ mm:]h.
 	 	
 ctok
   
  mmh.
6 Juani: →  ola blekbrim-​gu.
   
  PL black.bream-​
dat
   
  for all the black bream.
7  
  (0.4)
8	 Nabaj:	 oh daadu?
 	 	
inj true
 	 	
oh right?
9	 Jenni:	 yuwayi;
 	 	
yes
 	 	
yes;
It is easy to see how these issues generate more questions. Is all code-​switching 
rule-​governed? How do social and linguistic factors interact? What kind of 
grammar or grammars are involved when people code-​switch? When people 
switch rapidly from phrase to phrase for instance, are they switching between 
the two different grammars of the codes they are using, or do they develop a 
distinct code-​switching grammar which has its own rules? There are still no gen-
erally accepted answers to these questions.
Exercise 14
Does code-​switching between distinct varieties occur in your community? With the permis-
sion of the participants, record a conversation which involves switching between varieties.
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
59
•	 Can you suggest reasons for each switch (e.g. situational or metaphorical/​affective)?
•	 Is there a distinct code-​switching variety or a fused lect used between fluent bilinguals/​
multlinguals in your community?
•	 How do people feel about code-​switching? Are your participants aware of how much 
they switch between varieties? Do they consider their ability to code-​switch as a positive 
resource?
Attitudes to code-​switching
Example 25
(a)	
In Hemnesberget, two linguists recorded university students home on vacation. The 
students unconsciously switched between the local dialect and standard Norwegian 
according to the topic. When they later heard the recordings, some were appalled 
and promised they would not switch in this way in the future.
(b)	
“When I switch (inadvertently), I usually realise soon afterwards and correct myself, 
but it is still embarrassing.”
(c)	
“Code-​switching is not very pure.”
(d)	
“My attitude towards code-​switching is a very relaxed one.”
(e)	
“People say that language mixing is lazy or ignorant, or that these speakers don’t 
know either of the languages. They are wrong.”
People are often unaware of the fact that they code-​switch. When their attention 
is drawn to this behaviour, however, many tend to apologise for it, condemn 
it, and generally indicate disapproval of mixing languages. Among Mexican 
Americans, the derogatory term “Tex Mex” is used to describe rapid code-​
switching between Spanish and English. In parts of French-​speaking Canada, 
“joual” is a similar put-​down label for switching between French and English, 
and in Britain [tuʈi fuʈi] (“broken up”) Panjabi refers to a style which switches 
between Panjabi and English. In Malaysia code-​switching between the national 
language, Bahasa Malay, and English and other local dialects has been dismissed 
as “Manglish” by officials. In Hemnesberget, the speech of young students who 
were switching between the local dialect and the standard was condemned as 
knot or “artificial speech”.
Reactions to code-​switching styles are negative in many communities, des-
pite the fact that proficiency in intra-​sentential code-​switching requires good 
control of both codes. These reactions may reflect the attitudes of the majority 
monolingual groups in places like North America and Britain. In places such 
as PNG and East Africa, where multilingualism is the norm, attitudes to pro-
ficient code-​switching are much more positive. The PNG bigman’s status is 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
60
undoubtedly enhanced by his ability to manipulate two or more codes profi-
ciently, as illustrated in ­example 18. It seems possible that an increase in ethnic 
self-​consciousness and confidence may alter attitudes among minority group 
members in other communities over time, so that such switches will be regarded 
as evidence of sociolinguistic proficiency. A more recent approach to language 
switches which also regards them positively is translanguaging.
Translanguaging
Translanguaging is a term that has been increasingly used in the last ten years or 
so by sociolinguists and applied linguists who are interested in minority group 
education. Translanguaging involves a different approach to analysing situations 
where language or dialect mixing occurs. The term was first used to describe 
the political struggles of language minorities to assert their language rights, 
and to resist negative evaluations (such as those illustrated in ­example 25) of 
their dynamic linguistic practices. But the meaning of the term is constantly 
evolving and different researchers currently use it with different meanings. We 
are adopting the definition provided by Li Wei, a leading British sociolinguist 
who has written about the difference between the terms code-​switching and 
translanguaging.
Code-​switching refers to language or dialect alternation in a specific inter-
action, as illustrated by most of the examples in the code-​switching section 
in this chapter. The alternation occurs at precise points in the interaction and 
analysis suggests that linguistic rules or constraints apply as described in that 
section. Those adopting this approach usually begin by identifying the varieties 
or codes involved and then analyse the interaction in terms of structure and 
function. They study how the different grammatical systems are integrated into a 
coherent unit, and why the switching is occurring. What purpose does the switch 
achieve or what social meaning is being conveyed?
An approach using a translanguaging perspective focuses on the dynamic 
process of conveying meaning, often drawing on many different communica-
tive resources. These may include signs, pictures and written symbols (semiotic 
resources), as well as paralinguistic resources (such as pitch, volume, speech rate, 
facial expressions, and gestures), alongside a range of conventional linguistic 
resources. Researchers who take this approach aim to challenge boundaries 
between named languages, as well as boundaries between linguistic, paralin-
guistic, and nonlinguistic means of communication. They focus on collabor-
ation within and across groups of people. Many educationists have discussed 
the implications of this approach for children from minority language groups. It 
is a positive approach which encourages children to make use of all their com-
municative resources in the classroom.
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
61
So what do the concepts of code-​switching and translanguaging share, and how 
do they contrast? Almost 60 years ago John Gumperz described code-​switching 
as involving a single integrated linguistic repertoire where all the speakers’ 
language resources “form a behavioural whole, regardless of grammatical dis-
tinctness, and must be considered constituent varieties of the same verbal reper-
toire”. This suggests that researchers studying code-​switching and those taking 
a translanguaging approach share some basic theoretical assumptions although 
their goals may be different. Code-​switching researchers tend to be interested 
in the linguistic features of switches and the social meanings they convey. 
Translanguaging scholars are typically more interested in attitudes to minority 
children’s language practices and the political and educational implications of an 
approach which encourages children to draw on a range of resources to make 
meaning. A teacher who uses this approach in the classroom would encourage 
students to use all their linguistic and multimodal resources to communicate 
effectively. Hence children from minority language groups would be encouraged 
to use their minority language in the classroom, for example, to help them solve 
problems, and communicate their ideas.
Example 26
English Club poster
Source: Dovchin, Pennycook, Sultana (2018: 201–​2).
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
62
Arish, Ehsan and QQ are drawing a poster:
Casual conversation
Translation
Para-​linguistic features
Arish: SpongeBob, ki deya 
jai?
SpongeBob, what can 
we use for him?
Ehsan: >“I am ready. I am 
ready. I am read”.<
I am ready. I am 
ready. I am ready.
((in the high-​
pitched voice of 
SpongeBob))
QQ: <Screw you guys!!! 
I am going to join this 
club.>
Screw you guys!!! 
I am going to join 
this club.
((in the squeaky voice 
of Cartman))
Ehsan: Owwww. We are 
not going to give “screw 
you guys”. Mane...
Owwww. We are 
not going to give 
“screw you guys”. 
I mean...
QQ: the one who are not 
joining the club!
the one who are not 
joining the club!
QQ: Screwemmmmmmm! 
Screwemmmmmmm! 
Screwemmmmmmm!>
Screwemmmmmmm!
Screwemmmmmmm!
Screwemmmmmmm!
Arish: >who don’t join the
English Club<.
who don’t join the 
English Club.
((in the squeaky 
voice of Cartman))
Arish goes out and sees 
a group of German 
delegates heading 
towards the English 
Club. Running back 
to the Club, he 
expresses caution to 
others. (The German 
delegates enter. Ehsan 
stands up right away 
and Arish and QQ 
return to their normal 
posture.)
Arish: Behave yourself
because there are 
foreigners.
Behave yourself 
because there are 
foreigners.
((bends and moves 
his head from left to 
right, as if searching 
for something 
and whispers like 
a cartoon/​film 
character, suspecting 
the invasion of a 
foreign character or 
stranger))

LANGUAGE CHOICE
63
Casual conversation
Translation
Para-​linguistic features
QQ: What do they want 
here?
What do they want 
here?
((stands up and bends 
his head and starts 
looking stealthily 
around))
Arish: I told you. They are 
here. <Intruders in close 
proximity!!!>
I told you. They are 
here. Intruders 
in close 
proximity!!!
((whispering))
QQ: Who are they?
Who are they?
Arish: Dude! I don’t care. 
<IN-​TRU-​DERS>!
Dude! I don’t care. 
<IN-​TRU-​DERS>!
QQ: Get your gun ready.
Get your gun ready.
((both of them stand 
with their fingers 
pointed as guns, as if 
ready to shoot))
Exercise 15
Example 26 demonstrates translanguaging. Using the table below as a guide, list the 
semiotic resources, paralinguistic resources and linguistic resources that each participant in 
this interaction uses to construct meaning.
Participant
Semiotic resources
Paralinguistic 
resources
Linguistic   
resources
Arish
Ehsan
QQ
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 16
Could a researcher studying code-​switching and a researcher studying translanguaging 
use the same data?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
64
In this chapter, the focus has moved from macro-​level sociolinguistic patterns 
and norms observable in multilingual and bilingual contexts, to micro-​level 
interactions between individuals in these contexts. Individuals draw on their 
knowledge of sociolinguistic norms when they talk to one another. They may 
choose to conform to them and follow the majority pattern, using the H variety 
when giving a formal lecture, for example. Or they may decide to challenge the 
norms and sow the seeds of potential change, writing poetry in the L variety, 
for instance. People also draw on their knowledge of sociolinguistic patterns 
and their social meanings when they code-​switch or translanguage within a 
particular domain. Skilful communicators may dynamically construct many 
different facets of their social identities in interaction drawing on a range of 
linguistic and nonlinguistic resources. This point will be developed further in 
Part II. This chapter has also indicated that attitudes to a minority language are 
very important in determining not only its use in a code-​switching style, or in 
translanguaging practices, but also its very chances of survival. These issues are 
discussed further in the next chapter.
Exercise 17
In the first section of the discussion of code-​switching above, the sociolinguistic patterns which 
characterise the behaviour of young people in Pamaka (Eastern Suriname) were described.
How could the behaviour of the young man who avoids using Pamaka with his friends 
be interpreted, if we assume he was engaged in dynamic social identity construction?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 18
There are many journals which include articles analysing the language use patterns of 
multilingual speech communities: e.g. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development; 
Journal of Sociolinguistics; Language in Society; Language and Communication; International 
Journal of Multilingualism; and Multilingua.
Choose an article from one of these journals which focuses on a speech community that 
you find interesting and consider whether the article suggests answers to the following 
questions.
•	 How many distinct codes or varieties (languages/​dialects/​styles) are identified in the art-
icle? Using the information provided can you draw a model similar to ­figure 2.1 to sum-
marise the sociolinguistic norms for language choice in different contexts?
•	 Could the community be considered diglossic or polyglossic?
•	 Is there any evidence of code-​switching? If so, what factors seems to account for switching? 
Is there any information on attitudes to different varieties and attitudes to code-​switching?
•	 Overall, do you think the article you have chosen provides a thorough account of the 
sociolinguistic norms of the community?
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
65
Methods
Four ways of collecting information about language use in multilingual communities are 
mentioned in this chapter. Each requires careful preparation to ensure that you don’t 
waste your participants’ time or cause them any discomfort.
1	
Observation: see ­exercise 3. This is the least intrusive method of collecting data. 
For ethical reasons, unless you have the permission of those being observed, it is 
important that you observe only in publicly accessible spaces, or collect data from 
the media. This can include social media, but if observing online communication on 
a site requiring a login (as in a Facebook or WhatsApp group), consider that this is 
not the public domain, but is a private group and thus should be treated as if you 
were observing the group in real life (i.e. permission to collect data is required).
2	
Interview: see ­exercises 2 (b), 14. This can involve any number of people as long 
as they agree. The more people who are interviewed the more reliable the results. 
Choosing representatives from different groups also contributes to more reliable 
results as we will see in later chapters. With increasing uptake of video-​conferencing 
software such as Zoom, Skype and Facetime, it is becoming much easier to interview 
people as you don’t need to get everyone together in the same place and the software 
can manage the recording. However, it should be noted that people don’t necessarily 
interact in the same way in online video communication as they do in person.
3	
Recording: see ­exercise 14. Recording is essential for studying the linguistic features 
of any variety, and for studying code-​switching or translanguaging which involves 
speech. For ethical reasons, those recorded must be aware they are being recorded. 
Recording can be carried out easily with most portable devices, although a quality 
microphone is often an invaluable addition to the sociolinguist’s toolkit. Remember, 
if recording, it is important that you test your recording equipment beforehand!
4	
Corpus data analysis: see text just before ­example 23. This requires a lot of work and 
access to a large amount of data. Aside from spoken data, one way of collecting large 
amounts of language data is to collect social media posts. This can be done semi-​auto-
matically by connecting certain programmes to the interfaces of sites such as Twitter 
or Facebook. In addition, these sites collect information about posts, such as where 
they originate, and can often recognise what language is being used. Of course, com-
puter programmes can’t always be relied upon for this kind of recognition, especially 
for minority languages, as they rely upon large amounts of data being available online.
In later chapters we will identify further data collection methods.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 2
Answer to ­exercise 1 (a)
You need to consider a number of factors in assessing how well you know a 
language. Can you both understand and speak the language? Can you read and 
write it? And how well? Rate yourself on a scale of 1 to 5 for each skill: speaking, 
understanding, reading, writing.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
66
Here is an example of a scale for speaking skills:
1	 Complete fluency in a wide range of contexts.
2	 Cope with most everyday conversations.
3	 Cope with very simple conversation.
4	 A few words and phrases such as simple greetings, thanks etc.
5	 No knowledge.
Generally, the degree of linguistic skill we develop is an indication of the extent 
of our social experience with a language. If, for example, we use a language only 
in speaking to others in the marketplace, the vocabulary and grammar we use 
will be restricted to such contexts. If we use a language only for reading the 
newspaper, we may not be able to speak it fluently.
Answer to ­exercise 1 (b)
(i)	 Kalala would probably use informal Shi, especially if his parents were pre-
sent. If his brother was close in age and they got on well they would be 
likely to use Indoubil to each other. If his brother was much younger he 
would not yet know much Indoubil.
(ii)	 Indoubil, the language of peer-​group friendship.
(iii)	 This would depend on his assessment of what languages the stranger knew. 
He would probably use Kingwana if he guessed the person lived in Bukavu, 
but standard Swahili if he thought they came from out of town. However, 
his assessment of the stranger’s social status, or the function of the inter-
action might also be relevant, as discussed in the next section.
Answer to ­exercise 4 (a)
The domain-​based approach allows for only one choice of language per domain, 
namely the language used most of the time in that domain. Clearly more than 
one language may occur in any domain. Different people may use different 
languages in the same domain. We will see below that for a variety of reasons 
(such as who they are talking to) the same person may use different languages 
in the same domain.
Answer to ­exercise 4 (b)
Oi Lin Tan’s choices illustrate further factors which may influence code choice. 
The particular addressee may influence code choice within a domain. She uses 
Singapore English to her sisters and friends of the same age –​ it is the code com-
monly used by young people to each other, partly because they use it so much 
at school, and partly because they feel positive about it. She uses Cantonese to 
elderly vegetable sellers, perhaps because she wants to emphasise their common 
ethnicity so they will feel well-​disposed towards her and she may get a better 
bargain, but perhaps also because she judges that Cantonese is the language 
they are most proficient in, and she wants the exchange to be as comfortable as 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
67
possible for them. A model which took account of these factors would be much 
more complicated than that illustrated in ­figure 2.1.
Answer to ­exercise 5
Figure 2.2 illustrates one way of representing language choice in Bukavu for 
Kalala. (Other arrangements of the relevant factors are also possible.)
Figure 2.2  Model of appropriate code choice in Bukavu
Answer to ­exercise 6
H(igh) variety
L(ow) variety
Religion (sermon, prayers)
H
Literature (novels, non-​fiction)
H
Newspaper (editorial)
H
Broadcasting: TV news
H
Education (written material, lectures)
H
Education (lesson discussion)
L
Broadcasting: radio
L
Shopping
L
Gossiping
L
Answer to ­exercise 7 (a)
(i)	 They are different varieties of the same language.
(ii)	 They are used in mutually exclusive situations. Where H is appropriate, L is 
not, and vice versa. H is used in more formal contexts and L in less formal 
contexts.
(iii)	 Only L is used for conversation with family and friends.
(iv)	 L is learned “naturally” in the home. H is learned more formally –​ usually 
in school.
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
68
(v)	 This is a tricky question. In the usual sense of prestige –​ i.e. high status –​ the 
answer is H. However, people are often more attached to L emotionally. 
When people have this kind of fondness for a variety, the variety is some-
times described as having “covert prestige” (see ­chapter 15).
(vi)	 H is generally codified in grammar books and dictionaries. More recently 
linguists have also begun to codify the L variety in some places, such 
as Haiti.
(vii)	 Literature is usually written in H, but when the L variety begins to gain 
status people begin to use it to write in too.
Answer to ­exercise 7 (b)
The use of Ranamål and Bokmål by members of the Hemnesberget speech com-
munity, as described by Blom and Gumperz, qualifies as diglossic on all cri-
teria. One apparent exception is the fact that people used Bokmål or standard 
Norwegian for everyday conversation to those from outside the village. To fellow 
villagers it would be considered snobbish, but it was normal to outsiders. This 
simply emphasises that the diglossic pattern characterises the Hemnesberget 
speech community as Blom and Gumperz described it, but does not neces-
sarily extend outside it. Note, however, that in a “classic” diglossic community, 
H would not generally be used comfortably for everyday conversation even to 
outsiders.
Answer to ­exercise 8 (a)
Spanish
Guaraní
Religion
✓
Literature
✓(serious)
✓(magazines)
Schooling
✓
Broadcasting
✓
✓(e.g. farming)
Shopping
✓
Gossiping
✓
Answer to ­exercise 8 (b)
Yes, on the whole. In some domains, as discussed above, choice of language 
depended on factors such as the particular topic or function of the interaction. In 
rural areas, lack of proficiency in Spanish may (still) lead to the use of Guaraní 
in situations where Spanish would be appropriate in the town. Nevertheless in 
general in the 1960s, people were still clear that one code rather than the other is 
most appropriate in particular interactions. In the twenty-​first century, however, 
interactions in urban homes typically involve both languages.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
69
Answer to ­exercise 9
H typically used
L typically used
Formality
In formal settings: e.g. lecture.
In informal settings: e.g. 
family dinner.
Social 
distance
Between participants with 
high social distance in low 
solidarity contexts: e.g. 
broadcast political debate.
Between participants with 
low social distance in high 
solidarity contexts: e.g. 
friends in a coffee bar.
Social status
With people of high(er) status 
because of the domains 
in which it is used: e.g. to 
the doctor in a medical 
examination.
With people of equal or 
low(er) status because of 
the domains in which it is 
used: e.g. to a child in the 
shops.
Answer to ­exercise 10
(a)	 From Ranamål to Bokmål because Ranamål is the variety used for personal 
interactions while Bokmål is appropriate for official transactions.
(b)	 From their Chinese dialect, Cantonese, to English because the topic of 
Chinese food is appropriately discussed in Cantonese but the technical topic 
introduced is more easily discussed in English, the language in which they 
are studying.
Answer to ­exercise 11
•	The use of title and full name (Mr Robert Harris) rather than an affectionate 
nickname (Robbie).
•	 The very full and formal construction with a subordinate clause (if . . . imme-
diately) preceding the main clause.
•	 The use of a distancing construction (there will be consequences which you 
will regret) rather than, say, the more familiar you’ll be sorry.
•	 The use of relatively formal vocabulary (e.g. immediately rather than, say, 
right now, regret rather than be sorry).
Answer to ­exercise 15
The three participants in this conversation draw upon items from popular cul-
ture such as South Park, Sponge Bob Square Pants, and Star Wars. These can be 
considered as the semiotic resources they draw upon and recontextualise in both 
spoken conversation and on the poster itself. They use paralinguistic features 
(such as squeaky voices and physical actions) to reference these resources. 
The linguistic resources take the form of language choice (note the switches 
to Bangla by Arish and Ehsan), which appear only when not reproducing the 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
70
English-​language semiotic resources. The use of English in this context is also 
important as these speakers are all members of the English Club, and the focus 
of the club is to speak and study English.
Answer to ­exercise 16
Yes they could. But their analyses would focus on different aspects of the data 
and be expressed in ways that reflected their different approaches. The researcher 
interested in code-​switching might focus on the social meaning conveyed by 
each of the languages or dialects involved. This researcher might also examine 
evidence regarding whether and how the speakers were conforming to the lin-
guistic constraints of the languages or dialects that they were drawing on. The 
translanguaging expert would be more interested in the range of meaning-​
making resources that the speakers were using (linguistic and paralinguistic and 
perhaps also symbolic), and the ways in which they were creatively and dynam-
ically constructing meaning in interaction. If the interaction involved a dom-
inant language/​dialect and a minority language/​dialect, this researcher might 
also draw attention to the importance of treating the minority variety with the 
same respect as the majority variety. They might also note the likelihood that the 
speakers do not perceive these linguistic boundaries, but rather regard their lin-
guistic resources as a coherent whole.
Answer to ­exercise 17
The young man’s avoidance of Pamaka and use of Sranan Tongo can be 
interpreted in a number of ways. Since the sociolinguistic norm is to use Pamaka 
in a conversation with friends in the village, he could be indicating he is feeling 
annoyed or irritated by his friends. However, since Sranan Tongo is associated 
with urban centres and modernity, his behaviour can also be interpreted as a 
deliberate construction of a cool, sophisticated social identity.
Concepts introduced
•	Domain
•	 Diglossia
•	 High (H)/​Low (L) diglossic variety
•	 Bilingualism (with and without diglossia)
•	 Polyglossia
•	 Code-​switching
•	 Situational code-​switching
•	 Metaphorical code-​switching
•	 Code-​mixing
•	 Lexical borrowing
•	 Intra-​sentential code-​switching
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
71
•	 Equivalence constraint
•	 Matrix language frame and embedded language
•	 Inter-​sentential code-​switching
•	Translanguaging
Note
1	 We have used the system for representing sounds (rather than letters) which is described 
in the Appendix. Linguists provide representations of the way people pronounce words, 
as opposed to their spellings, in square brackets. Individual sounds are also represented in 
square brackets, to distinguish them from letters.
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Aipolo and Holmes (1990) on Tongan in New Zealand
Allen and Burridge (2006) on French loan words for food
Auer (1999) introduces the term “fused lect”
Blackledge and Creese (2017) on translanguaging
Blackledge and Creese (2019) on multilingualism
Blom and Gumperz (1972) on Hemnesberget, Norway
Browning (1982); Sifianou (2003) on Greece
Choi (2005) on Paraguay in the twenty-​first century
Clyne (1984) on Luxembourg
Creese and Blackledge (2019) on translanguaging
Dahmen (in press) on Jaru/​Kriol code-​mixing
De Bres, Julia (personal communication) on Luxembourg
Dharurkar (2019) on English borrowings in modern Indian languages
Dorian (1982) on Gaelic in the Scottish Highlands
Eckert (2018) on diglossia in southern France (­chapters 1 and 2)
Ervin-​Tripp (1968) on Japanese war-​brides
Gal (1979) on Oberwart, Hungary
Garcia and Li Wei (2014, 2015) on translanguaging
Gardner-​Chloros (1997) on code-​switching in Strasbourg stores
Goyvaerts (1988, 1996); Goyvaerts, Naeyaert and Semikenke (1983) on Bukavu
Gumperz (1977) on code-​switching
Journal of Asian and Pacific Communication (2020) 30: 1/​2 on diglossia in the 
Asian Pacific Region
Kasstan (2018) on contested authenticity of speakers of Francoprovençal/​
Arpitan
Li (2005) on Chinese–​English code-​switching in England
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
72
McDonald (1994) on women’s language to pets as evidence of innovation in 
Brittany
Migge (2007) on Pamaka and Sranan Tongo in Suriname
Mputubwele (2003) on Democratic Republic of Congo (Zaire)
Rubin (1968, 1985) on Paraguay
Santarita and Martin-​Jones (1990) on Portuguese in London
Siebenhaar (2006) on Swiss–​German internet chat
Siegel (1995) on Fijian–​Hindi code-​switching for humour
Terkourafi (2012) on the language of hip hop
Valdman (1988) on Haiti
Quotations:
Example 7 is from Reinecke (1964: 540)
Example 8 quotes from Eckert (2018: 3, 17)
Example 10 (c) is adapted from Gumperz (1977: 1)
Example 12 is from Smith (1971: 4)
Example 15 is from Edwards (1986: 90–​1)
Example 16 is from Gal (1979: 112)
Example 18 is an excerpt from Sankoff (1972: 45–​6) where a full analysis of the 
complete text from which this excerpt is taken is provided, demonstrating 
the complexities of analysing code-​switching behaviour
Example 20 is adapted from information provided by Julia de Bres
Example 22 is adapted from Myers-​Scotton (1997: 80)
Quotation about current attitudes to Katharévousa is from Dimitropoulos 
(1983), cited in Linguistic Minorities Project (1985: 68)
Example 24 is from a forthcoming article on Jaru and Kriol code-​switching by 
Dahmen in the International Journal of Bilingualism
Example 25 (b) is a Kurdish–​Arabic bilingual, ­example 25 (c) is a Hebrew–​
Arabic–​English trilingual, and ­example 25 (d) is a French–​English bilin-
gual –​ all are quoted in Grosjean (1982: 148)
Example 25 (e) is from an article on the corpus research of Poplack et al. (2020) 
https://​ottawacitizen.com/​news/​local-​news/​dit-​quoi
Quotation from Gumperz at the beginning of the translanguaging section is cited 
in Rubinstein (2018: 93) with its source in Gumperz (1964: 140)
Example 26 is from Dovchin, Pennycook and Sultana (2018: 201–​2)
Useful additional reading
Albirini (2016)
Coulmas (2018)
Fasold (1984): ­chapters 1 and 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHOICE
73
Ferguson (1959) reprinted in Coupland and Jaworski (2009)
Fishman (1971, 1972, 2003)
Gumperz (1964, 1971, 1977)
Hoffmann (2014) on fieldwork and interviews as data collection methods
Li Wei (2018) on code-​switching vs. translanguaging
Mahootian (2006)
Mesthrie (2014) on data collection and analysis in multilingual communities
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 5
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 6
Michael-​Luna and Canagarajah (2007) on code-meshing in relation to literacy 
development
Moore, Bradley and Simpson (2020) on translanguaging
Myers-​Scotton (1993, 1997, 2009); Myers-​Scotton (2006): ­chapter 6
Otheguy, García, and Reid (2015) on translanguaging vs. code-​switching
Platt (1977)
Poplack (1980)
Rampton (1995)
Romaine (2000): ­chapter 2
Saville-​Troike (2003): ­chapter 3
Thomason (2001)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 4
Winford (2003) for those who are ready for a more advanced discussion
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

74
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-4
There are many different social reasons for choosing a particular code or var-
iety in a multilingual community, as ­chapter 2 illustrated. But what real choices 
are there for those who speak lesser-​used languages in communities where the 
people in power use a world language such as English or Spanish? How do eco-
nomic and political factors influence language choices? The various constraints 
on language choice faced by different communities are explored in this chapter, 
as well as the potential longer-​term effects of these choices –​ language shift or 
language death. The final section of the chapter describes attempts to reverse 
these consequences through language revival efforts.
Language shift in different communities
Migrant minorities
Example 1
Maniben is a young British Hindu woman who lives in Coventry. Her family 
moved to Britain from Uganda in 1970, when she was 5 years old. She 
started work on the shop floor in a bicycle factory when she was 16 years 
old. At home Maniben speaks Gujarati with her parents and grandparents. 
Although she had learned English at school, she found she didn’t need much 
at work. Many of the girls working with her also spoke Gujarati, so when 
it wasn’t too noisy they would talk to each other in their home language. 
Maniben was good at her job and she got promoted to floor supervisor. In 
that job, she needed to use English more of the time, though she could still 
use some Gujarati with her old workmates. She went to evening classes 
to learn computer skills. Now she works in the main office and she uses 
English almost all the time at work.
Maniben’s pattern of language use at work has gradually shifted over a period 
of ten years. At one stage she used mainly Gujarati; now she uses English almost 
exclusively. Maniben’s experience is typical for those who use a minority language 
Language maintenance  
and shift
3
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
75
in a predominantly monolingual culture and society. The order of domains in 
which language shift occurs may differ for different individuals and different 
groups, but gradually over time the language of the wider society displaces the 
minority language mother tongue. There are many different social factors which 
can lead a community to shift from using one language for most purposes to 
using a different language, or from using two distinct codes in different domains, 
to using different varieties of just one language for their communicative needs. 
Migrant families provide an obvious example of this process of language shift.
In countries like England, Australia, New Zealand and the USA, the school is 
one of the first domains in which children of migrant families meet English. They 
may have watched English TV programmes and heard English used in shops 
before starting school, but at school they are generally expected to interact in 
English. They need to use English because it is the only means of communicating 
with the teacher and other children. For many children of migrants, English 
soon becomes the normal language for talking to other children –​ including their 
brothers and sisters. Because her grandparents knew little English, Maniben 
continued to use mainly Gujarati at home, even though she had learned English 
at school and used it more and more frequently at work. In many families, how-
ever, English gradually infiltrates the home through the children. Children dis-
cuss school and friends in English with each other, and gradually their parents 
begin to use English to them too, especially if they are working in jobs where 
they use English.
There is pressure from the wider society too. Immigrants who look and 
sound “different” are often regarded as threatening by majority group members. 
There is pressure to conform in all kinds of ways. Language shift to English, for 
instance, has often been expected of migrants in predominantly monolingual 
countries such as England, the USA, Australia and New Zealand. Speaking good 
English has been regarded as a sign of successful assimilation, and it was widely 
assumed in the past that this meant abandoning the minority language. So many 
migrant families gradually shift from using Gujarati, or Italian or Vietnamese 
to each other most of the time, to using English. This may take three or four 
generations, but sometimes language shift is completed in just two generations. 
Typically, migrants are virtually monolingual in their mother tongue, their chil-
dren are bilingual and their grandchildren are often monolingual in the language 
of the “host” country. We can observe the shift by noting the change in people’s 
patterns of language use in different domains over time.
Exercise 1
(a)	
If you have a friend or acquaintance who belongs to a different ethnic group from 
you with a distinct language, they may be willing to share their family history with 
you. It is very important to be polite and not to put any pressure on someone 
who is reluctant, however. They may have good reason to feel unwilling to share 
experiences which may have been painful.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
76
If they are willing to talk to you, find out whether they migrated to the country 
you both now live in, or whether their parents or grandparents did so. If so, when 
did they arrive, and why did they come? Try to trace the language history of each 
generation. What languages do their grandparents/​parents/​brothers and sisters 
speak in different domains? Does your friend still speak their ethnic language? If 
so, who to and in what contexts?
(b)	
People are often unaware of the range of ethnic groups living in their area. How 
could you find out how many ethnic groups there are in the area where you live?
(c)	
Walk down the main street of your city, town or village and photograph and/​or 
write down all the material which you think contributes to the linguistic landscape. 
You should take note of everything visual which has the goal of communication. 
Note where it occurs, its size and colour, and any other relevant features. What clues 
distinguish between an “official” sign and an unofficial or informal sign? Who do 
you think are the intended addressees of the official signs compared to the unoffi-
cial signs?
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 2
There are migrant communities in many countries: e.g. Irish and Welsh communities in 
Argentina, Portuguese Africans, and Germans in South Africa. Choose a country which 
you know very little about and see what you can discover about the pattern of language 
maintenance and shift for one migrant community in the country.
Non-​migrant communities
Example 2
Armeen is an Iranian teacher of English. He is concerned that Farsi or Persian, 
the official language of Iran, is displacing his native language Azerbaijani. 
One piece of evidence supporting his concern about Azerbaijani is that 
the streets of his hometown Tabriz are full of signs in the Farsi language. 
What is more, people are not taught to read and write Azerbaijani, despite 
the fact that there is a rich literature in the language, some of it housed in 
books in the Tabriz library. So there is a vicious circle. People don’t use 
Azerbaijani in public signs because they know that literacy in Azerbaijani 
is now almost non-​existent.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
77
Language shift is not always the result of migration. Political, economic and 
social changes can occur within a community, and this may result in linguistic 
changes too. As Iran struggles to achieve national unity, Farsi, the language of 
the largest and most powerful group, the Persians, can be considered a threat 
to the languages of the minority ethnic groups. Iran is a multi-​ethnic country of 
82 million people, and in principle minority ethnic languages are protected by 
the Iranian Constitution. But the reality is that they are not taught in schools, 
and speakers of even the largest minority language, Azerbaijani, are shifting to 
Farsi in a number of domains. Farsi has official status and it dominates the 
public space in Tabriz, and this sends a clear symbolic message about its signifi-
cance and relevance in Iran, and about the irrelevance of Azerbaijani from the 
perspective of the government. In a recent political speech, the Governor of East 
Azerbaijan code-​switched frequently and rapidly between Farsi and Azerbaijani, 
even when addressing an Azerbaijani audience. Though it is in no immediate 
danger, the long-​term prognosis is not good for Azerbaijani unless some assertive 
action is taken to maintain it.
In Oberwart, an Austrian town on the border of Hungary, the community has 
been gradually shifting from Hungarian to German for some time.
Example 3
Before the First World War the town of Oberwart (known then by its 
Hungarian name, Felsöör) was part of Hungary, and most of the towns-
people used Hungarian most of the time. However, because the town had 
been surrounded by German-​speaking villages for over 400 years, many 
people also knew some German. At the end of the war, Oberwart became 
part of Austria, and German became the official language. Hungarian was 
banned in schools. This marked the beginning of a period of language shift.
In the 1920s, Oberwart was a small place and the people, who were mainly 
farm workers, used Hungarian to each other, and German with outsiders. As 
Oberwart grew and industry replaced farming as the main source of jobs, the 
functions of German expanded. German became the high language in a broad 
diglossia situation in Oberwart. German was the language of the school, 
official transactions and economic advancement. It expressed formality and 
social distance. Hungarian was the low language, used in most homes and 
for friendly interaction between townspeople. Hungarian was the language 
of solidarity, used for social and affective functions. It soon became clear that 
to “get on” meant learning German, and so knowledge of German became 
associated with social and economic progress. Speaking Hungarian was 
increasingly associated with “peasantness” and was considered old-​fashioned. 
Young people began to use German to their friends in the pub. Parents began 
to use German instead of Hungarian to their children. In other words, the 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
78
domains in which German was appropriate continued to expand while those 
where Hungarian was used contracted. By the 1970s, God was one of the few 
addressees to whom young people still used Hungarian when they said their 
prayers or went to church.
The patterns of language use for any individual in Oberwart in the 1970s 
depended on their social networks. Who did they interact with? Table 3.1 shows 
that interactions between older people and “peasants” (those working in jobs 
associated with the land) tended still to be in Hungarian. These are in the top left-​
hand side of the table. Towards the right and bottom of the table are interactions 
between younger people and those working in jobs associated with the new 
industries or in professional jobs. Here German predominates. The pattern in the 
table suggested that German would gradually completely displace Hungarian in 
Oberwart, unless something drastic were to happen.
Table 3.1  Choice of language in Oberwart
Speaker
Age of 
speaker
1 To      
God
2 To older 
peasants 
(grandparents’ 
generation)
3 To 
parents
4 To 
friends and 
workmates 
of same 
age
5 To 
children
6 To 
doctor and 
government 
officials
A
63
Hu
Hu
Hu
Hu
GHu
G
B
61
Hu
Hu
Hu
Hu
GHu
G
C
58
Hu
Hu
Hu
GHu
GHu
G
D
52
Hu
Hu
Hu
GHu
GHu
G
E
27
Hu
Hu
GHu
G
G
G
F
25
Hu
Hu
GHu
G
G
G
G
22
Hu
Hu
G
G
G
G
Source: Adapted from Gal (1979).
And something drastic did happen. After the collapse of communism in 
Central Europe in 1989, and the subsequent change in the relationship between 
Hungary and other European countries, the social and economic status of 
Hungarian improved in Oberwart. In 1992 a Hungarian-​medium high school 
was established in Oberwart, and in 1995 primary education became available 
in Hungarian in some schools, thus providing a domain in which Hungarian 
could once more be used. Renewed economic ties with Hungary provided fur-
ther motivation for speaking Hungarian. This change in attitude and educa-
tional support had an effect: in the 2001 census, 1,169 (17.5%) of Oberwart 
residents reported that they spoke Hungarian. By 2006, Hungarian was being 
learnt by 660 students in Bergenland (the region to which Oberwart belongs) 
as a first language and by 2,062 students as a foreign language. The pattern 
of language shift has at least been slowed down and may perhaps reverse in 
Bergenland.

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
79
Exercise 3
(a)	
Assuming the direction of shift had remained constant, add another two rows of 
speakers (H and I) to table 3.1 predicting a possible pattern of language use for two 
ten-​year-​olds in Oberwart for columns 1–​6.
(b)	
This first section has shown how the patterns of use of a minority language shift 
over time. In which domains might a minority language group realistically hope to 
maintain their language?
Answers at end of chapter
Migrant majorities
The examples discussed so far in this chapter have illustrated that language shift 
often indicates the influence of political factors, such as who is in power, and 
economic factors, such as the need for work. People may shift both location 
and language to find jobs. Over the last couple of centuries, many speakers of 
Irish, Scottish Gaelic and Welsh, for instance, have shifted to England, and con-
sequently to English, primarily in order to get work. They need English both for 
their job success and for their social well-​being –​ to make friends. But often the 
outcome (shift from a minority to a majority language) is the same when it is the 
majority group who do the physical moving.
When colonial powers invade other countries, their languages often become 
dominant. Countries such as Portugal, Spain, France and Britain have generally 
imposed their languages along with their rule. Yet this has not always resulted 
in linguistic subjugation and language shift. Multilingualism was too well-​
established as normal in countries like India and Papua New Guinea, and in 
many African countries. It was not possible for a single alien and imported lan-
guage to displace and eradicate hundreds of Indigenous vernacular languages. 
But when multilingualism was not widespread in an area, or where just one 
Indigenous language had been used before the colonisers arrived, languages were 
often under threat. In this context, English has been described as a “killer lan-
guage”. Where one group abrogates political power and imposes its language 
along with its institutions –​ government administration, law courts, education, 
religion –​ it is likely that minority groups will find themselves under increasing 
pressure to adopt the language of the dominant group.
Example 4
Tamati lives in Whanganui, a large New Zealand town. He is 10 years old  
and he speaks and understands only English, though he knows some Māori  
words and phrases. None of his mates can speak Māori either. His grand-
father speaks Māori, however. Whenever there is a big gathering, such as  
a funeral or an important tribal meeting, his grandfather is one of the best  
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
80
speakers. Tamati’s mother and father understand Māori, but they are not  
fluent speakers. They can manage a short simple conversation, but that’s  
about it. Tamati’s little sister, Miriama, has just started at a pre-​school  
where Māori is used, so he thinks maybe he’ll learn a bit from her.
In New Zealand, Māori people overwhelmingly moved from monolin-
gualism in Māori in the late nineteenth century, through bilingualism in Māori 
and English, to monolingualism in English in the second half of the twentieth 
century. Until 2013, the overall trend of Māori was steadily less use. The 
Map 3.1  New Zealand
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
81
2013 census indicated that only 21% of adults claimed to be able to hold 
an everyday conversation in Māori, a 5% decrease since 2006. And national 
surveys of the health of the language by the Māori Language Commission 
confirmed that the number of fluent speakers was steadily declining. However, 
while Māori is still considered to be endangered, efforts to revive the language 
seem to be having some effect and the future is beginning to look a little 
more hopeful. The figures from the 2018 census indicate that the percentage 
of Māori people reporting conversational ability in Māori has stabilised at 
around 21%, and more recent language surveys support this. A number of 
factors are making a difference, including Māori immersion in pre-​schools, 
schools and wānanga (tertiary institutions); many more Māori-​language 
programmes on TV and radio; strong family and community support; and 
what Richard Benton describes as “an exponential increase in the number of 
people (including non-​Māori native-​born New Zealanders and immigrants) 
learning the language in adult education and university courses”. Richard 
concludes optimistically “the language is in a far less parlous state than it was 
50 years ago”.
Most Aboriginal people in Australia, and many Native American people in 
the USA, have similarly lost their languages over four or five generations of 
colonial rule. The Indigenous people were swamped by English, the language 
of the dominant group, and their numbers were decimated by warfare and dis-
ease. The result of colonial economic and political control was not diglossia 
with varying degrees of bilingualism, as found in many African, Asian and South 
American countries, but the more or less complete eradication of the many 
Indigenous languages. Over time the communities shifted to the colonisers’ lan-
guage, English, and their own languages died out. The Navajo or Diné people 
in the USA have been an exception, though their language is now steadily being 
eroded. During the Second World War Navajo speakers transmitted thousands 
of radio messages in an effective code based on their language. Fighter planes 
became hummingbirds, submarines became iron fish. In 2021 the language is 
being used to name sections of the planet Mars in the Perseverance mission. 
Elders hope this will inspire more young Navajo people to understand the sig-
nificance of learning their language.
When language shift occurs, it is almost always shift towards the language of 
the dominant powerful group. A dominant group has little incentive to adopt 
the language of a minority. The dominant language is associated with status, 
prestige and social success. It is used in the “glamour” contexts in the wider 
society –​ for formal speeches on ceremonial occasions, by newsreaders on TV 
and radio, and by those whom young people admire (such as pop stars, social 
media influencers and other celebrities). It is scarcely surprising that many 
young minority group speakers should see its advantages and abandon their 
own language.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
82
Language death and language loss
Example 5
In 2011, British newspapers reported that Ayapaneco, an Indigenous lan-
guage of Mexico, was in danger of dying out as the only two remaining 
fluent speakers (aged 75 and 69) refused to talk to each other.
Needless to say, this report conceals a much more complex reality. Firstly, the 
name Ayapaneco for the language was given by outsiders; the two men actually 
call it Nuumte Oote (“True Voice”). Secondly, no-​one actually knows why the 
two men do not speak to each other. There may be cultural reasons for their 
behaviour, e.g. an “avoidance relationship”, as appropriate in some Australian 
Aboriginal cultures. Thirdly, and most relevantly for the discussion in this 
chapter, the reasons for the disappearance of Ayapaneco can more accurately be 
linked to factors such as the increasing urbanisation of the population, and the 
political decision to introduce compulsory education in Spanish, rather than to 
the lack of communication between these two old men.
Nevertheless, it is generally true that when all the people who speak a lan-
guage die, the language dies with them. Sometimes this fact is crystal clear. In 
1992, when Tefvik Esenç died, so did the linguistically complex Caucasian lan-
guage Ubykh. Manx has now completely died out in the Isle of Man –​ the last 
native speaker, Ned Maddrell, died in 1974, although there are currently school-​
based efforts to revive Manx with a new generation of speakers. Despite recent 
attempts to revive it, most people agree that Cornish effectively disappeared 
from Cornwall in the eighteenth century when Dolly Pentreath of Mousehole 
died in 1777. Less than half of the 250–​300 Aboriginal languages spoken in 
Australia when the Europeans arrived have survived, and fewer than two dozen 
are being actively passed on to younger generations. Many disappeared as a 
direct result of the massacre of the Aboriginal people, or their death from diseases 
introduced by Europeans. In Tasmania, for instance, the whole Indigenous popu-
lation of between 3,000 and 4,000 people was exterminated within 75 years. 
Their languages died with them. These are cases of language death rather than 
language shift. These languages are no longer spoken anywhere.
Example 6
Mapuche (also called Mapundungun) is an Indigenous language of Chile 
which is fast disappearing as a result of 500 years of unremitting Spanish 
domination. The Mapuche people have long been recognised as courageous 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
83
warriors since they consistently fought the Spanish until their final defeat 
in 1881. Today, however, the language is spoken only by elderly people in 
rural areas and Spanish is increasingly displacing it from every domain 
except the family –​ and even there it is fast disappearing.
The sad story of language shift among the Mapuche, the largest Indigenous 
population in Chile, is explained by a steady loss of commitment to their lan-
guage, especially among young people, some of whom regard it as an “unciv-
ilised” language. Spanish confers prestige while Mapuche offers no rewards in 
their view. Parents have stopped using the language to their children. A com-
bination of negative attitudes and lack of use guarantees it will disappear, and 
once gone the language will have died since it is not spoken elsewhere. Recent 
government revitalisation efforts have been critiqued by scholars as tokenistic. 
The only hope, they argue, lies with politically motivated grassroots movements 
which challenge colonial hegemony. The term these movements have adopted is 
“language reclamation”.
Exercise 4
Using this resource as a starting point, consider how the coronavirus COVID-​19 pandemic 
has impacted endangered languages:
www.nytimes.com/​2021/​01/​24/​opinion/​covid-​lakota-​language.html.
A community, such as the Turkish community in Britain, may shift to English 
voluntarily over a couple of generations. This involves the loss of the language 
for the individuals concerned, and even for the community in Britain. But Turkish 
is not under threat of disappearing because of this shift. It will continue to thrive 
in Turkey. But when the last native speaker of Martuthunira, Algy Paterson, 
died in 1995, this Australian Aboriginal language died with him. Indeed, it was 
predicted that almost all Australian Aboriginal languages would be extinct by 
the year 2000, a prediction which fortunately has not been completely fulfilled. 
However in 2020, the coronavirus COVID-​19 pandemic killed older people in 
many countries where endangered languages are spoken by just a few elderly 
people, including Brazil, India, North America and Peru.
When a language dies gradually, as opposed to all its speakers being wiped 
out by a massacre or an epidemic, the process is similar to that of language shift. 
The functions of the language are taken over in one domain after another by 
another language. As the domains in which speakers use the language shrink, the 
speakers of the dying language become gradually less proficient in it.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
84
Example 7
At 20 years old, Annie is a young speaker of Dyirbal, an Australian 
Aboriginal language. She also speaks English which she learned at school. 
There is no written Dyirbal material for her to read, and there are fewer 
and fewer contexts in which she can appropriately hear and speak the lan-
guage. So she is steadily becoming less proficient in it. She can understand 
the Dyirbal she hears used by older people in her community, and she uses 
it to speak to her grandmother. But her grandmother is scathing about her 
ability in Dyirbal, saying Annie doesn’t speak the language properly.
Annie is experiencing language loss. This is the manifestation, in the 
individual’s experience, of wide-​scale language death. Because she uses English 
for most purposes, her vocabulary in Dyirbal has shrunk and shrunk. When 
she is talking to her grandmother, she keeps finding herself substituting English 
words like cook in her Dyirbal, because she can’t remember the Dyirbal word. 
She can’t remember all the complicated endings on Dyirbal nouns. They vary 
depending on the sound at the end of the noun, but she uses just one ending -​
gu for all of them. For other words she simply omits the affix because she can’t 
remember it. Her grandmother complains vociferously about her word order. 
Annie finds herself putting words in the order they come in English instead of in 
the order her grandmother uses in Dyirbal. It is clear that Annie’s Dyirbal is very 
different from traditional Dyirbal.
Because English is now so widely used in her community, it seems unlikely 
that Dyirbal will survive in a new form based on the variety Annie speaks. It is 
on its way to extinction. When Annie’s generation die it is pretty certain Dyirbal 
will die with them. The process of language death for the language comes about 
through this kind of gradual loss of fluency and competence by its speakers. 
Competence in the language does not disappear overnight. It gradually erodes 
over time.
With the spread of a majority group language into more and more domains, 
the number of contexts in which individuals use the ethnic language diminishes. 
The language usually retreats until it is used only in the home, and finally it is 
restricted to such personal activities as counting, praying and dreaming. The 
stylistic range that people acquire when they use a language in a wider range 
of domains contracts. Even in contexts where the language is still used, there 
is a gradual reduction in the complexity and diversity of structural features of 
the language –​ speakers’ sound rules are simplified, their grammatical patterns 
become less complex and their vocabulary in the language gets smaller and 
smaller.
In the wider community, the language may survive for ritual or ceremonial 
occasions, but those who use it in these contexts will be few in number and their 
fluency is often restricted to prayers and set speeches or incantations. In many 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
85
Māori communities in New Zealand, for instance, the amount of Māori used in 
ceremonies is entirely dependent on the availability of respected elders who still 
retain some knowledge of the appropriate discourse. Māori is now used in some 
communities only for formal ceremonial speeches, prayers for the sick, and per-
haps for a prayer to open a meeting.
Exercise 5
(a)	
What is the difference between language shift and language death?
(b)	
When language shift occurs in a diglossia situation, H sometimes displaces L, while in 
other contexts L displaces H. Can you think of examples of each of these processes?
Answers at end of chapter
Factors contributing to language shift
Economic, social and political factors
Example 8
In Tabriz, a city in Azerbaijan in Iran, Hadi’s seven-​year-​old niece and nine-​
year-​old nephew no longer know some simple words in Azerbaijani, their 
parents’ mother tongue. They play with each other using Persian or Farsi, 
the official language of Iran. Their schooling is in Farsi and their mothers 
encouraged their interest and skill in the language from an early age to pre-
pare them for school.
What factors lead a community to shift from using one language to using 
another? Initially, the most obvious factor is that the community sees important 
reasons for learning the second language. The reasons are often economic, but 
they may also be political –​ as in the case of Israel which is discussed later in 
this chapter. Obtaining work is the most obvious economic reason for learning 
another language. In English-​dominated countries, for instance, people learn 
English in order to get good jobs. This results in bilingualism. Bilingualism or 
bidialectalism is always a necessary precursor of language shift, although, as 
stable diglossic communities demonstrate, it does not always result in shift.
The second important factor, then, seems to be that the community sees no 
reason to take active steps to maintain their ethnic language. They may not see it as 
offering any advantages to their children, for example, or they may not realise that 
it is in any danger of disappearing. Without active language maintenance, shift is 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
86
almost inevitable in many contexts. For example, where a migrant minority group 
moves to a predominantly monolingual society dominated by one majority group 
language in all the major institutional domains –​ school, TV, radio, newspapers, 
government administration, courts, work –​ language shift will be unavoidable 
unless the community takes active steps to prevent it. Very often, without con-
sciously deciding to abandon their ethnic language, a community will lose it 
because they did not perceive any threat. At first it appears very important to 
learn the majority language in order to achieve social and economic success. The 
minority language seems safe because “we all speak it”. Yet, without conscious 
maintenance it can and usually does disappear in as few as three generations.
The social and economic goals of individuals in a community are very important 
in accounting for the speed of shift. Rapid shift occurs when people are anxious 
to “get on” in a society where knowledge of the second language is a prerequisite 
for success. Young upwardly mobile people are likely to shift fastest. It has also 
been noticed that the shift to another language may be led by women or by men, 
depending on factors such as where new jobs lie and the gender roles in the society. 
Young women in Oberwart, for example, led the shift to German because they 
were the ones taking most advantage of new jobs offered by industrial changes. In 
Iran young women are increasingly contesting social norms (e.g. those associated 
with the hijab), and in north-​west Iran, as suggested in ­example 8, many mothers 
encourage their children to learn Persian rather than Azerbaijani, the Indigenous 
language of the area, because they consider Persian to be the more prestigious, and 
even more polite, language which can also help their children succeed in schools.
Newly arrived migrant women in New Zealand, on the other hand, often 
have less education than their husbands. They tend to stay at home, at least 
initially, maintaining the minority language. When they get work it is often in 
low-​paid jobs such as night-​cleaning or in bakeries. There they work with others 
from their own ethnic group and so they can use their ethnic language in the 
work domain too.
Demographic factors
Demographic factors are also relevant in accounting for the speed of language 
shift. Resistance to language shift tends to last longer in rural than in urban 
areas. This is partly because rural groups tend to be isolated from the centres of 
political power for longer, and they can meet most of their social needs in the 
ethnic or minority language. So, for example, because of their relative social iso-
lation, Ukrainians in Canada who live out of town on farms have maintained 
their ethnic language better than those in the towns.
Although an increasing number of younger urban people now speak Māori 
as a second language, the communities in New Zealand where Māori survives 
as a language of everyday communication are relatively inaccessible rural areas, 
populated almost entirely by Māori people. In these communities, there are a 
very few older native speakers who still use the language to talk to each other in 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
87
their homes and in the streets, as well as for formal Māori speech events. In fact, 
before TV became widespread, the school was the only domain where English 
was regularly used in these communities. Everyday interactions between Māori 
people were in Māori: Māori was used at church, in the shops, for community 
meetings and in the pub. Improved roads, bus services, TV in every home –​ and 
even in the pub –​ has changed all that. Richard Benton, a sociolinguist who 
surveyed the use of Māori in New Zealand in the late twentieth century, summed 
up the situation by saying that even in these isolated communities Māori is now 
a language which can only be used between consenting adults!
Example 9
In 1974, a Chilean refugee family went to live in a small provincial New 
Zealand town where there was work but no opportunity at all to use their 
mother tongue, Spanish. Their eight-​year-​old daughter, Crystal, quickly 
realised that her knowledge of Spanish made her seem odd to her school 
friends and she rapidly refused to use Spanish even at home. Language shift 
from Spanish to English for Crystal was almost complete by 13 years old. 
She retained some understanding of Spanish (i.e. some passive knowledge), 
but she refused to speak it under any circumstances.
Shift tends to occur faster in some groups than in others. The size of the group 
is sometimes a critical factor. In Australia, the areas with the largest groups of 
Maltese speakers (Victoria and New South Wales) had the lowest rates of shift 
towards English. Spanish has survived well in the USA due partly to the large 
numbers of speakers. By contrast, members of a migrant family in an urban area 
where no-​one else speaks their mother tongue face a much more difficult task. 
With few opportunities to use their mother tongue, language maintenance is 
much more difficult.
To maintain a language, you must have people you can use it with on a regular 
basis. Crystal’s family had nowhere they could use Spanish except in the home, 
and no-​one they could talk to in Spanish except each other. They were both 
isolated and “odd” in the eyes of others. Maintaining a language is near impos-
sible under these conditions. Crystal’s solution to the challenge of integration 
was to marry a monolingual New Zealander.
Exercise 6
What would you predict as the effect of intermarriage on language maintenance and shift? 
If, in England, an English-​speaking woman marries a Gujarati-​speaking man, for instance, 
which language will they use to their children?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
88
Intermarriage between groups can accelerate language shift. Unless multi-
lingualism is normal in a community, one language tends to predominate in 
the home. German immigrants in Australia are typical. Despite its multicultural 
composition, Australia is predominantly a monolingual society. When a German-​
speaking man marries an English-​speaking Australian woman, English is usually 
the dominant language of the home, and the main language used to the children. 
The same pattern has been observed in many other communities. In Oklahoma 
in the USA, for instance, in every family where a Cherokee speaker has married 
outside the Cherokee community, the children speak only English.
A mother whose English is not strong, or who consciously wants to pass on 
the minority language to her children, may slow down the process of shift to 
English by using the language to the children. And there are some strongly patri-
archal groups where the father’s support for the use of the minority language 
in the home proves effective –​ many Greek and Italian fathers in Australia, for 
example, and Samoan fathers in New Zealand, actively encourage the use of 
their languages in the home. Māori men have also expressed concern that their 
sons should learn Māori, since they may need it to speak formally on the marae 
(the formal meeting area) in later life. But once the children of mixed marriages 
start school, it takes a very determined parent to succeed in maintaining the 
minority language in the home –​ especially if the other parent doesn’t speak the 
minority language well, or at all.
Attitudes and values
Example 10
Ione is a young Samoan boy living in Australia. His family are very proud 
of their Samoan identity and culture and they take every opportunity to 
do things the Samoan way. They are part of an active Samoan community 
where the language is used regularly for church services and social events. 
Ione belongs to a Samoan Youth Club attached to the church. They play 
sport, organise dances, sing and write their own songs, and go on regular 
trips –​ all of which he loves. Ione is proud to be Samoan and is pleased his 
family taught him his language. For him, being Samoan includes knowing 
how to speak Samoan.
Language shift tends to be slower in communities where the minority language 
is highly valued. When the language is seen as an important symbol of ethnic 
identity, it is generally maintained longer. Positive attitudes support efforts to use 
the minority language in a variety of domains, and this helps people resist the 
pressure from the majority group to switch to their language.
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
89
Source: Flann O’Riain’s “Cartoon of Irish Language” from George Jones (1994) Lazy Way to 
Gaelic. Tal-​y-​bont, Wales: Y Lolfa.
The status of a language internationally can contribute to these positive attitudes. 
Maintaining French in Canada and the USA is easier because French is a language 
with international status. It is obvious to French Americans in Maine, for instance, 
that French is a good language to know. It has international prestige. Immigrant 
Greeks are proud of the contribution of Greek to Western philosophy and culture, 
and this awareness of the importance of their language helps them resist language 
shift to English. For similar reasons, we would expect a language with the inter-
national status of Spanish to have a better chance of resisting shift than languages 
with few speakers such as Māori or Dyirbal. But even the high status of Spanish as 
a world language could not offset the attitudes of the local community to Crystal’s 
family’s “oddness” described in ­example 9. Pride in their ethnic identity and their 
language can be important factors which contribute to language maintenance, 
provided there is strong community support for these attitudes.
Exercise 7
(a)	
Why do you think people might want to maintain their language when they move 
to a new country?
(b)	
Make a list of the factors which seem to contribute to language maintenance as 
opposed to those which favour language shift.
Answers at end of chapter
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
90
How can a minority language be maintained?
Example 11
. . . nothing benefits a country more than to treasure the languages and 
cultures of its various peoples because in doing so, it fosters intergroup 
understanding and realises greater dividends in the form of originality, cre-
ativity and versatility.
There are certain social factors which seem to retard wholesale language 
shift for a minority language group, at least for a time. Where language is 
considered an important symbol of a minority group’s identity, for example, 
the language is likely to be maintained longer. Polish people have regarded 
language as very important for preserving their identity in the many countries 
they have migrated to, and they have often maintained Polish for three to four 
generations. The same is true for Greek migrants in places like Australia, New 
Zealand and the USA. Toba language speakers who move from the Chaco 
Province to Buenos Aires in Argentina where Spanish, the official language, is 
used in interaction by most city dwellers, also regard Toba as central to their 
cultural identity.
If families from a minority group live near each other and see each other fre-
quently, this also helps them maintain their language. Members of the Greek 
community in Wellington, New Zealand, for instance, belong to a common 
church, the Greek Orthodox church, where Greek is used. They have established 
shops where they sell foodstuffs imported from Greece and where they use Greek 
to each other. There are Indian and Pakistani communities in Britain who have 
established the same kind of communities within cities, and you can often hear 
Panjabi or Gujarati spoken in their shops. In the USA, Chinese people who live 
in the Chinatown areas of big cities are much more likely to maintain a Chinese 
dialect as their mother tongue through to the third generation than those who 
move outside the Chinatown area. In Buenos Aires, Toba speakers create spaces 
within the city where they can socialise in the cultural groupings that make sense 
to them, and develop new ways of “being Toba”, whilst also doing their best to 
maintain their language against the inroads of Spanish.
Another factor which may contribute to language maintenance for those who 
emigrate is the degree and frequency of contact with the homeland. A regular 
stream of new migrants or even visitors will keep the need for using the lan-
guage alive. Polynesian migrants from the islands of Niue, Tokelau, Tonga and 
Samoa arrive in New Zealand regularly. New Zealand Polynesians provide them 
with hospitality, and the new arrivals provide new linguistic input for the New 
Zealand communities. The prospect of regular trips back “home” provides a 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
91
similar motivation to maintain fluency for many groups. Samoan men in New 
Zealand, for instance, often expect to return home to take up family and com-
munity responsibilities at a later stage in their lives. Greek migrants also see a 
trip back to Greece as a high priority for themselves and their children. Most 
Greek New Zealanders regard a trip back to Greece as essential at some point 
in their lives, and many young Greek girls take the trip with the express aim of 
securing a good Greek husband. Clearly this provides a very strong incentive to 
maintain proficiency in Greek.
Example 12
Josie goes to a Catholic secondary school in Bradford. Her best friend is a 
Polish girl, Danuta. Josie thinks Danuta has a hard life. Danuta’s father is 
a dentist and he is very strict and, in Josie’s opinion, very bossy. He insists 
that everyone speaks Polish in his house. Josie has only been to visit once 
and even when she was there Danuta’s dad used Polish to his wife and the 
rest of the children. Danuta has to go to Polish Saturday School too. Josie 
doesn’t envy Danuta, but Danuta doesn’t seem to mind. In fact, she is very 
proud of being Polish and of her bilingualism.
Because the pressures to shift are strong, members of a minority commu-
nity may decide to take active steps to protect their language. If we consider 
the influence of social factors such as participants and setting on language 
choice, for instance, it is clear that social factors may help resist the influence 
of economic pressures. Where the normal family organisation for an ethnic 
group is the extended family with grandparents and unmarried relatives living 
in the same house as the nuclear family, for example, there is good reason to 
continue using the minority language at home. Similarly, groups which dis-
courage intermarriage, such as the Greek and the Chinese communities, con-
tribute to language maintenance in this way. Marriage to a majority group 
member is the quickest way of ensuring shift to the majority group language 
for the children. And conversely, marrying into your own linguistic–​ethnic 
group contributes to the chances that your language will be maintained within 
your family.
Example 13
Hiwot migrated from Ethiopia to New Zealand with her father when she 
was 15 years old. Her mother tongue and first language is Amharic, the 
official language of Ethiopia. Now, after 15 years living in New Zealand, 
she is married to an Ethiopian man and has two young children, Abera and 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
92
Konjit. Hiwot teaches her children about Ethiopian culture and speaks to 
them in Amharic because she wants to keep them connected to her family’s 
culture. Fortunately, she receives great support from the local Ethiopian 
community. The children learn traditional songs, dances, and sometimes 
writing in Amharic when she takes them to the Ethiopian Orthodox Church 
on Saturdays. On Sundays the family attends the church service together. 
They spend time with many other Ethiopians after the service while sharing 
traditional food. This provides opportunities for their children to make 
Ethiopian friends and practice their Amharic.
A group who manage to ensure their language is used in settings such as 
school or their place of worship will obviously increase the chances of lan-
guage maintenance. Tongan people in New Zealand attend church services in 
Tongan. Heritage language programmes in Canada use the minority language 
in school for part of each day in order to maintain the languages of groups 
such as Canadian Ukrainians and Canadian Germans. In Wales, bilingual edu-
cation is available throughout the education system in many areas. In such cases 
the community has taken steps to try to maintain their language, though the 
continued influx of English speakers to Wales means that Welsh will never be 
“safe”.
Institutional support generally makes the difference between success and 
failure in maintaining a minority group language. Education, law and adminis-
tration, religion and the media are crucial domains from this point of view. The 
minority group which can mobilise these institutions to support language main-
tenance has some chance of succeeding. When the government of a country is 
committed to maintaining or reviving a language, it is possible to legislate for 
its use in all these domains, as happened in Israel with Hebrew. When Wales 
achieved devolved government in 1999, the Welsh National Assembly made 
Welsh a compulsory subject in school for children up to 16 years old. (This 
topic is discussed further in ­chapter 5 in the section on language planning.) The 
final section of this chapter focuses on just one area –​ education –​ where insti-
tutional support can contribute to language maintenance and even language 
revival.
Exercise 8
Imagine you have moved to another country where your mother tongue is not used and 
you want to teach it to your children. What strategies could you use to encourage them to 
want to understand and use your language?
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
93
Exercise 9
List the different kinds of institutional support which can be sought by a community of 
people who want to maintain their minority language within a society where English is the 
language of the majority. Provide an example of each.
Answer at end of chapter
Many of the factors discussed in this section as relevant to language mainten-
ance have been integrated by Howard Giles and his colleagues, using the concept 
of ethnolinguistic vitality. These social psychologists suggest that we can predict 
the likelihood that a language will be maintained by measuring its ethnolin-
guistic vitality. Three components are involved: firstly, the status of the language 
as indicated by attitudes towards it; secondly, the size of the group who uses 
the language and their distribution (e.g. concentrated or scattered); and thirdly, 
the extent to which the language enjoys institutional support. The concept of 
ethnolinguistic vitality is clearly very useful in studying language maintenance 
and shift, though devising satisfactory ways to measure the components is often 
a challenge. The concept of ethnolinguistic vitality also provides some ideas for 
those interested in slowing down or reversing language shift.
Exercise 10
Exercise 1 (c) introduced the idea of a linguistic landscape.
What kind of information can a study of language in the public domain or the linguistic 
landscape provide about the vitality of a minority linguistic community?
This issue is discussed in the next paragraph
Examining linguistic landscapes means looking at public texts in their phys-
ical and social context. As mentioned in the answer to ­exercise 1 (c), the lin-
guistic landscape can be a rich source of information about the sociolinguistic 
complexities of a community. Evidence of the vitality of a minority linguistic 
group may consist of restaurant signs, shop signs, church signs, advertisements, 
and even graffiti in the minority language. Posters may provide information 
about public events or activities, also indicating the vibrancy of a particular 
minority linguistic community.
Public or official bilingual or multilingual signs can be interpreted in many 
different ways. They could indicate a community where several languages have 
official status, as in Wales or Luxembourg, for example. Or they could indi-
cate that important information needs to be in several languages because the 
linguistic repertoires of some individuals may be restricted to just one of those 
languages. Alternatively, they may indicate that the sign writer wishes to convey 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
94
an impression of sophistication. Though Japan is considered a very homogeneous 
monolingual society, one researcher reported that almost 20% of the signs in the 
area of Tokyo that he surveyed were multilingual. The order in which languages 
occur on signage can also convey a subtle political message, a point relevant to 
research on language policy as we will see in ­chapter 5. For a minority group 
fighting for the survival of its language, official signage is often a political battle 
well worth engaging in.
Language revival
Sometimes a community becomes aware that its language is in danger of 
disappearing and takes deliberate steps to revitalise or reclaim it, in a process 
known as language revival or reclamation. Attempts have been made in Ireland, 
Wales and Scotland, for example, to preserve the Indigenous languages, and in 
New Zealand steps have been taken to attempt to reverse language shift and 
reclaim Māori. It is sometimes argued that the success of such efforts will depend 
on how far language loss has occurred –​ that there is a point of no return. But 
it seems very likely that more important are attitudinal factors such as how 
strongly people want to revive the language, and their reasons for doing so. 
Hebrew was revived in Israel after being effectively dead for nearly 1,700 years. 
It had survived only for prayers and reading sacred texts (much as Latin was 
used in Catholic services until the 1960s) and that was all. Yet strong feelings of 
nationalism led to determined efforts by Israeli adults to use it to children, and 
as a result it has been successfully revived.
The story of Welsh is also interesting. Welsh was a flourishing language in the 
nineteenth century. It had survived well as the L language in a diglossia situation 
where the ruling elite used English for administration. Even industrialisation in 
the nineteenth century initially supported the language since it provided work 
for the Welsh speakers in the coal-​mining valleys. Welsh people used the lan-
guage for their everyday communication with each other. But the invasion of 
Wales by English industrialists had in fact begun a process of language erosion. 
The work available in mines and iron works attracted English immigrants, and 
as a result the Welsh language was overwhelmed by the flood of English they 
spoke. The situation was then exacerbated by the fact that many Welsh-​speaking 
miners left their Welsh valleys during the depression of the 1930s. So the number 
of Welsh speakers in Wales was being reduced by the effects of both in-​migra-
tion and out-​migration. Language shift to English in public domains was also 
apparent –​ especially in industrialised South Wales.
It has been said that in 1840 over two-​thirds of the population of Wales spoke 
Welsh, and half of them spoke only Welsh. By the 1980s only 20% of the popu-
lation spoke the language. But the rate of decline has become less rapid. In 2001, 
for the third time, the census results indicated an increase in the number of young 
people speaking Welsh. And a 2004 survey reported that 22% of those sampled 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
95
could speak Welsh, and 57% of those considered themselves fluent, with 88% 
reporting that they used Welsh daily. A 2014 survey noted a small decline: 19% 
of the population reported they spoke Welsh with 46% considering themselves 
fluent, and 84% of the fluent speakers using Welsh daily. However, this statistic 
Map 3.2  Census map of Welsh Language usage in 2015
Source: Intellectual Property Office ©2015 Crown copyright.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
96
masks the regional changes that have taken place within Wales, with the number 
of speakers in traditionally Welsh-​speaking regions such as Gwynedd falling, 
while the number of young speakers in urban areas such as Cardiff, where Welsh 
has not traditionally been spoken, is rising. This has been attributed partly to 
migration, and partly to parents in Welsh cities sending their children to Welsh-​
medium schools.
It has taken a conscious and concerted effort on the part of many Welsh 
people to slow down the process of language loss. This has included obtaining 
a Welsh-​language TV channel and establishing successful bilingual education 
programmes which extend from pre-​school to tertiary level in areas such as 
Gwynedd. Effective bilingual schooling has generally involved a process known 
as “immersion”. Children are immersed in the language (like a warm bath), and 
it is used to teach them science, mathematics and social studies, for instance. 
They are not “taught” the language. It is rather used as a medium of instruc-
tion to teach them the normal school curriculum. This method has proved very 
successful in many different countries as a means of learning a second language.
Example 14
David is Welsh and he lives in Llandudno in Gwynedd. He is 14 years old 
and he goes to a Welsh-​medium boys’ secondary school where he is taught 
maths, physics and chemistry in English, and history, geography and social 
studies in Welsh. Like most of the boys in his class he went to a Welsh-​
medium primary school where almost all the teaching and learning was 
in Welsh. His parents speak some Welsh but they are not fluent, and he 
reckons he now knows a lot more Welsh vocabulary than they do. His little 
sister attends the local Welsh primary school and she has been complaining 
to their parents that there are some “foreigners” from Liverpool in her 
class who make fun of the sounds of Welsh. David has threatened to come 
and sort them out, but so far his parents have managed to restrain his 
enthusiasm!
In at least some areas, Welsh–​English bilingualism has become a reality for 
children who are taught in Welsh at school. Now, ironically, it appears the success 
of these programmes may again be under threat as a result of the economic situ-
ation of the English. Poor and unemployed families from areas such as Liverpool 
have moved to Wales because it is cheaper to live in the countryside than in the 
towns. At the other end of the social scale, richer people are exchanging small 
townhouses in the south of England for much larger houses and land in Wales. 
The children of these English people are a threat to the success of bilingual 
programmes since they see no point in learning Welsh. Once again, economic 
factors are likely to be important in assessing the long-​term outcomes of efforts 
at language maintenance and revival.
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
97
Exercise 11
The scales introduced in ­chapter 1 provide a useful framework for considering the different 
factors which lead to language maintenance or language shift in different contexts. 
Consider one minority group situation that is familiar to you.
(a)	
What is the status of the minority group compared to the majority group?
(b)	
Which is the language of solidarity for the group and which language expresses 
social distance or formality?
(c)	
How formal are the different situations each language is used in?
(d)	
Which language expresses referential meaning most satisfactorily and most fre-
quently, and which expresses social or affective meaning most often?
(e)	
Which patterns are likely to result in language maintenance and which in lan-
guage shift?
Exercise 12
Figure 3.1 provides a useful way of analysing the relationship between linguistic and non-
linguistic factors in relation to language maintenance and shift. Consider how each of the 
factors in the wheel is relevant in favouring or inhibiting language shift in relation to a 
minority language in your country.
Answer at end of chapter
Figure 3.1  Dimensions for analysing language maintenance and shift
Source: Developed from Spolsky (1978).
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
98
Exercise 13
Yoruba, the language of people living in the state of Lagos in Nigeria, West Africa, is 
increasingly threatened by the spread of English. In November 2006, Chief Olusoji Smith 
led a group of tribal elders who recommended that Yoruba be made compulsory as an 
admission criterion into tertiary institutions. How much of a contribution do you think this 
will make to encouraging parents to use Yoruba in the home?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 14
Can you think of any factors which may contribute to language shift which have not been 
discussed in detail in this chapter?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 15
Bilingual education has been discussed in this chapter mainly as a means of maintaining 
or reviving the language of a minority community under threat from a more dominant 
language. But there are other benefits of bilingualism. Can you think of three additional 
reasons why parents might wish their children to be bilingual?
Answer at end of chapter
There is clearly no magic formula for guaranteeing language maintenance 
or for predicting language shift or death. Different factors combine in different 
ways in each social context, and the results are rarely predictable. Similar factors 
apparently result in a stable bilingual situation in some communities, but lan-
guage shift in others. This account has stressed the importance of economic, 
social, demographic and attitudinal factors. Economic factors are very influen-
tial and rarely work in favour of maintaining small minority group languages. 
Where new jobs are created by industrialisation, they are often introduced by 
groups using a majority group language with status –​ often a world language 
such as English, Spanish or French.
Globalisation also contributes to this trend. Along with the global spread of 
concepts, artifacts and ways of doing things, comes the global language which 
labels them. The degree of success of a group in resisting the intrusion of a 
global language into all domains, and especially the family domain, will gen-
erally account for the speed of language shift. Successful resistance requires a 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
99
conscious and determined effort to maintain the minority language: “Wishing 
will not make it so”.
Though economic and political imperatives tend to eliminate minority 
languages, it is important to remember examples like Welsh and Hebrew which 
demonstrate that languages can be maintained, and even revived, when a group 
values their distinct identity highly and regards language as an important symbol 
of that identity. Finally, it is also important to realise that pressures towards 
language shift occur mainly in countries where monolingualism is regarded as 
normal, and bilingualism is considered unusual. For most of the world, it is 
bilingualism and multilingualism which are normal. In countries like Singapore 
or India, the idea that you should stop speaking one language when you start 
learning another is inconceivable.
Methods
See ­exercise 1 and the associated answers for several methods of collecting data on multi-
lingual communities (e.g. observation, interview, linguistic landscapes and library work). 
These methods can also be used to collect information on language maintenance efforts 
by minority group communities.
Remember: if you use these methods, they each require careful preparation to ensure 
that you don’t waste your participants’ time or cause them any discomfort.
•	 Observation: see answer to ­exercise 19 at the end of ­chapter 2. In this chapter we 
suggested that photographs and notes on linguistic landscapes (posters, adverts, graffiti 
etc) might indicate use of minority languages in a community which would support lan-
guage maintenance efforts.
•	 Interview: see answer to ­exercise 19 at the end of ­chapter 2. In this chapter we suggested 
interviewing a friend or acquaintance who belongs to an ethnic minority with a distinct 
language. This could provide the basis for developing a set of questions which could be 
used to interview more people.
Additional methods of collecting information on language maintenance efforts by minority 
groups:
•	 Questionnaire: A written questionnaire is a useful way of collecting information from 
a larger group of minority group members. There is a large literature to guide you in 
devising a good questionnaire. Trialing the questionnaire with friends who are members 
of the minority group is also essential.
•	 Recording: Recordings made by families who use a minority language can provide 
useful insights into their language maintenance practices. People are often unaware of 
their language practices, so recordings provide more reliable data than interviews and 
questionnaires. They also provide much more detail regarding the ways in which the 
majority and minority language are used by different family members in the home, as well 
as the different functions they serve.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
100
  However, this is a potentially intrusive and time-​consuming approach, so sensitivity is 
needed. You could ask a good friend to trial this method, perhaps by recording for half 
an hour at different times of the day over a week. This would help ensure that you are 
aware of the challenges that this method involves. In her PhD, Melanie Revis describes 
these challenges in detail as well as the additional information she gained from recordings 
provided by three minority group families. The dynamic nature of linguistic interaction in 
such families is well illustrated by her analysis, as well as the complex contextual influences 
on their linguistic usage.
•	 Social media: Many minority languages have a growing online presence, and one easy 
way to see some community-​based language maintenance is to look for Facebook groups 
that discuss a language, both in that language and sometimes in English as well. Often 
these groups are a mixture of L1 (first language) and L2 (second language) speakers of 
the language and serve as a way for L2 speakers to ask questions about language usage 
that they might not understand. These social media groups can be a way for diasporic 
language groups to connect with speakers across the world.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 3
Answer to ­exercise 1 (b)
There are many possible ways to research the ethnic groups in the area where 
you live. You could note the range of takeaway bars, restaurants and shops 
which cater for different ethnic tastes. (A New Zealand student identified 12 
different languages used in 16 different takeaway bars in Wellington city centre.) 
The range of Indigenous and non-​Indigenous names in the telephone directory 
provides additional information. You could ask at the local community centre, 
the citizens’ advice bureau, the library, local churches and the local schools and 
kindergartens. You could look for evidence of provision made for the language 
needs of different language groups –​ for instance, notices in different ethnic 
languages on community notice boards, religious services in a range of languages, 
newspapers in different languages, and so on.
Answer to ­exercise 1 (c)
Consider how many different linguistic varieties (languages, dialects, styles) you 
identified on your walk and what they suggest about the kind of community in 
which you live. The linguistic varieties observable in public spaces can provide 
valuable information about the sociolinguistic complexities of a community. 
Official signs painted professionally in formal script in the dominant language(s) 
may contrast with unofficial signs in a minority language which may be infor-
mally painted or handwritten. Graffiti may illustrate a vernacular linguistic 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
101
variety. And since graffiti often express subversive messages (from the point of 
view of those in authority), the linguistic landscape may provide insights into 
the ongoing linguistic battles underway in a society. As a participant observer, 
you know how to interpret the social significance of different components of 
your own linguistic landscape. You can also guess the intended audience of a 
particular sign. If you tried the same exercise in a city in a foreign country, you 
would face a much more difficult challenge in knowing the social meaning of 
what you were observing.
Answer to ­exercise 3 (a)
Speaker
Age
1
2
3
4
5
6
H
10
Hu
GHu
G
G
G
G
I
10
Hu
G
G
G
G
G
A number of alternatives are possible, but your pattern should show only 
German in column 3 and the spread of German into column 2.
More recent research in this area suggests that though the numbers of people 
working in agricultural jobs has decreased, attitudes to Hungarian remain posi-
tive. This is indicated partly by an increase in the numbers reporting in the 
1991 census that they used Hungarian. Without more detailed recent research, 
however, we cannot know how much Hungarian people use in their everyday 
interactions, and in which domains it is still used.
Answer to ­exercise 3 (b)
In general, the more domains in which a minority language is used, the more 
likely it will be maintained. Domain compartmentalisation –​ keeping the domains 
of use of the two languages quite separate –​ also assists resistance to infiltra-
tion from the dominant language. Where minority languages have resisted shift 
longest, there has been at least one domain in which the minority language is 
used exclusively. The home is the one most under any family’s control and, espe-
cially where there are grandparents and other older family members who use the 
language, language maintenance has sometimes been possible. In larger minority 
communities the minority language may be maintained in more domains than 
just the home. Religious services may be held in the minority group language; and 
some education (e.g. out-​of-​school classes) may take place in the language. There 
may even be some work available which allows the use of the minority language.
Answer to ­exercise 5 (a)
Language shift generally refers to the process by which one language displaces 
another in the linguistic repertoire of a community. It also refers to the result of 
this process. Language death has occurred when a language is no longer spoken 
naturally anywhere in the world.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
102
Language shift for the Chinese community may result in Cantonese being no 
longer spoken in New Zealand or Britain, but Cantonese will not suffer lan-
guage death while there are millions of people who use it as a first language in 
China and South-​East Asia. If Welsh was no longer spoken in Wales, however, it 
would be a dead language.
Answer to ­exercise 5 (b)
In most of the examples given in first half of this chapter, a dominant language, 
which initially serves only H functions for a community, has gradually displaced 
the minority language in the domains where it served L functions. So English, 
the H language for many immigrant communities, tends to displace their ethnic 
language. In Oberwart too, it is the H variety, German, which is displacing the 
L variety, Hungarian. In Sauris, described in ­chapter 1, ­example 7, Italian, the 
H variety, was displacing the German dialect which served L functions. In cases 
such as these, where the H variety is a fully developed language used elsewhere by 
another community, extending it into L domains presents no linguistic problems. 
The required grammar and vocabulary are already available. Moreover, the 
high status of the H variety favours such a shift. Similarly, a standard language 
can steadily take over the domains of a vernacular dialect, as in rural southern 
France.
It is possible, however, for a vigorous L variety to gradually expand its 
functions upwards into H domains and take over the functions of H in literature, 
administration, the law and so on. Examples of this process are Greek Dhimotiki 
in this chapter and Tanzanian Swahili as described in ­chapter 5. Indonesian is 
a well-​known example of a language which began as a language of the market-
place, but which expanded into all domains, and is now the national language 
of Indonesia.
The story of Hebrew shows that it is also possible, through hard work, to 
take a highly codified H variety which is not used for everyday conversation 
anywhere else and expand its linguistic resources so that it can be used in L 
domains too. Hebrew expanded from a narrow range of religious (H) functions 
to become the national language of Israel, and it is now used as a first language 
for all functions by many speakers.
The reasons for the different directions that language shift may take involve 
more than just economic factors, such as where the jobs are. The number of 
speakers of a language, or the extent of a group’s political influence or power, 
may be crucial. Attitudes and values are important too. Factors such as the status 
of a language and its importance as an identity marker may be crucial, as the 
Hebrew example suggests.
Answer to ­exercise 6
When marriage partners use different languages, the majority group language 
almost always displaces the minority language. Most often in such families, 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
103
parents use the majority language to their children. When the minority language 
is the mother’s language it may survive longer, but in the end shift to the majority 
language seems inevitable.
Answer to ­exercise 7 (a)
Language is an important component of identity and culture for many groups. 
Maintaining their distinct identity and culture is usually important to a minority 
group member’s self-​esteem, and this will affect the degree of success achieved 
in the society.
Answer to ­exercise 7 (b)
It is possible to make a very long list of factors which in some places seem to 
contribute to language maintenance, but the same factors may elsewhere have 
little effect or even be associated with shift. In other words, there are no absolute 
answers to this exercise.
On the basis of what you have read so far you might have identified some 
factors which fit into one of the following categories and which could contribute 
to language maintenance:
1	
The patterns of language use: the more domains in which the minority lan-
guage can be used, the more chance there is of its being maintained. The 
possibilities will be largely determined by socioeconomic factors, such as 
where the jobs are.
2	
Demographic factors: where a group is large enough to provide plenty of 
speakers, and is reasonably able to isolate itself from contact with the majority, 
at least in some domains, there is more chance of language maintenance. 
Minority languages may be maintained for longer where members of ethnic 
communities are living in the same area. The frequency of contact with the 
homeland can also be important –​ a large number of new immigrants, visitors 
or visits to the “mother country” tend to contribute to language maintenance.
3	
Attitudes to the minority language: where it is valued and regarded with 
pride as identifying the minority group and expressing its distinctive culture, 
there is more chance of a language being maintained. It helps if the language 
has status in the community too. Support for language maintenance from 
bilingual peers can contribute to maintenance (just as pressure from mono-
lingual majority group peers can accelerate shift).
Answer to ­exercise 8
In answering this exercise, you can be very creative and think of ways to engage 
your children with “your” language. The following are some suggestions to help 
stimulate your discussion:
•	You could tell and read stories to your children in your language.
•	You could teach them songs in your language.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
104
•	You could have role plays, such as shopping transactions, or cooking lessons, 
where your children are required to use your language.
•	You could ensure that they frequently speak with family members who speak 
your language (grandparents, uncles and aunties, and especially their cousins), 
back in your country, if possible.
•	If this is culturally appropriate, you could play traditional DVDs with dances 
and songs and encourage your children to dance and sing along.
•	You could watch entertaining films in your language.
•	You could teach them jokes and puns in your language.
There are many other ways which the further reading at the end of this chapter 
may suggest to you.
Answer to ­exercise 9
Institutional support can be sought in domains such as education, religion, law 
and administration, and the media.
Examples of this kind of support are:
•	Use of the minority language in education, e.g. bilingual education programmes 
–​ using or teaching the minority language in school, in pre-​school, and in after-​
school programmes.
•	Use of the language in places of worship, e.g. for services, sermons, hymns and 
chants.
•	Support by the law and administration, e.g. the right to use the language in 
court, the House of Assembly, in dealing with government officials, etc.
•	Use of and support for the language in the media, e.g. TV and radio 
programmes, newspapers and magazines, Facebook pages, YouTube videos 
of people speaking their languages, and Wikipedia in minority languages 
(although this is user-​generated and can have unforeseen consequences, such 
as the situation in 2020 when a well-​meaning American teenager created large 
amounts of the Scots language version of Wikipedia without any knowledge 
of Scots grammar).
Answer to ­exercise 12
The patterns identified will vary according to the minority group selected. Very 
often the answers will be complicated.
Scottish Gaelic in Britain, for instance, has different status in the eyes of 
different people –​ even the Scots themselves. For some it is the language of soli-
darity and the language with which they identify. It is an effective vehicle of 
referential meaning as well as positive affective meaning for such people. Others 
regard Scottish Gaelic as irrelevant and useless. For them it has low status, 
especially compared to English. Whether Scottish Gaelic can be used in formal 
contexts, such as a school board meeting, depends on which part of Scotland a 
person lives in, and how many proficient speakers are present.
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
105
Where a language is rated as high in status by its users, and also regarded as 
a language of solidarity to be used between minority group members; where it 
is regarded as appropriate for expressing referential as well as affective or social 
meaning; and where it is able to be used in a wide range of contexts, both formal 
and informal –​ the language is much more likely to be maintained. Welsh would 
fit this description in the opinion of those who support Welsh language main-
tenance. Welsh is used in formal and official contexts, is seen in public signage, 
and is heard in public domains. A language confined to informal contexts and 
conversations between friends and used for expressing predominantly social 
functions is vulnerable to replacement by the higher status, more widely used 
language of the wider society.
Answer to ­exercise 13
Though it may contribute to the prestige of Yoruba and encourage more positive 
attitudes to its maintenance, it seems unlikely that a requirement of Yoruba for 
entrance to tertiary institutions will make much difference to the use of Yoruba 
in the home. To encourage the more widespread use of Yoruba, it would prob-
ably be more useful to require that it be used more extensively in educational 
institutions at all levels.
Answer to ­exercise 14
One important factor which may contribute to language shift but which has 
not been discussed in detail in this chapter is technological change, including 
the increased accessibility of all kinds of material through the internet, together 
with widening access to handheld devices and high-​speed wireless internet. 
These have a tendency to accelerate the spread of already dominant world 
languages. However, since services like Google Translate can now translate 
any webpage, the important factor becomes not just the language of content 
writers, but the languages that the Artificial Intelligence (AI) can translate 
between. Often, minority languages do not receive a reliable service in this 
regard as the AI of translation requires large amounts of input to become 
reliable.
You may have thought of other factors too, some of which may be discussed 
in the next two chapters.
Answer to ­exercise 15
Some advantages of bilingualism:
•	Bilingualism is an advantage socially because it provides access to more than 
one speech community. This can be especially important when grandparents 
speak only one language which is not the language of the community that their 
grandchildren live in. Bilingual grandchildren can maintain contact with their 
grandparents.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
106
•	Bilingualism is an advantage cognitively because there is evidence that the 
ability to manipulate more than one linguistic system encourages cognitive 
flexibility. Children in bilingual programmes have often proved to be better 
at maths, for example, than monolingual children from similar backgrounds. 
Chapter 13 discusses this issue in more detail. Bilinguals are also often credited 
with better memories and with being more linguistically creative.
•	Bilingualism is often an advantage economically because some employers hire 
people who can address customers in their preferred language.
•	Bilingualism has been shown to delay the onset of Alzheimer’s disease by about 
four years or so.
You may be able to think of further advantages of being bilingual in specific 
communities.
Concepts introduced
•	Language shift
•	Broad diglossia
•	Language death
•	Language loss
•	Language maintenance
•	Bilingual education
•	Ethnolinguistic vitality
•	Linguistic landscapes
•	Language revival/​reclamation
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
AILA Research Network, email circulated on Language Policy 1 December 2006 
on Yoruba
Appel and Müysken (1987: 35) on Cherokee
Baker (1992); Lewis (1978); www.statistics.gov.uk/​census2001/​profiles/​com-
mentaries/​ethnicity.asp on Wales
Bell, David and Starks (2000); Fairbairn-​Dunlop (1984); Hirsh (1987); 
Jamieson (1980); Roberts (1991, 2001); Verivaki (1991) for New Zealand 
minority groups
Benton (1991, 2001), Survey of the Health of the Māori Language (2001) and 
recent personal communication. The quotations from Richard Benton in the 
section on migrant majorities are taken from a personal email.
Bialystok (2007) on bilingualism and dementia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE AND SHIFT
107
Brown (1995) on Mapuche
Cenoz (2003) for an overview of the benefits of bilingualism
Clyne (1982, 1985) on Australian ethnic minorities
Dunmore (2019) on immersion education and revitalisation
Eckert (2018)
Evans (2010) on Ubykh
Gal (1979); Bodo (2005); Carnevale et al. (2008); www.statistic.at on Oberwart
Giles (1977); Giles and Johnston (1987) on ethnolinguistic vitality
Gorter (2006); Shohamy and Gorter (2009) on linguistic landscapes
Gutmann Fuentes (2019) on Mapudungun
Hecht (2011) on Toba (with assistance from Mariana Lazzarro Salazar)
Lane, Chris (2020) personal communication based on his analysis of the 2018 
New Zealand census statistics on the Māori language. See also www.stats.
govt.nz/​news/​1-​in-​5-​maori-​people-​speak-​te-​reo-​maori
Leith (1983) on English
Linguistic Minorities Project (1985) on England
Māori Language Commission/​Te Taura Whiri for information on the health of 
the Māori language: www.tetaurawhiri.govt.nz/​english/​issues_​e/​reo/​:http://​
www.tetaurawhiri.govt.nz/​english/​issues_​e/​reo/​
Mirvahedi (2016, 2020) on language use in Iran
Mirvahedi and Nasjian (2010) on Farsi and Azerbaijani in Iran
Revis (2015) discusses methods for recording minority group family interactions 
in the home
Schmidt (1985, 1990); Dixon (2002) on Aboriginal languages, including Dyirbal
Spolsky (1978, 2003) on Māori
www.guardian.co.uk/​world/​2011/​apr/​13/​mexico-​languageayapaneco-​dying-​out 
on Ayapaneco or Nuumte Oote
www.npr.org/​2021/​03/​12/​976641201/​mapping-​maaz-​nasa-​uses-​navajo-​
language-​to-​name-​features-​on-​mars
Quotations:
Example 11 is a quotation from Herder cited in Fishman (1978: 49–​50)
Useful additional reading
Austin and Sallabank (2011)
Baker and Wright (2021)
Bell (2014): ­chapter 3
Bigelow and Engman (2020) on reclamation of Indigenous languages
Blackwood, Lanza and Woldemariam (2017) on linguistic landscapes and iden-
tity construction
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
108
Boberg (2017) on using written questionnaires
Child Language Research and Revitalization Working Group (2017)
Crystal (2002a)
Evans (2010)
Fishman (2001)
Leonard (2017) on language reclamation and decolonisation
Linguistic Minorities Project (1985)
May (2001)
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 8
Meyerhoff, Schleef and Mackenzie (2015) on methodology
Myers-​Scotton (2006): ­chapter 4
Revis (2017)
Romaine (2007)
Schleef (2014) on written surveys and questionnaires
Thomason (2015)
www.clickonwales.org/​2012/​01/​cymdeithas-​at-​50-​half-​a-​century-​ago/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

109
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-5
Over half the world’s population is bilingual and many people are multilin-
gual. They acquire a number of languages because they need them for different 
purposes in their everyday interactions. Kalala’s experience in the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (Zaire), described at the beginning of ­chapter 2, 
illustrated this. One language was his ethnic or tribal language, another was 
the language of his education, and another served as a useful language of 
wider communication in particular contexts, such as the marketplace, or with 
outsiders or tourists. This chapter examines the labels and the criteria that 
sociolinguists use to distinguish between different varieties or codes in multi-
lingual communities.
Example 1
Mr Patel is a spice merchant who lives in Mumbai. When he gets up, he 
talks to his wife and children in Kathiawari, their dialect of Gujarati. 
Every morning he goes to the local market where he uses Marathi to buy 
vegetables. At the railway station he buys a ticket into Mumbai city using 
Hindustani, the working person’s lingua franca. He reads his Gujarati 
newspaper on the train, and when he gets to work he uses Kacchi, the 
language of the spice trade, all day. He knows enough English to enjoy an 
English cricket commentary on the radio, but he would find an English 
film difficult to follow. However, since the spice business is flourishing, his 
children go to an English-​medium school, so he expects them to be more 
proficient in English than he is.
The fact that India is one of the most multilingual nations in the world is 
reflected in Mr Patel’s linguistic repertoire, just as the linguistic heterogeneity 
of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire) was reflected in Kalala’s rep-
ertoire. With a population of over a billion, Indians use hundreds of different 
languages –​ the exact number depends on what counts as a distinct language, as 
opposed to a dialect of another language. With this kind of linguistic diversity, 
it is easy to understand the problems facing the country at the national level. 
Linguistic varieties and 
multilingual nations
4
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
110
Should a country use the same language for internal administration and for offi-
cial communications with other nations? Which language or languages should 
be used by the government and the courts? In order to assess the relative claims 
of different languages, it is necessary to look at their status and the functions 
which they serve.
Sociolinguists have developed a number of ways of categorising languages, 
according to their status and social functions. The distinction between a ver-
nacular language and a standard language is a useful place to start.
Vernacular languages
The term vernacular is used in a number of ways in sociolinguistics. It gen-
erally refers to a language which has not been standardised and which does 
not have official status. There are hundreds if not thousands of vernacular 
languages, such as Buang in Papua New Guinea, Hindustani in India, Tapiete 
in Argentina, Mapuche in Chile, and Bumbar in Vanuatu, many of which have 
never been written down or described. In a multilingual speech community, the 
many different ethnic or tribal languages used by different groups are referred 
to as vernacular languages. Vernaculars are usually the first languages learned 
by people in multilingual communities, and they are often used for a relatively 
narrow range of informal functions.
There are three components to the meaning of the term vernacular, then. The 
most basic refers to the fact that a vernacular is an uncodified or unstandardised 
variety. The second refers to the way it is acquired –​ in the home, as a first var-
iety. The third is the fact that it is used for relatively circumscribed functions. 
The first component has been most widely used as the defining criterion, but 
emphasis on one or other of the components has led to the use of the term ver-
nacular with somewhat different meanings.
Some have extended the term to refer to any language which is not the offi-
cial language of a country. An influential 1951 Unesco report, for instance, 
defined a vernacular language as the first language of a group socially or polit-
ically dominated by a group with a different language. So, in countries such as 
the USA where English is the language of the dominant group, a language like 
Spanish is referred to as a Chicano child’s vernacular. But Spanish would not 
be regarded as a vernacular language in Spain, Uruguay or Chile, where it is an 
official language. In this sense, Greek is a vernacular language in Australia and 
New Zealand, but not in Greece or Cyprus. The term vernacular here simply 
means a language which is not an official language in a particular context. 
When people talk about education in a vernacular language, for instance, they 
are usually referring to education in an ethnic minority language in a particular 
country.
The term vernacular generally refers to the most colloquial variety in a 
person’s linguistic repertoire. In a multilingual community, this variety will often 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
111
be an unstandardised ethnic or tribal language. The vernacular is the variety 
used for communication in the home and with close friends. It is the language 
of solidarity between people from the same ethnic group. By extension, the term 
has been used to refer in a monolingual community to the most informal and 
colloquial variety of a language which may also have a standardised variety. 
The term vernacular is used with this meaning by sociolinguists studying social 
dialects, as we will see in ­chapter 6.
Finally, the term vernacular is sometimes used to indicate that a language is 
used for everyday interaction, without implying that it is appropriate only in 
informal domains. Hebrew, for example, used to be a language of ritual and 
religion with no native speakers. It was no-​one’s “parental tongue” and was 
certainly not considered a vernacular language at that time. Sociolinguists have 
described the process of developing it for use as the national language of Israel 
as vernacularisation. Its functions were extended from exclusively H functions to 
include L functions. From being a language of ritual, Hebrew became a language 
of everyday communication –​ a vernacular language. In this sense, vernacular 
contrasts with ritual or classical language. The Catholic church at one time used 
Latin for church services, rather than vernacular languages such as English, 
French and Italian. Using this definition, any language which has native speakers 
would be considered a vernacular. This is a very broad definition, and it is gen-
erally not as useful as the more specific definition which contrasts vernacular 
languages with the standardised languages used for more formal functions.
Exercise 1
(a)	
Using the first definition above, which of the languages used by Kalala in ­chapter 2, 
­example 1, and Mr Patel in ­example 1 above, qualify as a vernacular language?
(b)	
Is Dyirbal, described in ­chapter 3, ­example 7, a vernacular language? Use the three 
criteria introduced in this section to help you come to a decision.
Answers at end of chapter
Standard languages
Example 2
Do not take the termes of Northern-​men, such as they use in dayly talke, 
whether they be noblemen or gentlemen, or of their best clarkes all is a 
matter; nor in effect any speach used beyond the river Trent, though no 
man can deny but that theirs is the purer English Saxon at this day, yet it 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
112
is not so Courtly nor so currant as our Southern English is, no more is the 
far Westerne mans speach; ye shall therefore take the usuall speach of the 
Court, and that of London and the shires lying about London within LX 
myles, and not much above.
This is George Puttenham’s sixteenth-​century view of where young authors 
would find the most acceptable variety of English. Good English speech was to 
be heard, in Puttenham’s opinion, at Court and from gentlemen who lived within 
60 miles of London. He was largely right in identifying the social and regional 
origins of the variety which we now regard as standard British English.
The term standard is even more slippery than vernacular because it too is used 
in many different ways by linguists. Here is one definition which can serve as a 
useful starting point:
A standard variety is generally one which is written, and which has undergone 
some degree of regularisation or codification (for example, in a grammar and 
a dictionary); it is recognised as a prestigious variety or code by a community, 
and it is used for H functions alongside a diversity of L varieties.
This is a very general definition and it immediately excludes most of the 
world’s four or five thousand languages. Only a minority of the world’s languages 
are written, and an even smaller minority are standardised in the sense of codi-
fied and accepted by the community as suitable for formal functions. It will be 
useful to look at an example to illustrate what the definition means in a particular 
context.
Standard English emerged “naturally” in the fifteenth century from a var-
iety of regional English dialects, largely because it was the variety used by the 
English Court and the influential merchants of London, as Puttenham noted. 
The area where the largest proportion of the English population lived at that 
time was in a neat triangle containing London, where the Court was based, and 
the two universities, Oxford and Cambridge. In addition, the East Midlands was 
an important agricultural and business area, and London was the hub of inter-
national trade and exports to Calais. It was also the centre of political, social and 
intellectual life in England.
So it was the dialect used in this area which formed the basis of what we 
now think of as standard English. It was prestigious because of its use in Court. 
It was influential because it was used by the economically powerful merchant 
class. People who came to London from the provinces recognised this and often 
learned it, and this of course made it useful. The more people who used it, the 
less effort people had to make to understand regional varieties. It is easy to see 
how such a code would rapidly develop formal H functions in the context of 
administration and government.

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
113
Standard varieties are codified varieties. Codification is usually achieved 
through grammars and dictionaries which record, and sometimes prescribe, the 
standard forms of the language. Dictionary writers (or lexicographers) have to 
decide which words to include in the dictionary as part of the standard variety, 
as well as which forms to mark as dialectal, and which to omit altogether. They 
generally take the usage of educated and socially prestigious members of the 
community as their criterion.
The codification process, which is part of the development of every standard 
variety, was accelerated in the case of English by the introduction of printing. 
In 1476, William Caxton, the first English printer, set up his printing press in 
Westminster. He used the speech of the London area –​ the newly emerging 
standard dialect –​ as the basis for his translations. In other words, he used the 
vocabulary, the grammar and the pronunciation of this dialect when looking 
for words, constructions and spellings to translate works from French. Selecting 
forms was not always straightforward, however. Caxton comments, for instance, 
on the problems of deciding between egges and eyren, alternative forms used for 
eggs at the time. This choice involved grammar as well as pronunciation since 
these forms represented alternative ways of pluralising words (the -​en plural 
marker has survived in oxen, for instance). Like other codifiers, he reported 
that he consulted the best writers of the upper class for judgements on usage 
problems.
The development of standard English illustrates the three essential criteria 
which characterise a standard: it was an influential or prestigious variety; it was 
codified and stabilised; and it served H functions in that it was used for com-
munication at Court, for literature and for administration. It also demonstrates 
that what we refer to as a standard language is always a particular dialect 
which has gained its special position as a result of social, economic and polit-
ical influences. A standard dialect initially has no particular linguistic merits, 
whether in vocabulary, grammar or pronunciation. It is simply the dialect of 
those who are politically powerful and socially prestigious. Once it begins to 
serve as a norm or standard for a wider group, however, it typically develops 
the wider vocabulary needed to express the new functions that it is required 
to serve.
Standard languages developed in similar ways in many European countries 
during the fifteenth, sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. In Italy, Spain, France 
and Romania, for example, there were a variety of dialects of the vernacular 
languages (which all derived from varieties of colloquial Latin) which served 
the L functions of their communities, alongside classical Latin, the H language. 
From these dialects there gradually emerged a standard, generally based on the 
dialect of the political, economic and social centre of the country. Some dialects 
had extra help –​ the Italians, for example, established a language academy as 
early as 1582 to make pronouncements on what counted as standard Italian –​ 
but most were natural births.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
114
Exercise 2
Look up the meaning of “standard” in a good dictionary. Which of the meanings listed 
seems closest to the definition provided in this section?
Answer at end of chapter
World Englishes
Once a standard dialect develops or is developed, it generally provides a very 
useful means of communication across areas of dialect diversity. Its status 
as a prestige language guarantees it will spread. Standard English has served 
as a useful variety for communication between areas of dialect diversity, not 
only within Britain but also in countries where the British have had a colo-
nial influence. Local varieties of English, with distinctive linguistic features, have 
developed in many multilingual countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, Hong 
Kong, India, and many African countries where English has served as a valuable 
language of wider communication in a multilingual context.
The terms World Englishes and New Englishes have been used to empha-
sise the range of different varieties of English that have developed since the 
nineteenth century. In contexts where multilingualism is the norm, relatively 
standard varieties, such as formal Singapore English, expressing global concepts 
shared across nations, co-​exist alongside more “nativised” varieties of English, 
influenced by local languages. Singlish, a very informal, colloquial variety of 
Singapore English, is a well-​described example. These nativised varieties may 
express the local aspirations and identities of a wide range of communities, and 
this is reflected in linguistic characteristics such as stress patterns, vocabulary 
from local languages, grammatical features which indicate the influence of local 
languages, and semantic concepts drawn from the other languages spoken in 
the communities where they are used. Singlish has a frequently occurring ethnic 
final tag lah, for example, as well as distinctive intonation patterns, grammar 
and vocabulary. Chin chye lah in answer to a query means something like it’s up 
to you, I don’t mind. Indian English also has a very distinctive stress pattern, an 
end-​tag kya meaning right?, and many words from local languages are woven 
into Indian English conversations.
Many New Englishes use just one invariant tag form: e.g. he is going there 
isn’t it; she loves you isn’t it. These varieties, typically used by those for whom 
English is a second language, have been labeled by Braj Kachru as outer-​circle 
varieties of English to distinguish them from varieties used by people as a first 
language or mother tongue (sometimes labelled native speakers), or inner-​circle 
varieties (see ­figure 4.1).
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
115
The local varieties of English which have developed in New Zealand,  
Australia, Canada and the USA, where most of the populations are monolin-
gual English speakers, are examples of inner-​circle English varieties. Kachru  
also identified an expanding circle of those who acquired English as an add-
itional, adjunct or foreign language for a wide range of reasons such as trade  
or access to higher education, as in China or Japan. English is a foreign lan-
guage in the expanding circle, serving no crucial communication functions  
within a country.
Exercise 3
The concept of inner, outer and expanding circles of English presents some problems when 
we think about the way English is used in countries such as India and Singapore, where 
it is the first language of many people. Can you think of a better way of distinguishing 
between different varieties of English across the world?
Answer at end of chapter
While there is a range of variation in spoken varieties at all linguistic levels 
of analysis, the degree of variation in written standard varieties has not been so 
great in the past. Countries like Australia and New Zealand have established 
their own standard Englishes, both spoken and written, but in some countries 
the standard English of Britain has served as a norm until relatively recently. In 
Figure 4.1  Inner, outer and expanding circles of English
Source: Slightly adapted from Kachru (1985).

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
116
Singapore, for instance, British English is still endorsed, at least tacitly, by the gov-
ernment as the appropriate target variety in schools and official communications. 
The dialect which emerged as the standard in Caxton’s time –​ the ancestor of all 
standard Englishes –​ has been influential well beyond the borders of its original 
dialect area. However, globalisation means there are now many more speakers 
of English in the outer and expanding circles than in the inner circle, and with 
English as the global language of the internet, and computer-​mediated commu-
nication, variation in old and new Englishes, both written and spoken, will con-
tinue to develop.
English has clearly served as a language of wider communication in many 
pluralist contexts, and in many multilingual countries. Alternatively, a particular 
vernacular or local language may develop the role of a language of wider com-
munication in a multilingual area. Such languages are labelled “lingua francas”, 
and they are the topic of the next section.
Lingua francas
Example 3
In the 1960s, a Catholic nun, Sister Dominic, was sent to Rome for a 
meeting between nuns from different countries. She spoke no Italian but she 
had been managing pretty well with her French and English until she lost 
her purse one evening. She simply could not explain what had happened 
to the local police officer. A priest overheard her struggles and came to her 
rescue. They proceeded to explore their linguistic repertoires trying to find 
a language they shared. He came from Brazil and spoke Portuguese and 
Spanish, but he had been living in Rome for some time, and so he was by 
then familiar with the local variety of Italian. Finally, they found a language 
in which they could communicate –​ Latin! At that time, Latin was still the 
language of church services and both had learned Latin to university level. 
As Sister Dominic described it, the result was a very funny encounter, with 
her explaining her predicament in formal Latin and the priest then trans-
lating into the local Italian dialect.
In this particular encounter, Latin functioned as a lingua franca –​ a language of 
communication between two people. In the meeting Sister Dominic was attending 
between nuns from South America, Africa, Ireland and France, the language of 
wider communication or lingua franca was English. When academics and experts 
meet at international conferences, or when politicians arrange summit meetings, 
a world language such as English, French or Spanish is often used as the lingua 
franca. In these examples, a particular language serves as a lingua franca in a 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
117
particular situation. More generally, however, the term lingua franca describes 
a language serving as a regular means of communication between different lin-
guistic groups in a multilingual speech community.
Example 4
In the heart of the north-​west Amazon near the border between Colombia 
and Brazil, there is a group of Indians who live along the Vaupés river. The 
river is their food source as well as their communication line with other 
Indians and the outside world.
Tuka is a young Indian girl who lives with her family and five other fam-
ilies in a longhouse on the river. The language of her longhouse and the 
language she learnt first is her father’s language, Tuyuka. In a sense then, 
in this community, the father’s language is what is usually referred to as 
the “mother tongue” (i.e. the first language learned). Tuka has learnt her 
mother’s language, Paneroa, as well, however, and speaks it fluently. She 
knows some Spanish which she learned from a couple of the older men who 
spent time working on rubber plantations when they were younger and then 
returned to the longhouse. And she knows Tukano, the language used along 
the river to communicate with Indians who do not speak the longhouse 
language.
Since there are over 20 languages used by other longhouses within reason-
able paddling distance of her longhouse, Tukano is a very useful language 
for communicating with a wider group. It is the lingua franca of her area 
of the Vaupés. When a group of visitors arrive in their canoes, they begin 
by giving the ritual greetings in their own language, providing information 
such as where they have come from, and how long they have been travel-
ling. Then, if they do not know Tuyuka, in order to communicate more spe-
cific information and to exchange gossip, they switch to Tukano, the lingua 
franca for Tuka’s area.
A lingua franca is a language used for communication between people whose 
first languages differ. Between the Colombian Indians, Tukano is the main lingua 
franca, and it can be used with Indians who live in the Vaupés area of the north-​
west Amazon on both sides of the border between Colombia and Brazil. If 
Indians want to communicate with non-​Indians in the area they need a second 
lingua franca, since non-​Indians rarely learn Tukano. Colombians use Spanish, 
and Brazilians use Portuguese.
In some countries, the most useful and widely used lingua franca is an official 
language or the national language. In Tanzania, for instance, Swahili is the  
language people tend to choose first when they are speaking to someone from a  
different tribal group. In Papua New Guinea, Tok Pisin (or Neo-​Melanesian) is  
the most widespread lingua franca, though, not surprisingly in a country with  
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
118
over 800 different vernaculars, there are also other regional lingua francas, such  
as Hiri Motu, which is used widely in the province of Papua. In the former Soviet  
Union, where about 100 different vernaculars were spoken, Russian served as  
a lingua franca as well as being the national and official language of the USSR.  
Throughout the Arabic-​speaking world, Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), a  
modern version of Classical (Koranic) Arabic, is used as a lingua franca among  
the educated. In other countries, educated people often use the language of the  
former colonial power as a lingua franca.
In multilingual communities, lingua francas are so useful they may eventually 
displace the vernaculars. When people from different ethnic groups marry in the 
Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire) or Tanzania or Papua New Guinea, 
they often use the lingua franca of their area as the language of the home, 
Map 4.1  (a) The Vaupes River and the borders with Columbia and Brazil; and (b) The 
Negro and Amazon Rivers and surrounding countries

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
119
and their children may therefore learn very little of their father’s and mother’s 
vernaculars. The reason that this has not happened in the Vaupés area, i.e. that 
Tukano has not displaced the many languages of the different longhouses, is 
related to the marriage patterns, which are exogamous. People must marry 
outside their language and longhouse group, and the taboo against marrying 
someone who speaks the same language is very strong. So a husband will speak 
to his wife in the longhouse language, while the wife replies in her own language. 
Maintaining linguistic distinctiveness is important in this multilingual commu-
nity. If linguistic distinctiveness is an important identifying value for a group, 
then ethnic languages and vernaculars tend to survive, often for a considerable 
time. But, as discussed in ­chapter 3, there are many factors which may contribute 
to their replacement, and the usefulness of lingua francas in multilingual areas is 
certainly one relevant factor.
Lingua francas often develop initially as trade languages –​ illustrating again 
the influence of economic factors on language change. In West Africa, Hausa 
is learned as a second language and used in nearly every marketplace. In East 
Africa, Swahili is the most widely used trade language and it was this –​ the fact 
that it was known and used so widely –​ which led the Tanzanian government to 
select it for promotion as the country’s national language. (Swahili’s progress to 
national language is described in the next chapter.) The history of Tok Pisin is 
similar. It spread as a useful lingua franca for trade in Papua New Guinea and 
became so widely known and used that it was adopted as an official language. 
Some believe it is the front runner as a choice for national language, though 
others think this unlikely in the current political climate. Tok Pisin began life as 
a pidgin language.
Exercise 4
The usefulness of lingua francas which have emerged naturally in a multilingual context 
has often resulted in them being selected as national or official languages.
What factors do you think will be relevant when selecting a language to promote as 
an official or national language? Are they likely to be mainly linguistic or nonlinguistic 
factors?
Answer at end of chapter
There have been many successful attempts to create a language for communi-
cation between people who use different languages. From a linguistic and socio-
linguistic point of view, the most interesting lingua francas in many respects are 
pidgin and creole languages.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
120
Pidgins and creoles
Pidgins
Example 5
Bipo tru igat wanpela liklik meri nau nem bilong em Liklik Retpela Hat. Em i 
save slip wantaim Mama na Papa bilong em long wanpela liklik haus. Papa i 
save wok long bus, i save katim paiawut na ol man save baim long em. Orait i 
gat lapun meri i stap long narapela haus. Dispela lapun emi Tumbuna Mama.
A long time ago, there was a little girl named Little Red Riding Hood. She 
lived with her mother and father in a little house. Father worked in the bush, 
cutting trees for firewood, which he sold to people. Now there was a very old 
lady who lived in another house. This old lady was Little Red Riding Hood’s 
grandmother.
Most people have a predictable reaction to pidgin languages. They find them 
amusing. If you read a children’s story in a variety of pidgin English, it is easy 
to understand why –​ it sounds a lot like baby-​talk. But even if we take a serious 
article from the newspaper, many speakers of English still find pidgin languages 
humorous or babyish. It is very difficult for some to overcome these attitudes 
to pidgins which are based partly on their language. Yet pidgins and creoles are 
real languages, not baby-​talk. They are used for serious purposes, and each has 
a describable and distinctive linguistic structure.
Why do pidgins develop?
A pidgin is a language which has no native speakers. Pidgins develop as a means 
of communication between people who do not have a common language. So a 
pidgin is no-​one’s native language or mother tongue. Pidgins seem particularly 
likely to arise when groups with different languages are communicating in a situ-
ation where there is another dominant language. On Caribbean slave plantations 
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, West African people were deliber-
ately separated from others who used the same language so as to reduce the risk 
of their plotting to escape or rebel. In order to communicate with each other, as 
well as with their overseers, they developed pidgins based on the language of the 
plantation bosses as well as their own languages.
On sea coasts in multilingual contexts, pidgins developed as languages of 
trade between the traders –​ who used a colonial language such as Portuguese, or 
Spanish or English –​ and the Indians, Chinese, Africans or Native Americans that 
they were trading with. In fact, many of the meanings which have been suggested 
 
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
121
for the word pidgin reflect its use as a means of communication between traders. 
It may derive from the word business as pronounced in the pidgin English 
which developed in China, or perhaps from Hebrew pidjom meaning trade or 
exchange, or perhaps from the combination of two Chinese characters péi and 
tsīn meaning paying money.
Example 6
Bislama is a variety of Melanesian Pidgin which is used by nearly everyone 
in Vanuatu, an archipelago of about 80 islands and a population of around 
200,000 in the south-​west Pacific. Like the Caribbean pidgins, it originated 
because of the need for a lingua franca among plantation workers. But 
the Melanesians who worked in the nineteenth century on the sugar-​cane 
plantations of Queensland (Australia), and later Fiji, were not slaves. They 
were “indentured” or contract workers. The pidgin then spread because it 
was so useful to traders in sandalwood and seaslugs (or beche de mer, from 
which the language’s name derives). The usefulness of a lingua franca in 
Vanuatu, a country with over 100 different vernacular languages, guaran-
teed its survival there. Today Bislama is a fully functioning creole which has 
been adopted as Vanuatu’s national language, as we will see in ­chapter 5.
Sign in Vanuatu: If you want a ferry hit the gong
Source: Janet Holmes.
Initially, then, pidgins develop with a narrow range of functions. Those who 
use them speak other languages, so the pidgin is an addition to their linguistic 
repertoire used for a specific purpose, such as trade or perhaps administration. 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
122
In terms of the dimensions identified in ­chapter 1, pidgins are used almost exclu-
sively for referential rather than affective functions. They are typically used for 
quite specific functions like buying and selling grain, or animal hides, rather than 
to signal social distinctions or express politeness. Consequently, the structure of 
a pidgin is generally no more complicated than it needs to be to express these 
functions. Nobody uses a pidgin as a means of group identification, or to express 
social distance, and so there is no pressure to maintain referentially redundant 
features of a language or complicated pronunciations whose main purpose is to 
signal how well educated you are.
What kind of linguistic structure does a pidgin language have?
Example 7
Juba Arabic is a pidgin language spoken in the southern Sudan. It has 
a small vocabulary of words for trade and basic communication, and 
borrows when necessary from languages native to the Sudan or from col-
loquial Arabic. It has a very simple sound system and has almost entirely 
eliminated the complicated morphology of Arabic (which has inflections 
for gender, number and person on the noun, and tense and negation on the 
verb). Juba Arabic has its own distinct structure, and it is a stable variety. 
Though it is easier for an Arabic person to learn than for an English speaker, 
it does require learning and cannot be just improvised for an occasion.
Pidgin languages are created from the combined efforts of people who speak 
different languages. All languages involved may contribute to the sounds, the 
vocabulary and the grammatical features, but to different extents, and some add-
itional features may emerge which are unique to the new variety. Nevertheless, 
it has been found that when one group speaks a prestigious world language and 
the other groups use local vernaculars, the prestige language tends to supply 
more of the vocabulary, while vernacular languages have more influence on the 
grammar of the developing pidgin. The proportion of vocabulary contributed 
to Tok Pisin by English, for example, has been estimated at 77%, compared to 
about 11% from Tolai, the particular local vernacular which has contributed the 
largest amount of vocabulary. The language which supplies most of the vocabu-
lary is known as the lexifier (or sometimes “superstrate”) language, while the 
languages which influence the grammatical structure are called the substrate. So 
in Papua New Guinea, English is the lexifier language for Tok Pisin, while Tolai 
contributes to the substrate.
Because pidgins develop to serve a very narrow range of functions in a very 
restricted set of domains, they tend to have a simplified structure and a small 
vocabulary compared with fully developed languages. Pacific pidgin languages 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
123
have only five vowels, for example: [a, e, i, o, u], compared to around 20 in most 
varieties of English (see the Appendix). Consonant clusters tend to be simpli-
fied (e.g. pes for paste), or vowels are inserted to break them into two syllables 
(e.g. silip for sleep). Affixes are dispensed with. So words generally do not have 
inflections, as in English, to mark the plural, or to signal the tense of the verb. 
Nor are affixes used to mark gender, as in Spanish and Italian. Often the infor-
mation that affixes convey is signalled more specifically elsewhere in the sen-
tence, or it can be deduced from the context, or it is referentially redundant. 
Every learner of French or Spanish, for example, knows that the grammatical 
gender of objects is strictly dispensable if you are interested in communication 
as opposed to impressing people.
Exercise 5
Consider table 4.1. What evidence can you find to support the claim that pidgin languages 
signal only a minimum of grammatical information explicitly?
Table 4.1  Comparison of verb forms in four languages
French
English
Tok Pisin
Cameroon pidgin
je vais
I go
mi go
a go
tu vas
you go
yu go
yu go
elle/​il/​va
she/​he/​it goes
em go
i go
nous allons
we go
yumi go
mipela go
wi go
vous allez
you go
yupela go
wuna go
elles/​ils vont
they go
ol go
dem go
Source: Todd (2003: 2).
Answer at end of chapter
The discussion of inflections has illustrated that pidgin languages tend to 
reduce grammatical signals to a minimum. This makes them easier to learn and 
to use for the speaker, although it puts a greater burden on the listener. In other 
respects, pidgins are difficult for the learner since they tend to be full of struc-
tural irregularities.
The vocabulary needed for a trade language is very small compared to the 
vocabulary of a fully-​fledged language. While estimates vary widely, it has been 
suggested that the average monolingual English-​speaking adult has a vocabulary 
of around 20,000 word families. For a pidgin language which is used only for 
trade, a few hundred words is sufficient. But, as in fully developed languages, 
one form may do a great deal of work. Tok Pisin pas can mean a pass, a letter, 
a permit, ahead, fast, firmly, to be dense, crowded or tight, and to be blocked or 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
124
shut. In Cameroon Pidgin English, the word water can mean lake, river, spring, 
tear or water. This linguistic feature (polysemy) is particularly characteristic of 
the vocabulary of pidgin languages. Every form earns its place.
Attitudes to pidgins
Example 8
Young visitor to Papua New Guinea.
When I first heard Pidgin English I just thought it was baby-​talk. I thought 
anyone can do that. It had words like liklik for “little” and cranky for 
“wrong” and nogut for “bad”. It just made me laugh. Then I began to 
realise it wasn’t as easy as I’d thought. People kept correcting me when 
I tried, and they got annoyed if I didn’t take it seriously. I soon learned 
better.
Pidgin languages do not have high status or prestige and, to those who do not 
speak them, they often seem ridiculous languages. They have been described as 
mongrel jargons and macaroni lingos, and given negative labels such as Broken 
English and Kitchen Kaffir (i.e. Fanagalo, a South African pidgin). They are often 
the butt of comedy routines and a number of apocryphal definitions are widely 
quoted. It has been falsely claimed, for example, that piano in pidgin English is 
“big fella bakis (box) yu faitim he cry”.
Because of the large number of pidgin words which derive from a European 
language in a pidgin such as Tok Pisin, many Europeans consider pidgins to be a 
debased form of their own language. They assume they can guess the meanings. 
This can lead to misunderstandings which can be very serious, as the following 
example demonstrates.
Example 9
A Papua New Guinean stumbled against a white woman coming out of 
the theatre. When questioned about what had happened, the Papua New 
Guinean replied: “Mi putim han long baksait bilong misis” [I touched the 
woman’s back with my hand]. As Suzanne Romaine reports: “The answer 
cost him half a tooth, his job, and three months in prison, due to the confu-
sion between the meaning of Tok Pisin baksait meaning ‘back’, and English 
backside.”
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
125
Lifecycle and origins of pidgins
To sum up, a pidgin language has three identifying characteristics:
1	
it is used in restricted domains and functions
2	
it has a simplified structure compared to the source languages
3	
it generally has low prestige and attracts negative attitudes –​ especially from 
outsiders.
Pidgins often have a short life. If they develop for a restricted function, they 
disappear when the function disappears. In the Vietnam War, a pidgin English 
developed for use between the American troops and the Vietnamese, but it sub-
sequently died out. In the same way, a trading pidgin usually disappears when 
trade between the groups dies out. Alternatively, if trade grows, then more con-
tact will generally lead to at least one side learning the other’s language, and so 
again the need for the pidgin disappears. In some cases, however, pidgins go on 
to develop into fully-​fledged languages or creoles.
Exercise 6
Can you guess which European languages are the lexifier languages: i.e. have contributed 
to the vocabulary of the languages illustrated in the following sentences?
(a)  mô pe aste sa banan
I am buying the banana
(b)  de bin alde luk dat big tri
they always looked for a big tree
(c)  a waka go a osu
he walked home
(d)  olmaan i kas-​im chek
the old man is cashing a cheque
(e)  li pote sa bay mo
he brought that for me
(f)   ja fruher wir bleiben
yes at first we remained
(g)  dis smol swain i bin go fo maket
this little pig went to market
Answers at end of chapter
There are some languages that seem to appear very frequently as the lexifier 
languages of those pidgins studied to date, such as Malay, Portuguese, Dutch, 
French, Spanish and English. In Australia, most pidgins that existed had English 
as the lexifier language. One notable exception was Broome Pearling Luggers 
Pidgin, which was spoken in the latter part of the nineteenth century and the 
early twentieth century by people working in the pearling industry in Western 
Australia’s Kimberley region. The workers in this industry included Malays, 
Japanese, Filipinos, Hakka Chinese and Koreans, as well as local Yawaru, 
Karjarri and Bardi people. Broome Pearling Luggers Pidgin was largely Malay 
based, but its lexicon and morphophonology also came from Japanese, Western 
Australian Pidgin English, and local Aboriginal languages. This shows not just 
that a pidgin can have many sources of input, with words coming from a range 
of languages, but also that pidgins can themselves contribute to other pidgins.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
126
Example 10
Example of Broome Pearling Lugger’s Pidgin.
[PE =​ Western Australian Pidgin English; M =​ Malay; J =​ Japanese.]
The pearl is clouded. It won’t sell.
Po:rr
kotor–​ya
tera
baiya
tidak
pearl
dirty
Predicator Neg
buyer
not
PE
M
J “be”
M
PE
Creoles
Example 11
Excerpt from the Pepa Bilong Inkam Takis of the Government of Papua 
New Guinea.
Tok Tru Olgeta
Olgeta tok hia mekim long dispela pepa emi tru tasol. Mi soim pinis olgeta 
pei mani bilong mi bilong dispela yia . . .
Declaration
I, the person making this return, declare that the particulars shown herein 
are true in every particular and disclose a full and complete statement of the 
total income derived by me during the twelve months from . . .
Most creoles derive from pidgin languages. A creole is a pidgin which has 
acquired native speakers. Many of the languages which are called pidgins are in 
fact now creole languages. They are learned by children as their first language 
and used in a wide range of domains. Tok Pisin (which was used to illustrate 
some of the features of pidgins in the previous section) is one obvious example 
of a pidgin which has developed into a creole language. This makes it clear that 
the label of a language is not an accurate guide to its status as pidgin or creole. 
Despite its name, Tok Pisin is a creole because it has been learned as a first lan-
guage by a large number of speakers, and has developed accordingly to meet 
their linguistic needs.
As a result of their status as a group’s first language, creoles also differ from  
pidgins in their range of functions, in their structure and in some cases in the  
attitudes expressed towards them. A creole is a pidgin which has expanded in  
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
127
structure and vocabulary to express the range of meanings and serve the range  
of functions required of a first language.
Structural features
Example 12
Roper River Creole/​Kriol
(a) im megim ginu
he makes a canoe
[present tense]
(b) im bin megim ginu
he made a canoe
[past tense]
(c) im megimbad ginu
he is making a canoe
[present continuous]
(d) im bin megimbad ginu
he was making a canoe
[past continuous]
The linguistic complexity of creole languages is often not appreciated by 
outsiders. We mentioned above that pidgin languages do not use affixes to signal 
meanings such as the tense of a verb or the number of a noun. Creole languages, 
however, do develop ways of systematically signalling meanings such as verb 
tenses, and these may develop into inflections or affixes over time. By com-
paring the different sentences from Roper River Creole (also known as Kriol) 
in ­example 12, you should be able to work out how the past tense and the con-
tinuous aspect are expressed.
Map 4.2  Papua New Guinea and the area of the Buang Tribe

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
128
The past tense is signalled by the particle bin, while the progressive aspect is 
marked by the suffix -​bad which is attached to the verb. An example from Tok 
Pisin can illustrate the process by which a creole develops systematic ways of 
concisely expressing additional meanings as the demands made on the language 
by the speakers increase.
Example 13
Tok Pisin you will go at different stages:
(a)	
baimbai yu go
(b)	 bambai yu go
(c)		
bai yu go
(d)	 yu bai go
(e)		
yu bfgo
In its pidgin stage, to reference future events, Tok Pisin used the adverb 
baimbai which derived from the English phrase by and by. This is illustrated in 
sentence (a) baimbai yu go. As the pidgin developed into a creole, the adverb 
gradually shortened to bambai or bai as in (b) and (c). Sentence (d) illustrates 
an alternative position used for bai while (e) shows how it eventually became 
attached to the verb as a regular prefix signalling future tense. The meaning is 
expressed more concisely but also less obviously –​ a common outcome.
The substrate is another source of structural complexity for a creole. Table 4.1 
showed that Tok Pisin has two first person plural pronouns, yumi and mipela. 
Most Oceanic languages make a distinction between an inclusive plural form, 
such as yumi, which refers to the speaker and the addressee, and an exclusive 
plural form, such as mipela, which refers to the speaker and some third party, 
but not the addressee. Since this inclusive/​exclusive distinction does not occur in 
English (the lexifier language), it is a clear example of substrate influence on Tok 
Pisin, and it is found widely in Pacific pidgins and creoles.
Pidgins become more structurally regular as they undergo creolisation, the 
process by which a pidgin becomes a creole. The lists in table 4.2 illustrate a lin-
guistic strategy which regularises the structure of words with related meanings, 
and so makes the forms easier to learn and easier to understand. The meaning 
relationship between the words in the first column and the third column is 
exactly the same and this is reflected in the form of the creole, but not in English. 
So once you recognise the pattern, it is possible to form new words in the creole 
language, and to guess the English translation. If you knew the Tok Pisin word 
for hot was hat you could predict that the word meaning to make hot or to heat 
would be hatim. You can similarly guess that the English verb missing from the 
list in table 4.2 is to dirty or make dirty. Notice that English is nowhere near 
so regular in form. While we can sometimes find patterns like black/​blacken, 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
129
soft/​soften and wide/​widen, it is not long before an irregular form trips up the 
unwary learner of English. While there is a word shorten in English, there is no 
word longen, for instance.
Table 4.2  Tok Pisin forms
Tok Pisin
English
Tok Pisin
English
bik
big, large
bikim
to enlarge, make large
brait
wide
braitim
to make wide, widen
daun
low
daunim
to lower
nogut
bad
nogutim
to spoil, damage
pret
afraid
pretim
to frighten, scare
kol
cool
kolim
to make cool
doti
dirty
dotim
—​—​
Exercise 7
Can you work out the patterns and fill in the gaps in the following list?
Tok Pisin
English
gras
grass
mausgras
moustache
gras bilong fes
beard
gras bilong hed
—​—​—​—​—​
gras antap long ai
eyebrow
gras nogut
weed
pisin
bird
gras bilong pisin
gras bilong dog
gras bilong pusi
—​—​—​—​—​
—​—​—​—​—​
—​—​—​—​—​
han
hand
han bilong pisin
—​—​—​—​—​
Answer at end of chapter
As the creole develops, paraphrases like the ones above become more com-
pact and concise, often at the cost of semantic “transparency”. This is clearly a 
normal process in language. So: washman is a combination of elements meaning 
“man employed to do the washing” (a bit like English washerwoman –​ an 
interesting example of a cultural difference in gender roles too). But though its 
meaning is clear when you know it, and therefore easy to remember, there is no 
reason why it could not mean “man who washes the streets”, for instance, and 
have derived from a longer phrase spelling out that meaning more explicitly. 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
130
Once it has compacted into washman its precise meaning has to be learned. 
Similarly, daiman could mean “executioner” or “hangman”, but in fact means 
corpse. When concise compounds like these develop from longer phrases, they 
become less transparent, and this is a common process in the development of 
languages.
In fact, one of the reasons linguists find the study of pidgins and creoles so 
fascinating is precisely that they provide laboratories of language change in 
progress, and for testing hypotheses about universal linguistic features and 
processes. Opportunities to observe the development of new creole forms at 
first hand are not easy to find, but one recent example is Nicaraguan Sign 
Language, a creole which is developing among schoolchildren in Nicaragua. 
The children’s overwhelming social need to communicate with each other 
and to express their ideas and feelings is driving the process. Hence, study of 
pidgins and creoles clearly demonstrates the crucial role of social factors in 
language development. It is the need to express more complex meanings which 
motivates structural changes, and the functional demands which lead to lin-
guistic elaboration.
Functions
Example 14
Cameroon Pidgin English
Foh di foh dis graun oh foh no bi sehf –​ dat na di ting wei i di bring 
plenti hambag. Wehda na sohm behta sehns sei mek man i tai hat
Foh di shap ston an shap stik dehm foh bad lohk wei dehm di wohri 
man foh dis graun, Oh foh kari wowo ting foh fait dis trohbul wei i big 
laik sohlwata so?
To be, or not to be –​ that is the question;
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
The slings and arrows of outrageous fortune
Or to take arms against a sea of troubles
And by opposing end them?
(Hamlet, III. i)
Many present-​day creoles are spoken by descendants of the African slaves in 
the USA and the Caribbean. As mentioned above, the common language of the 
plantations was generally a pidgin, and children naturally acquired the pidgin 
as a first language. As the families’ communicative needs expanded, so did the 
resources of the language they used. The pidgin developed into a creole.
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
131
Alternatively, a pidgin can become so useful as a lingua franca that it may be 
expanded and used even by people who share a tribal language. In multilingual 
speech communities, parents may use a pidgin so extensively during the day, in 
the market, at church, in offices and on public transport that it becomes normal 
for them to use it at home too. In this case, too, children will often acquire it as 
their first language, and it will develop into a creole. Tok Pisin is the first lan-
guage of many children in Papua New Guinea.
Once a creole has developed it can be used for all the functions of any lan-
guage –​ politics, education, administration (including tax forms, as illustrated 
in ­example 11), original literature (and translations of Shakespeare too, as in 
­example 14), and so on. Tok Pisin is frequently used as the language of debate 
in the Papua New Guinea Parliament, and it is used for the first three years 
of education in many schools. Creoles have become accepted standard and 
even national and official languages, as illustrated in the next chapter. Once 
developed there is no evidence in their linguistic structure to reveal their pidgin 
origins. A linguist doing a present-​day (or synchronic) analysis of, say, Afrikaans 
would not be able to identify it as a creole, though many believe it has creole 
origins. The features which might suggest such origins are all features which 
can be found in other well-​established languages with no history of creolisa-
tion that we can know about. (Even English has been described by some as a 
latter-​day creole, with French vocabulary superimposed on a Celtic/​Old English 
base.) This is fascinating and provocative since, as mentioned above, it suggests 
that the processes of pidginisation and creolisation may be universal processes 
which reveal a great deal about the origins of language and the ways in which 
languages develop.
Attitudes
Though outsiders’ attitudes to creoles are often as negative as their attitudes 
to pidgins, this is not always the case for those who speak the language. Tok 
Pisin has status and prestige for people in Papua New Guinea who recognise 
its usefulness as a means of communication with a wide range of influential 
people, as well as in getting a decent job. The code-​switching in ­example 18, 
­chapter 2 demonstrated its use as a language signalling the speaker’s community 
status, even though it was not strictly necessary for communication purposes. 
The Buang Taxi Truck Company similarly use Tok Pisin for their meetings, even 
though all present speak Buang. It is also a language of solidarity between Papua 
New Guineans with different vernaculars. Though Haitian Creole is the L lan-
guage alongside prestigious French in Haiti, nevertheless the majority of the 
people who are monolingual in the creole express strong loyalty to it as the lan-
guage which best expresses their feelings.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
132
Example 15
Haitian Creole text
Tout moun fèt lib, egal ego pou diyite kou wè dwa. Nou gen la rezon ak la 
konsyans epi nou fèt pou nou aji youn ak lot ak yon lespri fwatènite.
All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights. They are 
endowed with reason and conscience and should act towards one another 
in a spirit of brotherhood.
(Article 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:    
www.omniglot.com/​writing/​haitiancreole.htm)
Origins and endings
Example 16
Some words seem to turn up in many different pidgin languages. The 
Portuguese word savi meaning know, for instance, and palava meaning 
trouble are found in many English-​based pidgins and creoles. The word bell 
is heard in both Tok Pisin and Chinese Pidgin. Grease is rendered as glease 
in Chinese Pidgin, and in an American pidgin known as Chinook Jargon, 
and as gris in Tok Pisin.
Despite their huge geographical spread –​ they are found in every continent –​ 
many similarities are found among those pidgins and creoles which have been 
studied to date. Over 100 have been identified, but the lexifier language for 
most (about 85) is one of seven European languages: English (35), French (15), 
Portuguese (14), Spanish (7), German (6), Dutch (5) and Italian (3). So perhaps 
the similarities are not surprising.
But the fact that similarities have been found between pidgins from quite 
different geographical regions, and in pidgins where quite different languages 
have contributed to their development, suggests things are not quite so straight-
forward. Some have argued that all pidgins and creoles had a common origin. 
They claim that most pidgins can be traced back to a single fifteenth-​century 
Portuguese pidgin, and perhaps further to a Mediterranean lingua franca, Sabir. 
Others argue that each pidgin arises and develops independently. They account 
for the similarities by pointing to two types of constraints on their development 
which they all share. Firstly, pidgins arise in different contexts but for the same 
kinds of basic functions –​ trade, barter, and other essentially transactional and 
referentially oriented functions. Secondly, these functions are expressed through 
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
133
structural processes which seem universal to all situations of language develop-
ment –​ processes such as simplification and reduction of redundant features (like 
grammatical gender markers). It is argued that these processes will be found 
in any context where basic communication is the aim, so there is no need to 
argue for a common origin for all pidgins. It is easy to see the fascination of the 
debate –​ and it is one which seems likely to continue for some time.
There is almost as much debate about what ultimately happens to a creole. There 
are a variety of answers depending on the social context. In societies with rigid social 
divisions, a creole may remain as a stable L variety alongside an officially sanctioned 
H variety, a situation illustrated in diglossic Haiti where Haitian Creole is the L var-
iety alongside French. Where social barriers are more fluid, the creole may develop 
towards the standard language from which it has derived large amounts of vocabu-
lary. When a creole is used side-​by-​side with the standard variety in a community 
where social barriers are not insuperable, features of the creole tend to change in the 
direction of the standard variety. This process is described as decreolisation.
Eventually there may exist a continuum of varieties between the standard 
language and the creole –​ sometimes described as a post-​creole continuum. 
In this situation, linguists label the variety closest to the standard an acrolect 
(where acro means high), whereas the variety closest to the creole is labeled the 
basilect or “deep” creole. These two varieties are often mutually unintelligible. 
Varieties in between these two extremes are described as mesolects or inter-
mediate varieties. Examples can be found in Jamaica and Guyana. In Guyanese 
Creole, the acrolectal form I told him, used by educated middle-​class people, has 
a mesolectal form I tell im, used by lower middle-​class people, and a basilectal 
form mi tell am used by old and illiterate rural labourers. Over time, a creole in 
this situation may be engulfed by the standard language, as Negerhollands has 
been by Dutch in the Dutch West Indies. One further possibility, as we shall see 
in ­chapter 5, is that a creole may be standardised and adopted as an official lan-
guage, as Tok Pisin was in Papua New Guinea, or become a national language, 
as did Indonesian, a language which developed from pidgin Malay.
Exercise 8
Using the social dimensions introduced in ­chapter 1 –​ solidarity, status, formality and 
function –​ consider the social characteristics of the following linguistic varieties described 
in this chapter.
(a)	
vernacular
(b)	
standard
(c)	
lingua franca
(d)	
pidgin
(e)	
creole
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
134
Exercise 9
Most research on creoles has focused on the relationship between the creole and the 
(usually European) lexifier language. But in the East Maroon community of Pamaka, 
the lexifier language (English) is never heard in daily interaction and nor is it an official 
language of Suriname. Rather people switch regularly between two creole languages; 
one the local rural community language Pamaka, and the other an urban creole, 
Sranan Tongo.
What are the implications for decreolisation in such a context?
Answer at end of chapter
Methods
Collecting data relevant to the topics in this chapter may involve computer-​based research 
rather than the interactional methods described in previous chapters. So fieldwork 
(e.g. observation, interview and recording –​ as described in the methods summaries in 
­chapters 2 and 3) will only be possible if you have access to a community where the var-
ieties are in use.
•	 Census data: analysing data from the relevant census statistics may provide informa-
tion on the number of ethnic groups in a community and the number of speakers of 
different varieties, as well as their degree of proficiency. However, you will need to check 
the form of the questions which led to the results in order to know what inferences you 
can draw about the languages concerned. So, for example, were people asked which 
languages they “know” (you need to think about what “know” could mean for different 
people), or which they can use for everyday conversation?
•	 Research literature survey: for some societies, countries and communities, 
research results may be available in books, journal articles or book chapters which 
can help you learn more about the number of varieties in use, including vernaculars, 
standards and lingua francas. Selecting a particular country for detailed study is a very 
satisfying way of learning more about the complexities of building a sociolinguistic 
profile of a community.
•	 Social media: a growing number of videos posted on services such as YouTube are 
by people who speak an outer circle variety of English. This could provide a useful 
source for looking at the similarities and differences between different varieties. 
There are also many videos where speakers provide some introspective comments 
about the variety (or varieties) that they speak. You can also find examples of creole 
languages on YouTube, as there is no restriction on what languages can be used in 
videos. However, it can be interesting if you try to use YouTube’s auto-​subtitling 
service with these videos, as it will typically recognise the language as whatever the 
lexifier is. Try it!
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
135
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 4
Answer to ­exercise 1
(a)	 Shi is Kalala’s vernacular. It is his tribal language, learned first and used in 
the home and with members of his ethnic group. In this sense, Kathiawari, 
a dialect of Gujarati, is Mr Patel’s vernacular (even though Gujarati is a 
written language with a literary tradition).
(b)	 Dyirbal can be classified as a vernacular language on all three criteria. It is 
unstandardised and unwritten. It is, or was, acquired in the home and is used 
between members of the same tribe for everyday interaction. Its functions 
are relatively circumscribed.
Answer to ­exercise 2
The following definition is from the Collins Online English Dictionary (www.
collinsdictionary.com/​dictionary/​english/​standard). It is very close to the defin-
ition discussed in this section.
Standard: an accepted or approved example of something against which 
others are judged or measured.
Note the definition stresses the notion of a model or norm without giving any 
indication of how that norm is determined or where it derives its status from. 
Sociolinguists emphasise the social and nonlinguistic factors which contribute to 
the emergence of a particular variety as the standard. They point out that purely 
linguistic considerations are rarely important. Though linguists may be involved 
in codification, their recommendations are generally guided by cultural or social 
factors such as prestige and usage, rather than by the intrinsic linguistic features 
of alternatives. This point is illustrated in ­chapter 5.
Answer to ­exercise 3
Over time, it has been recognised that the distinctions between the circles are 
very difficult to maintain, especially using the criterion of native vs. non-​
native speakers, or even first vs. second language speakers. An alternative 
approach is to think of the circles as identifying people with different degrees 
of proficiency: those in the inner circle are those with high or native-​like pro-
ficiency (whether they are so-​called native speakers or not), and the outer 
and expanding circles represent decreasing levels of proficiency, usually 
reflecting a more limited range of functions and less frequent use. Another 
approach would focus on the range of functions English serves, from all 
functions for those in the inner circle, through to a more limited range of 
functions as one moves out to the expanding circle.
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
136
Answer to ­exercise 4
Possible answers to this question are provided in the next chapter and you will 
find that the relevant factors are almost entirely nonlinguistic. Any linguistic 
problems can be resolved relatively easily after the selection is made on other 
grounds.
Answer to ­exercise 5
Note that the verb in French changes its form with each pronoun (though in 
speech there would be no distinction between vas and va). Grammatical infor-
mation about the subject is expressed twice therefore, once by the form of the 
pronoun and once by the verb form. In English, the verb has two different 
forms (go/​goes) distinguishing the third person singular verb form from the 
form with other subjects. In Tok Pisin and Cameroon Pidgin, the form of the 
verb is the same throughout. The pronoun alone signals the change in person 
and number of the subject. Note, however, that the pronoun system in Tok 
Pisin is grammatically more complex than the other languages since Tok Pisin 
distinguishes inclusive we (“you and me”) from exclusive we (“me and some 
other(s)”).
Answer to ­exercise 6
(a)	 Seychelles Creole: French is the lexifier language.
(b)	 Roper River Creole: English is the lexifier language.
(c)	 Sranan: English is the lexifier language.
(d)	 Cape York Creole: English is the lexifier language.
(e)	 Guyanais: French is the lexifier language.
(f)	 Papua New Guinea Pidgin German: German is the lexifier language.
(g)	 Cameroon Pidgin: English is the lexifier language.
Answer to ­exercise 7
hair
feather
dog’s fur
cat’s fur
wing of a bird
Answer to ­exercise 8
Vernacular languages contrast with standardised varieties predominantly on 
the status and formality dimensions. Vernaculars are generally low status var-
ieties used to express solidarity or construct aspects of social identity in informal 
contexts. Standard dialects are prestigious varieties which may be used in more 
formal situations.
 
 
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
137
Lingua francas and pidgin languages can perhaps be best described in terms 
of their functions. They are both primarily means of expressing referential 
functions –​ they are associated with informal but information-​oriented contexts.
Pidgins and creoles are generally regarded as low status linguistic varieties, 
though we will see in the next chapter that steps can be taken to raise the status 
of creoles which have been selected for promotion for political reasons.
Answer to ­exercise 9
Decreolisation is most unlikely in a situation where the lexifier language, English, 
is not in regular use in the community.
Concepts introduced
•	Vernacular and vernacularisation
•	Standard variety
•	Codification
•	World Englishes
•	Inner-​circle, outer circle and expanded circle varieties of English
•	Lingua franca
•	Pidgin
•	Lexifier or superstrate
•	Substrate
•	Creole
•	Creolisation
•	Decreolisation
•	Acrolect, basilect and mesolect
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Bickerton (1975) on Guyanese Creole
Chew (2007) on Singapore English and Singlish
Chua (2011) on Singapore English and Singlish
Collins Dictionary of the English Language (1991: 1504–​5) for definition of 
“standard”
Crowley (1990) for ­example 6
De Camp (1977) for ­example 7
Ethnologue: www.ethnologue.com/​ –​ an encyclopedic reference work cataloging 
the world’s known living languages
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
138
Hancock (1977) for statistics on pidgin and creole languages
Hosakawa (1987) on Broome Pearling Lugger Pidgin
Kachru (1992, 1997) on inner-​circle and outer-​circle Englishes
Migge (2007) on Suriname creoles (­exercise 9)
Mihalic (1971); Romaine (1988) on Tok Pisin
Nation (2001) on average adult vocabulary size
Pandit (1979) for ­example 1
Romaine (1988) for the list used in ­exercise 6 and most of the examples in 
­exercise 7
Senghas (1995) on Nicaraguan Sign Language
Sharpe and Sandefur (1976) for data from River Roper Creole
Siegel (2009) on Tok Pisin
Sorensen (1972) on north-​west Amazon
Unesco (1953)
Valdman (1988) on Haiti
Quotations:
Example 2 is an excerpt from George Puttenham The Art of Poesie, 1589, which 
is quoted in Shaklee (1980: 46)
Example 5 has been attributed to Paul Freyburg, who worked as a translator for 
Kristen Press in Papua New Guinea in 1963: despite efforts, no published 
source has been located
Example 9 is from Nelson (1972), reported in Romaine (1988: 11–​12)
The speech from Hamlet in ­example 14 was translated by R. Awa and is quoted 
in Crystal (2003: 14)
Useful additional reading
Crystal (2002b, 2003)
Crystal (2010): ­chapter 55
Fasold (1990)
Holm (2000)
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapter 18 by Rajend Mesthrie describes how to 
analyse variation in multilingual societies
Kirkpatrick (2010)
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 9
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 11
Myers-​Scotton (2006): ­chapter 5
Pauwels, Winter and Lo Bianco (2007)
Romaine (1988, 1989)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LINGUISTIC VARIETIES
139
Romaine (2000): chapter 4
Saraceni (2015)
Siegel (2008, 2009)
Todd (1990)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 5
 
 
 
 

140
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-6
Example 1
Reinaldo Decoud Larrosa is a highly educated Paraguayan who lives in 
Asunción, the capital city. He has spent many years fighting to develop and 
encourage pride in Guaraní, an Indigenous language, among Paraguayans 
from all social backgrounds. Upper-​class Paraguayans have always regarded 
Spanish as the language of culture, education and civilisation, and in the 
past they tended to belittle Guaraní as the language of the ill-​bred and 
uneducated. Larrosa has pointed to the linguistic richness of Guaraní, with 
its 14 indicative tenses, and extensive vocabulary in areas such as botany, 
medicine and agriculture. He has also emphasised its importance as the 
only language which can adequately express Paraguayan national identity. 
As a result of his efforts and those of others, Guaraní is now a language 
most Paraguayans are proud of.
Paraguay is the only Latin American nation with a distinctive national lan-
guage –​ Guaraní. Guaraní is an Indigenous Native American language spoken 
by over 90% of the population, and it has co-​existed for the past 300 years with 
Spanish. Paraguay provides a clear case of stable broad diglossia: with Spanish, 
the H language, used in formal contexts, for administration, a great deal of edu-
cation and legal business; and Guaraní, the L language of solidarity, the language 
of love, humour and poetry.
In Paraguay, we find an interesting example of the competing claims of 
an Indigenous language and a world language for the status of national lan-
guage. Paraguayans are generally happy to recognise Spanish as a useful 
language for official business. But though Spanish and Guaraní both have 
official status, it is Guaraní which most people regard as their “real” national 
language. Guaraní is felt to be the language which best expresses their dis-
tinctive culture and traditions. These positive feelings towards Guaraní make 
Paraguay unique among Latin American countries. In other countries, the 
Indigenous languages have little status compared to Spanish or Portuguese, 
the colonial languages.
National languages, language 
policy, and language planning
5
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
141
Map 5.1  South America

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
142
Many Paraguayans consider that Guaraní is an important symbol of Paraguayan 
identity. People feel that you cannot be a true Paraguayan unless you can speak 
the language. Some claim that there are things they can say in Guaraní which are 
more difficult to express in Spanish. So while people find Spanish a useful lan-
guage for formal and business interactions, and it is increasingly heard in urban 
Paraguayan homes, most are proud of Guaraní and express strong loyalty towards 
it. Paraguayans who meet overseas, for instance, often use Guaraní to each other.
Exercise 1
Which of the following factors do you consider most relevant in assessing the suitability of 
Guaraní as the national language of Paraguay? Order the factors according to their import-
ance in relation to this issue.
(a)	
Guaraní is a linguistically interesting language with a complex tense system.
(b)	
Guaraní is spoken by over 90% of Paraguayans and is the only language of many 
rural people.
(c)	
Guaraní has an extensive vocabulary, especially in areas such as botany, medicine 
and agriculture.
(d)	
Guaraní expresses solidarity between Paraguayans both at home and abroad.
(e)	
Guaraní is considered a melodious language, especially appropriate for expressions 
of love.
(f)	
Guaraní is an Indigenous language which attracts a great deal of language loyalty 
from Paraguayans.
(g)	
Guaraní is a morphologically interesting language which forms words using additive 
and synthetic processes.
(h)	
Every president of Paraguay has been able to speak Guaraní.
Answer at end of chapter
National and official languages
Example 2
Vanuatu is a multilingual Pacific republic consisting of about 80 islands with 
a population of of almost 300,000 in 2018. It declared independence from a 
joint British and French colonial administration in 1980. Vanuatu is unique 
in the Pacific because it has adopted a non-​European language, a former 
pidgin, Bislama, as its sole national language. Bislama is an English-​lexified 
creole with origins in a Melanesian plantation pidgin. It is an invaluable 
lingua franca in Vanuatu, and a very politically acceptable national language.
 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
143
In the 1960s, the Paraguayan government used two different terms to distinguish 
between the status of Spanish and Guaraní: Guaraní was declared the “national” 
language while Spanish was an “official” language of Paraguay. In sociolinguistics 
the distinction between a national language and an official language is generally 
made along the affective–​referential dimension, or more precisely in this context, 
the ideological–​instrumental dimension. A national language is the language of a 
political, cultural and social unit. It is generally developed and used as a symbol 
of national unity. Its functions are to identify the nation and unite its people. An 
official language, by contrast, is simply a language which may be used for gov-
ernment business. Its function is primarily utilitarian rather than symbolic. It is 
possible, of course, for one language to serve both functions.
Not surprisingly, governments do not always recognise the distinctions 
made by sociolinguists. They use the terms official and national to suit their 
political ends, as the Paraguayan case described above illustrates. However, the 
Paraguayan situation changed again in 1992, when Guaraní was granted official 
status alongside Spanish. So Paraguay now has two official languages and one 
national language, Guaraní. The same pattern is found in multilingual Tanzania 
with one national language, Swahili, but two official languages, Swahili and 
English. Similarly, in Vanuatu, the national language is Bislama, a Pacific creole, 
and it is also an official language alongside French and English, the languages 
of the previous colonial administrators. Many countries make no distinction 
between a national language and an official language. In countries which regard 
themselves as monolingual nations, the same language serves both purposes. In 
multilingual communities, however, all kinds of permutations have been used in 
order to satisfy both political and social goals on the one hand, and more prac-
tical and utilitarian needs on the other.
In multilingual countries, the government often declares a particular language 
to be the national language for political reasons. The declaration may be a step 
in the process of asserting the nationhood of a newly independent or established 
nation, for instance, as in the case of Swahili in Tanzania, Hebrew in Israel, 
Malay in Malaysia and Indonesian in Indonesia. Where this national language 
cannot serve all the internal and external functions of government business, 
however, it has then been necessary to identify one or more official languages as 
well. So French is an official language in many countries, such as the Ivory Coast 
and Chad, where France was previously a colonial power, and Arabic is an offi-
cial language in Israel alongside Hebrew.
The identification of official languages may also be necessary when the choice 
of national language is problematic. In multilingual India, for example, attempts 
to give Hindi sole status as the national language have not succeeded. Twenty-​
two Indian languages are recognised in the Indian constitution alongside English 
and Hindi for the country as a whole, and different states may have their own 
official languages. Telugu, for instance, is the official language of the state of 
Andhra Pradesh.1 Some multilingual countries have nominated more than one 
national language. The Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire), for instance, 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
144
has four African languages as national languages, Lingala, Swahili, Tshiluba 
and Kikongo, alongside French as an official language. Lingala is, however, the 
official language of the army. In Haiti, the 1983 constitution declared Haitian 
Creole a national language alongside French, but it was not until 1987 that the 
Creole was granted official status.
Exercise 2
Can you fill in the following table?
Why do you think some countries have more than one language with official status?
Country
Official language(s)
Argentina
Australia
Belgium
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Ecuador
Finland
France
Haiti
India
Indonesia
Jordan
Kenya
Liberia
Morocco
Myanmar
New Zealand
Norway
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Philippines
Singapore
Tanzania
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Answer at end of chapter
Official status and minority languages
Because of its colonial history, as well as its value as a world language and 
international lingua franca, English is an official language in many countries 
 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
145
throughout the world, such as Pakistan, Fiji, Vanuatu, Jamaica and the Bahamas, 
as well as those listed in the answer to ­exercise 2. Often it shares this official 
status with an Indigenous language, such as Malay in Malaysia, Swahili in 
Tanzania and Gilbertese in Kiribati. But, interestingly, English is not legally an 
official language of England, the USA, or New Zealand. In these countries it has 
not been considered necessary to legislate that the language of the majority is 
an official language. In New Zealand, ironically, although English is de facto (in 
fact or actuality) the official language of government and education, Māori and 
New Zealand Sign Language are the two languages which have legal or de jure 
status as official languages.
Example 3
Dun Mihaka is one of a number of Māori activists who have campaigned 
for many years for Māori rights. An articulate, stimulating and abrasive 
public speaker, he has often ended up in court on charges of breaching 
the peace as a result of his protests. There he has insisted on addressing   
the court in Māori –​ a language which until 1987 was not recognised by the 
New Zealand courts. Now he has the right to address the court in Māori –​ 
and the court will provide a person to translate his words into English.
Māori was declared an official language of New Zealand in 1987. What 
that means, however, is far from clear. Cynics have described it as merely a cos-
metic procedure aimed at quietening the demands of Māori activists. But the 
declaration clearly gave the language a status it did not have previously, and 
acknowledges its symbolic importance to the country as a whole, as well as to 
the Indigenous Māori people in particular. It could also be regarded as a positive 
statement of intent –​ a first step in a process which has encouraged the use of 
Māori in an increasing number of official institutional domains such as the law 
courts, official government ceremonies and transactions, and in education.
Māori activists campaigned for many years for the right to use Māori in offi-
cial and administrative contexts. Most used peaceful means, but minority groups 
have often taken very radical action in order to get official recognition for their 
languages. Similarly, in Wales, Welsh has official status under the Welsh Language 
(Wales) Measure 2011, and public bodies such as local government, universities 
and hospitals are required to give equal treatment to English and Welsh, produ-
cing all public documents and signage in both languages. However, Welsh does 
not have official status in the rest of Britain. As with Māori in New Zealand, the 
official status of Welsh in Wales is the result of a long-​running campaign by lan-
guage activists. In the late twentieth century, Welsh activists painted out English 
road signs in protest against the dominance of English and the English, and the 
President of Plaid Cymru (the Welsh Nationalist Party) promised to “fast to the 
death” to get a Welsh TV channel.
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
146
Elsewhere there have been riots over language issues. Linguistic minorities 
in India have rioted when their demands have fallen on deaf ears. In Belgium, 
French and Flemish have had legal equality since 1963, but language riots in 
1968 caused the fall of the government when they proposed to extend the French-​
speaking section of the University of Louvain (or, in Flemish, Leuven). Though 
the 1968–​69 Official Languages Act declared both French and English official 
languages in Canada, and gave them equal status in all aspects of federal admin-
istration, the Quebec government has been far from satisfied with the reality of 
English domination, and has threatened to secede over language-​related issues. 
And throughout the decades since 1969, there has been friction between the 
French-​speaking and English-​speaking communities, reflected in actions such 
as the trampling of the Quebec flag and public petitions in Ontario against 
bilingual highway signs. In the former Soviet Union, glasnost and perestroika 
brought in their wake a desire for increased independence among minority lan-
guage groups, as ­example 4 (a) illustrates. But Russian speakers have also felt 
concerned about their language rights, as shown in 4 (b).
Example 4
(a)	
Thousands of Moldavians demonstrated in the republic’s cap-
ital, Kishinev, yesterday and threatened a general strike if Soviet 
leaders failed to meet their demands for language concessions . . . 
Demonstrators, many waving Romanian flags, repeated demands for 
a return to the Latin alphabet from the Cyrillic imposed by Soviet 
dictator Josef Stalin.
(b)	 Russian-​speaking workers in Estonia on the Gulf of Finland struck 
for four days last week against language and election laws saying they 
discriminate against them.
(c)	
International Mother Language Day was established by UNESCO in 
1999. The date (February 21st) was chosen in memory of students shot 
and killed in 1952 by police in Dhaka, now the capital of Bangladesh 
but then part of Pakistan, as they demonstrated for official recogni-
tion of their language, Bengali.
(©1989 Reuters Limited)
Many minorities would like to gain official status for their languages, but 
the costs in terms of providing services and information in all official languages 
are considerable, and most governments count them carefully. In Canada, for 
instance, as well as French speakers and the Indigenous Canadian peoples, such 
as the Cree and Mohawk, there are many other Canadian minorities –​ Italians, 
Portuguese, Chinese and Ukrainians, for instance. Together these minority groups 
make up about 27% of the total Canadian population and it was reported in 
the 2016 census that 23% of Canadians speak a language other than English 
or French in the home. Many resent the special status of the French-​speaking 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
147
Canadians, who make up only 21% of the population. Providing services, infor-
mation, legal representation and, in some places, education in just two official 
languages is an expensive business. It seems unlikely other minorities will earn 
such rights easily.
Exercise 3
In 1855, Dean Trench, a leading architect of the Oxford English Dictionary, expressed the 
hope that studying the dictionary would “lead through a more intimate knowledge of 
English into a greater love of England”. In the 1980s, this attitude was expressed once 
again in relation to the standard dialect of English. The British Secretary of State for 
Education pointed to the importance of the English language as a symbol of nationhood.
What do you think of the claims of these men that studying standard English will 
develop a sense of national pride in England?
Answer at end of chapter
What price a national language?
Many countries have regarded the development of a single national language as 
a way of symbolising the unity of a nation. “One nation, one language” has been 
a popular and effective slogan. In earlier centuries, the national language of a 
political entity often emerged naturally and relatively unselfconsciously over a 
period of time. English in England, French in France, Japanese in Japan, Spanish 
in Spain seem obvious examples. There were very few languages with this kind 
of status before about 1500. Then the number increased dramatically, especially 
in the nineteenth century as linguistic nationalism in Europe grew. It almost 
doubled again in the twentieth century with the emergence of colonised coun-
tries from colonial rule into independent nation-​states.
Over the last 100 years or so, nationhood and independence have been very 
important political issues throughout the world. In the struggle to establish a 
distinct national identity, and to secure independence from colonial rule, the 
development of a national language has often played an important part. The 
symbolic value of a national language as a unifying rallying point in the fight 
for independence was quickly appreciated in countries such as Tanzania, where 
more than 120 languages are spoken. In other multilingual countries, such as 
China, the Philippines and Indonesia, where there are large populations speaking 
hundreds of different vernaculars, a national language is not only a useful lingua 
franca and official language, it also serves a symbolic unifying function for these 
nations.
Where there is a single dominant group, the issue of which language to choose 
as the official language to represent the nation generally doesn’t arise. Somali is 
the first language of 90% of the people of Somalia and the official and national 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
148
language of the country. Danish is the national language of Denmark, and the 
first language of 98% of the people. Numerical dominance is not always what 
counts, however. Political power is the crucial factor.
In multilingual countries, the significance of political power in the choice of 
national language is particularly clear. There are over 100 vernacular languages 
spoken in the Philippines. When they gained independence in 1946, Pilipino 
(now Filipino) was declared the national language. It was so closely based 
on Tagalog, however, the ethnic language of one particular group, that it has 
never been unanimously accepted. Tagalog has around 12 million speakers, 
but Cebuano, for example, has over 10 million speakers, and Ilocano, another 
Indigenous language, over 5 million speakers. The choice of Tagalog reflected the 
political and economic power of its speakers who were concentrated in the area 
which included the capital, Manila. Its re-​labelling as Filipino in 1987 was an 
attempt to help it gain acceptance more widely, but resentment at the advantages 
it gives to a particular ethnic group is still keenly felt, and sociolinguists note that 
Filipinos regard it as useful, rather than strongly identifying with it. Moreover, 
the re-​labelling has still not really caught on, with some Filipino Australian 
respondents to the Australian census in 2016 reporting the language they spoke 
at home as Tagalog, and others reporting it as Filipino.
In Indonesia, by contrast, the government did not select the language of 
the political and social elite, the Javanese, as the national language. Instead, 
they developed and standardised a variety of Malay which was widely used 
in Indonesia as a trade language. Since Javanese has a complex linguistically 
marked politeness system based on assessments of relative status (see ­chapters 6 
and 10), this was an eminently sensible decision. Indeed, the successful spread of 
Indonesian owes a great deal to the fact that it is a very useful neutral linguistic 
choice in many situations.
Like India, some African countries have avoided selecting just one language 
as the national language, since the wrong choice could easily lead to riots and 
even war. Tanzania, however, successfully adopted Swahili as its national lan-
guage, and the story of how this was achieved illustrates nicely what is involved 
when a country decides to develop an Indigenous language for use as a national 
language. Linguists are often involved in this process of language planning. The 
next section discusses the steps which must be taken.
Planning for a national official language
Form, functions and attitudes
What is involved in developing a code or variety (whether dialect or language) 
so that it is suitable for official use? Addressing this challenge involves issues 
relating to the form of the variety, the functions it serves, and the attitudes that 
people hold towards it. There are generally four interrelated steps:
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
149
1	
Selection: choosing the variety or code to be developed.
2	
Codification: standardising its structural or linguistic features. This kind of 
“linguistic processing” is known as “corpus planning”.
3	
Elaboration: extending its functions for use in new domains. This involves 
developing the necessary linguistic resources for handling new concepts and 
contexts.
4	
Securing its acceptance: the status of the new variety is important, and so 
people’s attitudes to the variety being developed must be considered. Steps 
may be needed to enhance its prestige, for instance, and to encourage people 
to develop pride in the language, or loyalty towards it. This is known as 
“status planning” or “prestige planning”.
The relationship between the steps is summarised in table 5.1.
Table 5.1  Steps in language planning
Form
Function and attitudes
Social
Linguistic
Selection
Codification
Acceptance
Elaboration
Source: From Haugen (1966a: 934), by kind permission of the American Anthropological 
Association.
Selecting the code to be developed is often an entirely political decision, a 
matter of language policy, though linguists may point out the different linguistic 
problems presented by selecting one variety rather than another. Acceptance by 
the people will generally require endorsement by politicians and socially presti-
gious groups. So selection and acceptance are matters of language policy, steps 
which involve social and political factors. Codification and elaborating the 
code to handle a wider range of functions are, by contrast, essentially linguistic 
processes. Producing a dictionary and ensuring there are words available for 
teaching science in the variety, for instance, are problems for linguists. In prac-
tice, however, all these steps are closely interrelated, as the examples below will 
demonstrate.
Case study: Tanzania
Selecting a code
When Tanzania gained independence in 1961, the government faced the 
dilemma of which language to choose as its official national language. Choosing 
one language from over 100 Indigenous languages, each associated with a par-
ticular tribe, would have simply provoked discontent, if not inter-​tribal warfare. 
Choosing English for a newly independent nation seemed inappropriate (though 
many other nations have had little choice but to use the language of former 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
150
colonisers as their only official language). The first President of Tanzania, Julius 
Nyerere, chose Swahili, a language of the Bantu language family, which was 
widely used throughout the country as a lingua franca in many contexts.
There were some obvious reasons for his choice. Some were pragmatic.  
Swahili was already the medium of primary education, for instance, and so all  
Tanzanians learned the language at school. Other obvious reasons were more  
ideological. Ninety-​six per cent of Tanzania’s languages are Bantu languages,  
like Swahili, so it could be clearly identified as an African language. Moreover,  
Swahili had served as the lingua franca of the anti-​colonial political movement  
for independence. In this role, it had acted as a kind of social cement between  
very disparate groups. It could hardly have had better credentials from a polit-
ical and social point of view.
Map 5.2  Central Africa
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
151
Codifying and elaborating Swahili
The process of standardising Swahili was begun by the British administration 
well before independence. In the 1920s, a southern variety of Swahili, used 
in Zanzibar, was selected as the basis for the standard. The fact that it was 
being used in primary education and for administration meant standardisation 
was essential. Its codification involved developing a standard spelling system, 
describing the grammar of the variety selected as the new standard, and writing 
a dictionary to record its vocabulary.
Following Tanzanian independence in 1961, Swahili was used in more and 
more contexts for education, administration, politics and law. Its vocabulary 
was expanded to meet the demands of new contexts by borrowing freely from 
Arabic and English as appropriate. President Nyerere intended that eventually 
it should be used for post-​primary education, in the Higher Courts, and in all 
areas of government. This meant intensive work in order to develop the neces-
sary vocabulary and technical terms, and an enormous amount was achieved in 
a short space of time. In 1984, however, the government decided not to extend 
Swahili-​medium education to secondary and tertiary education. Despite ongoing 
argument over this decision, English is still used in education for these levels.
Exercise 4
Why do you think English might be regarded by some politicians as more suitable than 
Swahili for secondary and tertiary education in Tanzania?
What are the counter-​arguments?
Answer at end of chapter
Attitudes to Swahili
The role of Swahili in unifying the people of Tanzania to work for independence 
guaranteed it prestige and positive attitudes. The charisma of Nyerere himself 
carried over to the language he used extensively in his speeches and his political 
writings. He used it in domains where formerly English had been used exclu-
sively –​ he also translated Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar and The Merchant of 
Venice into Swahili –​ and this too increased its status. People have often seen the 
success of Swahili as the national language in Tanzania as due to its “neutral” 
status –​ it is not identified with a particular tribe. But its widespread acceptance 
was also due to the fact that Tanzanians developed a strong loyalty towards the 
language which united them in working towards uhuru (freedom).
The story of the acceptance of Swahili as the national language of Tanzania is 
therefore an interesting one. Swahili serves as a lingua franca in a country with 
hundreds of different tribal vernaculars. It provides an economical solution to 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
152
the problem of which language to use for local administration and primary edu-
cation. It provides a culturally acceptable symbol of unity. Linguistic diversity 
can seem problematic to those working for political unification. It is potentially 
divisive. Swahili has provided a very convenient compromise in Tanzania. But 
finally, it is important to remember that the story of how Swahili became the 
national language of Tanzania might be told rather differently by a group whose 
tribal vernacular was a competing lingua franca.
In this section, the steps involved in developing a particular code or variety 
for use as a national language have been discussed in relation to a large multi-
lingual country, Tanzania, where the competing varieties are distinct languages. 
Exactly the same processes and steps are relevant in the deliberate development 
of a particular dialect for use as national language in a monolingual country, as 
we shall see in the next section in relation to Norway, a country with a relatively 
small and homogeneous population.
Source: Reprinted with kind permission of the Mario Gallery.

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
153
Exercise 5
A successful national language needs to serve a variety of functions. The following have 
been identified as important:
•	 Unifying: it must unify the nation, and offer advantages to speakers over their dialects 
and vernaculars.
•	 Separatist: it must set the nation apart from surrounding nations. It should be an appro-
priate symbol of separate national identity.
•	 Prestige: it should be recognised as a proper or “real” language with higher status than 
local dialects and vernacular languages.
•	 Frame-​of-​reference function: the standard variety serves as a yardstick for correctness. 
Other varieties will be regarded as non-​standard in some respect.
Does Swahili serve all these functions for the Tanzanian nation?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 6
The Academy of the Hebrew language in Israel was faced with the reverse of the task 
facing language planners in Tanzania: namely, to revive an ancient written language 
to serve the daily colloquial needs of a modern people. Describe each of the four steps 
outlined above (code selection, codification, elaboration and acceptance) in relation to 
the development of a national language for Israel, and identify any problems you think the 
language planners faced.
Answer at end of chapter
Developing a standard variety in Norway
Example 5
Two competing varieties of Norwegian. [Bm is Bokmål; Nn is Nynorsk.]
Bm: Det rette hjemlige mål i landet er det som landets folk
Nn:         heimlege                       folket i landet
Bm: har arvet fra forfedrene, fra den ene ætt til den andre
Nn:     arva frå           frå      eine ætta
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
154
The right native tongue in (this) country is that which (the) country’s 
people have inherited from ancestors, from the one generation to 
the next.
In 1814, Norway became independent after being ruled by Denmark for four 
centuries. The government was then faced with a diglossia situation with 
Danish as the H language and a range of Norwegian dialects as the L varieties, 
but no standard Norwegian language. Upper-​class people spoke Danish with 
Norwegian pronunciation in formal situations, and a compromise between that 
and local Norwegian dialects in informal contexts. Lower-​class and rural people 
used Norwegian dialects, with Danish influence evident in the speech of towns-
people. Where was the government to look for an official national language for 
Norway?
Selecting a code
Essentially the Norwegian government had the choice of developing a national 
language from standard Danish or from local Norwegian dialects. While Danish 
offered all the advantages of being codified in dictionaries and grammars, it was 
the language of H domains and of the “oppressors” from whom Norway had 
gained independence. So although choosing Danish would have reduced the lin-
guistic problems facing the planners, it presented different kinds of problems. 
Standard Danish was not used widely for informal interaction, especially in 
rural areas, and people’s attitudes towards the language were generally at least 
ambivalent, if not hostile. On the other hand, choosing a variety from among 
the regional Norwegian dialects raised problems relating to the form and new 
functions required of a standard language. Any dialect selected would need 
codifying and would require extensive functional elaboration. And the problem 
of which dialect to select caused obvious headaches in relation to people’s 
attitudes.
Two different approaches were taken to developing a standard written var-
iety of Norwegian. One approach selected a variety based on Danish, with 
some orthographic and morphological modifications based on educated 
urban Norwegian speech. This eventually developed into Bokmål, the variety 
mentioned in the description of Hemnesberget in ­example 6 in ­chapter 1. The 
other approach created a new Norwegian written standard by drawing on a 
range of rural Norwegian dialects. It was first called Landsmål (language of the 
country), and later, after several reforms, Nynorsk (new Norwegian).
Codification and elaboration
The Nynorsk solution, which involved amalgamating features from several 
dialects, is the most intriguing from a linguistic point of view. This composite 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
155
variety was essentially the brainchild of Ivar Aasen, a schoolteacher who had 
studied Norwegian dialects. He wrote a grammar and a 40,000-​word dictionary 
of the variety he was advocating as the new Norwegian standard. As a result, 
this constructed variety turned out to be one of the best described languages 
around at the time.
Aasen identified common grammatical patterns in different dialects, and he 
chose vocabulary from a range of different regions. Where there was a choice of 
word forms, he selected those he considered least “corrupted” or “contaminated” 
by Danish. Rural dialect resources also solved the problem of functional elab-
oration, or extending the use of Norwegian into domains where Danish had 
previously been the only appropriate code. New words were needed for many 
concepts which had previously been discussed only in Danish. Dialect forms 
were Aasen’s main resource for creating new words.
Since the late nineteenth century, then, Norway has had these two competing 
official written varieties. During the first half of the twentieth century, lan-
guage planners tried to bring the two closer together (into Samnorsk or united 
Norwegian) through continued codification efforts. After the Second World 
War, however, political differences led to a change in attitude among Bokmål 
supporters in particular. The official policy of amalgamation was no longer 
pursued so vigorously, and another spelling reform in 1981 introduced more 
conservative forms into Bokmål.
Nevertheless, it is important to recognise that although Norwegians regard 
Nynorsk and Bokmål as distinct written varieties, they continue to have much 
in common –​ as ­example 5 shows. Their syntax is almost identical. They 
differ mainly in the form of particular words (e.g. hjemlige vs. heimlege), and 
in spelling (e.g. frå vs. fra), but they also share many morphological variants. 
From a linguistic point of view, they are very similar indeed (though, of course, 
Norwegians speak Bokmål and Nynorsk with a wide range of regional and 
social accents).
Pronouncements are regularly made by the Norwegian Language Council 
about which spellings of particular words are officially sanctioned. Official 
documents are printed in both varieties, and schoolchildren are taught to read 
and write both, though local councils decide which variety is to be used as the 
main vehicle of instruction in the local schools.
Acceptance
What about the problem of attitudes to these two varieties? Though Norwegian 
nationalists enthusiastically welcomed Nynorsk, the Norwegian-​based variety, 
and rejected the modified Danish alternative, many influential educated city 
dwellers did not. They regarded a standard based on rural dialects as rustic and 
uncivilised. If Nynorsk was to be accepted at all, government support was essen-
tial. And it was also necessary to persuade influential public figures to endorse 
and to use the new variety in public contexts. Aasen succeeded in this to the 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
156
extent that in 1885 Landsmål was voted officially equal with Danish, in 1929 
it was relabelled Nynorsk, and at its peak in 1944 it was the chief language of 
instruction for 34.1% of all schoolchildren. Since then, Nynorsk has had mixed 
fortunes, and by 2008 it was the language of instruction for only 13.4% of pupils 
in primary school. Many people use both Bokmål and Nynorsk depending on 
the context. But Bokmål forms continue to displace Nynorsk forms rather than 
vice versa.
In practice, then, while political activists continue to argue about the appro-
priate form of a written Norwegian standard, it is clear that Bokmål rather than 
Nynorsk has been winning. It is used in most books and by most schools as a 
medium of instruction. Though some people insist on Nynorsk as the only pos-
sible variety for a “true” Norwegian to use, and stress its significance as a more 
democratic variety, many dislike its “country bumpkin” associations. Bokmål 
has urban and sophisticated connotations. These attitudes are now widespread 
and their effects on people’s usage are likely to make government intervention 
and language planning irrelevant in the long run.
In some countries, a standard dialect of a language, suitable for official uses 
and acceptable as a national symbol, has emerged naturally, with little or no help 
from government agencies or linguistic experts. In Norway, as in many more 
recently developing nations, things have not been so simple. The government has 
considered it necessary to make deliberate choices, to accelerate the process of 
language standardisation and to legislate on the status of particular varieties. In 
Ireland, it seems the government’s endorsement of contradictory policies risks 
alienating young people. The aim of encouraging new young speakers to use 
Irish in a wide range of contexts is proving inconsistent with more conservative 
efforts to retain its traditional functions associated with older speakers in the 
Gaeltacht (regions where the Irish language is, or was until recently, the primary 
spoken language of the majority of the community). It is clear that language 
policy development and planning is a fascinating mixture of political and social 
considerations, as well as linguistic ones.
Exercise 7
The development of a standard language has sometimes been described as involving the 
following two steps:
(i)	
create a model for imitation
(ii)	
promote it over its rivals.
Linguists are often involved as advisers at both stages. Some people have argued that 
linguists can provide useful linguistic expertise for achieving step (i) but they have no con-
tribution to make to step (ii). Do you agree?
Answer at end of chapter
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
157
Exercise 8
Researchers in the area of linguistic landscapes (introduced in ­chapter 3) 
usually distinguish between “top-​down” and “bottom-​up” signs. What do 
you think this distinction refers to? Is it an easy-​to-​apply clear-​cut distinc-
tion? What implications does it have for language policy and planning?
These issues are discussed in the next paragraphs
Linguistic landscapes in social and political 
context
“Top-​down” signs are official signs, designed by public authorities, while 
“bottom-​up” signs are non-​official signs, usually produced by individuals or 
groups. However, the distinction is not always clear: e.g. professional signs 
produced by commercial organisations may be perceived by some as relatively 
“official”, especially if they have passed through a design and approval process, 
or are required to follow a set of guidelines and can be found in identical form 
nationwide. A more useful classification that has been proposed is a continuum 
from official to non-​official rather than a simple either–​or categorisation.
On the other hand, Nikolas Coupland suggests that all linguistic landscaping 
is generated “from above”, since people’s reasons for choosing what to portray 
are influenced by language ideologies. Whether they conform to the official lan-
guage policy or challenge it, they unavoidably give the policy credence by impli-
citly acknowledging its existence. This gives a clue concerning the implications 
for language planning of the distinction between top-​down and bottom-​up or 
relatively official vs. relatively unofficial signage. An analysis of the linguistic 
landscape can provide useful clues as to the gap which often exists between 
official language policy and actual linguistic practices. What the government 
legislates and what happens on the ground is often quite different, as illustrated 
in ­example 6.
Example 6
Timor-​Leste is a multilingual Pacific country with approximately 17  
Indigenous languages, and three non-​Indigenous languages, Portuguese,  
Indonesian and English, each associated with a different period of outside 
influence. There are two official languages, Portuguese and Tetun,  
the country’s Indigenous lingua franca which is spoken by about 70% of  
the population. The choice of Portuguese as an official language reflects  
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
158
400 years of colonial rule. This was followed by 24 years under Indonesian  
rule. In 2002, the UN peace-​keeping forces arrived to assist the transition  
to independence, bringing with them an influx of English.
An analysis in 2010 of the linguistic landscape in Dili, the capital of Timor-​
Leste, identified material in eight different languages, with Portuguese clearly 
the dominant official language. Astonishingly, Tetun, the Indigenous official lan-
guage, was not evident at all on official signs in the linguistic landscape surveyed. 
Most surprising perhaps was the dominance of English. Monolingual English 
signs accounted for 60% of the signs surveyed, and signs involving English and 
another language accounted for a further 15%. The linguistic landscape of Dili 
thus provides a dramatic example of the gap between official language policy 
and actual language practice in Timor-​Leste.
Once again we see the importance of examining the interaction between pol-
itical considerations, social considerations and linguistic behaviour. The exten-
sive use of English in signage in Timor-​Leste provides further evidence of the 
steady effects of globalisation. The final section of this chapter changes focus 
from telescope to microscope, and examines a few of the nitty-​gritty linguistic 
issues that language planners deal with when they get involved in codifying a 
variety.
Map 5.3  Timor-​Leste

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
159
Exercise 9
A sign in the carpark of McDonalds in Meknes, a Moroccan city
Source: Janet Holmes.
Consider the McDonalds sign in the above image.
1	
Can you identify the languages in each segment?
2	
What does your experience of written material suggest
(a)	
about the status relationship between the two languages?
(b)	
about the relationship between official language policy and actual practice 
in Meknes?
Answer at end of chapter
The linguist’s role in language planning
Example 7
Lexicographer: a writer of dictionaries, a harmless drudge.
(Samuel Johnson (1755) Dictionary of the English Language)

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
160
Language academies have existed for centuries, but it is also true that individ-
uals have often had an enormous influence on language planning, and especially 
on the standardisation or codification of a particular variety. Samuel Johnson’s 
40,000-​word dictionary was a landmark in the codification of English; though, 
as ­example 7 demonstrates, he had few illusions about the lexicographer’s role. 
Ivar Aasen in Norway created a composite variety of Norwegian (Landsmål/​
Nynorsk) from a range of dialects. In Israel, Eliezer Ben-​Yehuda was the most 
influential proponent of the vernacularisation of Hebrew. Francis Mihalic wrote 
the first authoritative grammar and dictionary of Tok Pisin in the 1950s. And 
in New Zealand Harry Orsman completed the first dictionary of New Zealand 
English on historical principles in 1997.
More often these days, the nuts and bolts of language planning are handled 
by committees, commissions or academies. Moreover, the focus of much lan-
guage planning activity has altered from the promotion of national and official 
languages in countries trying to establish their autonomy, to include concern 
for minority and endangered languages. The Kanak Languages Academy, for 
example, has been established to preserve the Indigenous languages of New 
Caledonia. Codification and vocabulary expansion are typically of prime con-
cern for language academies, and in the next section, these processes are briefly 
illustrated, drawing mainly on Māori for exemplification.
Codification of orthography
Example 8
In January 1982, the Greek government passed a law to implement a 
new writing system called MONOTONY. MONOTONY replaced a 
complicated system of symbols with a single stroke to indicate pronun-
ciation. Until this law passed, the Greeks used a system introduced after 
Alexander the Great spread the Empire, to make Athenian pronunciation 
clearer to foreigners. In the earlier system, there were five rules for pla-
cing accents, seven for accenting nouns and pronouns, and five rules for 
accenting verbs. Each rule had dozens of exceptions. It was estimated 
that it took average Greek school children 4,500 hours to learn to write 
their language. With MONOTONY in place, it is estimated that millions 
will be saved in printing expenses, and typing time will be reduced by up 
to 35%.
Like the Norwegian example discussed earlier in the chapter, ­example 8 
illustrates that governments often get involved with spelling reform. The Welsh 
government’s official support for Welsh revitalisation or reclamation is evident 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
161
in the steady replacement of anglicised spellings by Welsh names. So Llanelli 
has replaced Llanelly, respecting the fact that y is pronounced differently in 
Welsh. And more radically English forms of place names, such as Swansea, 
appear alongside the original Welsh forms (Abertawe). The latter, however, is 
not spelling reform: rather it is the recognition of bilingualism in the linguistic 
landscape, in contrast to the situation described in Timor-​Leste. In Wales there-
fore, we can see the recognition of the status of Welsh in the linguistic landscape, 
whether this means replacing anglicised spelling with Welsh, or providing both 
Welsh and English versions of a place name.
Bilingual signage in Cardiff, Wales
Source: Courtesy of Michael Willett.
In the past, the church was probably the main influence on the written form 
of previously unwritten languages. Missionaries were trained to translate the 
Bible into the local language of the place where they were working, and this 
usually meant first developing a spelling system for the language. In the USA, for 
instance, Navajo, the Athabaskan language of about 150,000 Navajos, was first 
written down by missionaries in the early twentieth century. A century earlier in 
New Zealand, Thomas Kendall, the first resident missionary, produced a rough 
attempt at an orthography for Māori in 1815.
Missionaries were often good linguists who produced a spelling system which 
accurately represented the pronunciation of the language. Inevitably there were 
problems, however. In Samoan, for instance, the sound [ŋ] represented in English 
as ng was accurately identified as a single sound rather than two separable 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
162
sounds. So, as ­example 9 illustrates, it was written simply as g. Samoans therefore 
write laga (weave) but say something which sounds to English ears like “langa”. 
They write galu but say something which sounds like “ngalu”. Consequently 
English speakers generally mispronounce words like mogamoga when they first 
see Samoan written down.
Example 9
Samoan
English
laga
weave
gagana
language
galu
wave, breaker
mogamoga
cockroach
tagi
weep, cry
In Māori, however, where [ŋ] also occurs, this single sound was written as two 
letters, ng. As a result, Māori words like tangi (weep), which are almost identical 
in pronunciation to Samoan tagi, are nevertheless spelt differently. The Samoan 
orthography is strictly a more precise representation of its sound system –​ one 
symbol is used for one sound. This example illustrates the influence a missionary 
could have on the codification process.
A problem in standardising the spelling of Māori is the choice between a 
macron over the top of a vowel letter marking its length (ā) vs. a double vowel 
(aa). Wellington printers have preferred the macron, while Auckland printers 
have favoured the double vowel. When it came to decisions about which to use 
for printing materials for use in schools or for government notices, there was a 
great deal of argument by the advocates of each system about why theirs was the 
better system, as ­example 10 demonstrates.
Example 10
Letter to the Editor of the New Zealand Listener.
Sir
. . . most of the arguments for using double vowels have been demolished 
as people have learnt more about the sound systems of Polynesian 
languages . . . The double-​vowel writing system has always been awk-
ward. It greatly complicates the learner’s task of using a dictionary, 
and has the added disadvantage of making many familiar words look 
unfamiliar . . .
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
163
As for the statement that the use of a diacritical mark is “impossible 
with most word-​processors”, one can only wonder how the French and 
Germans (among others) cope with computers . . .
(Albert J. Schütz, Professor of Linguistics, University of Hawai’i)
In New Zealand, the Māori Language Act of 1987 established the Māori 
Language Commission to advise on the development of Māori as an official 
language of New Zealand. On the long vowel issue, it came down in favour of 
the systematic use of the macron, describing it as simpler, easier to read, more 
economical and less likely to result in ambiguity. The macron is now univer-
sally accepted for all official communications, educational materials and signage, 
and the capabilities of word-​processing software doubtless contributed to this 
resolution. It is possible to download software that allows you to setup any 
keyboard to type with macrons (http://​kupu.maori.nz/​about/​macr​ons-​keybo​
ard-​setup). This is not so true of the introduction of new vocabulary, where 
social and cultural factors may be as relevant in choosing forms as linguistic and 
technological ones.
Sign at Victoria University of Wellington: note the order of the languages and the 
difference in size of font, as well as the use of macrons in the Māori
Source: Courtesy of Professor Meredith Marra.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
164
Developing vocabulary
Example 11
The Academy of the Hebrew Language in Israel has tried to select Indigenous 
words where possible, but widespread usage has led them to accept lipstick 
and pajama, for instance. Borrowed words are often integrated into Hebrew 
structure, however, so that check-​im (bank checks), uses the Hebrew plural 
suffix -​im. (Note too the adoption of American spellings rather than British 
pyjama and cheque.)
Hebrew faced the problem of finding words for everyday colloquial things 
which had previously been referred to in people’s vernacular languages. More 
often a language will need vocabulary for more specialised or formal domains, 
as was the case with Swahili, Tok Pisin and Malay, or for concepts and objects 
introduced from another culture, as with Navajo in the USA. In New Zealand, 
the Māori Language Commission has often been asked for advice on vocabu-
lary for new contexts and uses of Māori, as people want to use it for new 
functions such as writing official documents, and teaching mathematics and 
geography.
Example 12
Te Kōmihana mō Te Reo Māori
or
Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Māori
A specific example of the kinds of choices which faced the Māori Language 
Commission in this area is illustrated by the problem of providing Māori names 
for Government institutions, including themselves. They were called at first Te 
Kōmihana mō Te Reo Māori. Te reo is a widely known Māori phrase meaning 
the language, but the title also includes the word kōmihana which simply 
borrows the English word commission and adapts it to the Māori sound system. 
The transliteration is quite predictable, with k substituting for c, h substituting 
for s (since Māori has no [s]‌, and [h] is the usual fricative substitution), and a 
final vowel, since Māori is a language in which all syllables end in vowels. The 
Commission changed its name however to Te Taura Whiri i te Reo Māori (liter-
ally the rope binding together (the many strands of) the Māori language). This 
is a Māori name for the Commission –​ not one borrowed from English. The 
commissioners felt that such a label had greater linguistic and cultural integrity, 
 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
165
and this provides an insight into how they see their task. In advising others 
on usage, they are often faced with the dilemma of which of these options to 
recommend:
1	
a word borrowed from English
2	
an equivalent Māori word which is perhaps not well known or with a slightly 
different meaning which could be adapted
3	
a word newly created from Māori resources.
The Commission takes the view that its task is not simply a mechanical one 
of making Māori a more suitable instrument for official communication and 
modern education. It recognises another more symbolic and less instrumental 
dimension to its task. Consequently, where possible the Commission uses 
Indigenous resources, trying to “remain true to the spirit of the language”; but, 
of course, this is not always achievable. For example, the founding document of 
New Zealand –​ The Tiriti (Treaty) o Waitangi –​ involved too well established a 
borrowing to attempt a change. (Waitangi is the place in New Zealand where the 
Treaty was first signed on 6 February 1840.) On the other hand, The National 
Library was translated rather metaphorically as Te Puna Mātauranga o Aotearoa 
(literally the fount of knowledge of New Zealand).
A nice example of the adaptation of an older Māori word with a slightly 
different meaning is the use of rangapū which has been officially adopted to 
translate the important concept of partnership –​ important in the ongoing polit-
ical debates about the relationship between Māori and Pākehā (New Zealanders 
of European origin) in New Zealand. It is a word which meant group or com-
pany but which was not widely known and was little used.
Coining words is another solution. The term reo irirangi, literally spirit voice, 
uses Indigenous resources to label a modern object, the radio. Another example 
which demonstrates that even a Commission can have a sense of humour is the 
coinage pūkoro ure to translate condom. Pūkoro means literally a long thin bag-​
shaped net for catching eels and ure is the word for penis.
Exercise 10
Can you identify which of the following words have been borrowed into Māori from 
English and guess the reasons for the borrowings?
(a)	 neke
snake
(b)	 weka
native woodhen
(c)	 parau
plough
(d)	 pihikete
biscuit
(e)	 whare
house, hut
(f)	 pia
beer
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
166
(g)	 wai
water
(h)	 pahi
bus
(i)	 kuia
old woman
(j) 	 kuˉmara
sweet potato
Answer at end of chapter
Acceptance
I have provided some very specific examples of the kinds of linguistic issues 
that language planners get involved with, illustrating mainly from Māori. The 
same issues have been faced by those involved in the development of the Navajo 
language in the USA, Aboriginal languages in Australia, Swahili in Tanzania 
and standard Norwegian in Norway. The next step in the process involves the 
politicians and the people as much as the sociolinguist.
Example 13
(a)	
Getting a separate TV channel was a major triumph for Welsh lan-
guage activists. This contributed greatly to the status of Welsh as a 
language to be taken seriously.
(b)	 Radio Vanuatu –​ a crucial means of inter-​island communication –​ 
uses mainly Bislama, the national language. This enhances its status 
and inevitably contributes to the process of standardisation.
(c)	
Māori language supporters celebrated the launch of the first Māori 
TV station in March 2004. Broadcasting in Māori and English, it 
has proved very popular, and according to media statistics, it reaches 
more than 1.8 million New Zealanders each month (over a third of 
the total population), including half of all Māori over five years old. 
The number of viewers has increased at a rate of 14% every year since 
the station’s launch.
The Māori Language Commission can recommend that certain linguistic 
forms be adopted by the media and used in schools, just as the Norwegian 
government regularly publishes its lists of approved words. But people have to 
accept and use them. This is what finally determines whether a proposed form 
succeeds or fails, and this applies as much to an individual word as to a new 
code selected to serve as a standard official language. The adoption of forms 
by the media can contribute to the process. But, finally, the people will decide. 
The Norwegian government’s ambivalence between Bokmål and Nynorsk 
in Norway has been a source of irritation to people. And the government’s 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
167
regular pronouncements in the media on new “official usages” which represent 
attempts at compromise have not always been accepted. It is said that people 
often ignore the newspaper lists of officially approved forms and use the ones 
they happen to have learned in school. In such a situation, people finally vote 
with their tongues, and it seems Bokmål is emerging as the de facto written 
standard in many areas.
Nevertheless, it is generally true that government support plays an important 
part in gaining acceptance for a code. In China, Putonghua (or Mandarin) has 
been promoted by the Chinese government as the standard variety of Chinese 
since 1949 when the People’s Republic was established. The fact that many 
Chinese people already spoke this variety no doubt helped, but the government’s 
unwavering attitude and deliberate efforts to promote its use in a wide variety 
of contexts have led to its gaining wide acceptance among the 1,400 million or 
so Chinese who make up the Republic. Putonghua uses the pronunciation of the 
Beijing dialect, the capital city, together with the grammar of the highly valued 
Northern Chinese dialects, and the vocabulary of modern colloquial Chinese. 
These choices have also helped people to accept it. A variety which begins with 
some status always has a useful head-​start.
In Singapore, the government’s Speak Mandarin Campaign has been simi-
larly successful in persuading the dialect-​speaking Chinese population to switch 
within the space of a generation to Mandarin from Hokkien, Cantonese, 
Teochew, Hockchew, Hainanese, Hakka and other Chinese dialects. Phyllis 
Chew describes it as “perhaps the world’s most successful language-​engineering 
campaign”. The percentage of Chinese households in Singapore using Mandarin 
as the dominant language rose from 13% in 1980 to 46% in 2015. Organised 
efforts to promote the learning of a language have been labelled “acquisition 
planning”.
Exercise 11
What steps could a government take to spread the knowledge, use and acceptance of a 
language?
Answer at end of chapter
Acquisition planning
Having considered the linguist’s role at the micro-​level of codification, it is useful 
finally to return to the macro-​level of language planning activities. In addition 
to corpus planning and status or prestige planning, which were discussed above, 
sociolinguists may also make a contribution towards organised efforts to spread 
a linguistic variety by increasing the number of its users. This is sometimes called 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
168
“acquisition planning”, and, since the most widespread method of encour-
aging the acquisition of a language is to use the education system, it is also 
known as language-​in-​education planning. Language planners may be asked to 
advise about a range of issues, such as who should be the target of the language 
promotion efforts, the most effective language teaching methods in particular 
contexts, what materials should be used, and how the programmes should be 
evaluated. Should everyone have access to language teaching, for instance? How 
much say should a local community have in the way a language is taught, or the 
materials used, as opposed to a top–​down uniform approach monitored by the 
government?
In China, newspapers and radio contributed to early efforts to promote 
knowledge of Mandarin: a demonstration radio programme promoted the 
approved pronunciation, while newspapers in Mandarin printed in transcribed 
characters. In Japan, although there are substantial minority groups speaking 
Korean and Chinese, Japanese is the only official language. Acquisition planning 
currently focuses only on English which all children are required to study 
throughout the school system. In Tanzania, Norway, Singapore and many other 
countries, the education system plays a crucial role in acquisition planning, 
and issues of access, curriculum, methodology and evaluation are decided by 
government departments. “Absorption centers” in Israel, where immigrants 
live while sorting out employment and housing, offer government subsidised, 
on-​site Hebrew classes. By way of contrast, in the early days of attempts to 
revive or reclaim Māori, people from the Māori community took the initia-
tive to establish their own pre-​schools where Māori was used. They sought 
advice from sociolinguists who had studied similar programmes overseas, and 
the early kohanga reo (language nests) were under the control of the local com-
munity and used local resources and materials. Classes were also held in many 
Māori communities, using a range of different methods and materials, in order 
to provide opportunities for adults to improve their Māori language knowledge 
and proficiency. These two examples illustrate different ways of approaching 
acquisition planning.
Exercise 12
This chapter has emphasised the political basis of many language planning activities. 
Imagine you were a speaker of the minority language, Capiznon, in the Philippines when 
the government decided to rename Tagalog as Pilipino and develop it both as the national 
language and as an official language alongside English. What costs would this entail for 
you and your community?
Answer at end of chapter
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
169
Exercise 13
Rob’s family live in New Zealand where English is the dominant language. He and his 
wife, Anke, have decided to use German in the home to help their children develop bilin-
gual proficiency. Decisions about which language to use in the home illustrate informal, 
grassroots acquisition planning, or family language policy and planning. Many of those 
involved in language maintenance and revival consider the home to be the crucial domain 
for achieving their goals. Consider religion and workplace domains. Do you think that 
decisions about language use at the micro-​level in these domains could be considered as 
examples of acquisition planning?
Answer at end of chapter
Finally, it is interesting to note that people can be very creative in their 
methods of supporting language maintenance and revival efforts, as ­example 14 
illustrates.
Example 14
Renata Flores: Peru’s Queen of Quechua Rap
Source: Photograph by Celia D. Luna.
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
170
Exercise 14
Map 5.4  Linguistic map of Quechua and Aymara in South America
Source: Reproduced with permission of The Licensor through PLSclear.
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
171
Quechua is an Indigenous language spoken by more than eight million people across 
the South American Andes, especially in Peru where it is the second most spoken lan-
guage. Nevertheless, it was considered an endangered language since the numbers of 
speakers was steadily declining. But in 2017, there was a reported increase of 14% since 
2007, according to the national census figures. This may be attributable to increased gov-
ernment and regional support for Indigenous languages, including the introduction of 
bilingual education for the first three years of schooling. There are, however, still many 
challenges facing those who wish to maintain and revitalise or reclaim this language.
On the basis of what you have read in ­chapters 3, 4 and 5, identify three possible 
threats to Quechua language maintenance, and three steps that could be taken to help 
preserve it.
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 15
It has been argued by some that the apostrophe is a redundant diacritic in English writing 
and should be abolished. What arguments can you provide for and against this position?
Answer at end of chapter
Conclusion
Example 15
A New Zealander who had moved to England decided to prepare a dessert 
involving fruit which in her New Zealand childhood had been called chinese 
gooseberries. As a result of successful linguistic engineering, followed by 
a good promotional campaign, she knew they were now known in New 
Zealand and overseas as kiwifruit. She was somewhat dismayed, however, 
on opening her English recipe book to read the first instruction “Slice up 6 
Kiwis”. In New Zealand, Kiwi refers to a New Zealander!
Language planning is defined most simply as deliberate language change. This 
covers a wide variety of activities including the introduction of new labels for 
fruit, the reform of spelling systems, and the provision of advice on non-​sexist 
terminology such as Ms and chairperson (a topic discussed in ­chapter 12). It 
also includes the development of national languages and standard dialects, as 
illustrated in this chapter.
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
172
Language planners generally focus on specific language problems. Their role is 
to advise on a policy for language use which will solve the problems appropriately 
in particular speech communities. This chapter has focused in some detail on a 
few specific cases of language planning in order to exemplify some of the issues 
which have to be resolved by language planners, and some of the ways which 
have been used to resolve them. We have seen for instance that language planners 
may need to develop a variety upwards into new H domains, as with Swahili, Tok 
Pisin, Indonesian and Nynorsk, or alternatively downwards into new L domains 
as in the case of Hebrew, Bokmål and to some extent Mandarin Chinese.
This chapter has been concerned mainly with the language policies of coun-
tries and states rather than the language behaviour of individuals. Yet it has 
been clear that ultimately it is the patterns of linguistic behaviour of individual 
language users that determine whether a national policy will succeed or not. 
If people do not use an official language, then it will simply wither away. If 
recommendations about approved or preferred spellings are ignored, they will 
become defunct. The reasons why people adopt one form and not another are 
complicated. Language constructs aspects of social, ethnic and gender identity, 
and signals membership of particular groups as well as nationhood.
Multilingualism highlights linguistic diversity and makes it easier to per-
ceive, as we have seen in the first part of this book. But it is clear that there is 
rich linguistic diversity within languages too. Members of monolingual speech 
communities use this diversity to signal their attitudes and allegiances, and con-
struct their social identities and relationships, just as multilingual people use 
their different languages for these purposes. Kalala (in ­chapter 2, ­example 1) 
signalled his ethnic group membership and constructed solidarity with other 
members of his tribe when he used Shi. He consolidated his relationships within 
his friendship and age groups when he used Indoubil. His variety of Swahili sig-
nalled his regional and social background. In Part II of this book, we will look 
in some detail at how monolinguals draw on their linguistic resources to signal 
such nonlinguistic information, and how they use these resources to construct 
different aspects of their social identities and social relationships.
Methods
Methods for collecting and analysing data to inform language policy and to assist in lan-
guage planning efforts:
•	 In addition to the use of census data described at the end of ­chapter 4 to identify the 
numbers of speakers of different varieties, and their degree of proficiency, sociolinguists 
engaged in providing language policy advice will need to assess how different varieties 
are evaluated by members of the target community. Chapter 15 provides information 
on methods of collecting attitude data.
•	 Advice on how to raise the prestige of a variety selected for use as an official or national 
language (status planning) will need to be based on a review of resources for promoting 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
173
that variety: e.g. social media, public broadcasting, use in H domains by prestigious 
community members, and so on.
•	 To assist with language planning, specific linguistic skills are needed to codify any variety 
selected for use in new domains such as education, law and government. Lexicographers 
code vocabulary, and language planning may require them to advise on how to choose 
or develop the many new lexical items needed for use in domains previously unavailable 
to the selected variety.
•	 Grammarians will need to advise on which forms to select in codifying a standard 
variety, especially for written materials. They will consider frequencies based on the 
analysis of corpus data, as well as evaluating the relative acceptability of proposed 
forms. I have argued, for instance, for the abolition of apostrophes in English as they 
frequently cause confusion and are often misplaced. But though this linguistic reform 
seems eminently sensible (there are vanishingly few instances where the removal of an 
apostrophe would cause ambiguity of meaning), those who have invested in learning 
the rules are a powerful lobby group and so it is unrealistic to recommend such a 
radical proposition.
Once you have completed a linguistics degree, you may find yourself in a position where 
your advice will be sought on language policy and language planning matters, as have 
some of our former students. Reading widely on the topics discussed in this chapter will 
prepare you for such a role.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 5
Answer to ­exercise 1
This is a good question to discuss with others since an exchange of views is likely 
to be helpful. There can certainly be no definitive answer to such a question. 
Nevertheless, linguistic features of the language are less relevant than attitudinal, 
political and social factors. So statements (a) and (g) are probably least relevant 
to the adoption of the language as a national language, and statements (c) and 
(e) are relevant only to the extent that they express Paraguayans’ attitudes to 
their language and suggest that it could be developed relatively easily if adopted 
for other reasons. Statements (b), (d) and (f) are the ones we would rate highest, 
with (h) an interesting indication of the political value of knowing the language. 
Overall it must be recognised that the preservation and maintenance of the lan-
guage has owed much to political factors. Guaraní has proved useful politically 
as a unifying symbol for the nation.
Answer to ­exercise 2
The list below is based on the status given to these languages by the governments 
of the relevant countries. In many countries, there is no one language which 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
174
can adequately serve as the only official language. A world language such as 
English is often used as an official language for external official functions, along-
side a local language which serves internal official functions (e.g. Philippines, 
Tanzania). In some countries, giving more than one language the status of offi-
cial language is a way of recognising the linguistic and cultural diversity within 
the country (e.g. India, Papua New Guinea, Singapore).
Country
Official language(s)
Argentina
Australia
Spanish
English (de facto)
Belgium
Dutch (Flemish), French, German
Brazil
Portuguese
Canada
English, French
Chile
Ecuador
Finland
Spanish
Spanish
Finnish, Swedish
France
French
Haiti
French, Haitian Creole
India
Hindi, English, 22 regional languages1
Indonesia
Indonesian
Jordan
Kenya
Arabic
Swahili, English
Liberia
Morocco
Myanmar
New Zealand
English
Modern Standard Arabic, Berber
Burmese
Māori, New Zealand Sign Language, English (de facto)
Norway
Norwegian (Nynorsk, Bokmål), Sami
Papua New Guinea
English, Tok Pisin, Hiri Motu
Paraguay
Guaraní, Spanish
Philippines
Filipino, English
Singapore
Malay, Mandarin, Tamil, English
Tanzania
Swahili, English (de facto)
Uruguay
Spanish
Vanuatu
Bislama, French, English
Answer to ­exercise 3
Your answer will indicate your views about the relationship between language 
and nation. The attitudes expressed by the men cited reflect the tendency to see 
language and nation as synonymous –​ one language =​ one nation. This view of 
the “ideal” nation-​state as a single people using a single language is very widely 
held. To some extent, it is apparent in the descriptions of the language situations 
in Paraguay and Tanzania, as discussed in this chapter.
Alternative views are possible, however. Some sociolinguists argue, for 
example, that “one nation–​one language” reflects the hegemonic impact of pre-
dominantly monolingual cultures, such as those of France and England, where 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
175
one ethnic group dominates, and is in control of political power. They suggest 
that studying standard English is not likely to lead to a love of England for a 
Black British person whose home language variety is ridiculed and repressed, 
and whose economic prospects are depressing. Nor is it likely that linguistic 
minorities in Britain, such as speakers of Panjabi, Polish and Greek, will be very 
enthusiastic about a “one nation–​one language” viewpoint.
Answer to ­exercise 4
The obvious answer is that materials are already available in English for teaching 
at these levels, and it will clearly be cheaper to use these than to develop materials 
in Swahili. As a world language, English will also give students access to a wider 
information base.
The counter-​arguments involve considering the level of linguistic competence 
in a language which is necessary before it is possible to learn effectively through 
it at secondary and tertiary level. Most Tanzanians identify strongly with Swahili 
and they are fluent in it by the end of primary or elementary school. The switch 
to English as the medium for education in secondary school is likely to create a 
barrier for at least some Tanzanians. Those from poor backgrounds and rural 
areas are most vulnerable. Not all will succeed in mastering English well enough 
to gain the benefits it offers.
Answer to ­exercise 5
The discussion of Swahili illustrates that it can be regarded as serving all these 
functions in Tanzania.
•	Unifying: Swahili serves to unify Tanzanians, since it is not the language of a 
particular tribe. It offers advantages over tribal languages as a means of com-
munication, education and access to government jobs, for instance.
•	Separatist: since Swahili is used throughout East Africa as a lingua franca, 
this function is not so clearly realised as others. Guaraní in Paraguay is a 
better example of a language serving this separatist function, since it clearly 
distinguishes Paraguay from other South American nations. Swahili sets apart 
Tanzania from surrounding countries only to the extent that it is the national 
language of Tanzania. However, the standard used is a distinctly Tanzanian 
variety of Swahili. It is certainly regarded by many Tanzanians as a symbol of 
their separate national identity.
•	Prestige: there is no doubt about the status of Swahili as a proper or “real” 
language. It has much greater status in the nation as a whole than any tribal 
vernacular language.
•	Frame of reference function: there is a standard variety of Swahili which exists 
alongside a range of regional varieties. The standard was developed from the 
variety spoken in Zanzibar town. The standard is clearly recognised as the 
norm and other varieties are regarded as regionally marked.
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
176
Answer to ­exercise 6
In 1922, Hebrew was recognised, alongside English and Arabic, as an official 
language in British-​ruled Palestine, and in 1948 Hebrew became an official lan-
guage of the newly declared State of Israel.
1	
Code selection: in Israel, the chosen language had to act as a Jewish symbol 
and therefore had to be a Jewish language. Hence, the only real choices for 
the people of Israel were Yiddish or Hebrew. The selection of Hebrew was 
basically a political decision. It was considered the only possible choice for 
the great majority of Israeli Jews. Not all Jews spoke Yiddish and it had little 
prestige. For many the associations of Yiddish –​ especially the variety closely 
related to German linguistically –​ were simply unacceptable.
2	
Codification: like Latin, Hebrew is a highly codified variety. Grammars and 
dictionaries already existed. Spelling and pronunciation rules based on clas-
sical texts existed too. Codification of the modern variety of Hebrew which 
has now emerged is still in progress.
3	
Elaboration: this is where most work needed to be done. The selection 
of forms for use in everyday conversation involved drawing on a variety 
of literary dialects of Hebrew, as well as the various, mainly European, 
vernaculars spoken by immigrants to Israel.
4	
Acceptance: Hebrew had great prestige. People respected it and revered it 
as the language of religion and literature. An extensive literary revival of 
Hebrew in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries meant it was used for 
new and broader functions by writers. This prepared the ground for its being 
seen as the obvious candidate for national language. It was adopted as a 
vernacular first in the 1880s by enthusiasts who persuaded people to teach 
it to their children as a first language, though some felt it was too sacred for 
everyday use. Its advantages as a lingua franca between immigrants who 
spoke many different languages generally added to its attractions. So its pres-
tige, its unifying function and its usefulness all contributed to its acceptance.
This answer, and the account of the establishment of Hebrew as the national 
language of Israel, is based on the sources in the Reference section below. An alter-
native analysis regards Hebrew as a creole with Yiddish as the substrate language 
and Hebrew as the superstrate or lexifier language. An even more radical position 
labels the language as Israeli and regards it as a creole with input from Hebrew, 
Yiddish and a number of European languages including Russian and Polish.
Answer to ­exercise 7
While linguists have obvious expertise in developing the form of a standard var-
iety, the task of promoting the variety will require a variety of skills and resources 
which are not particularly linguistic. However, sociolinguists have a role to play 
in advising on the relative advantages and disadvantages of different varieties 
from the point of view of their likelihood of acceptance. Some varieties begin 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
177
with a head-​start –​ Swahili in Tanzania, for instance, had a great deal going for 
it in terms of acceptance compared with English, and was therefore easier to pro-
mote. Promoting Yiddish would have been very problematic in Israel.
Answer to ­exercise 9
	1	
The two languages are French and Modern Standard Arabic, the language of 
media and written texts in Morocco.
	2	
(a)	 If you are not familiar with Arabic you might assume that the sign is 
giving precedence to French, since it is on the left side of the sign and 
people using Roman script read from left to right. If you are familiar 
with Arabic you will know that Arabic is read from right to left. Thus an 
Arabic reader will see the Arabic as taking precedence. Bilingual readers 
will recognise the fact that the sign gives equal status to each language.
		
(b)	 The official languages of Morocco are Modern Standard Arabic and 
Berber, as indicated in the table for the answer to ­exercise 2 in this 
chapter. However French is a prestige language and an official second 
language, taught in schools, used in commerce, culture, science, educa-
tion and government, and widely used as a lingua franca. So this sign is 
somewhat inconsistent with official policy (which would specify Arabic 
and Berber) –​ but it reflects widespread practice.
Answer to ­exercise 10
Items (d) and (f) are obvious borrowings referring to foodstuffs introduced by 
Europeans. Item (a) is a borrowing: there are no snakes in New Zealand and 
the concept was introduced with the English language. Similarly items (c) and 
(h) refer to imported objects. The Māori Language Commission would not try to 
alter or replace well-​established borrowings such as these.
The remaining words (b), (e), (g), (i) and (j) are Māori words, as you might 
have guessed since they refer to New Zealand items, or to concepts which are 
basic in most cultures.
Answer to ­exercise 11
In implementing a language policy to extend the use of a particular variety or 
code, most governments use both the education system and the mass media –​ 
newspapers, radio, TV and internet. They also encourage and approve the use of 
the language in official spheres of administration. An effective education system 
can be a very powerful means of extending the functions of a particular var-
iety, spreading proficiency in the variety and giving it status which increases its 
acceptability, as both the Chinese and the Tanzanian examples illustrate.
Answer to ­exercise 12
Since the national language Pilipino (alongside English) would be used in schools 
after the first three years, the costs would include the possibility of language 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
178
shift over time. Attitudes to Capiznon as an ethnic identity symbol would be 
important if it was to survive. Since it has a large number of speakers (around 
650,000 in 2015), and a secure regional base in Western Visayas, the chances of 
resistance to language shift are good. However it is likely that reading material 
and media resources in Capiznon would steadily become more limited as Pilipino 
and English displaced it from various official domains.
Answer to ­exercise 13
If we define acquisition planning as language planning aimed at assisting people 
to acquire a new variety, then we need to consider the reasons for decisions about 
language use in each domain in order to decide whether these count as examples of 
acquisition planning. A decision to use the language of a minority ethnic group in 
church might be made for ideological reasons –​ because the language symbolises 
the community’s distinctiveness, for example. Encouraging acquisition might not 
be a priority. On the other hand, if the church wishes to encourage children to 
learn the ethnic language, this could be an example of acquisition planning. If 
the workforce comprises a large number of workers from a minority ethnolin-
guistic group, a decision to use the language of this group in the workplace might 
be made for reasons of efficient communication or to help make employees feel 
more comfortable. If a company is committed to language maintenance, however, 
their decision to encourage use of the minority language in the workplace could 
be regarded as a contribution to acquisition planning at the micro-​level.
Answer to ­exercise 14
Three possible threats to Quechua language maintenance:
1	
Many speakers of Quechua do not regard their language positively –​ they lack 
language loyalty. They regard Spanish as “better” or superior, and recognise it is 
important for obtaining employment, especially in urban areas. Consequently, 
many parents resist efforts to maintain Quechua through bilingual education, 
for example, because they want to ensure upward mobility for their children.
2	
There is great linguistic variation among speakers in different areas, to the 
extent that different varieties are often mutually unintelligible. Selecting a 
variety for maintenance through its use in education, for instance, is there-
fore no easy matter.
3	
Many of those who use Quechua do not recognise the possibility that lan-
guage shift may displace it over time. They cannot conceive of the idea that 
it would disappear, and therefore do not take active steps to maintain it 
against inroads from Spanish.
Three steps that could be taken to preserve Quechua, as discussed in this chapter:
1	
Status planning to counter the stigma attached to it by many speakers.
2	
Corpus planning to identify and develop an acceptable written standard variety, 
codify it and expand its vocabulary for use in education and other H domains.
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
179
3	
Acquisition planning to ensure the language continues to be used by children 
and to increase the number of its users as much as possible.
Some steps have been taken in all these areas but more is needed according to 
sociolinguists researching these issues.
Answer to ­exercise 15
See:
•	www.wgtn.ac.nz/​lals/​resources/​Publications/​04June2008.pdf
•	www.washingtonpost.com/​local/​obituaries/​john-​richards-​dead/​2021/​04/​25/​
9c7c1994-​a425-​11eb-​a774-​7b47ceb36ee8_​story.html
Note the difference between:
Residents’ refuse to be placed in bins vs. Residents refuse to be placed in bins
Source: David Blazek, Washington Post.

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
180
Concepts introduced
•	National language
•	Official language
•	De facto and de jure status of languages
•	Linguistic landscapes
•	Language planning
•	Corpus planning
•	Status or prestige planning
•	Acquisition planning
•	Codification
Note
1	 Any state within India may adopt one or more official state languages and the constitu-
tion of India thereby legislates that any official state language is included in the official 
languages of India.
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Blanc (1968); Cooper (1989); Gold (1989) on Hebrew
Bourhis (1983) on French in Quebec
Cameron and Bourne (1989) on English
Choi (2005); Rubin (1968, 1985) on Paraguay
Coughlan (2021) on tensions around Irish language policy
Coupland (2010) on Welsh and linguistic landscapes
Crowley (1990) on Bislama in Vanuatu
Ennaji (2005) on Morocco
Fraser (2006) on French and English in Canada
Gonzalez (1998) on the Philippines
Haugen (1959, 1965, 1966b) on Norwegian
Hornberger and Coronel-​Molina (2004) on Quechua
Jahr (1989) on Norwegian
Jaworksi and Thurlow (2010) on linguistic landscapes
Kirkwood (1989) on the Soviet Union
Kvietok Dueñas (2019) on Quechua language policy and planning
Landry and Bourhis (1997) on linguistic landscaping and ethnolinguistic vitality
Macalister (2012) on Timor-​Leste
Mputubwele (2003) on Democratic Republic of Congo-​Zaire
Russell (1989) on Swahili in Tanzania
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

NATIONAL LANGUAGES: POLICY and PLANNING
181
taiwantoday.tw/​ct.asp?xItem=​186691&ctNode=​454 on International Mother 
Language Day
Trudgill (2009) on Norwegian
Tupas (2015) on the Philippines
Vikör (1995) on Norwegian
Vuzo (2018) on language in secondary and tertiary instruction in Tanzania
Whiteley (1968, 1969) on Swahili in Tanzania
Wiggen (1997) on Norwegian
Wurm (1985) on Tok Pisin
www.cal.org/​co/​haiti/​hlang.html on Haiti
www.throng.co.nz/​maori-​television/​ on Māori TV statistics
www12.statcan.gc.ca on 2016 census Canadian language data
Zuckermann (2003) on Israeli and alternative approaches to Hebrew
Quotations:
Example 4 is taken from the Dominion (a daily newspaper published in 
Wellington, New Zealand), 1 August 1989
Example 8 is from the San Francisco Chronicle, 26 December 1982
Example 10 is from the New Zealand Listener, 5 April 1986
The quotation on the success of the Speak Mandarin Campaign in Singapore is 
from Chew (2007: 77)
Example 14 is from www.nytimes.com/​2020/​04/​28/​world/​americas/​peru-​
Indigenous-​rap-​renata-​flores.html
Useful additional reading
A report on tribal language revitalization in head start and early head start (2017)
Bigelow and Engman (2020) on reclamation of Indigenous languages
Cooper (1989)
Crystal (2010)
Cunningham and King (2021) on linguistic landscapes and language policy
de Bres (2015)
Eastman (1983)
Fasold (1984): ­chapters 2 and 9
Garvin and Mathiot (1956)
Haugen (1966a)
Jones, M.C. (2019)
Kaplan and Baldauf (2013)
McColl Millar (2005)
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

MULTILINGUAL SPEECH COMMUNITIES
182
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 6
Mirvahedi and Macalister (2017) on family language policy
Mirvahedi and Nasjian (2010) on institutional support for language mainten-
ance in Iran
Myers-​Scotton (2006): ­chapter 12
Paulston and Tucker (2003): parts X and XI
Pauwels, Winter and Lo Bianco (2007)
Revis (2017) on family language policy
Ricento (2005)
Rubin and Jernudd (1971)
Seals (2019) on politics and language identity
Shohamy (2006)
Spolsky (2009)
Spolsky (2012) on family language policy
Trudgill (2009)
Wardhaugh (1987)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 14
https://​aeon.co/​ess​ays/​bes​ide-​the-​point-​punc​tuat​ion-​is-​dead-​long-​live-​punc​tuat​
ion?utm​_​sou​rce=​Aeon+​New​slet​ter&utm_​c​ampa​ign=​87a​ae88​cc7-​EMAI​L_​CA​
MPAI​GN_​2​020_​08_​3​1_​05​_​27&utm​_​med​ium=​email&utm_​t​erm=​0_​411​a82e​
59d-​87a​ae88​cc7-​69531​301 –​ for a discussion on punctuation
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Language variation: focus on users
Part II
 


185
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-8
In the first section of this book, the focus was on language variation in multi-
lingual communities. In this section, the focus moves to language variation in 
monolingual communities. People often use language to signal their membership 
of particular groups and to construct different aspects of their social identity. 
Social status, gender, age, ethnicity and the kinds of social networks and com-
munities that people belong to are important dimensions of identity in many 
communities. We illustrate the way people use language to signal and enact such 
affiliations in this second section of this book.
Example 1
Telephone rings.
Pat:	
Hello.
Caller:	
Hello, is Mark there?
Pat:	
Yes. Just hold on a minute.
Pat (to Mark):	
There’s a rather well-​educated young lady from Scotland 
on the phone for you.
When you answer the telephone, you can often make some pretty accurate 
guesses about various characteristics of the speaker. Pat was able to deduce 
quite a lot about Mark’s caller, even though the caller had said nothing expli-
citly about herself. Most listeners can identify when the caller is a child without 
any problem. When the caller is an adult, it is usually possible to tell whether 
a speaker is female or male. If the person has a distinctive regional accent, then  
their regional origins will be evident even from a short utterance. And it may also 
be possible to make a reasonable guess about the person’s socioeconomic status 
or educational background, as Pat did.
No two people speak exactly the same, which accounts for a myriad of accents 
throughout the world. There are infinite sources of variation in speech. A sound 
spectrograph, a machine which represents the sound waves of speech in visual 
form, shows that even a single vowel may be pronounced in hundreds of minutely 
different ways, most of which listeners do not even register. Some features of 
Regional and social dialects
6
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
186
speech, however, are shared by groups, and become important because they dif-
ferentiate one group from another. Just as different languages often serve a uni-
fying and separating function for their speakers, so do speech characteristics 
within languages. Due to their regional dialects, the pronunciation, grammar 
and vocabulary of Scottish speakers of English are all in some respects quite dis-
tinct from those of people from England, for example. Though there is variation 
within Scotland, there are also some features which perform an overall unifying 
function. The letter r in words like girl and star is pronounced in a number of 
English-​speaking areas, and Scotland is certainly one of them. And a Scot is far 
more likely to say I’ll not do it than I won’t do it, meet you at the back of 1 
rather than some time after 1, and he lives outwith Edinburgh rather than he 
lives outside Edinburgh.
Similarly, the pronunciation of bath with the same vowel as in sat 
distinguishes a speaker from the north of England from a southerner. And 
while many speakers of English use the same vowel in the three words bag, 
map and bad, workers in Belfast pronounce them in ways that sound like 
[beg], [ma:rp] and [bod] to English people. Speech provides social information 
too. Dropping the initial [h]‌ in words like house and heaven often indicates 
a lower socioeconomic background in English. And so does the use of gram-
matical patterns such as they don’t know nothing them kids or I done it last 
week. We signal our group affiliations and our social identities by the speech 
forms we use.
Regional variation
International varieties
Example 2
A British visitor to New Zealand decided that while he was in Auckland, 
he would look up an old friend from his army days. He found the address, 
walked up the path and knocked on the door.
“Gidday,” said the young man who opened the door. “What can I do 
for you?”
“I’ve called to see me old mate Don Stone,” said the visitor.
“Oh he’s dead now mate,” said the young man.
The visitor was about to express condolences when he was thumped on 
the back by Don Stone himself. The young man had said, “Here’s dad now 
mate”, as his father came in the gate.
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
187
There are many such stories –​ some no doubt apocryphal –​ of mistakes based on 
regional accent differences. To British ears, a New Zealander’s dad sounds like an 
English person’s dead, bad sounds like bed and six sounds like sucks. Americans 
and Australians, as well as New Zealanders, tell of British visitors who were 
given pens instead of pins and pans instead of pens. On the other hand, an 
American’s god sounds like an English person’s guard, and an American’s ladder 
is pronounced identically with latter.
Example 3
Graffiti on a wall in Wellington:
Wellington sux
Auckland nil
There are vocabulary differences in the varieties spoken in different regions 
too. American candies are New Zealand lollies and British sweets. South Africans 
use the term robot for British traffic light. British wellies (Wellington boots) 
are New Zealand gummies (or gumboots), while the word togs refers to very 
different types of clothes in different places. In New Zealand, togs are what you 
swim in. In Britain you might wear them to a formal dinner.
Exercise 1
If English is used in your community, you may like to check out the extent of American vs. 
British influence on vocabulary in your region. The following questions provide a simple 
way of measuring this. Ask ten of your friends to answer them and work out how many 
American items vs. how many British items they choose. You should allow for the fact 
that some may use both. If you are not sure which is the British item and which is used 
in the USA, check in a big reference dictionary such as Webster’s Third New International 
Dictionary or the big Oxford English Dictionary.
(a)	
When you go window-​shopping do you walk on the pavement or the sidewalk?
(b)	
Do you put your shopping in the car’s trunk or in the boot?
(c)	
When the car’s engine needs oil do you open the bonnet or the hood?
(d)	
Do you fill up the car with gas or with petrol?
(e)	
When it is cold do you put on a jersey or a sweater?
(f)	
When the baby is wet does it need a dry diaper or nappy?
(g)	
Do you get to the top of the building in an elevator or a lift?
(h)	
When the children are hungry do you open a can or a tin of beans?
(i)	
When you go on holiday do you take luggage or baggage?
(j)	
When you’ve made an error do you remove it with an eraser or a rubber?
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
188
Pronunciation and vocabulary differences are probably the differences that 
people are most aware of between different dialects of English, but there are 
grammatical differences too. Can you distinguish the preferred American usages 
from the traditional British usages in the sentences in ­example 4?
Example 4
(a)	
Do you have a match?
(b)	 Have you got a cigarette?
(c)	
She has gotten used to the noise.
(d)	 She’s got used to the noise.
(e)	
He dove in, head first.
(f)	
He dived in head first.
(g)	
Did you eat yet?
(h)	 Have you eaten yet?
Speakers of American English tend to prefer do you have, though this can 
now also be heard in Britain alongside the traditional British English have you 
got. Americans say gotten where people in England use got. Many Americans 
use dove while most British English speakers prefer dived. Americans tend to ask 
did you eat while the English ask have you eaten. Are the American or the British 
usages predominant where you live? In New Zealand, where American forms are 
usually regarded as more innovative, younger New Zealanders say dove, while 
older New Zealanders use dived.
The differences that English speakers throughout the world notice when 
they meet English speakers from other nations are similar to those noted by 
speakers of other languages too. Spanish and French, for example, are languages 
which are extensively used in a variety of countries besides Spain and France. 
Speakers of Spanish can hear differences of pronunciation, vocabulary and 
grammar in the varieties of Spanish spoken in Mexico, Spain, Argentina and 
Paraguay, for example. Native speakers of French can distinguish the French 
used in Montreal from Parisian and Haitian French. There are differences in 
the vocabulary of different varieties. So, for example, a Parisian’s travail (work) 
is a djobe in Montreal. The word for beggar is mendiant in France but quêteux 
in Quebec. And Canadians tend to use aller voir un film, while Parisians prefer 
aller au cinéma. Even grammatical gender assignment differs in the two varieties. 
Appétit (appetite) and midi (midday), for instance, are feminine in Canada, but 
masculine in France, while the opposite is true for automobile and oreille (ear). 
Clearly Canadian French and Parisian French are different dialects.
Sometimes the differences between dialects are a matter of the frequencies 
with which particular features occur, rather than completely different ways of 
saying things. People in Montreal, for example, do not always pronounce the 
l in phrases like il pleut and il fait. Parisians omit the l too –​ but less often. If 
you learned French in school you probably struggled to learn which verbs used 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
189
avoir and which used être in marking the perfect aspect. Getting control of these 
patterns generally causes all kinds of headaches. It would probably have caused 
you even more pain if you had realised that the patterns for using avoir and être 
are different in Montreal and Paris.
Exercise 2
How do you pronounce batter? How many different pronunciations of this word have you 
noticed? Use any method you like to represent the different pronunciations.
Answer at end of chapter
Intra-​national or intra-​continental variation
Example 5
Rob:	
This wheel’s completely disjaskit.
Alan:	
I might could get it changed.
Rob:	
You couldn’t do nothing of the sort. It needs dumped.
This conversation between two Geordies (people from Tyneside in England) is 
likely to perplex many English speakers. The double modal items might could is 
typical Geordie, though it is also heard in some parts of the southern USA. The 
expression needs dumped is also typical Tyneside, though also used in Scotland, 
as is the vocabulary item disjaskit, meaning worn out or completely ruined. 
The way English is pronounced is also quite distinctive in Tyneside, and per-
haps especially the intonation patterns. Because they like the speech heard in 
TV programmes such as Vera, Auf Wiedersehen Pet, Geordie Shore and by TV 
personalities such as Ant and Dec, some people can imitate the tune of Geordie 
speech –​ if nothing else. We are dealing here not just with different accents but 
with dialect differences within a country, since the distinguishing forms involve 
grammatical usages and lexical items as well as pronunciation.
Regional variation takes time to develop. British and American English, for 
instance, provide much more evidence of regional variation than New Zealand or 
Australian English. Dialectologists can distinguish regional varieties for almost 
every English county, e.g. Yorkshire, Lancashire, Northumberland, Somerset, 
Cornwall and so on, and for many towns too. Some British dialects, such as 
Scouse (heard in Liverpool), Cockney, and Geordie, even have distinct names 
showing how significant they are in distinguishing groups from one another. 
Within the London area, the Cockney dialect is quite distinctive with its glottal 
stop [ʔ] instead of [t]‌ between vowels in words like bitter and butter, and its 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
190
rhyming slang: e.g. apples and pears for stairs, lean and lurch for church, the 
undoubtedly sexist trouble and strife for wife, and the more ambiguous cows 
and kisses for the missus.
In the USA, too, dialectologists can identify distinguishing features of the 
speech of people from different regions. Northern, Midland and Southern are 
the main divisions, and within those three areas a number of further divisions 
can be made. Different towns and even parts of towns can be distinguished. 
Within the Midland area, for example, the Eastern States can be distinguished; 
and within those the Boston dialect is different from that of New York City; 
and within New York City, Brooklynese is quite distinctive. The Linguistic Atlas 
Projects (http://​us.engl​ish.uga.edu/​) provide a rich source of information on the 
features of pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary which distinguish different 
American dialects and an archive of recordings of these dialects (and many 
others) can be found in the International Dialects of English Archive (www.
dialectsarchive.com). In the rural Appalachians, one can hear pronunciations 
such as acrosst and clifft, as well as verbs with a-​ prefixes, such as a-​fishin’ 
and a-​comin’. Words for dragonfly in the Eastern States include darning needle, 
mosquito hawk, spindle, snake feeder, snake doctor and snake waiter, but of 
these only darning needle is used in New York. From darning needle, however, 
New York has developed two new variants dining needle and diamond needle. 
(It becomes difficult at this point to remember that these are all names for an 
insect not a sewing implement!)
In areas where English has been introduced more recently, such as Australia 
and New Zealand, there seems to be less regional variation –​ though there is 
evidence of social variation. The high level of intra-​national communication, 
together with the relatively small populations, may have inhibited the devel-
opment of marked regional differences in these countries. In New Zealand, for 
instance, there are greater differences among the Māori dialects than within 
English, reflecting the longer period of settlement and more restricted means of 
communication between people from different Māori tribes before European 
settlers arrived. Māori pronunciation of words written with an initial wh, for 
example, differs from one place to another. The Māori word for fish is ika in 
most areas but ngohi in the far North, and kirikiri refers to gravel in the west but 
sand in the east of New Zealand. There are many more such differences.
Exercise 3
Can you guess what the following words and phrases mean?
They are all words collected from regional dialects of British English. A good British English 
dialect dictionary will provide information about their meanings and where they are used.
(a)	
snowblossom
(b)	
time for our snap
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
191
(c)	
mask the tea
(d)	
the place was all frousted
(e)	
clinker bells
(f)	
a great mawther
(g)	
I’m really stalled
(h)	
a bairn
(i)	
an effet
(j)	
I’ll fill up your piggy, it’s time for bed
Answers at end of chapter
Figure 6.1 is a map of England showing where different dialect words are 
used for the standard English word splinter. The boundary lines are called 
isoglosses. This is just one word out of thousands of linguistic features which 
vary in different dialects, and which were documented by Harold Orton’s com-
prehensive Survey of English Dialects in the 1950s. When all the information 
on linguistic regional variation is gathered together on a map, with isoglosses 
drawn between areas where different vocabulary, or grammatical usages or 
pronunciations occur, the result looks something like a spider’s web. Some of 
the web’s lines are thicker than others because a number of boundaries between 
features coincide.
But there is also a great deal of overlap between areas. The line between an 
area where people use [a]‌ rather than [a:] in a word like path, for example, 
does not coincide with the line which separates areas using have you any sugar? 
rather than have you got any sugar? Areas which use the word elevenses rather 
than snap or snack do not all use different words for brew or snowflake or 
manure or splinter. The same vocabulary may be used throughout an area 
where contrasts in the pronunciation of words are quite dramatic. In other 
words, defining linguistic areas is not at all straightforward –​ a point which is 
illustrated very clearly in ­example 6 below. For an interactive way of looking 
at this, a mobile app has been developed by researchers in Cambridge and in 
Switzerland to update the regional patterns of English in the British Isles. The 
app is called “English Dialects” and is freely available for smartphones and 
tablets.
Exercise 4
Where there are differences between regions, it is interesting to discover the local names 
for particular objects. There are often regional differences in the words used for standard 
English scarecrow, stream and cowpat, for instance.
If you live in a community where English is used, you could investigate such differences. 
When asking people what they call these items, you should phrase your question so as to 
avoid using the word you are interested in.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
192
To exemplify, we have provided four questions aimed at eliciting labels for four more  
objects which often vary regionally:
(a)	
What do you call a small round sweet cake with a hole in the middle?
(b)	
What do you call the vehicles people push babies round in?
Figure 6.1  Words for splinter in English dialects
Source: Trudgill (1994: 21), with permission of Taylor & Francis.
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
193
(c)	
What do you call an item worn to protect clothing especially while cooking?
(d)	
What do you call the shoes people wear for tennis or running?
Collect information from a range of people on what they call these objects, and where 
possible include older people who were born outside your area.
Exercise 5
Some words vary in pronunciation between different geographical areas in the UK and 
Ireland, yet in other English-​speaking countries there doesn’t seem to be a clear pattern to 
the variation. The word scone is one such example. Some people rhyme it with cone, while 
others rhyme it with gone. Which do you do?
Ask as many people as you can how they pronounce scone. Are there differences? Does 
there seem to be any pattern to the variation? Do all of the people from the same place 
say it the same way?
Cross-​continental variation: dialect chains
Example 6
Miriam learnt French and Italian at university and was a fluent speaker 
of both. As part of her course, she was required to study for three months 
in Paris and three months in Rome. Her time in Paris went well and she 
decided to take a holiday on her way to Rome, travelling across France to 
Italy. She was keen to hear the varieties of French and Italian spoken in 
provincial towns. She stayed in cheap pensions (French “bed-​and-​break-
fast” places), and she made a special effort to talk to the local people rather 
than tourists.
Her Parisian accent was admired and she could understand the French 
of Dijon and Lyon. But as she moved further from Paris she found the 
French more difficult to follow. Near the border between France and 
Italy, in the town of Chambéry, she could not be sure what she was 
hearing. Was it Italian French or French Italian? Whatever it was, it was 
difficult for her to understand, though she had no trouble making herself 
understood. Most people thought she spoke beautifully –​ especially for 
a foreigner!
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
194
In Italy she found that the Italian spoken in Turin and Milan was very 
different from the Italian she had learned at university. As she approached 
Rome, however, she gradually began to comprehend more of what she 
heard. And finally in Rome she found some kind of match between the way 
she spoke and the way the Italians around her spoke.
Though a map suggests the languages of Europe or India are tidily 
compartmentalised, in reality they “blend” into one another. The varieties of 
French spoken in the border towns and villages of Italy, Spain and Switzerland 
have more in common with the language of the next village than the language 
of Paris. From one village and town to the next there is a chain or continuum. 
(Just as an interesting aside here, Penelope Eckert, an American sociolinguist, 
describes how Jules Gilliéron’s Atlas Linguistique de la France, which is over 
100 years old, gives her “the shivers” because she finds it so exciting. She says the 
Atlas provided great pleasure as she used it to trace sound changes wandering 
and interacting across the French countryside.)
Dialect continuums or chains are very common across the whole of 
Europe. One chain links all the dialects of German, Dutch and Flemish from 
Switzerland through Austria and Germany, to the Netherlands and Belgium, 
and there is another which links dialects of Portuguese, Spanish, Catalan, 
French and Italian. A Scandinavian chain links dialects of Norwegian, Swedish 
and Danish, so that Swedes and Norwegians in adjacent areas can commu-
nicate more easily than fellow-​Swedes from southern and northern Sweden. 
The same kind of dialect chains are found throughout India and China. They 
illustrate very clearly the arbitrariness of the distinction between “language” 
and “dialect”.
It is easy to see that if we try to define what counts as German vs. Dutch 
or Swedish vs. Norwegian or Italian vs. French using only linguistic features, 
the task will be fraught with problems. Where should we draw the boundaries 
between one dialect and the next, or one language and the next? The linguistic 
features overlap, and usage in one area merges into the next. Intelligibility is no 
help either. Most Norwegians claim they can understand Swedish, for instance, 
although two distinct languages are involved, while Chinese who speak only 
Cantonese cannot understand those who speak Wu, despite the fact that both are 
described as dialects of the Chinese language.
Example 7
Ming is an elderly woman who lives with her son in a rural village near 
the town of Yingde in Guangdong Province in southern China. The family 
grows vegetables for the local market. Ming speaks only her provincial 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
195
dialect of Chinese, Cantonese. Last summer, Gong, an official from Beijing 
in the north, visited her village to check on the level of rice and ginger 
production. Gong also spoke Chinese, but his dialect was Mandarin or 
putonghua. Ming could not understand a single word Gong said.
Languages are not purely linguistic entities. They serve social functions. In 
order to define a language, it is important to look to its social and political 
functions, as well as its linguistic features. So a language can be thought of as 
a collection of dialects that are usually linguistically similar, used by different 
social groups who choose to say that they are speakers of one language which 
functions to unite and represent them to other groups. This definition is a 
sociolinguistic rather than a linguistic one: it includes all the linguistically very 
different Chinese dialects, which the Chinese define as one language, while sep-
arating the languages of Scandinavia which are linguistically very similar, but 
politically quite distinct varieties.
Exercise 6
(a)	
Define the difference between a regional accent and a regional dialect.
(b)	
What do you think is the difference between a regional and a social dialect?
Answers at end of chapter
Social variation
Received Pronunciation: a social accent
Example 8
Diana:	
Have you heard –​ Jonathan’s engaged to that northern girl –​   
from Cumbria!
Reg:	
She may be northern but I assure you she is very acceptable.   
Her father is a lord, and a rich one at that! She has had the best 
education money can buy. Those traces of northern accent are 
fashionable these days my dear!
In earlier centuries, you could tell where an English lord or lady came from 
by their regional form of English. But by the early twentieth century, a person 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
196
who spoke with a regional accent in England was most unlikely to belong to 
the upper class. Upper-​class people had an upper-​class education, and that gen-
erally meant a public (i.e. private!) school where they learned to speak RP. RP 
stands not for “Real Posh” (as suggested by a young friend), but rather for 
Received Pronunciation –​ the social accent of the best educated and most pres-
tigious members of English society. It is claimed that the label derives from the 
accent which was “received” at the royal court, and it is sometimes identified 
with “the Queen’s English”, although the accent used by Queen Elizabeth II, as 
portrayed so brilliantly by Helen Mirren in the film The Queen, is a rather old-​
fashioned variety of RP. Even the Queen’s English changes over time. Jonathan 
Harrington and his colleagues compared the Queen’s Christmas Day messages 
from the 1950s to the 1980s, and found that the Queen’s speech has kept pace 
with changes in RP, albeit a few steps behind.
RP was promoted by the BBC (British Broadcasting Company) for decades. 
It is essentially a social accent, not a regional one. Indeed, it conceals a speaker’s 
regional origins. This is nicely illustrated in ­figure 6.2 (the accent triangle). As 
the triangle suggests, most linguistic variation will be found at the lowest socio-
economic level where regional differences abound. Further up the social ladder 
the amount of observable variation reduces till one reaches the pinnacle of RP –​ 
an accent used by less than 5% of the British population. So a linguist trav-
elling round Britain may collect over a dozen different pronunciations of the 
word grass from the working-​class people she meets in different regions; and she 
will hear very much less variation from the lower-​middle-​class and middle-​class 
people. And, at least until recently, the upper classes would pronounce the word 
as [gra:s] wherever they came from in England. Things are changing, however, as 
the exchange in ­example 8 suggests.
Figure 6.2  Social and regional accent variation
Source: From Trudgill (1983). Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
Figure 6.2 captured the distribution of accents in England until recently. Today 
a more accurate diagram might have a somewhat flatter top, suggesting accents 
other than RP can be heard amongst those who belong to the highest social class 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
197
(see ­figure 6.3 later in the chapter). In other speech communities, it is certainly 
possible to hear more than just one accent associated with the highest social 
group. Most well-​educated Scots, Irish and Welsh speakers of English do not 
use RP, and there is more than one socially prestigious accent in these countries. 
And in ex-​colonies of Britain such as Australia and Canada, other accents have 
displaced RP from its former position as the most admired accent of English. In 
fact, RP now tends to be perceived by many people as somewhat affected (or 
real posh!).
This kind of negative reaction to RP has also been reported in Britain, espe-
cially among young Londoners, many of whom use an accent popularly labeled 
“Estuary English” when it first attracted attention in the 1990s, because it is 
claimed to have developed along the Thames Estuary. Some have labelled it the 
“new RP”. In fact, like previous London-​based linguistic innovations, features 
of this modern urban dialect are rapidly spreading both regionally and socially 
and it is a good illustration of the process of levelling. Levelling involves the 
reduction of dialect and/​or accent variation, and the rapid spread of so-​called 
Estuary English has certainly reduced regional variation in a large area of the 
south of England. It shares many linguistic features with Cockney, another 
variety which delineates both a regional and a social group, but speakers of 
Estuary English don’t usually drop their aitches or use [f]‌ at the beginning of 
the word think.
Social dialects
The stereotypical “dialect” speaker is an elderly rural person who is all but unin-
telligible to modern city dwellers. But the term dialect has a wider meaning than 
this stereotype suggests. Dialects are linguistic varieties which are distinguish-
able by their vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation; the speech of people from 
different social, as well as regional, groups may differ in these ways. Just as RP 
is a social accent, so standard English is a social dialect. It is the dialect used by 
well-​educated English speakers throughout the world. It is the variety used for 
national news broadcasts and in print, and it is the variety generally taught in 
English-​medium schools.
Standard English
Example 9
(a)	
I’ve not washed the dishes yet today.
(b)	 I haven’t washed the dishes yet today.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
198
Standard English is more accommodating than RP and allows for some vari-
ation within its boundaries. This is represented in ­figure 6.3 by the flat top of the 
trapezium or table-​topped mountain. The flat top symbolises the broader range 
of variants (alternative linguistic forms) which qualify as part of the standard 
dialect of English in any country. It is estimated that up to 15% of British people 
regularly use standard British English. So in standard English, a limited amount 
of grammatical variation is acceptable. A speaker of standard English might 
produce either of the sentences in ­example 9 above.
Figure 6.3  Social and regional dialect variation
Source: From Trudgill (1983). Reproduced by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The dialect we grace with the name standard English is spoken with many 
different accents. But, as illustrated in the discussion of regional dialects, there 
are also many standard Englishes. American standard English is distinguish-
able from South African standard English and Australian standard English, for 
instance, and all three differ from the British standard dialect.
In social terms, linguistic forms which are not part of standard English are 
by definition non-​standard. Because the standard dialect is always the first to be 
codified, it is difficult to avoid defining other dialects without contrasting them 
with the standard. And then, because such non-​standard forms are associated 
with the speech of less prestigious social groups, the label inevitably acquires 
negative connotations (though, as discussed in ­chapter 15, some non-​standard 
dialects, associated with particular groups, are positively evaluated by their users 
and by those who admire them). It is very important to understand, however, 
that there is nothing linguistically inferior about non-​standard forms. They are 
simply different from the forms which happen to be used by more socially presti-
gious speakers. To avoid the implication that non-​standard forms are inadequate 
deviations from the standard, some sociolinguists use the term “vernacular” as 
an alternative to non-​standard, and we follow this practice.
Vernacular is a term which is used with a variety of meanings in sociolinguistics, 
as discussed in ­chapter 4, but the meanings have something in common. Just 
as vernacular languages contrast with standard languages, vernacular dialect 
features contrast with standard dialect features. Vernacular forms tend to be 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
199
learned at home and used in informal contexts. So all uses of the term vernacular 
share this sense of the first variety acquired in the home and used in casual 
contexts. Vernacular dialects, like vernacular languages, lack public or overt 
prestige, though they are generally valued by their users, especially as means of 
expressing solidarity and affective meaning –​ a point we return to in the discus-
sion of attitudes to language in ­chapter 15.
So far we have been discussing accents and dialects as if the linguistic features 
which identify them were stable, fixed and absolute. But, as with the notion of 
distinguishable languages, this is just a convenient fiction. The way people speak 
is characterised by patterned variation. The patterns are fascinating and indicate 
the social factors which are significant in a society. To illustrate this point, the 
rest of this chapter will discuss the relationship between speech and social status 
or class.
Caste dialects
People can be grouped together on the basis of similar social and economic 
factors. Their language generally reflects these groupings –​ they use different 
social dialects. It is easiest to see the evidence for social dialects in places such 
as Indonesia and India where social divisions are very clear-​cut. In these coun-
tries, there are caste systems determined by birth, and strict social rules govern 
the kind of behaviour appropriate to each group. The rules cover such matters 
as the kind of job people can have, who they can marry, how they should dress, 
what they should eat, and how they should behave in a range of social situations. 
Not surprisingly, these social distinctions have corresponding speech differences. 
A person’s dialect is an indication of their social background.
There are quite clear differences in Indian languages: for example, between 
the speech of the Brahmins and non-​Brahmin castes. The Brahmin word for milk 
in the Kannada language, for instance, is haalu, while non-​Brahmin dialects say 
aalu. The Tamil Brahmin word for sleep is tuungu, while non-​Brahmin dialects 
use the word orangu. And in Tulu, the Brahmin dialect makes gender, number 
and person distinctions in negative tenses of the verb which are not made in 
non-​Brahmin dialects. In Javanese, too, linguistic differences reflect very clear-​
cut social or caste divisions.
Example 10
An Indonesian student at a British university was trying to explain to her 
English friend the complications of social dialects in Java and the ways in 
which Javanese speakers signal their social background.
It is much harder than in English . . . It is not just a matter of saying sofa 
instead of couch, or house rather than ’ouse. Every time you talk to a 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
200
different person you have to choose exactly the right words and the right 
pronunciations. Almost every word is different and they fit together in 
patterns or levels, depending on who you are talking to. Because I am 
well-​educated and come from a rich family, I am expected to use five 
different levels of language.
Javanese social status is indicated not just in choice of linguistic forms but 
also in the particular combinations of forms which each social group custom-
arily uses, i.e. the varieties or stylistic levels that together make up the group’s 
distinctive dialect. In English, stylistic variation involves choices such as ta mate 
vs. thank you so much. In Javanese, things are more complicated. There are 
six distinguishable stylistic levels. Table 6.1 provides a couple of words from 
different levels to show the overlap and intermeshing of forms involved. (This 
example is discussed further in ­chapter 10 where the reasons for the numbering 
system are made clear.)
Table 6.1  Two Javanese words at different stylistic levels
You
Now
Stylistic level
padjenengan
samenika
3a
sampéjan
samenika
3
sampéjan
saniki
2
sampéjan
saiki
1a
pandjenengan
saiki
1b
kowé
saiki
1
Source: Adapted from Geertz (1960). With the permission of The Free Press, a division of Simon 
& Schuster Inc.
There are three distinct Javanese social groups and three associated dialects 
(see table 6.1):
1	
The dialect of the lowest status group, the peasants and uneducated towns-
people, consists of three stylistic levels: 1, 1a and 2.
2	
The dialect of urbanised people with some education consists of five stylistic 
levels: 1, 1a, 2, 3 and 3a.
3	
The dialect of the highly educated highest status group also consists of five 
levels, but they are different from those of the second social group: 1, 1a, 1b, 
3 and 3a.
In Javanese, then, a particular social dialect can be defined as a particular 
combination of styles or levels, each of which has its distinctive patterns of 
vocabulary, grammar and pronunciation, though there are many forms which 
are shared by different stylistic levels.
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
201
Social class dialects
The term “social class” is used here as a shorthand term for differences between 
people which are associated with relative social prestige, wealth and education. 
In most societies, bank managers do not talk like office cleaners, and lawyers do 
not speak in the same way as the burglars they defend. Class divisions are based 
on such status differences. Status refers to the deference or respect people give 
someone –​ or don’t give them, as the case may be –​ and status generally derives 
in Western society from the material resources a person can command, though 
there are other sources too. Family background may be a source of status inde-
pendently of wealth (in Britain, the youngest child of an earl may be poor but 
respected!). So class is used here as a convenient label for groups of people who 
share similarities in economic and social status.
Vocabulary
Social dialect research in many different countries has revealed a consistent rela-
tionship between social class and language patterns. People from different social 
classes speak differently. The most obvious differences –​ in vocabulary –​ are in 
many ways the least illuminating from a sociolinguistic point of view, though 
they clearly capture the public imagination. In the 1950s in England, many 
pairs of words were identified which, it was claimed, distinguished the speech 
of upper-​class English people (“U speakers”) from the rest (“non-​U speakers”). 
U speakers used sitting room rather than lounge (non-​U), and referred to the 
lavatory rather than the (non-​U) toilet. The following excerpt from a Nancy 
Mitford novel provides an illustration.
Example 11
Uncle Matthew:	 I hope poor Fanny’s school (the word school 
pronounced in tones of withering scorn) is doing her 
all the good you think it is. Certainly she picks up some 
dreadful expressions there.
Aunty Emily,  
calmly, but on  
the defensive: 
Uncle Matthew:	 Education! I was always led to believe that no 
educated person ever spoke of notepaper, and yet 
I hear poor Fanny asking Sadie for notepaper. What 
is this education? Fanny talks about mirrors and 
mantlepieces, handbags and perfume, she takes sugar 
in her coffee, has a tassel on her umbrella, and I have 
no doubt that, if she is ever fortunate enough to catch a 
husband, she will call his father and mother Father and 
Mother. Will the wonderful education she is getting 
Very likely she does. She also picks up a good deal of 
education.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
202
make up to the unhappy brute for all these endless 
pinpricks? Fancy hearing one’s wife talking about 
notepaper –​ the irritation!
Aunty Emily:	
A lot of men would find it more irritating to have a 
wife who had never heard of George III. (All the same, 
Fanny darling, it is called writing paper you know –​ 
don’t let’s hear any more about note, please.)
If these vocabulary differences exist at all, they are rather like those which 
distinguish Brahmin and non-​Brahmin castes –​ they distinguish social groups 
on a categorical basis. You either use the U term or you don’t. It is not quite so 
simple, of course, since inevitably the U terms spread beyond the boundaries of 
the U group, and so new terms are introduced to maintain the distinction. By the 
1970s, only non-​U speakers, it was claimed, used handbag for U bag, a non-​U 
settee was a U sofa, and your non-​U relatives were U relations. There is no empir-
ical research to back up these claims, but even if they exist, vocabulary clues are 
superficial and conceal the complexity and relative fluidity of social class mem-
bership in places like Britain, and even more so in the USA. The barriers between 
groups are not insurmountable as in caste-​based societies. People can move up 
and down the social ladder, and this potential mobility is mirrored more accur-
ately in other aspects of their speech –​ such as pronunciation.
Exercise 7
A preference for different vocabulary by different social groups is relatively easy to identify 
and always fascinates people. Can you produce a list of words for your speech community 
that divides people into different groups according to their social background?
In English, words for death, lavatory, really good and under the influence of alcohol, for 
example, often vary from one social group to another.
Pronunciation
Example 12
Kim:	
Only uneducated people drop their h’s.
Stephen:	
Let’s hear you say “Have you heard about Hilda’s new house 
that her husband left her? It cost her a heck of a lot to fix 
up.” If you don’t drop a single h in that sentence you’ll sound 
like one of Monty Python’s upper-​class twits!
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
203
In describing differences between Canadian and Parisian French, we mentioned 
that the differences are often not absolute, but rather matters of frequencies. 
Exactly the same is true for the speech of different social groups. Groups are 
often distinguished by the frequency with which they use particular features, 
rather than by their use of completely different forms. This important point 
can be illustrated with a simple example. Usha Pragji, a New Zealand student, 
recorded a radio broadcast of two elderly people’s accounts of their childhood 
in Edwardian Wellington, the capital city of New Zealand. The two speakers 
contrasted on a range of social variables.
Example 13
Marjorie Lee lived in what she described as “a new large hideous Edwardian 
mansion”. Her father was a lawyer. Her mother had been one of the first 
women students at Canterbury College, part of the University of New 
Zealand. Marjorie went to Miss Barber’s Private School until her early 
teens when she was provided with a governess.
George Davies lived with four members of his family in a small house. 
His mother was a solo parent whose only steady income came from 
“keeping grandmother”. As George said, “we weren’t hard-​up, we were 
absolutely poverty-​stricken.” Illustrating this, he recounted that they some-
times took palings off the fence for firewood, and “you could pretty well 
tell the state of the family finances by whether Grandma’s inlaid brooch 
was in the pawn shop or not.”
The two recordings were analysed to see whether there were differences 
between the speakers in terms of the numbers of [h]‌s they “dropped” in words 
like house. Unstressed words like her and have in ­example 12 were excluded. 
Usha found that Marjorie Lee did not omit a single [h] while George Davis 
dropped 83% of the [h]s which occurred in his interview. The speakers’ different 
social backgrounds were clearly signalled by the different proportions of this 
feature of their speech.
This speech variable is generally called [h]‌-​dropping –​ a label which you 
should note represents the viewpoint of speakers of the standard. The variable 
can be labelled (HDROP) and the two variants that are generally analysed are 
[h] and 0, though in fact things are more complicated as you will find if you 
listen carefully. There are degrees of aspiration or [h]-​ness which are typically 
simplified to [h] vs. 0 to make the analysis easier.
(HDROP) has been analysed in many social dialect studies of English. 
Figure 6.4 shows the average [h]‌-​dropping scores for five different social groups 
in two different places in England: West Yorkshire and Norwich. Different 
studies use different labels for different classes, so wherever we compare 
data from different studies we have simply used numbers. In this figure (and 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
204
throughout the book), group 1 refers to the highest social group (often called 
the upper middle class or UMC) and group 5 to the lowest (usually called the 
lower or working class).
Figure 6.4  [h]‌-​dropping in Norwich and West Yorkshire social groups
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Trudgill (1974) and Petyt (1985).
In both areas, the highest social group drops the least number of [h]‌s and the 
lowest group omits the most. The regularity of the patterns from one group to 
the next seems quite remarkable when you first see a diagram of this kind, but 
it is quite typical. The average scores for socially differentiated groups generally 
follow exactly this kind of pattern for any linguistic variable where there are 
clearly identifiable standard and vernacular variants.
There are regional differences in that the West Yorkshire scores are systemat-
ically higher than the Norwich scores, but the overall pattern remains the same. 
We also need to remember that these are averages and within each social group 
there is always a great deal of individual variation. In the West Yorkshire study, 
for example, one person who belonged socially in the middle group (3) dropped 
every [h]‌. From a linguistic point of view, taking account only of [h]-​dropping, 
they sounded as if they came from a lower social group. Averaging may conceal 
considerable variation within a group.
The way different pronunciations fall into a sociolinguistic pattern indicating 
the social class of their speakers was first demonstrated by William Labov in a study 
of New York City speech which is now regarded as a classic in sociolinguistics. 
He is also considered to be the father of “variationist sociolinguistics”, another 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
205
name for the quantitative study of the systematic relationship between social 
characteristics and linguistic features. He designed a sociolinguistic interview to 
elicit a range of speech styles from 120 people from different social backgrounds, 
and then he analysed their pronunciations of a number of different consonants 
and vowels. He found regular patterns relating the social class of the speakers to 
the percentage of standard, as opposed to vernacular, pronunciations that they 
produced.
Some of the linguistic features he studied have been found to pattern socially in 
English-​speaking communities all over the world. The variable (-​ing) pronounced 
as -​ing vs. -​in’ ([iŋ] vs. [in]) at the end of words like sleeping and swimming, for 
instance, distinguishes social groups in every English-​speaking community in 
which it has been investigated. The figures in table 6.2 demonstrate that, as 
with [h]‌-​dropping, there are regional variations between communities, but the 
regularity of the sociolinguistic pattern in all four communities is quite clear.1 
The Brisbane data was collected from adolescents, while the data from the other 
communities is representative of the communities as a whole. In each commu-
nity, people from lower social groups use more of the vernacular [in] variant 
than those from higher groups.
Table 6.2  Percentage of vernacular [in] pronunciation for four social groups in speech 
communities in Britain, the USA and Australia
Social group
1
2
3
4
Norwich
31
42
91
100
West Yorkshire
5
34
61
83
New York
7
32
45
75
Brisbane
17
31
49
63
Example 14
In New York City in 1964, a man was observed in three different depart-
ment stores asking one store worker after another: “where are the women’s 
shoes?”. The man appeared not only to have a short memory, since he 
repeated his question to a shop assistant in each aisle on several different 
floors, he also appeared to be slightly deaf since he asked each person to 
repeat their answer to him. After receiving the answer, he would scurry 
away and scribble something in his notebook. Oddest of all, when he finally 
made it to the fourth floor where the women’s shoes were, he showed 
absolutely no interest in them whatsoever but wandered around the floor 
asking, “Excuse me, what floor is this?” When questioned by a puzzled 
store detective, he said he was a sociolinguist!
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
206
One linguistic form which has proved particularly interesting to sociolinguists 
studying English-​speaking speech communities is the variable (r) in words like 
car and card, for and form. For our purposes, there are two possible variants 
of (r). Either it is present and pronounced as something like [r]‌, or it is absent 
[0].2 If you listen to a range of dialects, you will find that sometimes people pro-
nounce (r) as [r] following a vowel in words like car and card, and sometimes 
they don’t. In some regions, pronouncing (r) as [r] is part of the standard pres-
tige dialect –​ in the Boston and New York areas of the eastern USA, for example, 
and in Ireland and Scotland (though recent research suggests that this varies 
with gender as well as class in the speech of working-​class and socially mobile 
people in Edinburgh, and that a change may be happening in other parts of 
Scotland too). In other areas, standard dialect speakers do not pronounce (r) as 
[r] after vowels (or “post-​vocalically” as linguists describe it) in words like car 
and card.3 In areas where [r] pronunciation is prestigious, sociolinguists have 
found patterns like those described above for [h]-​dropping and -​in’ vs. -​ing ([in] 
vs. [iŋ]) pronunciation. The higher a person’s social group, the more [r] they 
pronounce.
In New York City, Labov conducted an interesting experiment demon-
strating in a neat and economical way that pronunciation of post-​vocalic [r]‌ 
varied in the city according to social group. As ­example 14 describes, he asked 
a number of people in different department stores where to find an item which 
he knew was sold on the fourth floor. Then, pretending he hadn’t heard the 
answer, he said, “Excuse me?”. People repeated their answers and he obtained 
a second and more careful pronunciation. So each person had four chances to 
pronounce the variable (r) as [r] or not: twice in fourth and twice in floor. This 
ingenious rapid and anonymous survey technique provided some interesting 
patterns.
The results showed clear social stratification of [r]‌ pronunciation. Overall, 
the “posher” the store, the more people used post-​vocalic [r]. And even within 
stores a pattern was evident. In one store, for instance, nearly half the socially 
superior supervisors used post-​vocalic [r] consistently, while only 18% of the less 
statusful salespeople did, and the stock boys rarely used it at all.
Post-​vocalic [r]‌ illustrates very clearly the arbitrariness of the particular forms 
which are considered standard and prestigious. There is nothing inherently bad 
or good about the pronunciation of any sound, as the different status of (r) in 
different cities illustrates. In New York City, pronouncing (r) as [r] is generally 
considered prestigious. In Reading in England it is not. This is apparent from the 
patterns for different social groups in the two cities illustrated in ­figure 6.5. In 
one city (New York) the higher your social class the more you pronounce post-​
vocalic (r) as [r]. In the other (Reading), the higher your social class the fewer 
you pronounce.

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
207
Figure 6.5  Post-​vocalic [r]‌ in Reading and New York social groups
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Romaine (1984: 86).
Example 15
Cholmondley:  Which ’otel are you staying at old chap?
Source: Cartoon by Kaamran Hafeez. Reproduced with permission of CartoonStock.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
208
The same point is illustrated by [h]‌-​dropping. Kim’s comment in ­example 12 
expresses a widely held viewpoint –​ only uneducated people drop their [h]s. 
Some claim that [h]-​dropping is evidence of laziness or slovenly speech. Yet 
well into the twentieth century, people who belonged to the highest social 
class in England did not pronounce [h] at the beginning of words like hotel 
and herb. Interestingly, initial [h] has reappeared in the speech of young 
Londoners who belong to ethnic minority groups. Clearly, the particular lin-
guistic forms which people regard as prestigious or stigmatised are in gen-
eral totally arbitrary. In New York City, older white residents of the Lower 
East Side use non-​rhotic pronunciations to assert their status as authentic 
New Yorkers since New York speech is traditionally [r]-​less or non-​rhotic. 
The arbitrariness of the particular sounds invested with social significance 
is probably most obvious in the pronunciation of vowels where the precise 
values of the standard forms are entirely determined by the speech of the most 
prestigious social group.
Example 16
Sir –​ What is happening to the humble letter “i” in New Zealandese? 
In many mouths HIM becomes HUM, JIM is JUM and TILL is TULL. 
I overheard a young girl telling her friend on the phone that she had 
been to a doctor and had to take six different PULLS a day. After four 
repetitions, she had to spell it to be understood.
In this letter, the writer is complaining about the way New Zealanders pro-
nounce a particular vowel. The examples illustrate the difficulty of precisely 
describing differences in the pronunciation of vowels without the aid of a phon-
etic script. Measuring slight differences in the way speakers pronounce the “same” 
vowels is also a challenging task. In his pioneering study of New York speech, 
Labov measured people’s pronunciation of five vowels as well as a number of 
consonants. Measuring the presence or absence of [h]‌ or [r], or the difference 
between [in] and [iŋ], is difficult enough when you are listening to recordings of 
interviews. Measuring small but significant differences in vowel pronunciations 
can seem a nightmare. Labov developed a method which involved giving a score 
to different pronunciations according to how close they were to the prestige pro-
nunciation or standard in the community.
The scoring system is most easily understood by giving an example. In 
New Zealand, a survey of 141 people living in the South Island distinguished 
three different social groups on the basis of the way speakers pronounced the 
diphthongs (gliding vowels) in words such as boat, bite and bout. Four points 
on a scale were used to measure the different pronunciations. A score of 4 was 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
209
allocated to pronunciations closest to RP, and a score of 1 to the “broadest” 
New Zealand pronunciations, with two points in between. A pattern emerged 
with the highest social group scoring 60 or more (out of a possible 100) for 
these diphthongs, the middle group scoring between 50 and 55, while the 
lowest social group scored less than 43 (where 25 was the minimum possible 
score).
Many New Zealanders consider RP an inappropriate standard accent 
for New Zealand but, at least in the late twentieth century when this study 
was undertaken, it was still an influential prestige norm. The systematically 
patterned scores for diphthong pronunciation in different social groups clearly 
revealed the social basis of New Zealand patterns of pronunciation. The higher 
a person’s social class, the closer their pronunciation was to RP. The scoring 
system allowed comparison of the way different social groups pronounced 
these vowels.
Another way of distinguishing different people’s pronunciations of the same 
vowel is to analyse recordings of their speech using a spectrograph and some 
specialised computer software. With high-​quality recordings, it is even possible 
for the software to find and identify the sounds by itself. This allows linguists 
studying phonology to take precise measurements of the sound frequencies 
produced when saying the vowels and lets them find an average for each speaker. 
This is a more objective way of doing the same kind of analysis as with the 
scoring system. With the increasing use of computer software in analysing lan-
guage, many sociolinguists (or sociophoneticians) who are interested in how 
different people produce the “same” sounds differently (or phonological vari-
ation) now use this method. But there are still some advantages in using the 
more traditional auditory method, mainly because it better represents how the 
listener perceives sounds. This is perhaps particularly the case for intonation, 
which involves a number of parameters and is often annotated using a combin-
ation of auditory and acoustic analyses.
Exercise 8
You will find that you can collect examples yourself to illustrate the patterns described, 
though it takes a bit of practice to accurately identify the sounds you are listening for.
Audio-​record the best-​educated person you know, and the person with the least edu-
cation. Ask them to describe the first school they went to. Then choose a variable for com-
parison. In English, you could count the number of [iŋ]s they use compared to the number 
of [in]s at the end of words like swimming and running.
Check whether any differences you find between your speakers in the numbers of [in] 
vs. [iŋ] are consistent with the findings reported in this chapter.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
210
Example 17
Jean Charmier is a young Parisian who works as a labourer on a con-
struction site. His speech is quite different in many ways from the speech 
of the news announcers on French national TV. One difference involves 
his pronunciation of the as in words like casser (break) and pas (not). He 
says something which sounds more like cosser for casser and instead of je 
ne sais pas for I don’t know, he omits the ne (as most people now do in 
colloquial French) and pronounces the phrase as something which sounds 
like shop.
Although the sociolinguistic patterns already described have been most exten-
sively researched in English-​speaking communities, they have been found in 
other languages too. In fact, we would expect to find such patterns in all commu-
nities which can be divided into different social groups. In Paris, the pronunci-
ation of the first vowel in words like casser and pas varies from one social group 
to another. In Montreal, the frequency with which [l]‌ is deleted distinguishes the 
French of two social groups, as illustrated in table 6.3.
Table 6.3  Percentage [l]‌-​deletion in two social classes in Montreal French
Professional
Working class
il (impersonal)
e.g. il pleut (it is raining)
89.8
99.6
il (personal)
e.g. il part (he is leaving)
71.6
100.0
elle
29.8
82.0
Source: Reproduced from Sankoff and Cedergren (1971: 81).
Table 6.3 also introduces another interesting influence on linguistic variation. 
The pronunciation of a linguistic form often alters in different linguistic contexts. 
This table shows that not only does [l]‌-​deletion differ between the social classes, 
it also differs according to the grammatical status of the word in which it occurs. 
[l] has almost disappeared in Montreal French in impersonal il.
The surrounding sounds also affect the likelihood of [l]‌-​deletion. It is much 
more likely to disappear before a consonant than before a vowel. This is the 
point being made by Stephen in ­example 12. Most people “drop their hs” in 
an unstressed syllable. So linguistic as well as social factors are relevant in 
accounting for patterns of pronunciation. Yet within each linguistic context the 
social differences are still quite clear.
Similar patterns can be found in any speech community where there is social 
stratification. In Tehrani Persian, as well as in the Swahili used in Mombasa, the 
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
211
same relationship is found between speech and social class. The higher social 
groups use more of the standard forms, while the lowest groups use the fewest 
standard forms.
Grammatical patterns
Example 18
Whina is 8 years old and she is telling a visitor the story of a film she 
has seen.
And then these little flies went to go and they made a house by theirself, 
and this big fly was playing his guitar. He play and play. Then the little 
flies was making the house, and then the flies um sew um these leaves 
up all together.
This is an extract from a recorded interview. Whina was one of 80 New Zealand 
children who were recorded telling the story of a film they had seen. As the 
extract shows, this was a good way of providing a natural context for the chil-
dren to use a large number of past tense forms of verbs. It was then possible 
to compare the proportion of standard verb forms in the speech of children 
from different social groups. On average, it was found that children from lower-​
class families used more vernacular verb forms than children from middle-​class 
families.
This pattern has been noted for a variety of grammatical variables. Here are 
some examples of standard and vernacular grammatical forms which have been 
identified in several English-​speaking communities:
Form
Example
Past tense verb forms:
1  I finished that book yesterday.
2  I finish that book yesterday.
Present tense verb forms:
3  Rose walks to school every day.
4  Rose walk to school every day.
Negative forms:
5  Nobody wants any chips.
6  Nobody don’t want no chips.
Ain’t:
7  Jim isn’t stupid.
8  Jim ain’t stupid.
As with pronunciation, there is a clear pattern to the relationship between  
the grammatical speech forms and the social groups who use them. Figure 6.6  
illustrates this. The higher social groups use more of the standard grammatical 
form and fewer instances of the vernacular or non-​standard form. As the  
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
212
grammatical pattern illustrated in ­figure 6.6 demonstrates, the third person sin-
gular form of the present tense regular verb (e.g. standard she walks vs. ver-
nacular she walk), sharply distinguishes between the middle-​class groups and the  
lower-​class groups. Sociolinguists describe this pattern as “sharp stratification”.  
People are often more aware of social stigma in relation to vernacular grammat-
ical forms, and this is reflected in the lower incidence of vernacular forms among  
middle-​class speakers in particular. Note that this pattern is found both in a var-
iety of American English spoken in Detroit, and in a variety of British English  
spoken in Norwich.
Sentence (6) in the above list illustrates a pattern of negation which is some-
times called “negative concord” or “multiple negation”. Where standard English 
allows only one negative in each clause, most vernacular dialects can have two 
or more. In some dialects, every possible form which can be negated is negated. 
An adolescent gang member in New York produced the following:
It ain’t no cat can’t get in no coop.
Figure 6.6  Vernacular present tense verb forms (3rd person singular: she walk) in 
Norwich and Detroit
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Trudgill (1983) and Wolfram and Fasold 
(1974).

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
213
Translated into standard English, the meaning of this utterance in context was:
There isn’t any cat that can get into any [pigeon] coop.
or, more simply:
No cat can get into any coop.
And from an adolescent in Detroit:
We ain’t had no trouble about none of us pulling out no knife.
Multiple negation is a grammatical construction which has been found in all 
English-​speaking communities where a social dialect study has been done. In 
every community studied, it is much more frequent in lower-​class speech than 
in middle-​class speech. In fact, there is usually a sharp stratification between the 
groups in the amount of multiple negation used. It is rare in middle-​class speech. 
Multiple negation is a very “salient” vernacular form. People notice it when it 
is used even once, unlike say the use of a glottal stop for the standard pronun-
ciation [t]‌ at the end of a word, where the percentage of glottal stops generally 
needs to be quite high before people register them. The dramatic split evident 
between middle-​class and lower-​class usage of multiple negation indicates this 
salience. Middle-​class speakers tend to avoid it, while lower-​class speakers use it 
more comfortably.
In reporting patterns relating linguistic features to social status, we have inev-
itably simplified a great deal. Many factors interact in determining the propor-
tion of vernacular or standard forms a person uses. Some of these are social 
factors such as the age or gender of the speaker, and they will be examined 
in the next couple of chapters. Another factor, however, which was mentioned 
briefly above, is the linguistic environment in which a word occurs. Table 6.3, 
for example, provided information on the effect of the linguistic environment 
in which [l]‌-​ deletion in French occurred. In some varieties of English, it has 
been found that people omit the auxiliary verb have more often before got (e.g. 
you got to go) than before other verbs (e.g. you’ve done that). The lexical con-
text appears to be relevant. Before analysing the effects of social variation, then, 
social dialectologists must take into account the effects of the linguistic environ-
ment in which the linguistic feature occurs.
Exercise 9
(a)	
Make three points about the distribution of vernacular or non-​standard forms in 
British urban dialects which are supported by ­figure 6.7.
(b)	
This diagram shows values for three towns in England. Similar diagrams can be 
drawn for social classes. If the labels “Hull”, “Milton Keynes” and “Reading” referred 
to social classes, which would be the lowest social class? How do you know?
Answers at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
214
Map 6.1  Map of England showing distance between London and other cities
Figure 6.7  Vernacular forms in three English towns
Notes: (1) vernacular was =​ use of was where standard English uses were: e.g. you was 
late again; and (2) Milton Keynes is a relatively new town 80 kilometres north of London; 
Reading is 60 kilometres west of London; and Hull is the furthest north and over 200 
kilometres from London.
Source: Cheshire, Kerswill and Williams (2005), with permission of Cambridge University 
Press, granted through PLSClear.
 
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
215
A note about methodology
Example 19
My friend Terry taught sociolinguistics at a New Zealand university. He 
described to his students how I and my colleagues Allan Bell and Mary 
Boyce designed our sample for the Wellington social dialect survey by 
establishing a quota of five cells for each of our target groups: young 
Pākehā women, middle-​aged Māori men, and so on. After the exams, he 
rang to tell me that some of his students had clearly misunderstood our 
method of collecting data. In their exam answers, they described how we 
had put people in cells before interviewing them!
The term “cell” is used to describe the box in a diagram which indicates the 
target numbers for each group in a sample. Our goal was a minimum of five 
people in each box or cell in the diagram to represent each group, including 
women and men, three age groups, two ethnic groups (Māori and Pākehā) and 
two social groups. We managed to reach our target, but not by capturing people 
and putting them in cells till they agreed to be interviewed! Table 6.4 illustrates 
a sample of 20 people divided by age and gender with a quota of five people per 
cell. You should be able to see from this that the more categories you have, the 
more people you need in your sample.
Table 6.4  A sample of twenty by age and gender, with a quota of five people per cell
Age
Young
Middle-​aged
Gender
Male
5 young males
5 middle-​aged males
Female
5 young females
5 middle-​aged females
Collecting good-​quality social dialect data requires considerable skill. Some of 
the challenges and pitfalls which face the social dialectologist will emerge during 
the discussion in the next few chapters. In this chapter, we have mentioned the 
use of rapid and anonymous surveys as one useful technique for collecting a 
lot of data very quickly. Labov used this method when he asked “where are the 
women’s shoes?” in the New York Department store.
Another example is the use of a street survey to ask people to pronounce 
certain words (presenting them in written or visual form to prevent possible 
bias from the interviewer’s pronunciation). This method allows the researcher 
to access features of the speech of a large number of people in a relatively short 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
216
time, and can provide interesting clues about what is worth studying in more 
detail. But it has obvious limitations. Though patterns of gender and age and 
sometimes ethnic variation can be detected using this approach, since we can 
often guess these features when we meet someone, it is harder to be sure about 
the social background of speakers when no social information is collected from 
them. And, of course, the data is limited in quantity and style. A sociolinguistic 
interview which attempts to elicit a range of styles as well as collecting back-
ground information from the interviewee is thus much more useful. This is by 
far the most widespread method of collecting social dialect data. But of course it 
is much more time-​consuming and thus expensive.
Conclusion
The way you speak is usually a good indicator of your social background. And 
there are many speech features which can be used as clues. Sociolinguists have 
found that almost any linguistic feature in a community which shows variation 
will differ in frequency from one social group to another in a patterned and 
predictable way. Some features are stable and their patterns of use seem to have 
correlated with membership of particular social groups in a predictable way for 
many years. Variation in pronunciation of the suffix -​ing and [h]‌-​dropping are 
examples of features which are usually stable. Grammatical features, such as 
multiple negation and tense markers, are often stable too. This means they are 
good ones to include in any study of an English-​speaking community. They are 
reliable indicators of sociolinguistic patterning in a community.
Social dialect surveys have demonstrated that stable variables tend to divide 
English-​speaking communities sharply between the middle class and lower or 
working classes. So patterns of [h]‌-​dropping and [iŋ] vs. [in] pronunciation 
clearly divide the middle-​class groups from the lower-​class groups in Norwich. 
Grammatical variables do the same, as ­figure 6.6 illustrated. There is a sharp 
rise in the number of vernacular forms between the middle-​class groups and the 
lower-​class groups both in Detroit and in Norwich, and the same pattern has 
been observed in many other communities. As mentioned above, this pattern has 
been labelled sharp stratification.
Not all variation is stable over time, however. In fact, variation is often used 
as an indicator of language change in progress. New linguistic forms don’t 
sweep through a community overnight. They typically spread gradually from 
person to person and from group to group and they often stratify the popu-
lation very delicately or finely. Unstable variation is thus associated with fine 
stratification and is a clue to linguistic changes in progress in the community, as 
we will see in ­chapter 9. In this chapter, we have focused largely on pronunci-
ation and grammar, but social dialectologists are increasingly paying attention 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
217
to pragmatic features too. The way people use tag questions (isn’t she, didn’t 
they), for example, or pragmatic particles such as you know, may also index 
social group.
In exploring the relationship between language and society, this chapter 
has been concerned almost exclusively with the dimension of social status or 
class. The evidence discussed indicates that the social class or group someone 
belongs to is generally signalled by their speech patterns. The patterns iden-
tified in the studies discussed in this chapter are thus correlations between a 
macro-​level social category (social class) and linguistic variables. But individ-
uals use language to construct various aspects of their social identity, and many 
people are not very conscious of belonging to a particular social class. They 
are much more aware of other aspects of their social identity and those of the 
people they meet. A person’s apparent gender identity and age are probably 
the first things we notice about them. The next chapter explores ways in which 
women and men speak differently, and describes speech differences associated 
with age.
Methods
To collect information on regional and social dialects, the following methods are useful:
•	 Rapid and anonymous survey, as described in ­example 14 and the note on method-
ology in this chapter.
•	 Street survey, as described in the note on methodology in this chapter. This provides an 
opportunity to elicit pronunciations of a greater number of words and phrases.
•	 Sociolinguistic interview, as described on page 205ff. and the note on methodology in 
this chapter. See also the references list below.
•	 Exercise 7 provides guidance on how to collect and analyse the variants of a specific 
variable.
•	 The media (TV, radio, films, internet, etc) are further sources of regional and social dia-
lect data. You can select specific variables such as [h]‌-​drop and [-​ing] and relate them 
to the regional and social backgrounds of the speakers using social media to identify 
these features.
•	 YouTube can be used to compare the pronunciations of speakers using comparable 
words. Try searching for “the accent challenge” to get some examples.
•	 There are some freely available resources online that you can use to explore lexical 
variation. One of these is the website www.english-​corpora.org. A corpus is essentially 
a large searchable database of language. One of the corpora on this site is called the 
Global Corpus of Web-​based English. It allows you to search for how frequent a word or 
phrase is, and tells you from which country the source text originates.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
218
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 6
Answer to ­exercise 2
Using the system for representing sounds in the Appendix, your answer for 
batter might include:
•	[batə] a pronunciation considered standard in Britain
•	[batər] a pronunciation considered standard in North America
•	[baʔə] a Cockney pronunciation
•	[baʔər] and [badər] pronunciations heard in the West Country of England.
There are many other possible pronunciations, including one common in 
Liverpool which sounds a little like [batsə] with affrication after the [t]‌; and 
another which occurs in New Zealand English which sounds like [betə] to 
British ears.
Answer to ­exercise 3
(a)	 snowflake (Somerset)
(b)	 time for a snack (Norfolk and elsewhere too)
(c)	 infuse or brew the tea (Cumberland, Durham, Northumberland, Yorkshire, 
Scotland)
(d)	 the place was all untidy, disordered (Lincolnshire)
(e)	 icicles (Somerset)
(f)	 a great rough awkward girl (Essex, East Anglia and elsewhere)
(g)	 I’m really fed up, weary (Yorkshire)
(h)	 child (Scottish)
(i)	 newt (south-​east)
(j)	 a piggy is a hot water bottle (Scotland, Northumberland)
Answer to ­exercise 6
(a)	 Accents are distinguished from each other by pronunciation alone. Different 
dialects are generally distinguishable by their pronunciation, vocabulary and 
grammar.
(b)	 Regional dialects involve features of pronunciation, vocabulary and grammar 
which differ according to the geographical area the speakers come from. 
Social dialects are distinguished by features of pronunciation, vocabulary 
and grammar according to the social group of the speakers. Social group 
is usually evaluated on the basis of a range of features, such as education, 
occupation, residential area and income level. So people who come from 
different social groups speak different social dialects if they use different 
words, pronunciations, and grammatical features. Examples of these are 
discussed in the next section of this chapter.
 
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
219
Answer to ­exercise 9
(a)	 Examples of points you might have made.
•	The pattern of vernacular usage is consistent for both variables in all three 
places.
•	Negative concord is slightly more frequent than non-​standard was in two 
of the three places.
•	Vernacular was is particularly distinctive of Hull speech, where it reaches 
almost 100% or categorical status.
•	The further north you travel from London, the higher the percentage of 
vernacular forms.
•	This table suggests that regional variation intersects with class variation 
since, as the section preceding this exercise indicates, these vernacular 
forms typically stratify urban populations socially.
(b)	 Hull would be the equivalent of the lowest social class because the percentages 
of vernacular forms are highest in Hull and lower social groups tend to use 
more vernacular forms.
Concepts introduced
•	Accent
•	Regional dialect
•	Regional accent
•	Isogloss
•	Dialect continuum/​chain
•	RP (Received Pronunciation)
•	Social accent
•	Levelling
•	Social dialect
•	American standard English
•	Non-​standard
•	Social variables
•	Vernacular
•	Variant
•	Sociolinguistic patterns
•	Sharp and fine stratification
Notes
1	 Here and elsewhere, we have combined data from groups 3 (upper working class) and 4 
(middle working class) in Norwich and West Yorkshire for ease of comparison with com-
munities which were analysed into only four social groups.
2	 For ease of discussion, we have represented the realisations of the variable (r) as [r]‌ vs. 0 
(or its absence), but the precise phonetic realisations are very varied.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
220
3	 “Post-​vocalic” is the term widely used for the [r]‌ in words like car and card which is not 
pronounced in many varieties of English, and we use this term throughout the book. Note, 
however, that strictly speaking one should refer to non-​pre-​vocalic [r] in such contexts, 
since [r] is always pronounced between vowels in words such as wary and carry.
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Armstrong (1996) on deletion of [l]‌ in French
Bayard (1987); Bayard et al. (2001) for New Zealand data
Becker (2009) on New York City and non-​rhoticity
Bright (1966) on Indian languages
Bright and Ramanujan (1964) on Indian languages
Chambers and Trudgill (2004)
Dickson and Hall-​Lew (2017) on Edinburgh speech
Eisikovits (1989a) on have deletion
Feagin (1979) for data on Anniston and West Virginia
Finegan and Besnier (1989: 383) for definition of a language
Gordon and Deverson (1985, 1989)
Guy (1988: 37) on “social class”
Harrington, Palethorpe and Watson (2000) on changes to the Queen’s accent
Kerswill (2001) on dialect levelling and Estuary English
Kerswill, Torgersen and Fox (2007) on loss of [h]‌-​dropping in speech of inner 
London adolescents
Labov (1966, 1972a, 1972b), especially data on New York City
Lee (1989) on Brisbane adolescents’ speech
McCallum (1978) on New Zealand children’s past tense forms
Mitford and Ross (1980); Wales (1994) on “U” speech
Orton et al. (1998) on British English dialects
Petyt (1985) for West Yorkshire dialect data
Pragji (1980) on [h]‌-​dropping
Romaine (1978, 1984) on Edinburgh speech
Sankoff and Cedergren (1971) on Montreal French
Shuy, Wolfram and Riley (1967) for Detroit data
Stuart-​Smith, Timmins and Tweedie (2007) on (r) in Glasgow
Trudgill (1974, 1983), especially data on Norwich
Wolfram and Fasold (1974) for Detroit data
Quotations:
Eckert’s comment about Gilliéron’s French atlas is from Eckert (2018: 3)
Example 11 is from Mitford (1949: 29)
Example 16 is from Gordon and Deverson (1989: 35)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REGIONAL AND SOCIAL DIALECTS
221
Useful additional reading
Becker (2017) on sociolinguistic interviews
Bell (2014): ­chapters 7 and 9
Chambers and Trudgill (2004)
Coupland and Jaworski (2009): Part 1: Language variation
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapter 2 by Michol Hoffman on how to plan and 
undertake a sociolinguistic interview
Horvath (2017) on observation in social dialect research
Hughes and Trudgill (2005)
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapters 3 and 4
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapters 2 and 3
Meyerhoff, Schleef and MacKenzie (2015) on sociolinguistic methodology
Milroy and Gordon (2003)
Tagliamonte (2006)
Trudgill (2009): ­chapter 2
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapters 2 and 6
Wolfram and Schilling-​Estes (2006)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

222
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-9
Do women and men speak differently? Do children speak differently from adults? 
The answer to both these questions is almost certainly “yes” for all speech com-
munities, and the reasons in both cases are mainly social and cultural.
The linguistic forms used by women and men generally contrast –​ to different 
degrees –​ in all speech communities. There are other ways too in which the 
linguistic behaviour of women and men may differ. It is claimed that in many 
societies women are linguistically more polite than men, for instance, and that 
women and men tend to emphasise different speech functions. These claims will 
be explored in later chapters. In the first section of this chapter, the focus will 
be on evidence that women and men from the same speech community may use 
different linguistic forms or the same forms to different extents.
First a brief comment on the meaning of the terms “sex” and “gender” in 
sociolinguistics. We have used the term gender rather than sex because sex has 
come to refer to categories distinguished by biological characteristics, while gender 
is more appropriate for distinguishing people on the basis of their sociocultural 
behaviour, including speech. The discussion of gender in this chapter focuses largely 
on contrasts between empirically observed features of women’s and men’s speech 
in different communities. The concept of gender allows, however, for describing 
masculine and feminine behaviours in terms of scales or continua rather than abso-
lute categories. So we can also think of the features associated with women and 
men’s speech as linguistic resources for constructing ourselves as relatively fem-
inine or relatively masculine. This approach is discussed further in ­chapter 12.
Gender-​exclusive speech differences: highly 
structured communities
Example 1
Tayana is a young Amazonian Indian woman from the north-​west Amazon  
Basin. She lives with her husband and children and a number of other  
families in a longhouse beside the river. The language of her longhouse is  
Gender and age
7
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
223
Tuyuka, which is the language of all the men in this tribe, and the language  
she uses to talk to her children. She comes from a different tribe and her  
first language is Desano. She uses Desano to her husband, and he replies in  
Tuyuka.
Women and men do not speak in exactly the same way as each other in any 
community. The Amazon Indians provide an extreme example. As described in 
­chapter 4, in any longhouse the language used by a child’s mother is different 
from her father’s language, because men must marry outside their own tribe, and 
each tribe is distinguished by a different language. In this community, women 
and men speak different languages in many contexts.
Less dramatically, there are communities where the language is shared by 
women and men, but particular linguistic features typically occur only in the 
women’s speech or only in the men’s speech. These features are usually small 
differences in pronunciation or word-​shape (morphology). In Montana, for 
instance, there are pronunciation differences in the Gros Ventre Native American 
tribe. Where the women say [kjaˈtsa] for bread the men say [dʒaˈtsa]. In this com-
munity, if a person uses the “wrong” form for their gender, the older members of 
Map 7.1  Colombia and Brazil
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
224
the community may consider them bisexual. In Bengali, a language of India, the 
women use an initial [l]‌ where the men use an initial [n] in some words.
Word-​shapes in other languages contrast because women and men use 
different affixes. In Yana, a (now extinct) North American Indian language, and 
Chiquitano, a South American Indian language, some of the words used between 
men are longer than the equivalent words used by women and to women, because 
the men’s forms sometimes add a suffix, as illustrated in ­example 2.
Example 2
Differences between the form for men and women in the Yana language 
include:
Women’s form
Men’s form
ba
ba-​na
deer
yaa
yaa-​na
person
t’et
t’en’-​na
grizzly bear
ʔau
ʔau-​na
fire
nisaaklu
nisaaklu-​ʔi
he might go away
Just the reverse is true for Yanyuwa, an endangered Australian Aboriginal lan-
guage, where it is often the women’s forms which are longer, because men and 
women use different forms of the class-​marking prefixes on noun classes, verbs 
and pronouns. Both male and female children learned the women’s version of 
Yanyuwa, and the boys only started using the men’s version once they passed 
their initiation into manhood. After that they would be chastised for using the 
“wrong” genderlect, as shown in ­example 3.
Example 3
[The Yanyuwa is in italics. the translation is in small capitals.]
Son:	
Mum, did you buy ni-​warnnyi [MEAT]?
Mother:	
Hey! Are you a man or woman? Man got to talk na-​warnnyi 
not ni-​warnnyi, that’s women’s talk, you got to talk properly, 
you not little kid you know.
Son:	
Hey look you complain because young people don’t talk 
language and when we do you got to laugh at us, man may as 
well not even bother.
Mother:	
Well, you just got to learn to talk proper way just like we did.
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
225
Sadly, we cannot see this happening any longer, as there remain just four 
speakers of Yanyuwa in the world, meaning that like many Australian Indigenous 
Languages, Yanyuwa will soon be extinct, and another contribution to sociolin-
guistic diversity will be lost. Another example where women’s forms are longer 
is provided by traditional and conservative styles of Japanese. Forms of nouns 
considered appropriate for women are frequently prefixed by o-​, a marker of 
polite or formal style.
In some languages, there are also differences between the vocabulary items 
used by women and men, though these are never very extensive. Traditional 
standard Japanese provides some clear examples.
Example 4
Differences between the vocabulary items used by men and women in trad-
itional standard Japanese include:
Women’s form
Men’s form
otoosan
oyaji
father
taberu
kuu
eat
onaka
hara
stomach
In modern standard Japanese, these distinctions are more a matter of degrees 
of formality or politeness than gender; so the “men’s” forms are largely restricted 
to casual contexts and are considered rather vulgar, while the “women’s” forms 
are used by everyone in public contexts. Increasingly, too, as gender roles change, 
with more women in the workforce and more men prepared to assist in child-​
rearing, young Japanese women are challenging restrictive social norms, and 
using the so-​called mens’ forms. While initially women who used these forms 
were regarded as rather “macho”, the social meaning of these forms is chan-
ging. They are no longer so much signals of masculinity as of informality and 
modernity.
Some languages signal the gender of the speaker in the pronoun system. In 
Japanese, for instance, there are a number of words for I, varying primarily in 
formality (a point explored further in ­chapter 10), but women are tradition-
ally restricted to the more formal variants. So ore is supposed to be used only 
by men in casual contexts and boku, the next most casual form, is supposedly 
used mainly by men in semi-​formal contexts, while women are conventionally 
expected to use only the semi-​formal variant, atashi, the formal watashi and 
the most formal watakushi (forms also used by men in formal contexts). Again, 
however, modern young Japanese women are increasingly challenging such 
restrictions by using boku in some contexts.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
226
Exercise 1
Do English pronouns encode the gender of the speaker?
Answer at end of chapter
Gender differences in language are often just one aspect of more pervasive 
linguistic differences in the society reflecting social status or power differences. If 
a community is very hierarchical, for instance, and within each level of the hier-
archy men are more powerful than women, then linguistic differences between 
the speech of women and men may be just one dimension of more extensive 
differences reflecting the social hierarchy as a whole. In Bengali society, for 
Map 7.2  Japan
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
227
instance, a younger person should not address a superior by first name. Similarly, 
a wife, being subordinate to her husband, is not permitted to use his name. She 
addresses him with a term such as suncho (do you hear?). When she refers to 
him, she uses a circumlocution. One nice example of this practice is provided by 
the Bengali wife whose husband’s name was tara, which also means star. Since 
she could not call him tara, his wife used the term nokkhotro or heavenly body 
to refer to him. This point –​ the interrelationship of gender with other social 
factors –​ is illustrated even more clearly in the next section.
The fact that there are identifiable differences between women’s and men’s 
speech in the communities discussed in this section reflects the clearly demarcated 
gender roles in these communities. Gender-​exclusive speech forms (i.e. some 
forms are used only by women and others are used only by men) reflect gender-​
exclusive social roles. The responsibilities of women and men are different in 
such communities, and everyone knows that fact, and knows what the rules are. 
There are no arguments over who prepares the dinner and who puts the children 
to bed.
Gender-​preferential speech features:   
variationist sociolinguistics
Example 5
Keith was a seven-​year-​old Canadian from Vancouver whose parents were 
working for six months in the city of Leeds in Yorkshire, England (see map 
6.1). He had been enrolled at the local school, and after his first day Keith 
came home very confused. “What’s your teacher’s name?” asked his father. 
“She says she’s Mrs Hall,” said Keith, “but when the boys call her Mizall 
she still answers them. And the girls sometimes call her Mrs Hall and some-
times Mizall. It sounds very funny.”
Not surprisingly, in Western urban communities where women’s and men’s 
social roles overlap, the speech forms they use also overlap. In other words, 
women and men do not use completely different forms. Rather they tend to use 
different quantities or frequencies of the same forms. In the English-​speaking 
populations in every city where speech data has been collected, for instance, 
women use more -​ing [iŋ] pronunciations and fewer -​ in’ [in] pronunciations 
than men in words like swimming and typing. In Montreal, the French used by 
women and men is distinguished by the frequencies with which they pronounce 
[l]‌ in phrases such as il y a and il fait. Both women and men delete [l], but men 
do so more often than women. In Sydney, some women and men pronounce the 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
228
initial sound in thing as [f], but the men use this pronunciation more than the 
women. Both the social and the linguistic patterns in these communities show 
gender-​preferential features (rather than gender-​exclusive). Though both women 
and men use particular forms, one gender shows a greater preference for one of 
them than the other.
In all these examples, women tend to use more of the standard forms than 
men, while men use more of the vernacular forms than women. In Australia, 
interviews with people in Sydney revealed gender-​differentiated patterns of 
[h]‌-​dropping.
Exercise 2
What would you predict for [h]‌-​dropping patterns? Is it more likely that women or men 
drop most [h]s?
Answer at end of chapter
Gender and social class
Example 6
Linda lives in the south of England and her dad is a lawyer. When she 
was 10 years old, she went to stay for a whole school term with her uncle 
Tom and auntie Bet in Wigan, a Lancashire town, while her mother was 
recovering from a car accident. She was made to feel very welcome both in 
her auntie’s house and at the local school. When she went home, she tried 
to describe to her teacher, Mrs Button, what she had noticed about the way 
her uncle and auntie talked.
Uncle Tom is a plumber . . . and he talks just like the other men on the 
building site where he works –​ a bit broad. He says ’ouse and ’ome and 
[kup] and [bus]. When she’s at home auntie Bet talks a bit like uncle 
Tom. She says “Me feet are killin’ me [luv]. I’ve ’ad enough standin’ [up] 
for today.” But she works in a shop and when she’s talking to customers, 
she talks more like you do Mrs Button. She says house and home and she 
talks real nice –​ just like a lady.
The linguistic features which differ in the speech of women and men in Western 
communities are usually features which also distinguish the speech of people 
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
229
from different social classes. So how does gender interact with social class? Does 
the speech of women in one social class resemble that of women from different 
classes, or does it more closely resemble the speech of the men from their own 
social class? The answer to this question is quite complicated, and is different 
for different linguistic features. There are, however, some general patterns which 
can be identified.
In every social class where surveys have been undertaken, men use more ver-
nacular forms than women. Figure 7.1 shows, for instance, that in social dialect  
interviews in Norwich, men used more of the vernacular [in] form at the end of  
words like speaking and walking than women. And this pattern was quite con-
sistent across five distinct social groups. (Group 1 represents the highest social  
group.)
Notice, too, that in the lowest and the highest social groups, the women’s 
speech is closer to that of the men in the same group than to that of women in 
other groups. In these groups, class membership seems to be more important 
than gender identity. But this is not so true of women in group 2. Their score 
(of 3%) for vernacular forms is closer to that of women in group 1 than it 
is to that of men from their own group. This may indicate that they identify 
or wish to identify more strongly with women from the next social group 
than with men from their own social group. Possible reasons for this are 
discussed below.
Figure 7.1  Vernacular [in] by gender and social group in Norwich
Source: This diagram was devised from data in Trudgill (1983).
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
230
Source: DENNIS THE MENACE ©2021 North America Syndicate, Inc., and used by permission 
of Hank Ketcham Enterprises.
Exercise 3
Recent research suggests that Japanese women and men may use grammatical patterns 
with different frequencies. Are you aware of any differences in the grammar of English-​
speaking women and men? What pattern of gender differences would you predict for 
grammatical variables such as multiple negation, which was discussed in ­chapter 6?
Answer at end of chapter
Across all social groups in Western societies, women generally use more 
standard grammatical forms than men and so, correspondingly, men use more 
vernacular forms than women. In Detroit, for instance, multiple negation (e.g. I 
don’t know nothing about it), a vernacular feature of speech, is more frequent in 
men’s speech than in women’s. This is true in every social group, but the diffe-
rence is most dramatic in the second highest (the lower middle class) where the 
men’s multiple negation score is 32% compared to only 1% for women. Even 
 

GENDER AND AGE
231
in the lowest social group, however, men use a third more instances of multiple 
negation than women (90% vs. 59%).
This pattern is typical for many grammatical features. In many speech com-
munities, when women use more of a linguistic form than men, it is generally the 
standard form –​ the overtly prestigious form –​ that women favour. When men 
use a form more often than women, it is usually a vernacular form, one which 
is not admired overtly by the society as a whole, and which is not cited as the 
“correct” form. This pattern has been found in Western speech communities all 
over the world. It was described in 1983 by Peter Trudgill, the sociolinguist who 
collected the Norwich data, as “the single most consistent finding to emerge 
from sociolinguistic studies over the past 20 years”. And many decades later it 
still seems to hold true for most Western communities.
This widespread pattern is also evident from a very young age. It was first 
identified over 60 years ago in a study of American children’s speech in a semi-​
rural New England village, where it was found that the boys used more [in] and 
the girls more [iŋ] forms. Later studies in Boston and Detroit identified the same 
pattern. Boys used more vernacular forms such as consonant cluster simplifica-
tion: e.g. las’ [las] and tol’ [toul], rather than standard last [last] and told [tould]. 
Boys pronounced th [ð] in words like the and then as [d]‌ more often than girls. 
In Edinburgh, differences of this sort were observed in the pronunciation of girls 
and boys as young as six years old. The pattern is clear, consistent and wide-
spread and it is evident from a very early age. What is the explanation for it? 
Why does female and male speech differ in this way?
Exercise 4
Before you read the next section, consider some possible explanations for the finding of 
urban social dialect surveys that women use more standard forms than men. Consider the 
possible influence of the dimensions discussed in ­chapter 1: social status, social distance 
or solidarity, the formality of the context, and the functions of speech. How might these 
affect the speech used by an interviewee in a social dialect survey? Bear in mind that no 
single explanation is likely to fit all cases.
Explanations for women’s linguistic behaviour
When the pattern first emerged, social dialectologists asked: “why do women 
use more standard forms than men?”. At least four different (though not mutu-
ally exclusive) explanations were suggested. The first appeals to social class and 
social status for an explanation, the second refers to women’s role in society, the 
third to women’s status as a subordinate group, and the fourth to the function of 
speech in expressing gender identity, and especially masculinity.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
232
The social status explanation
Some linguists have suggested that women use more standard speech forms than 
men because they are more status-​conscious than men. The claim is that women 
are more aware of the fact that the way they speak signals their social class back-
ground or social status in the community. Standard speech forms are generally 
associated with high social status, and so, according to this explanation, women 
use more standard speech forms as a way of claiming such status. It has been 
suggested that this is especially true for women who do not have paid employ-
ment, since they cannot use their occupations as a basis for signalling social 
status.
The fact that women interviewed in New York and in Norwich reported 
that they used more standard forms than they actually did has also been used 
to support this explanation. Women are typically considered less statusful in 
society compared to men, and so, it is suggested, some try to acquire more status 
by using standard speech forms, and by reporting that they use even more of 
these forms than they actually do.
Though it sounds superficially plausible, there is at least some indirect evi-
dence which throws doubt on this as the main explanation for gender differences 
in social dialect data. It is suggested that women who are not in paid employment 
are most likely to claim higher social status by using more standard forms. This 
implies that women in the paid workforce should use fewer standard forms than 
women working in the home. But the little evidence that we have in fact suggests 
that just the opposite may be true. An American study compared the speech of 
women in service occupations, working in garages and hotels, for instance, with 
the speech of women working in the home. Those in paid employment used 
more standard forms than those working in the home. In the course of their jobs, 
the first group of women were interacting with people who used more standard 
forms, and this interaction had its effect on their own usage. By contrast, the 
women who stayed home interacted mainly with each other, and this reinforced 
their preference for vernacular forms.
Exactly the same pattern was found in an Irish working-​class community. 
The younger women in Ballymacarrett, a suburb of Belfast, found work out-
side the community, and used a much higher percentage of linguistic features 
associated with high status groups than the older women who were working 
at home. This evidence throws some doubt, then, on suggestions that women 
without paid employment are more likely to use standard forms than those 
with jobs, and so indirectly questions the social status explanation for women’s 
speech patterns.
A variation on this explanation suggests that standard or prestige forms 
represent linguistic capital which people can use to increase their value or mar-
ketability in some contexts. This has the advantage of accounting for the higher 
proportion of such forms in the speech of those in the white-​collar professional 
 

GENDER AND AGE
233
workforce, especially when they are interacting with people they want to impress. 
Where women have few other sources of prestige, language may become espe-
cially significant as a social resource for constructing a professional identity. But 
if you work in a soap factory or a shoe factory, or on a building site, the forms 
that your companions value are more likely to be vernacular forms, so your lin-
guistic capital will take a different form.
Woman’s role as guardian of society’s values
Example 7
Mrs Godley, an early New Zealand settler, believed in the civilising influ-
ence of women. When two young men she knew were about to begin work 
on a sheep station in the South Island province of Canterbury in 1852, she 
warned them that they would become “semi-​barbarous”. She begged them 
to have a “lay figure of a lady, carefully draped, set up in their usual sitting-​
room, and always behave before it as if it was their mother”.
A second explanation for the fact that women use more standard forms than 
men in many Western speech communities points to the way society tends to 
expect “better” behaviour from women than from men. Little boys are gener-
ally allowed more freedom than little girls. Misbehaviour from boys is tolerated 
where girls are more quickly corrected. Similarly, rule-​breaking of any kind 
by women is frowned on more severely than rule-​breaking by men. Women 
are designated the role of modelling correct behaviour in many communities. 
Predictably then, following this argument, society expects women to speak more 
correctly and standardly than men, especially when they are serving as models 
for children’s speech.
A woman’s place is in the home.
This explanation of why women use more standard forms than men may be 
relevant in some social groups, but it is certainly not true for all. Interactions 
between a mother and her child are likely to be very relaxed and informal, and 
it is in relaxed informal contexts that vernacular forms occur most often in 
everyone’s speech. Standard forms are typically associated with more formal and 
less personal interactions. It seems odd to explain women’s greater use of more 
standard speech forms (collected in formal recorded interviews) by referring to 
a woman’s role as a speech model in her very intimate and mainly unobserved 
interactions with her child.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
234
Subordinate groups must be polite
Example 8
“You are an intolerable bore Mr Brown. Why don’t you simply shut up 
and  let  someone speak who has more interesting ideas to contribute,” 
said  Lord  Huntly in the well-​educated and cultured accent of the 
over-​privileged.
(Bassett, Sinclair and Stenson, 1985)
A third explanation which has been proposed for women’s use of more standard 
forms is that people who are subordinate must be polite. Children are expected 
to be polite to adults. Women as a subordinate group, it is argued, must avoid 
offending men –​ and so they must speak carefully and politely.
It is not immediately apparent why polite speech should be equated with 
standard speech. It is perfectly possible to express yourself politely using a ver-
nacular Liverpool or Glaswegian accent, for example, and it is equally possible to 
be very insulting using RP, as ­example 8 illustrates. A more sophisticated version 
of this explanation, however, which links it to the social status explanation, 
suggests that by using more standard speech forms women are looking after 
their own need to be valued by the society. By using standard forms, a woman is 
protecting her face (a technical term used by sociolinguists with approximately 
the same meaning as in the phrase to lose face). She is also avoiding offence to 
others.
Suggesting that a woman uses standard forms in order to protect her face is 
not very different from saying she is claiming more status than she is entitled to, 
compared to men from the same social group. On the other hand, the suggestion 
that women’s greater use of standard forms may relate not only to their own 
face-​protection needs, but also to those of the people they are talking to, is more 
promising. It is consistent with other evidence of women’s sensitivity to their 
addressees, which is discussed more fully in ­chapter 12.
Like most of the explanations presented, this explanation also begins from 
the assumption that it is women’s behaviour which is aberrant and has to be 
explained. Men’s usage is being taken as the norm against which women’s is 
being measured. Yet this seems odd when we remember that what people are 
trying to explain is why women are using the standard forms or the norms. 
Why should standard or “correct” behaviour need explaining? It is men’s speech 
which uses fewer standard forms –​ not women’s. Instead of asking “why do 
women use more standard speech forms than men?”, it makes more sense to ask 
“why don’t men use more standard forms?”.
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
235
Exercise 5
Before you read the next section, can you think of possible reasons why men in social dia-
lect studies might use more vernacular forms than women?
Vernacular forms express machismo
Example 9
Knocker:	
Comin’down the club Jim?
Jim:	
Not friggin’ likely. It’s rubbish that club.
Knocker:	
It ain’t that bad. Music’s cool. I seen a couple of sharp 
judies there too. If we plays our cards right . . . Anyways 
you was keen enough las’ week.
Jim:	
The music’s last Knocker. I’m off down the Pier ’ead if 
there ain’t nothin’ better on offer.
Knocker:	
Bleedin’ rozzers crawlin’ round down there. Come 
down ours instead.
Note: Vernacular lexical items in the Liverpool dialect Scouse: judies =​ 
girls; last =​ hopeless, terrible; rozzers =​ police.
One answer which has been suggested to the question “why don’t men use more 
standard forms?” is that men prefer vernacular forms because they carry macho 
connotations of masculinity and toughness. If this is true, it would also explain 
why many women might not want to use such forms.
There is some evidence to support the suggestion. The recorded speakers 
who were identified as most likely to win in a street fight were those who 
used most vernacular forms. The fact that Norwich men tended to claim that 
they used more vernacular forms than they actually did, while the women 
didn’t, supports this explanation too. The men apparently wanted to sound less 
standard than they actually were. This suggests these men regard vernacular 
forms positively and value them highly, even if they don’t always openly admit 
to doing so. It has been suggested, then, that these forms have “covert prestige” 
by contrast with the overt prestige of the standard forms which are cited as 
models of correctness. (See ­chapter 15 for a further discussion of covert and 
overt prestige.)
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
236
The converse of this claim is that standard forms tend to be associated with 
female values and femininity. Some linguists have pointed to the association of 
standard forms with female teachers and the norms they impose in the class-
room, with the suggestion that boys may reject this female domination, and the 
speech forms associated with it, more vigorously than girls. More generally in 
society, a preference for vernacular forms may be a reaction to what is perceived 
as overly influential female norms.
This explanation seems consistent with much of the sociolinguistic evidence 
which has accumulated. It is worth asking, however, what it implies about the 
values expressed by working-​class women’s speech. The recorded voices that 
people were asked to assess in terms of their likely abilities in a street fight were 
men’s voices. How do people respond to working-​class women’s speech? Would 
her listeners consider the high frequency of vernacular forms in the speech of the 
70-​year-​old woman in ­example 10 as evidence that she was a tough old woman 
constructing a masculine identity?
Example 10
C’mere an Ah’ll tell ye a wee laugh –​ ma twin –​ ma brother an me’s twins –​ 
he’s ten i a family, Ah’ve nane, Mary –​ an ma other niece’s daughter, she 
was up visitin er mother an oor Andy was in, as we just cawed im Aundra –​ 
Scoatch –​ but it’s Andrew –​ [. . .] Ah think e’ll maybe be aboot ten, Scott –​ e 
says, “Uncle Andrew, are you French?” E says, “Away, an don’t be daft! A’m 
Brigton!” E says, “Where’s that? Is that abroad? Fae Brigton!”
Or would they consider her a promiscuous old tart? One New Zealand study 
suggested that women avoid vernacular forms because they are associated with 
promiscuous women: “sluts” and “loose morals”.
There are other problems too. If a higher frequency of vernacular forms 
conveys connotations of masculinity (or promiscuity), then why do all 
speakers from all social classes use more vernacular forms in less formal 
contexts? (See ­chapter 10 for examples of this pattern.) Women use more 
vernacular forms in relaxed situations, as ­example 6 suggested. Why should 
forms most typically associated with informal relaxed contexts be identified 
as “masculine”?
Some alternative explanations
When we look for explanations to explain why women use more standard forms 
than men in many Western speech communities we can do a little better than 
Roger Shuy’s (probably tongue-​in-​cheek) comment: “... women continue to be 
one of the mysteries of the universe”.
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
237
How are women categorised?
Example 11
It was widely considered that Rose had married beneath her. Her parents 
were both doctors, as she was herself. She had been educated at a private 
girls’ school and had proceeded on the basis of an outstanding exam per-
formance to Oxford University. She was earning a very respectable salary 
from her practice when she married Bruce. Bruce worked in his father’s 
sports shop and, while it was clear he would eventually inherit the business, 
at the time of their marriage he seemed no match for Rose intellectually, 
financially or socially. Nevertheless, the marriage seemed to work –​ despite 
these apparent disparities.
There are alternative ways of accounting for at least some of the social dia-
lect evidence that women’s and men’s speech tends to differ in terms of the fre-
quency with which each gender uses standard and vernacular forms. Consider, 
for example, the data on which these generalisations are based. In assigning 
women to a particular social class, researchers in early social dialect studies 
often used the woman’s husband’s occupation as their major criterion. Not all 
women marry men from the same social class, however. It is perfectly possible for 
a woman to be better educated than the man she marries, or even to have a more 
prestigious job than him, as illustrated in ­example 11. In such cases, women’s use 
of more standard forms would require no explanation at all. They would simply 
be using appropriate forms which accurately reflected their social background. 
When women are classified by their husband’s social group, miscategorisation is 
one plausible explanation of their speech behaviour.
The influence of the interviewer and the context
In many social dialect studies, the interviewers are middle-​class, well-​educated 
academics. When people wish to be cooperative, they tend to accommodate to 
the speech of the person they are talking to. In other words, their speech becomes 
more like that of their addressee (as illustrated more fully in ­chapter 10). At 
least in some contexts, such as formal interviews, many women tend to be more 
cooperative conversationalists than men, as discussed in ­chapter 12. Hence one 
factor accounting for women’s use of more standard forms in social dialect 
interviews may be their greater accommodation to the middle-​class speech of 
their interviewers. There is clear evidence of speech accommodation: for instance, 
in Swahili data collected in Mombasa, a town in Kenya. The women interviewed 
shifted much more dramatically than the men, from more to less standard forms 
when they were speaking to a friend rather than a stranger.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
238
By contrast, men in formal contexts seem to be less responsive to the speech of 
others, and to their conversational needs. In fact, it seems perfectly possible that 
working-​class men might react against the speech of a middle-​class academic 
from the university, and so in their interviews they may have diverged in their 
speech forms, using more vernacular forms precisely to distinguish themselves 
from the interviewer. An Australian study demonstrated that this was exactly 
how adolescent boys reacted in an interview with a stranger. The differences 
between women’s and men’s speech behaviour would then be explicable in terms 
of their different responses to the interviewer collecting the data.
Exercise 6
How do you think you would speak in a social dialect interview? What would be the effect 
of the context and the interviewer’s status on your speech? With your friend’s permission, 
record yourself talking to a friend in a relaxed context. Then select three questions from 
those in the appendix to this chapter and interview your friend.
Can you hear any differences in your speech or that of your friend in the two contexts? 
If you are an English speaker, pay attention to [h]‌-​dropping and [in] vs. [iŋ] variation.
Do you think you might respond differently to a female vs. a male interviewer? Why 
might women respond differently from men in a formal interview situation with a male 
interviewer?
Answer at end of chapter
Many of the interviewers who collected the social dialect data discussed in 
the previous sections were male. The interview context was therefore different 
for men and women. Women were being interviewed by a male stranger, a 
highly educated member of the dominant group in the society. Men were being 
interviewed by a member of their own gender. In such circumstances, it is likely 
that the interview context would be considerably more comfortable for men 
than for women, especially for middle-​class men. Male solidarity would reduce 
the formality of the context. This too might account for men’s greater use of ver-
nacular forms.
In one of the earliest social dialect surveys, the male interviewers asked 
different questions of women and men in order to elicit a casual style of speech 
in which vernacular forms were more likely to occur. The women were asked 
about childhood games and skipping rhymes, while the men were asked about 
fights, terms for girls and, in some cases, terms for a woman’s sexual organs. 
As one pair of commentators note, “With the best will in the world, it seems 
unlikely that a discussion of skipping rhymes could induce the rapport of two 
men talking about smutty words.” The fact that men used more vernacular forms 
than women in these interviews does not then seem so surprising. It can be 
accounted for by the fact that the interview context was different for women 
and men.
 

GENDER AND AGE
239
Women’s greater use of standard speech forms may then be an indication of 
their sensitivity to contextual factors. Standard speech forms are used in more 
formal contexts. They reflect social distance. They are used in contexts where 
people operate primarily in terms of social status and role. When people do not 
know each other well, they tend to speak in ways that reflect their social roles 
(e.g. customer–​shopkeeper, teacher–​pupil, interviewer–​interviewee) rather than 
relating as individuals. Standard speech forms are appropriate to such transac-
tional roles. Where women use more standard speech forms than men in social 
dialect interviews, this may be due to the fact that they experienced the interview 
as a relatively formal interaction with a stranger.
This explanation accounts for the difference in women’s and men’s speech 
forms by referring to the relationship between the people concerned in the 
context in which they are operating. It provides a thought-​provoking alter-
native to explanations which characterise women as status-​conscious indi-
viduals who use more standard speech forms to ensure they are perceived as 
socially statusful.
Exercise 7
Can you think of social factors which might change the pattern described above, i.e. the 
fact that in many communities women tend to use more standard forms than men in more 
formal social contexts?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 8
My young German friend, Anke, thinks that the explanations suggested above for 
differences in women’s and men’s speech are biased against men. Do you agree?
What does this suggest about interpretations of social dialect data?
Discuss with your teacher how you might test alternative explanations for any gender 
differences in speech observed in your community.
This discussion of alternative explanations of women’s linguistic behaviour 
also illustrates another important point. The same behaviour may be interpreted 
quite differently by different researchers. Identifying linguistic differences 
between groups is just the first step. Interpreting their significance is another, and 
any interpretation will be influenced by a researcher’s theoretical framework and 
beliefs about the relationship between language and social factors. A researcher 
who believes the status dimension is more influential in accounting for linguistic 
differences than the solidarity dimension, for instance, will provide a different 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
240
explanation from one who sees a person’s social contacts as more influential in 
accounting for their speech than their social class background. This point will be 
illustrated further in ­chapter 8.
In concluding this section, it is worth noting that although gender generally 
interacts with other social factors, such as status, class, the role of the speaker 
in an interaction, and the (in)formality of the context, there are cases where 
the gender of the speaker seems to be the most influential factor accounting for 
speech patterns. In some communities, a woman’s social status and her gender 
interact to reinforce differential speech patterns between women and men. In 
others, different factors modify one another to produce more complex patterns. 
But in a number of communities, for some linguistic forms, gender identity 
seems to be a primary factor accounting for speech variation. The gender of 
the speaker can override social class differences, for instance, in accounting for 
speech patterns. In these communities, expressing masculine or feminine identity 
seems to be very important.
The social dialect survey of the Sydney community, mentioned above, provides  
some support for this view of gender as an important factor in its own right,  
as does data from a study in Tyneside, an area in the north-​east of England.  
Glottalisation of [p]‌, [t] and [k], for instance, is characteristic of the Tyneside  
vernacular. (Glottalisation involves cutting off the air at the vocal cords while  
producing the sounds [p], [t], [k].) This feature is better described as a masculine  
norm than a working-​class norm, since men use these glottalised sounds across  
all styles regardless of their social class, whereas glottalisation varies in the  
speech of women from different classes. Figure 7.2 makes the point graphically.
There is similar evidence from Reading where Jenny Cheshire, travelling by 
motor bike which gave her considerable street cred as well as a topic of con-
versation, recorded the speech of adolescent girls and boys in two adventure 
Figure 7.2  Glottalised [p]‌ in speech of Tyneside women and men from two social 
classes
Source: Fasold (1990: 101); reproduced with permission of John Wiley and Sons Inc.

GENDER AND AGE
241
playgrounds. She found the usual pattern of gender-​differentiation in grammat-
ical patterns such as multiple negation, and the use of forms such as ain’t. Overall, 
boys used vernacular forms more frequently than girls. The boys who used 
most vernacular forms had the highest scores on a “toughness” scale, involving 
factors such as: skill at fighting and participation in minor criminal activities (for 
example shop-​lifting); ambition to do a “tough” job, such as slaughterer; and 
swearing. But interestingly the speech of tough girls –​ those capable of swearing, 
stealing, or setting fire to the adventure playground –​ was quite distinguishable 
from that of the boys on a number of grammatical features. So toughness was 
here not the distinguishing factor. Gender identity itself seemed to be an influ-
ential explanatory factor accounting for different speech patterns which were 
observed. Penny Eckert’s research with adolescents in playgrounds in Detroit 
suggests that, while social group is a fundamental dimension, the symbolic value 
of speech is often more important for the girls than the boys. In these commu-
nities, specific linguistic forms may signal membership of the group “male” or 
“female” in particular, as well as indicating the different social aspirations of 
different groups.
Exercise 9
If English is not your first language, are you aware of gender patterns in your mother 
tongue?
(a)	
Does your mother tongue provide means of signaling the gender of the speaker 
or of the addressee? If so, what levels of linguistic analysis are involved? Sounds? 
Grammatical structures? Vocabulary?
(b)	
What resources does your mother tongue provide for signaling feminine identity 
and masculine identity?
(c)	
Before reading this chapter, were you aware of the different ways in which 
varieties of English provide speakers with a means of signaling their gender 
identity? If so, does this information influence the way you use English in inter-
action? How?
Overall, then, the nature of the relationship between gender and speech is 
complex, and the way gender interacts with a range of other factors needs 
careful examination in each speech community. The social roles that women and 
men play, their different values and social networks (who they talk to most), the 
social categories they identify with and the social identities they wish to con-
struct, and their sensitivity to contextual factors, including characteristics of the 
person they are talking to, are relevant factors accounting for people’s speech 
patterns which will be explored in more detail in the next few chapters. But sig-
nalling gender-​affiliation or constructing gender identity cannot be ignored as 
factors in their own right.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
242
This section has focused on the widespread evidence that men use more ver-
nacular forms than women, but there are exceptions to this pattern. Figure 7.1 
showed that women from the lower social groups in Norwich used almost as 
many vernacular forms as the men. And there are some communities, such as 
Pont-​rhyd-​y-​fen, a small Welsh mining community, and Brazlândia, a satellite 
city of Brasília, where the women use more vernacular forms than the men. 
A high frequency of vernacular forms may have a much wider range of associ-
ations than the explanation which identifies them with masculinity and toughness 
suggests, as we shall see in the next few chapters. To give just two contrasting 
examples, vernacular forms may express conservative, non-​urban values (where 
the standard is the urban norm), or alternatively vernacular forms may reflect 
anti-​establishment attitudes (where the standard is the middle-​class adult norm). 
The next section provides examples of young people’s use of vernacular forms 
expressing the latter.
Age-​graded features of speech
Example 12
I was listening to New Zealand radio when they announced that they were 
going to be interviewing the Minister of Health after the news. I couldn’t 
think who the Minister was. So I listened to the interview and I was very 
impressed with the policies he outlined, and particularly with his sensitive 
and sympathetic attitudes to the need for cervical screening for women. 
“How sensible,” I thought, “what an intelligent man!” I waited for the end 
of the interview to find out who he was. “And that was an interview with 
the Minister of Health, Helen Clark,” announced the interviewer. Well at 
least that explained the sympathetic attitude to women’s health issues!
One of the most obvious speech differences between women and men is in the 
pitch of their voices. Most people believe this difference develops at puberty. It 
is thought to be as difficult to guess the gender of a five-​year-​old on the phone 
as it is to identify the gender of a swaddled infant from its wails and coos. It is 
certainly true that young boys’ voices often break at puberty and become notice-
ably lower in pitch. Their voice quality reflects their physical growth. Boys’ vocal 
cords generally grow faster and bigger than girls’ at puberty. Men’s heads and 
lungs are also typically larger than women’s, just as adults’ heads are bigger than 
children’s. As a result, male voices generally sound lower in pitch than women’s, 
just as adult voices sound deeper than children’s. Differences are relative, how-
ever, and the pitch ranges of women and men overlap to a considerable extent. In 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
243
any community, there will always be some women whose natural speaking pitch 
is deeper than that of some men.
This physical explanation is only part of the reason for gender differences 
in voice pitch, however. Social and cultural factors contribute too. Young boys’ 
voices often become lower in pitch than girls’ voices well before there is any 
physical basis for the change. It sounds more masculine to speak with a lower-​
pitched voice, and so young boys often develop this masculine feature, along 
with other more obviously sociolinguistic features of male speech such as the 
greater use of vernacular forms described above.
Influence in public domains has been a male prerogative until relatively 
recently. The fact that women politicians, like Helen Clark in ­example 12, often 
have deeper voices than average may reflect the public’s preference for voices with 
masculine associations in politics; or perhaps women politicians are using male 
models in order to gain acceptance in spheres previously dominated by males. It 
is well-​known that Margaret Thatcher underwent training to lower the pitch of 
her voice when she was Britain’s Prime Minister, since she was persuaded that 
this would lead to people taking her more seriously. These norms are culturally 
relative too. There are cultures where the average pitch of men’s voices is con-
siderably higher than that of the average American male, for instance, and the 
upper reaches of some Japanese women’s pitch range are out of sight compared 
to those of English-​speaking women. Only a young child could compete.
Example 13
[G is a teenage Australian girl and I is a female interviewer.]
G:	
We went –​ I’ve seen “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest” –​ can’t 
even say “cuckoo” properly. That was a good show. The only thing 
is they swear a lot in it.
I:	
And that really bothers you?
G:	
Mm. Sometimes, like, sometimes I’ll be in the mood for it an other 
times I’ll think, you, know “I don’t wanna say that.” Cause when 
you listen t’other people it sounds terrible, you know . . .
I:	
You don’t think about that when you’re 13 or 14 doing it yourself.
G:	
No, you don’t. When you get older, you think, “Oh Jesus, what did 
I ever say that for?”
There are other features of people’s speech which vary at different ages too. 
Not only pitch, but vocabulary, pronunciation and grammar can differentiate age 
groups. There are patterns which are appropriate for ten-​year-​olds or teenagers 
which disappear as they grow older. These are patterns of age-​grading. Between 
the ages of 10 and 15, and typically with encouragement from their teachers 
and parents, middle-​class Glaswegians learn to substitute [t]‌ for the vernacular 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
244
glottal stop variant in words like water and matter. The extensive swear word 
vocabulary which some teenagers use is similarly likely to change over time, 
as ­example 13 suggests. The frequency with which they use such words tends 
to diminish, especially as they begin to have children and socialise with others 
with young families. It seems possible that adult men restrict swearing largely to 
all-​male settings, whereas females reduce their swearing in most settings as they 
move into adulthood.
Slang is another area of vocabulary which reflects a person’s age. Current 
slang is the linguistic prerogative of young people and generally sounds odd in 
the mouth of an older person. It signals membership of a particular group –​ the 
young. In New Zealand, young people currently use the terms cool, amazing, 
awesome and neat to describe something they approve of. Choice and sick are 
now out-​of-​date. Even earlier generations of New Zealanders used bosker and 
bonzer. Grouse is another such word that reappeared briefly in the early twenty-​
first century after previously being fashionable in the 1970s. Rich Californian 
Valley girls use mondo. Shubs is British urban slang for a rave or a party and 
mandem for a group of men or boys (see ­example 14 below).
Because slang is so ephemeral, vocabulary can be a useful clue if you are 
trying to guess a person’s age on the telephone or radio. Indeed, teenage vocabu-
lary changes so quickly that by the time you read this book, it is likely that the 
slang that was in fashion at the time of writing is now obsolete. The spread of 
such words is greater than ever before because of online communication and 
social media. Sometimes the words originating with teenagers get picked up by 
adults (or continue to be used as teenagers become adults). By the time this 
happens, new teenage slang is emerging to replace the terms now used by adults. 
For instance, salty meaning annoyed was considered teenage slang in 2017–​18, 
but by 2021 can be heard on TV shows by adults in their mid-​twenties. Out-​of-​
date slang words like spiffing, fantastic, super, groovy and fab identify a British 
person as a member of the older generation as accurately as an old-​fashioned RP 
pronunciation such as [o:fən] for often.
Exercise 10
Ask five people over 70 years old and five people between 15 and 25 years old from similar 
social backgrounds to tell you what words they would use in the following contexts:
(a)	
I’ve just got a new car. It’s_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​.
(Ask for two or three words meaning they like it and think it is good.)
(b)	
The Australians were beaten by six wickets and I’m not surprised. Their playing was_​
_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​.
(Ask for two or three words meaning it was terrible.)
(c)	
I heard a talk about personality types on the radio today. The speaker didn’t know a 
thing about the subject. It was _​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​  _​_​_​_​_​_​_​_​.
(Ask for two or three words meaning it was wrong or misleading.)
 

GENDER AND AGE
245
You could add another couple of sentences if there are particular slang words you 
would like to check out in this way.
Is there any pattern in the forms you have collected?
Are some words used only by the older people and others used only by young people?
Are there any words you had not heard before?
Are there any words used by one group which you think members of the other group 
would not understand?
Age and social dialect data
Example 14
Brian, a teenager from Hackney in London, is talking about how security 
guards came to get people out of a room where a party was being held.
there was about forty mandem like boys inside so we went yeah they 
came and like there was like security at the door so like no-​one had invi-
tation the people that we called so yeah so like they everyone ran in and 
so like the the security stopped the music and like turned on the lights 
said yeah everyone get out so they scattered the shubs
Note: mandem =​ group of boys; shubs =​ party/​rave.
Social dialect research has provided a great deal of information about patterns of 
pronunciation and grammar, and more recently discourse particles such as like, 
illustrated in ­example 14, for different age groups. The speech of young children, 
in Britain and the USA, for example, is generally not clearly differentiated by 
gender until they are approaching puberty, whereas in Denmark there is evidence 
of differences between boys’ and girls’ use of vernacular vs. standard morpho-
logical variants from as young as four years old. One possible explanation is that 
Danish children are much more strongly influenced by their peers, since 90% of 
those under four years of age spend 40 or more hours per week in daycare.
By their teenage years, most young people in English-​speaking communities  
have developed an awareness of the significance of standard English variants,  
though they may not choose to use them. A common age-​related pattern for  
stable vernacular forms, such as the use of [in] for standard [iŋ] in walking, or  
[d]‌ for [ð] in then, or multiple negation, is represented by the curve in ­figure 7.3.  
The graph suggests the relative frequency of vernacular forms in different age  
groups. It indicates that they are high in childhood and adolescence, and then  
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
246
steadily reduce as people approach middle age when societal pressures to con-
form are greatest. Then vernacular usage gradually increases again in old age  
as social pressures reduce, with people moving out of the workforce and into a  
more relaxed phase of their lives.
In other words, the model suggests that as people get older their speech 
becomes gradually more standard, and then later it becomes less standard and is 
once again characterised by vernacular forms.
In a New Zealand survey, the pattern in ­figure 7.3 was particularly clear in 
men’s use of the [in] vs. [iŋ] variants at different ages. Those in their 40s used fewer 
instances of [in] than those in their 20s, or than those over 70 years old. The first 
part of the pattern is illustrated in ­figure 7.4 in relation to the variable of mul-
tiple negation. Young children in both Detroit and the Appalachian region of the 
USA use multiple negation more frequently than adolescents, and adolescents use 
it more frequently than adults. Children gradually acquire standard forms in the 
same way as they gradually acquire new vocabulary and control of grammatical 
constructions. It is likely that this process reflects an expansion of the child’s styl-
istic range. In other words, the child gradually acquires standard forms alongside 
vernacular forms. The data probably also reflects the fact that, once acquired, the 
standard forms are likely to be used more often in an interview with a sociolinguist.
Many social dialectologists have found that adolescents use particularly high  
frequencies of vernacular forms, especially if they are forms such as ain’t and  
multiple negation which people clearly recognise and identify as non-​standard.  
This provides empirical support for a proposed peak during adolescence when  
peer group pressure not to conform to society’s norms is greatest. However,  
this pattern is not attributable to age alone. Like slang, vernacular forms act as  
Figure 7.3  Relationship between use of vernacular forms and age
Source: Reproduced from Downes (1998: 191); Aitchison (2001); and Labov (2006), by 
permission of Cambridge University Press.
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
247
solidarity markers; they can indicate membership of close-​knit social groups, as  
illustrated in the next chapter. New York gang members, for instance, delete the  
-​ed which signals past tense at the ends of words much more often than adults  
from the same social group, but also more often than those labelled “lames”  
(young people who do not belong to gangs). Gang members pretty much always  
say miss for missed (in utterances like he miss the bus yesterday) and pass for  
passed (they pass the ball) while lames or adults do so much less. And they  
use more multiple negation than adults and lames in the same social class. As  
discussed in ­chapter 8, membership of a close-​knit social group is more important  
than age alone in accounting for these patterns.
Patterns for particular linguistic features may vary between communities, but 
there is general agreement that, all other things being equal, in their middle 
years people are most likely to respond to the wider society’s speech norms by 
using fewer vernacular forms. So it is in middle age that people are most likely 
to use more standard forms. The use of standard or prestige forms typically 
peaks between 30 and 55 years old when people experience maximum societal 
pressure to conform. So standard vowels and [iŋ] pronunciations of words like 
working are usually highest in this period of people’s lives.
An interesting parallel in the multilingual context of Montreal is the level 
of bilingualism reported by French Canadians at different ages. Young people 
Figure 7.4  Multiple negation in different age groups in two communities
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Romaine (1984: 108–​9).
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
248
generally begin life monolingual in French. Then as they grow older, through 
school and work they become increasingly bilingual. Bilingualism is clearly an 
asset during their working lives so the level of reported bilingualism rises to a 
peak between 30 and 50 years old, while people are in the workforce. After retire-
ment, many revert to French monolingualism with their family and close friends. 
Bilingualism clearly functions as the equivalent of a linguistic prestige form in a 
monolingual community, while the reversion to French monolingualism parallels 
the greater use of vernacular forms among older people, as illustrated in ­figure 7.3.
Exercise 11
Imagine you have been cast in a play as an elderly woman or man, although you are only a 
young person. How could you use linguistic features to construct an appropriate age identity 
for your character? Think about discourse particles (such as well, like, you know in English), 
vocabulary choice, grammatical and phonological features, together with variations in pitch 
and speed which could be used to enact your role convincingly in your speech community.
Age grading and language change
Before leaving considerations of the relationship between age and speech 
patterns, it is important to notice how easy it is to confuse patterns of language 
change with speech patterns which vary with different age groups.
Exercise 12
Table 7.1  Vernacular pronunciation of standard [t]‌ in medial and final position in New 
Zealand English
Linguistic form
Age group
20–​30 years (%)
40+​ years (%)
Glottal stop [?]‌ for final [t]
(e.g. [ba?] for bat)
82
33
Flap for medial [t]‌
(e.g. [leder] for letter)
35
  6
Source: From Hui (1989: 6).
There are at least two alternative explanations for the pattern shown in table 7.1. What 
are they?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
249
When a linguistic change is spreading through a community, there will be a 
regular increase or decrease in the use of the linguistic form over time. For an 
innovation –​ a form on the increase –​ this will show up in a graph as a low use 
of the form by older people and a higher use among younger people. For a form 
which is disappearing, just the opposite will be true. Younger people will use less 
of the form and older people more.
Milton Keynes is Britain’s fastest-​growing town. It was founded in 1967 
and by 2005 its population had more than quadrupled, and it is still growing. 
A social dialect study of teenage speech in the town indicated that [f]‌ was rapidly 
replacing standard [θ] in words like thought and mouth, and [v] was replacing 
standard [ð] in words like mother and brother. This feature has been called (th)-​
fronting since the standard sound is pronounced a little further back against 
the teeth, while the lips are involved in [f] and [v]. Is this a feature of adolescent 
speech or is it a change in progress? The evidence suggests that this is a change 
which began in London as long ago as 1850, and though it took a while to get 
started it is now accelerating as it spreads northwards.
Exercise 13
Figure 7.5 illustrates three vernacular features in three English towns: Milton Keynes is 
a relatively new town 80 kilometres north of London; Reading is 60 kilometres west of 
London; and Hull is the furthest north and over 200 kilometres from London (see map 6.1).
Figure 7.5  Three vernacular features in girls’ and boys’ speech in three English towns
Source: Cheshire, Kerswill and Williams (2005: 146), with permission of Cambridge 
University Press, granted through PLSClear.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
250
(a)	
Are there any differences in the patterns of use of the three sounds in the three towns?
(b)	
Does the figure support or challenge the claim that (th)-​fronting is spreading north 
in England?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 14
In the early twenty-​first century, sociolinguists began to pay attention to the frequency of 
like in the speech of young people (see ­example 14). There is disagreement about whether 
this is an age-​graded feature or a change in progress. What does ­figure 7.6 suggest? Does 
the distribution of like support the argument that like is an age-​graded feature or does it 
suggest that it is an incoming grammatical change in progress?
Answer at end of chapter
We will look at patterns of linguistic change in ­chapter 9 and consider how 
information about what different age groups are saying can provide clues to 
changes in progress. The discussion in this chapter shows that before studying 
patterns of change, it is important to know the normal distribution of stable 
forms through a community. Without this, it would be easy to make a wrong 
deduction. It would be possible, for instance, to interpret the pattern of lan-
guage use reported in Montreal as evidence of linguistic change in progress. We 
would project forward the monolingualism of the young and treat it as the in-​
coming pattern. We would then see the bilingualism of the middle-​aged group 
as likely to be displaced over time and predict a language shift to French, with 
Figure 7.6  Frequency of like across four age groups in Toronto
Source: Taken from Tagliamonte (2005).

GENDER AND AGE
251
loss of English. All this would be totally misleading in terms of what was really 
happening. In fact, the pattern of shift from monolingualism to bilingualism and 
back is one which is stable, and it simply repeats itself for different individuals 
over time.
This Montreal example also highlights the relationship between language 
and ethnicity which is so apparent in a community where a particular language 
is associated with a particular ethnic group. In the next chapter we will see 
that even in monolingual communities, ethnicity is often signalled by the way 
people speak.
Conclusion
The chapters in this section discuss what is generally regarded as the first wave 
of social dialect or variationist research. This approach correlates linguistic 
variables with macro-​level social categories such as social group, age, ethnicity 
and gender. The way each of these social categories is measured is to varying 
extents quite arbitrary. This is most obvious with social group or class, where 
measures are generally based on occupation, education and sometimes income 
levels or place of residence. The fact that different surveys use groupings of two, 
three or four categories clearly illustrates the arbitrariness of the divisions.
The distinctions between age groups are also arbitrary. So, for example: some 
surveys divide the community into adolescents vs. adults; others divide adults 
into groups of 20 years apart; and others distinguish between young, middle 
aged and elderly/​old. Ethnic group has sometimes been (often wrongly) assigned 
on the basis of skin colour or surname, and though more reliable surveys use 
self-​identification as the main criterion, both approaches are problematic when 
a person identifies with more than one ethnicity.
Finally, while most early social dialect surveys treat as unproblematic the 
assignation of participants to the categories female and male, gender has been 
recognised in more recent research as a contested category with permeable 
borders, as discussed in later chapters of this book, as well as in the Interlude 
which follows ­chapter 9.
Methods
Different methods to collect information and data on social dialects (remembering that the 
aim is to produce a relaxed environment for informal speech):
•	 A range of methods used to collect social dialect data is described at the end of ­chapter 6.
•	 Exercise 6 in this chapter suggests a way of practicing the skill of interviewing to collect 
good quality social dialect data. The appendix in this chapter provides suggestions for 
possible questions to encourage your interviewee to produce relaxed informal speech.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
252
•	 Exercise 10 suggests a means of eliciting data on vocabulary usage. Providing a written 
or spoken context for words helps people to think of the range they might use. Note 
that not everyone is a fluent reader, so it is important to be aware of this as a potential 
issue when collecting data from people you don’t know well. It is important to avoid 
embarrassing or upsetting anyone.
•	 Collecting data on features of pronunciation is easier than collecting data on grammat-
ical features or vocabulary because of the relative frequency with which instances of 
these features occur. It is impossible to avoid producing a large number of instances of 
the pronunciation of (th) for example because function words such as the, this and them 
are so frequent. To elicit a specific grammatical feature, you will need to devise a con-
text in which it is more likely to occur. The section on grammatical patterns in ­chapter 6 
identifies a number of such variables. As noted in ­example 18 in ­chapter 6, one way of 
eliciting past tense use is to ask people to recount the story of a film they have seen.
•	 The challenge of eliciting relaxed speech (another meaning of the vernacular) has led to 
innovations such as interviewing or recording people in small groups (as Jenny Cheshire 
did), though this raises problems of overlapping speech and distinguishing different 
voices. Another strategy is to use someone as similar to the interviewee as possible on 
social characteristics such as gender, age, ethnicity, and social background with the aim 
of reducing social distance. The next chapter includes research which has used these 
approaches.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 7
Answer to ­exercise 1
No. English pronouns do not reflect the gender of the speaker. The third person 
singular pronouns encode the gender of the referent, i.e. she vs. he, but all 
other pronouns can be used to refer to either gender. You might like to consider 
whether, and if so how, the pronouns used in other languages with which you 
are familiar encode gender.
Answer to ­exercise 2
In Sydney, as in all other English-​speaking communities where a social dialect 
survey has studied this feature, men drop more [h]‌s than women. The differences 
were not very great in Sydney, however: men dropped 16% in the interview con-
text, compared to women’s 5%. In the North of England [h]-​dropping is much 
more frequent. Hence Keith’s confusion in ­example 5. When asked to say her 
name on its own, Mrs Hall carefully pronounced the [h] at the beginning of Hall, 
though in other contexts she would omit it, as the boys in her class always did, 
and the girls usually did, when addressing her.
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
253
Answer to ­exercise 3
There is evidence that women use fewer instances than men of all the vernacular 
grammatical features discussed in the previous chapter. The pattern for multiple 
negation in Detroit is discussed in the next section. Similar patterns have been 
observed in other English-​speaking communities all over the world. The forms 
of present and past tense verbs, the use of past participles such as seen and done 
as past tense forms, and the use of ain’t are further grammatical variables which 
illustrate the same patterns. Further grammatical variables which are used differ-
ently by women and men are discussed in ­chapter 12.
Answer to ­exercise 6
As we will see in ­chapter 10, most people use more vernacular forms in more 
relaxed contexts. So if you were using English it is likely that you used more 
final [in] forms and dropped more [h]‌s in casual speech than in the interview 
situation.
Some possible answers to the other questions are discussed in the following 
section.
Answer to ­exercise 7
In societies where women do not have access to education and thus have restricted 
opportunities to acquire the standard variety, they do not use more standard 
forms than men. Similarly, in societies such as Saudi Arabia where women are 
confined to specific social contexts, they do not have the same opportunities or 
motivation as men to use standard forms.
Answer to ­exercise 12
Two possible interpretations of the data in table 7.1:
1	
The pronunciation of standard [t]‌ in medial and final position may be an 
age-​graded feature. As people approach middle age, their pronunciation 
of this sound may become more standard and less vernacular. This is a 
common pattern for a vernacular feature. If this were an accurate inter-
pretation of the data, one would predict that the percentage of vernacular 
forms would increase again in old age, so the incidence of vernacular 
forms for people of retirement age would be higher than for the 40–​60 
age group.
2	
Alternatively, the pronunciation of standard [t]‌ may be changing in New 
Zealand speech. If this is the case then the data suggests that the vernacular 
pronunciations (medial flap and glottal stop) are gradually displacing 
standard [t] in the speech of younger people. One would then predict that 
scores for those above 60 years of age would show a lower incidence of ver-
nacular forms than those for the 40–​60 age group.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
254
Answer to ­exercise 13
(a)	 The pattern of use for all three vernacular variants is similar in that they 
are most frequent in the usage of working-​class boys in all three towns. The 
pattern for middle-​class boys and girls is less clear-​cut, but middle-​class boys 
in Milton Keynes use more vernacular forms than middle-​class girls, which 
is not the case in the other towns.
(b)	 If (th)-​fronting is spreading north, we would expect it to be most frequent 
in Reading and Milton Keynes and least frequent in Hull, the northern-​most 
town. Though it is more frequent in middle class boys’ speech in Milton 
Keynes, this is clearly not the case overall. There are a number of possible 
explanations for this, one of which is that the change is too well-​established 
in working-​class speech for this data to show its progress northwards. Since 
vernacular changes tend to be established in working-​class speech before 
middle-​class speech, the fact that it is more evident in middle-​class boys’ 
speech in Milton Keynes than in middle-​class Hull speech supports the 
claim, but the Reading data does not.
Answer to ­exercise 14
The sudden increase in the use of like by 15–​16-​year-​olds and its dramatic 
reduction in the speech of 17–​19-​year-​olds supports the claim that like is an 
age-​graded feature (at least in Toronto English); i.e. a change that occurs at a 
particular point in a person’s life and then largely disappears. If instead like is a 
change in progress, we would expect it to continue to increase in frequency in 
the speech of young people as they grow older.
It has been suggested that like is a change in progress in other varieties of 
English, such as London English, but there is no published research on this yet. 
The relationship between age-​grading and change in progress is discussed fur-
ther in ­chapter 9.
Concepts introduced
•	Gender-​exclusive speech forms
•	Gender-​preferential features
•	Face
•	Gender and social group/​class
•	Age and social group/​class
•	Age grading
•	Language change
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
255
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Bodine (1975) on Chiquita(no); see also www.ethnologue.com
Bortoni-​Ricardo (1985) on Brasília
Bradley (2011) on Yanyuwa
Cheshire (1982a, 1982b) on Reading speech
Cheshire, Kerswill and Williams (2005) on (th)-​fronting in Milton Keynes
Coates and Cameron (1988) on explanation in social dialectology
Downes (1998) on age-​grading
Eckert and McConnell-​Ginet (2013): ­chapter 8 on Detroit adolescents’ speech
Eisikovits (1989b) on divergence from standard Australian English in adolescent 
boys’ speech
Fischer (1958) on in/​ing variation in children’s speech in New England
Gordon (1997) on New Zealand vernacular forms and the association with 
“loose morals”
Graddol and Swann (1989) on pitch ranges
Holmes, Bell and Boyce (1991) for New Zealand data on vernacular [in]   
usage
Horvath (1985) for Sydney data
Hui (1989) on New Zealand English
Labov (1972b: 264–​9) on the linguistic consequences of being a “lame”
Ladegaard and Bleses (2003) on gender differences in Danish children’s speech
Macauley (1977) on Glasgow speech
Milroy (1982) for Belfast data
Milroy (1989) for Newcastle data
Nichols (1983) on service occupations and speech
Romaine (1984) on Edinburgh children’s speech
Russell (1982) for Mombasa Swahili data
Shibamoto (1987) for Japanese data, updated by Kaya Oriyama and Andrew 
Barke (personal communication)
Shuy, Wolfram and Riley (1967) for Detroit data
Sorensen (1972) on Amazon Indians
Tagliamonte (2005) on like in Toronto
Thomas (1988) on Pont-​rhyd-​y-​fen speech
Trudgill (1992, 2009) especially data on Norwich
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
256
Quotations:
Example 3 is from Bradley (1988: 130)
Example 7 is adapted from Bassett, Sinclair and Stenson (1985: 67)
Example 9 is an edited excerpt from Cheshire (1989: 61)
Example 10 is from Macafee (1989: 194)
Example 13 is from Eisikovits (1989b: 43)
Example 14 was supplied by Paul Kerswill and Sue Fox from an interview 
regarding their social dialect data collected in London in the period between 
2004 and 2007
Graddol and Swann (1989: 57) on the topics used with women and men in 
social dialect surveys
Shuy (1969: 14): “. . . women continue to be one of the mysteries of the universe”
Trudgill (1983: 162): “. . . the single most consistent finding to emerge from 
sociolinguistic studies over the past 20 years”
Useful additional reading
Coates (2004)
Coates and Pichler (2011): part 1
Eckert (2012, 2018)
Eckert and McConnell-​Ginet (2013)
Fasold (1990): ­chapter 4
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapters 2 and 3
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 10
Meyerhoff, Schleef and Mackenzie (2015): ­chapters 5 and 6
Romaine (2000): ­chapter 4
SturtzSreetharan (2017) on indexing masculinity
Tagliamonte (2012)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 7
Appendix
Here are some questions which you could use to collect data in an informal 
interview.
(a)	What do you like doing best in your spare time?
(b)	 What did you do last weekend?
(c)	 Do you play any sport or get any regular exercise?
(d)	 Have you ever seen a fight around here? What happened?
(e)	 Do you remember your first day at school? How did you get there? What 
was it like?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GENDER AND AGE
257
(f)	 What’s the worst experience you’ve ever had at school –​ a really awful day 
or a day when something really horrible happened?
(g)	 What do you think of the standard of driving round here?
(h)	 Do you think old/​young people are better drivers? Why?
(i)	 Have you ever seen a bad accident around here? What happened?
(j)	 What does your family do at Christmas?
(k)	 What did you do on Christmas Day last year?

258
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-10
When people belong to the same group, they often speak similarly. But there 
are many different groups in a community, and so any individual may share lin-
guistic features with a range of other speakers. Some features index a person’s 
social status, as we saw in ­chapter 6; and others may vary in frequency in the 
speech of women and men, or identify a person as a teenager rather than a 
middle-​aged citizen, as illustrated in ­chapter 7. There are also linguistic clues to 
a person’s ethnicity, and closely related to all these are linguistic features which 
are responsive to social pressure from those we interact with most frequently; 
people in our social networks. Individuals draw on all these resources when they 
construct their social identities. This chapter illustrates the relevance of ethnicity 
and social networks in accounting for people’s speech patterns, as well as briefly 
introducing a related concept, the community of practice.
Ethnicity
Example 1
When I was in Montreal I found a small restaurant in the old French quarter where the menu 
looked affordable and attractive. I was greeted in French by the waiter and I responded 
in French, though my accent clearly signalled that English was my first language. At this 
point, the waiter, who was undoubtedly bilingual, had a choice. He chose to continue in 
French and, though I cannot be sure of his reasons, I interpreted this choice as expressing 
his wish to be identified as a French Canadian. In any case, I was very happy that my French 
had not been so awful that he felt he had to switch to English.
Many ethnic groups use a distinctive language associated with their ethnic iden-
tity, as demonstrated in the examples discussed in the first section of this book, 
as well as in ­example 1 above. Where a choice of language is available for com-
munication, it is often possible for an individual to signal their ethnicity by the 
language they choose to use. Even when a complete conversation in an ethnic 
Ethnicity and social networks
8
 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
259
language is not possible, people may use short phrases, verbal fillers or linguistic 
tags, which signal ethnicity. So interactions which appear to be in English, for 
example, may incorporate linguistic signals of the speakers’ ethnic identity, as 
illustrated in ­example 2.
Example 2
[The Māori is in italics. the translation is in small capitals.]
Lee:	
Kia ora [hello] June. Where you been? Not seen you round for 
a while.
June:	
Kia ora [hello]. I’ve just come back from my Nanny’s tangi 
[funeral]. Been up in Rotorua for a week.
Lee:	
E kī [is that so!] a sad time for you, e hoa [my friend] and for 
all your family, ne [isn’t it].
June:	
Ae [yes]. We’ll all miss Nanny. She was a wonderful woman.
In New Zealand many Māori people routinely use Māori greetings such as 
kia ora, and a conversation between two Māori people may include emphatic 
phrases, such as e kī, softening tags such as ne, and responses such as ae, even 
when neither speaks the Māori language fluently. Bargaining with Chinese 
retailers in the shopping centres, Chinese Singaporeans similarly often signal 
their ethnic background with linguistic tags, such as the untranslatable but 
expressive la, and phrases or words from their ethnic language. Emphasising 
common ethnicity may mean they get a better bargain!
Exercise 1
Consider the following utterances. Can you identify any of the linguistic clues to the 
speaker’s ethnicity?
(a)	
Yo mama so bowlegged, she looks like the bite out of a donut.
(b)	
Ah cannae mind the place they bairns are fae.
(c)	
Dem want me figo up dere go tell dem.
(d)	
Kia ora Hemi. Time to broom the floor eh.
(e)	
Already you’re discouraged! Goyim like bagels so why not this.
(f)	
My brother really hungry la. Let’s go for makan.
Answers at end of chapter
As we saw in ­chapter 3, when a group adopts (willingly or perforce) the dom-
inant language of the society, an important symbol of their distinct ethnicity –​ their 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
260
language –​ often disappears. Italians in Sydney and New York, African Americans 
and Hispanics in Chicago, and Indians, Pakistanis and Jamaicans in London are 
in this situation. For different reasons, so are most Scots, Irish and Welsh people 
in Britain, Aboriginal people in Australia, and Māori people in New Zealand. 
Ethnic groups often respond to this situation by using the majority language 
in a way which signals and actively constructs their ethnic identity. For groups 
where there are no identifying physical features to distinguish them from others 
in the society, these distinctive linguistic features may be an important remaining 
symbol of ethnicity once their ethnic language has disappeared. Food, religion, 
dress and a distinctive speech style are all ways that ethnic minorities may use to 
construct an ethnic identity which distinguishes them from the majority group.
Italians in Boston use a particularly high percentage of vernacular 
pronunciations of certain vowels, such as the vowel in words like short and 
horse. Similarly, both first-​ and second-​generation Italians in Sydney are distin-
guishable in different ways by their pronunciation of Australian English vowels. 
In New Zealand, as elsewhere in the world, Scots people tend to retain features 
of their Scottish English. The pronunciation of [r]‌ in words like part and star is 
widely noted as an indicator of Scottish ethnicity. American Jewish people often 
signal their ethnicity with a distinctive accent of English within any city in which 
they have settled. Studies of Jewish people in Boston and New York have iden-
tified distinctive pronunciations of some vowels. Jewish Americans also use eth-
nically marked linguistic tags such as oy vay, and occasional Yiddish vocabulary 
items, many of which, such as schmaltz, bagel, glitch and shlemiel, have passed 
into general American English.
African American Language (AAL)
Example 3
Jo:	 This ain’ that ba’, bu’ look at your hands. It ain’t get on you either. 
Asle, look at mine. This all my clay . . . In your ear wi’ Rosie Greer . 
. . I ain’ gone do that one . . . Did you hear about the fire at the shoe 
store? It wan’t a soul lef’.
In the USA, though their distinct languages disappeared centuries ago, African 
Americans do not need a distinct variety or code as a symbolic way of dif-
ferentiating themselves from the majority group. They are visibly different. 
Nevertheless, this group has developed a distinct variety of English known earlier 
as African American Vernacular English (AAVE), but more recently labelled 
African American Language (AAL) or African American English (AAE). This 
dialect has a number of features which do not occur in standard Mainstream 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
261
White American English, and others which occur very much less frequently in 
the standard variety. These linguistic differences act as symbols of ethnicity. They 
express the sense of cultural distinctiveness of many African Americans.
AAL is heard especially in the northern cities of the USA. One of its most dis-
tinctive features is the complete absence of the copula verb be in some social and 
linguistic contexts. In most speech contexts, speakers of standard English use 
shortened or reduced forms of the verb be. In other words, people do not usually 
say She is very nice but rather She’s very nice. They reduce or contract the is to 
s. In the same kinds of context, speakers of AAL omit the verb be, as illustrated 
in ­example 4.
Example 4
African American Language
American standard English
She very nice.
She’s very nice.
He a teacher.
He’s a teacher.
That my book.
That’s my book.
The beer warm.
The beer’s warm.
In recordings of Detroit speech, for instance, white Americans never omitted 
the copula verb be, whereas African Americans –​ especially those from the lower 
socioeconomic groups –​ regularly did.
Another distinctive grammatical feature of AAL is the use of invariant be to 
signal recurring or repeated actions, as in ­example 5.
Example 5
African American Language
American standard English
She be at school on weekdays.
She’s always at school on weekdays.
The children do be messin’ 
around a lot.
The children do mess around a lot.
I run when I bees on my way to 
school.
I always run when I’m on my way to 
school.
The beer be warm at that place.
The beer’s always warm at that place.
Clearly the grammar of AAL has some features which simply do not occur  
in the grammar of white Americans. However, there are many features of the  
English used by lower socioeconomic groups in the USA which also occur in  
AAL. Most AAL speakers simply use these features more frequently than most  
white Americans. Multiple negation was identified in ­chapter 6, for instance, as  
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
262
a feature of the English of many lower socioeconomic groups. It is also a feature  
of AAL, as ­figure 8.1 illustrates. In every social group interviewed in Detroit,  
African Americans used more multiple negation than white Americans.
Consonant cluster simplification is another feature which distinguishes the 
speech of white and African Americans. All English speakers simplify consonant 
clusters in some contexts. It would sound very formal, for instance, in a phrase 
such as last time to pronounce both [t]‌s distinctly. Most people drop the first [t] 
so the consonant cluster [st] at the end of last becomes simply [s]. AAL speakers 
also simplify the consonant clusters at the ends of words, but they do so much 
more frequently and extensively than speakers of standard and regional dialects 
of English.
AAL is different from the English of white Americans, then, in a number of 
ways. There are features which clearly distinguish the two dialects, such as the 
omission of the verb be and distinct meanings of be, as illustrated in ­example 5. 
And there are other features, such as multiple negation and consonant cluster 
simplification, where AAL uses higher frequencies than are found in the English 
of most white Americans.
It shouldn’t be thought, however, that all African Americans use AAL, nor do 
all AAL speakers use it all of the time. As with all language users, AAL is often 
just one of the codes in the sociolinguistic repertoire from which they select 
according to context. The choice of code carries important information about 
the social identity a speaker is performing, and ethnic or racial identity can inter-
sect with social class and gender to provide a range of different styles of speaking 
Figure 8.1  Multiple negation in Black and white Detroit speech
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Shuy, Wolfram and Riley (1967).
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
263
the same code. This is particularly relevant when individuals identify with mul-
tiple ethnic or racial backgrounds, and is one of the interesting ways in which 
research on language, race and ethnicity is changing. Rather than categorising 
speakers based on external judgements of race, as was the case in early studies 
on AAL, more recent research asks participants to self-​identify their race or eth-
nicity. However, using this approach, it is much harder to identify a speech com-
munity in the traditional sense.
This is shown in recent research by the sociolinguist Nicole Holliday, who 
analysed the different speaking styles of US Vice-​President Kamala Harris, the 
first Black female Vice-​President. Holliday found that VP Harris uses some 
features of AAL, but not others, simultaneously constructing an identity along 
race, class, gender and regional lines.
Exercise 2
(a)	
Using ­figure 8.1 as data, what is the relationship between ethnicity and social class 
in relation to the vernacular features of speech?
(b)	
Identify the features of the following passage which distinguish it from standard 
English. These are all features of AAL, though some also occur in other vernacular 
varieties.
It’s a girl name Shirley Jones live in Washington. ’Most everybody on her street like 
her, ’cause she a nice girl. Shirley like a boy name Charles. But she keep away from 
him and Charles don’t hardly say nothing to her neither.
(c)	
In the following sentences, what is the rule for the occurrence of be? [Note: 
* =​ ungrammatical utterance.]
1	
They usually be tired when they come home.
2	
* They be tired right now.
3	
James always be coming to school.
4	
* James be coming to school right now.
5	
Sometimes my ears be itching.
6	
* My ankle be broken from the fall.
		
Which of these is grammatical in this dialect?
7	
Linguists always be asking silly questions about language.
8	
The students don’t be talking right now.
Answers at end of chapter
Black British English
In Britain, the way different ethnic minorities speak English is often equally 
distinctive. The English of those who speak minority languages such as 
Gujarati, Panjabi and Turkish generally signals their ethnic background. And 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
264
people of West Indian or African Caribbean origin use a range of varieties, 
depending on where they live in England, and how long their families have 
lived in Britain. Those born in Britain are usually described as members of 
the Black British community and some speak a variety of Jamaican Creole as 
well as a variety of English. Others speak a range of varieties of English with 
different frequencies of creole features depending on the social context and 
who they are talking to.
The variety of Jamaican Creole still used by some Black British people is 
known as Patois or British Jamaican Creole. London Jamaican, for instance, 
is the London variety of Patois. It derives from Jamaican Creole, but it has a 
number of features which distinguish it from the Jamaican variety.
Example 6
Polly is a young Black British teenager who lives in the West Midlands. Her 
parents came to Britain from Jamaica in 1963 looking for jobs. Though 
Polly’s mother had a good education in Jamaica, the only work she was 
able to find in Dudley was cleaning offices at night. Polly’s father used to 
work in a factory, but he was laid off and has been unemployed for nearly 
two years now. They live in a predominantly Black neighbourhood and 
almost all of Polly’s friends are young Black people. She and her parents 
attend the local Pentecostal church. Her older brother used to attend too, 
but he has stopped since he left school.
Polly’s verbal repertoire includes: standard English spoken with a West 
Midlands accent; an informal variety of English with some Patois features, 
which could be described as Midlands Black English; and Patois, the var-
iety of Jamaican Creole used by Black people in Dudley in the 1980s, which 
was described in ­chapter 2. Polly’s patterns of language use are not simple. 
While her parents use Patois or British Jamaican Creole to her and her brother, 
she is expected to use English in response. At home she uses Black Midlands 
English, but she uses a more standard variety to her teachers at the college 
where she is doing a hairdressing course. With some friends she uses a variety 
called “chatting Patois” which has a small number of creole features. With other 
friends who like her can speak Patois, she uses full-​blown Patois. In most shops, 
she uses standard English with the local accent, unless she knows the young 
Black person behind the counter, in which case she might use Black Midlands 
English.
Polly’s ethnicity is signalled not so much by her knowledge of any particular 
variety, but by the way she uses the varieties in her linguistic repertoire. Some 
young Black British people use Patois for in-​group talk as a symbol of their eth-
nicity, but not all are proficient users. In contexts where Patois is appropriate, 
those who do not know much Patois use a variety of English which is clearly 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
265
marked as Black by the fact that it incorporates some Patois or creole features. 
The use of Patois, as well as the use of Patois features in informal varieties of 
English, obviously has an important symbolic function. These varieties signal a 
person’s ethnicity as Black British. Between Polly and her Black friends, Patois 
signals friendship or solidarity. It indicates that they belong together as a group 
of young Black British people. Someone who used standard English in this group 
when they were talking in the cafeteria between lessons, for example, would be 
labelled “prissy” or “snobby”.
There are a number of linguistic features which characterise Patois. It is a 
creole and as such it is quite distinct from standard English. There are lexical 
items such as lick meaning hit and kenge meaning weak, puny. There are many 
features of pronunciation, including stress and intonation patterns, which differ 
from those of standard English. The vowel sound in a word like home is some-
times pronounced as in Jamaican Creole, rather than as in the local variety of 
English. Words like then and thin are pronounced [den] and [tin]. Plural forms 
don’t have s on the end. Tenses aren’t marked by suffixes on verbs, so forms like 
walk and jump are used rather than walked, walks, jumped and jumps. The form 
mi is used for I, me and my (e.g. mi niem for my name) and the form dem is used 
for they, them and their (e.g. dem niem). Not surprisingly, given the patterns we 
have found elsewhere, some speakers use more of these features than others. 
Black Midlands English uses some of these features too, together with a distinct-
ively Midlands accent of English.
There are a number of regional varieties of Black British English, such as 
Polly’s Midlands variety and a London variety, as well as regional varieties of 
Patois, though many of them have not yet been described. The function of these 
varieties as symbols of ethnicity and Black identity among Black British people 
is quite clear, however. They could even be regarded as examples of “anti-​lan-
guage”, a term which has been used to signal their function of expressing oppos-
ition to the mainstream values of white British society which exclude Black 
people and their culture.
Exercise 3
Teachers have reported that some children who show no sign of Patois features in their 
speech during their early years at school, start using noticeably Black speech during ado-
lescence. Why do you think this might happen?
Answer at end of chapter
In the early twenty-​first century, social dialect researchers in ethnically  
diverse areas of inner-​city London, such as Hackney, identified a relatively  
new ethnic speech variety used by local young people. It has been labelled  
Multicultural London English (MLE) (or sometimes disparagingly Jafaican)  
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
266
because it is used by adolescents from a range of ethnic backgrounds, including  
Jamaican, African and Asian backgrounds, often described with the acronym  
BAME (Black Asian and Minority Ethnic). As well as using monophthongs  
where other varieties use diphthongs (e.g. [fe:s] for face and [go:] for go), these  
teenagers have developed a distinctive vocabulary. They call their friends [blud]  
blood rather than mate, nang is their word for good, buff means attractive,  
while butters means ugly. In MLE, a house is referred to as a yard, nuff means  
very and trainers are creps. People are referred to as mandem (as in ­chapter 7,  
­example 14).
The researchers believe that the new variety has developed as a result of 
high levels of immigration in the inner-​city area along with the typical desire 
of young people to distinguish themselves from other groups, and develop a 
Map 8.1  The Greater London Boroughs and West Midlands counties
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
267
distinctive identity. The more ethnically diverse a young person’s friendship 
networks are, the more likely they are to use MLE. Though it is strongly 
associated with Black British teenagers, it is in fact used much more widely 
and it is rapidly spreading.
Ma—ori English
Example 7
An’ den an old ant came –​ there was a old kuia. She went and walk to de 
ant’s house. An’ den she went and knock at the window. An’ den de ant 
started to open his window. An’ den he’s told the old kuia to go back. An’ 
den de old kuia was talking. An’ den de old kuia went and walk back.
In New Zealand there has been considerable discussion about whether a Māori 
dialect of English exists. Many people assert firmly that there is such a variety, 
but there is little evidence so far of linguistic features which occur only in the 
speech of Māori people. The alternation between [d]‌ and [ð] at the beginning 
of words like the and then, which is indicated in ­example 7, for instance, is 
by no means confined to the speech of Māori people. Greetings like kia ora 
and vocabulary items like tangi (funeral), illustrated in ­example 2, are used by 
Pākehā (New Zealanders of European origin) as well as Māori in New Zealand. 
However, in general, Māori people use Māori words more frequently in their 
speech than Pākehā people. The word kuia in ­example 7 illustrates this. Kuia 
is a Māori word meaning old woman, which is widely known in New Zealand. 
Nevertheless, its occurrence in the child’s story suggests the speaker is more 
likely to be Māori than Pākehā.
There are also grammatical features which occur more frequently in Māori 
English. In a study of eight-​year-​old children’s speech, vernacular verb forms 
(such as walk for walked) occurred more often in the speech of the Māori chil-
dren than the Pākehā. There were also some distinctive uses of verbs, such as 
went and, which seemed to be used as a narrative past tense marker by the 
Māori children, as illustrated in ­example 7.
A comparison of the speech of a small group of New Zealand women also 
found that the Māori women were more likely to use vernacular past tense forms 
of some verbs, as illustrated in sentences (a) and (b) in ­example 8. Moreover, 
Māori women were more likely than Pākehā to use present tense forms with s as 
in (c) and (d), and much more likely to omit have, as in (e) and (f).
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
268
Example 8
(a)	
She seen it happen and she stopped and picked Jo up off the 
bloody road.
(b)	 Well next I rung up the police.
(c)	
I says you wanna bet.
(d)	 So I gets home and I waited a couple of weeks.
(e)	
Yeah well you * seen him dancing eh so you understand.
(f)	
See I * been through all that rigmarole before.
Note: * indicates where have/​had has been omitted.
Exercise 4
Identify the clues in the following excerpt of transcribed speech which suggest that the 
speaker is Māori.
He’s a hell of a good teacher and everything eh. And um I sit in with him sometimes, and 
’cause all of a sudden he’ll come out speaking Pākehā you know, just it was only, it was 
only a sentence that he’ll speak, you know, one line of it, and the rest is just Māori eh.
Answer at end of chapter
New Englishes
It would be possible to consider African American English, Black British English 
and Māori English as examples of “new” varieties of English, compared to older, 
well-​established varieties such as British standard English and American standard 
English. However, the term New Englishes is most often used to describe var-
ieties which have developed in post-​colonial societies where the colonial powers 
have been displaced, but the legacy of English remains. Some examples were 
discussed in ­chapter 4 under the heading “World Englishes”. Fiji English, Hong 
Kong English, Singapore English, Indian English and the English used in the 
Philippines are typical examples of New Englishes.
It has been suggested that these varieties represent different stages along a tra-
jectory towards the development of a distinct local variety which symbolises the 
identity of each particular group of speakers. In other words, English undergoes 
re-​colonisation in order to express the identities of the local peoples in different 
communities. Using this framework, New Zealand English, Australian English 
and South African English are well-​developed examples, with distinctive lexis, 
grammatical patterns and phonological features, as well as established literatures 
in each of these varieties. Young people who use New Zealand English no longer 
think of their language as a variety of British English.
 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
269
Another view makes a sharp distinction between “settlement” colonies like 
Australia and New Zealand, where English has always been the first language of 
the majority group, and “exploitation” colonies such as Hong Kong and Singapore, 
India, Kenya and Tanzania, where multilingualism is the norm, and English has 
been adopted primarily for administrative convenience. In these countries, English 
was not initially taught by “settlers” to new generations of local people, and the var-
ieties of English which have developed are typically influenced by local languages 
spoken in the region, e.g. Hokkien Chinese, Malay and Tamil in Singapore.
As English continues to grow in terms of its utility as a lingua franca in multi-
lingual countries and at the international level, it is increasingly being adopted 
as a medium of education in many countries, especially at secondary and tertiary 
level. As a result, some varieties of the New Englishes, such as Singapore English, 
are now used in the home, and these are steadily moving into the position of 
“native-​speaker” or first language varieties of English with quite distinctive local 
features, as illustrated in the discussion of Singlish in ­chapter 4.
Overall, however, the value of the term New Englishes is still being debated, 
and it will be some time before any agreement is reached about whether it is 
useful, and if so, which varieties should be included as examples.
Exercise 5
Discuss with your fellow students where you think American standard English (also called 
Mainstream White American English) fits into an analysis which distinguishes settler col-
onies from exploitation colonies.
Source: ©2016 Keely Kidner, reproduced by kind permission.
Ethnolects in languages other than English
English is not the only language in which ethnolects form, although it seems 
to be the most widely documented. (Note that this highlights an Anglo-​centric 
problem in sociolinguistics itself, in that the research literature is dominated by 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
270
studies of English). We see the same thing happening in many large multicultural 
cities as described above for MLE, particularly in cities that have experienced 
inward migration.
An example of this can be found in Germany, which experienced a large influx 
of migrant workers in the mid-​twentieth century. Many of these workers, or 
Gastarbeiter, came to Germany from Turkey and then had families in Germany. 
The second language (L2) variety of German that they spoke became known as 
Gastarbeiterdeutsch. Subsequent generations of this community have developed 
the variety, and it has come to be associated with a migrant background iden-
tity. It has been referred to as Kiezdeutsch, Kanaksprak, Türkendeutsch or 
Türkenslang. Similar to MLE, Kiezdeutsch has been taken up beyond its ori-
ginal ethnic speech community and is now used by a range of ethnic groups in 
Germany, but predominantly by male adolescents. Example 9 shows some of the 
features of Kiezdeutsch: such as the use of [ʃ] where Standard German has [ç], as 
in ich (I), the use of Turkish words such as lan (man), and grammatical features 
such as zero-​copula.
Example 9
(a)
Isch
will
mit
dir
spielen
lan
I
want
with
you
play
man
I want to play with you, man!
(b)
München
weit
weg,
oider
Munich
far
away
man
Munich is far, man.
Exercise 6
Many languages have codes that signal ethnic identity in some way. Often this is remarked 
upon negatively, and speakers are often disempowered as a result. You might also have 
noticed that there are a range of different names for some ethnolects. This has certainly 
been the case with Kiezdeutsch, MLE, and AAL. See if you can find a media article that 
discusses an ethnolect of the majority language where you live. What ideologies does this 
reveal about ethnolects?
(The relationship between language attitudes and ideologies is discussed in ­chapter 15.)
This chapter has focused on features of people’s language which may signal 
and contribute to the dynamic construction of ethnic identity. And people from 
different ethnic groups often use language differently too. Particular groups 
develop ways of speaking which are distinctive to their culture. The fast rep-
artee known as soundin’, for example, is a distinctive use of language by African 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
271
American gang members, as is the ritual insult illustrated above by utterance 
(a) in ­exercise 1. In New Zealand, the greeting routines exchanged between 
Māori people, even in informal contexts, are similarly distinctive. And in more 
formal Māori contexts, the rules for greeting people are very different from those 
used in Pākehā formal meetings, as we will see in ­chapter 11. Even patterns of 
pausing, silence and conversational feedback may differ between ethnic groups, 
and this can sometimes result in misunderstandings. If you expect your inter-
locutor to give frequent signals that they are listening and interested (e.g. mm, 
yeah), then the absence of feedback can be disconcerting.
In everyday interaction, speech differences may also be an indication of people’s 
social networks, a concept which has proved extremely valuable in accounting 
for some speech patterns. Social networks move the focus from social features of 
the speaker alone, such as status, gender, age and ethnicity, to characteristics of 
the interaction between people.
Social networks
Example 10
Tom lives in Ballymacarrett, a Protestant area east of the River Lagan in 
Belfast. He is 18 years old and works as an apprentice in the shipyard. He 
got the job through his uncle Bob who works at the shipyard, and he has 
a cousin Mike, who works there too. He and Mike live in the same street 
and most nights they have a beer together after work. They also run a disco 
with two friends, Jo and Gerry, and that means that several nights a week 
they travel across town to perform at different venues.
The way Tom and his cousin speak indicates that they belong to a small close-​
knit working-​class community. The men they work with and mix with out-
side work are also their relations and neighbours, and they all speak alike. The 
patterns noted in the previous chapters suggest that, as members of the working 
class, they are likely to use more vernacular forms than other social groups. And 
they do. Tom and his mates use a high number of vernacular speech forms.
They frequently delete the th [ð] in mother and brother, for example, and  
pronounce man as [mo:n] and map as [ma:p]. By contrast, people in Tom’s com-
munity who are not so much a part of the kinship, neighbourhood and work  
networks –​ who are more marginal –​ tend to speak less “broadly” (i.e. with less  
distinctively Belfast pronunciations). Sandy, for instance, a man who lives on the  
edge of Ballymacarrett, works for the civil service. He comes from the Republic  
of Ireland and doesn’t have any family in Belfast. He sees people like Tom only  
occasionally in the pub. He is not really a part of the close-​knit Ballymacarrett  
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
272
male network, and his speech reflects this. He uses far fewer vernacular forms  
than Tom and Mike.
Figure 8.2 provides a visual representation of Tom’s social network as 
described by Lesley Milroy who undertook the Belfast research. Networks in 
sociolinguistics refer to the pattern of informal relationships people are involved 
in on a regular basis. There are two technical terms which have proved very 
useful for describing different types of networks –​ density and plexity. Network 
density refers to whether members of a person’s network are in touch with each 
other. Do your friends know each other independently of you? If so, your net-
work is a dense one. Tom’s friends and relations know and interact regularly 
with each other, as well as with him. He clearly belongs to a dense network. This 
is indicated by the various connections between Mike and Tom and Uncle Bob 
in ­figure 8.2.
Network plexity is a measure of the range of different types of transaction  
people are involved in with different individuals. A uniplex network or relation-
ship is one where the link with the other person is in only one area. You could  
be linked to someone else only because you work together, for example, or you  
might only play badminton or football together, and never meet in any other con-
text. If most transactions in a community are of this type, the network would be  
characterised as uniplex. Multiplex networks, by contrast, involve interactions  
with others along several dimensions. A workmate might also be someone you  
Map 8.2  Belfast
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
273
play tennis with and meet at church regularly. If most transactions in a commu-
nity are of this type, the network would be considered multiplex. Tom’s network  
is multiplex since the people he works with are also his pub-​mates, his relations  
and his neighbours.
It is not surprising that people’s speech should indicate the types of networks 
they belong to. The people we interact with are one important influence on 
our speech. When the people we mix with regularly belong to a homogeneous 
group, we tend to speak the way the rest of the group does, provided we want 
to belong to the group and like the people in it. (This point is developed fur-
ther in ­chapter 10 in the section on accommodation theory.) Parents notice this 
when their children’s speech begins to resemble the speech of the other kids at 
kindergarten and school rather than that of the family. Those children in the 
new town of Milton Keynes in England who had the strongest school-​based 
networks were using the most innovative features of the new variety (or koine) 
that was developing in the town. Their pronunciations of some sounds were 
quite different from their parents.
Adolescent gangs typically have quite distinctive ways of talking which signal 
their gang membership. In New York, for instance, a study of the speech of 
African American male gang members showed that the more involved a boy was 
with the gang, the more vernacular speech forms he used. Boys on the periphery 
of the gangs used more standard forms than those who were more central or 
core members. In Britain, too, the speech of young Black people indicates the 
extent to which they mix with other Black people or with non-​Black people in 
their work and play.
When adults belong to more than one network, they may signal this by uncon-
sciously altering their speech forms as they move from one context to another. 
A student, for example, may find she uses more standard forms with her friends 
at university, and more local, vernacular forms when she goes home to the small 
town or village where her family lives.
Figure 8.2  An example of a social network
Source: This diagram was constructed from data based on a similar one in Milroy (1987: 71).
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
274
Exercise 7
Using ­figure 8.2 as a model, draw a network for yourself based on your interactions on an 
average weekday or a weekend. Identify the three people you talk to most. Link them to 
yourself by lines on the diagram. Then if those people know each other join up the lines as 
appropriate. Then think who are the three people that each of them talk to most. Do they 
know each other? If so link them up –​ and so on.
Do you think your social network would provide any clues to the way you speak? Would 
it identify the people whose speech your speech most resembles? If not, what would pro-
vide a more accurate indication of the influences on your speech?
A study which examined language shift in Oberwart, an Austrian town on the 
Austrian–​Hungarian border, made good use of the concept of social networks. 
Susan Gal noted who talked to whom over a set period of time. The patterns of 
social interaction which emerged accounted for people’s language preferences. 
Some people in the Oberwart area worked in the fields and kept farm animals 
as their parents had before them –​ they continued to cling to a peasant way of 
life. Others worked in the industries which had become established in the town. 
Those people who interacted more with peasants were more likely to prefer 
Hungarian as their primary language, while those who had more contacts with 
people involved in industrial jobs tended to prefer German.
In Brazil, a similar pattern was found in the speech of rural Brazilian people 
who had moved to the city of Brasília. People who adapted to the city, and took 
advantage of what it offered, developed a wide range of relationships and tended 
to use more standard forms of Portuguese, while those who kept themselves to 
themselves, interacting mainly with kinfolk and friends from the country, tended 
to retain their vernacular rural accents.
In Ballymacarrett, the working-​class area of Belfast referred to in ­example 10, 
the women’s networks are more open than the men’s. The men, like Tom, work 
in the local shipyard with their relations, their neighbours and their mates. Their 
networks are dense. Young Ballymacarrett women work on the far side of the 
city where they have found better-​paid jobs. The people they work with are not 
their neighbours or relations, and so they are mixing with a more diverse group 
of people than their menfolk. These women’s networks are therefore less dense 
and less closed than the men’s, and correspondingly their speech has fewer ver-
nacular forms.
By contrast, in the Clonard, another area of Belfast, the men’s traditional 
source of employment –​ the linen industry –​ has disappeared, but the women 
have sought and found work together. Their networks therefore resemble those 
of the men in Ballymacarrett –​ they are dense and multiplex or closely-​knit, and 
this too is indicated by the women’s high use of vernacular speech forms. In 
Belfast, then, male and female speech differences are best explained in terms of 
the type of networks women and men belong to.
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
275
Example 11
Mary is a teenage girl who lives in a working-​class African American com-
munity on an island in the Waccamaw river in South Carolina. Most of the 
men work at construction jobs on the mainland to which they commute 
daily across the river. The women work in the seasonal tourist industry on 
the mainland as servants or clerks. No-​one in Mary’s community is very 
well off. She has seven brothers and sisters. Like everyone else on the island, 
Mary’s family own a small motor-​boat which her mother and father use to 
travel to the mainland for work each day. She goes to school on the school-​
boat, and, like almost all her island friends, she qualifies for a free lunch.
In her class at school she meets Tracy, who comes from the mainland 
white community up the river. Tracy has three younger brothers and her 
mother doesn’t have a paid job. She stays home and looks after the boys and 
the house. Tracy’s grandad was a cotton farmer and her dad had expected 
to carry on working the farm, but the cotton farming business went bust 
and they had to sell the farm, like most others in the area. So her father 
works as a supervisor at one of the hotels in the tourist area. They aren’t 
rich, but they’re a bit better off than Mary’s family. They have a reliable car 
and they can afford regular holidays.
If we examine the speech of Mary’s parents and Tracy’s parents in an interview 
with a white teacher visiting the community, we find some interesting patterns. 
There are differences between the women’s and the men’s speech. There are also 
differences between the speech of the African American parents and the white 
parents. But not the differences you might predict without thinking a little about 
their social networks. Tracy’s father’s speech is much closer to Mary’s mother’s 
speech than it is to Tracy’s mother’s speech. Both Tracy’s dad and Mary’s mum 
use more standard forms than their spouses. Mary’s dad uses a great many creole 
forms, while Tracy’s mother uses local vernacular dialect forms.
The patterns in these communities are best explained not by gender or by 
ethnicity, but by the interactive networks the two sets of parents are involved in. 
African American women interact in their daily work with tourists and middle-​
class Americans who use high frequencies of standard English forms. White 
men and young white women similarly work in service industries, interacting 
not with members of their own community but with strangers and outsiders. 
Their networks are neither dense nor multiplex. The people they work with are 
different from the people they live with and “play” with. Their speech is corres-
pondingly more standard, and they use fewer vernacular or creole forms than 
the white middle-​aged women and the African American men.
Many white middle-​aged women, on the other hand, work as housewives 
in their own communities, and they interact with each other regularly at the 
shops, for coffee, on the phone and in shared community and childcare activities. 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
276
African American men also interact with each other in their work on construc-
tion sites. Both these groups have much denser and more multiplex networks 
than the white men, the young white women, and the African American women. 
Like the Ballymacarrett men and Clonard women, they use more vernacular and 
fewer standard forms.
This example draws together a range of the social factors covered in this 
section of the book. The social class background, gender, age and ethnicity of the 
speakers are all relevant, but the example also clearly illustrates the overriding 
influence which social interaction plays in accounting for patterns of speech. 
Who we talk and listen to regularly is a very important influence on the way we 
speak, a point which will be pursued further in ­chapter 10. It is also illustrated 
in the final social concept to be considered in this chapter, the community of 
practice.
Communities of practice and the construction of social 
identity
Example 12
Jo:	 OK, us, you know, like the burnout . . . the burnout chicks, they sit 
over here, you know, and like jocky chicks stand right here . . . And 
then there’s like um the guys, you know, you know, like weirdos that 
think they’re cool. They just stand like on the steps, and hang out at 
that little heater . . . And then the poins are inside in the cafeteria, 
because they’re probably afraid to come out into the courtyard.
Jo, an American high school girl, is describing the social organisation of space 
in the school courtyard. In the process, she positions her own group, the female 
Burnouts, in relation to other groups in the school. Penelope Eckert, a socio-
linguist who spent many months at this American high school, uses the term 
community of practice to capture the complexities of what it means to belong 
to a social group like the Burnouts, and how this approach enabled her to study 
vowel change in progress. The Burnouts are mainly, but not exclusively, from 
low-​income families. They socialise in the local urban neighbourhood and their 
friendships extend beyond the school. They reject school values and they are 
aiming to join the workforce immediately on leaving school. Their behaviour, both 
linguistic (see ­figure 8.3), and nonlinguistic (eg. clothes, smoking, truanting, and 
playground space occupied), distinguishes them clearly from the Jocks, a much 
more conformist group who largely accept school values and are heading for 
college. Groups like these exist in every school community, though the names are 
different –​ nerds, bums, greasers, hoods, cholos, gangsters, drop-​outs and so on.
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
277
Exercise 8
What do the different proportions of negative concord (or ‘multiple negation’) evident in 
­figure 8.3 suggest about the relationship between Jocks and Burnouts and between girls 
and boys?
Answer at end of chapter
The concept of community of practice has been adopted by some sociolinguists 
to permit a focus on social categories like these which make more sense to 
participants than abstract categories such as class and gender. Communities of 
practice develop around the activities which group members engage in together, 
and their shared goals and attitudes. We all belong to many communities of 
practice which share particular goals and ways of interacting –​ family, sports 
team, work group, hiking group, drama club, church choir and so on. Some may 
be relatively long term; others, such as a group organising a party, a dance, a 
school fair or a conference, will be more temporary.
This social constructionism approach highlights the extent to which we use 
language to construct different identities in different social interactions. At 
school, Jo constructs her Burnout identity, using particular vocabulary (e.g. 
poins) and innovative variants of vowels in the pronunciation of words like fun 
and line. At home with her family or in her after-​school job, she may empha-
sise different aspects of her social identity, again using linguistic choices to indi-
cate her affiliations and values. Using this more ethnographic approach, the 
researcher focuses on the ways in which individuals “perform” particular aspects 
of their social identity in specific situations.
Different aspects of an individual’s social identity will be more or less rele-
vant in specific social contexts, and even at different points within the same 
Figure 8.3  Negative concord for Jocks and Burnouts
Source: Eckert (2000: 119).
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
278
interaction. So, for instance, a young African American male talking to an 
African American female is likely to highlight his masculinity at certain points 
in the conversation, but their shared ethnicity at others. Similarly, Jo constructs 
her identity as a super-​cool, non-​conformist Burnout when she interacts with 
Jock guys but, at certain points in the interaction, her linguistic choices may 
emphasise her gender identity, or her low-​income background. In ­example 13, 
the speaker performs a rather tough “masculine” identity.
Example 13
I says you better put those fuckin’ arms down because that’s fightin’ 
material for me . . . she says you can’t fuckin’ do nothin’ to me and I says 
you wanna bet?
The speaker in ­example 13 is Geraldine, a young working-​class Māori woman, 
describing a fight in which she was involved. In this brief snippet, talking to a 
much better educated and very feminine-​looking Māori woman, she selects con-
sistently vernacular variants of the [-​ing] variable, and vernacular present tense 
forms of the verb say, as well as using swear words. While [in] variants indicate 
her working-​class background, the consistency and concentration of vernacular 
linguistic features also make Geraldine sound tough and masculine. High fre-
quencies of the [in] variant are associated not only with working-​class speech 
but also with male speech, as described in ­chapter 7. Hence, Geraldine seems to 
be constructing a tough, masculine gender identity to contrast with the educated 
feminine identity of her addressee. This is a nice example of how social meaning 
is a dynamic mutual linguistic construction between different participants in an 
interaction.
Exercise 9
Geraldine’s frequent use of [in] variants in ­example 13 is discussed using a number of 
terms: “working-​class”, “tough” and “masculine”.
Do you think it makes sense to separate out nonlinguistic variables in this way?
An answer is suggested in the next paragraph
As noted in ­chapter 7, first-​wave social dialect researchers describe the lin-
guistic patterns that correlate with the macro-​level abstract categories of class, 
age, ethnicity and gender. But for describing the detail and complexity of what 
goes on in day-​to-​day interactions between individuals, the concepts of social 
network and community of practice are particularly useful. These concepts are 
associated with a second-​wave variationist approach which typically involves 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
279
ethnographic methods such as those used by Lesley Milroy in Belfast working-​
class communities and Penelope Eckert in Detroit suburban high schools.
Using this approach, the focus is on locally relevant categories which allow 
researchers to examine how individuals use linguistic resources in dynamic and 
constructive ways to express various social identities. These identities typically 
draw on macro-​level social categories, such as age, class, ethnicity and gender, 
as well as micro-​level categories, such as new gang member, or feisty friend, or 
nerdy student, or youngest child in the family. Indeed, it is these moment-​to-​
moment linguistic choices which ultimately create the larger-​scale patterns, a 
point which will become evident in the next chapter.
Exercise 10
How did the coronavirus COVID-​19 pandemic impact your patterns of interaction with 
people in your social networks and communities of practice?
Possible responses at end of chapter
Conclusion
When it comes to linguistic form, Plato walks with the Macedonian swine-
herd, Confucius with the head-​hunting savage of Assam.
This famous quotation from Edward Sapir expresses a very fundamental belief 
held by linguists. All language varieties are equal: there is no significant diffe-
rence in the complexity of their linguistic structure; and they all have resources 
for creating new vocabulary as it is needed, and for developing the grammatical 
constructions their speakers require. Any variety can be developed for use in 
any situation. A language used by a tribe buried in the mountains of Papua New 
Guinea or the depths of the Amazonian rainforests has the potential for use at 
the nuclear physics conferences of the Western world, or in the most sensitive 
diplomatic negotiations between warring nations. There are no differences in 
linguistic form between varieties which would prevent them developing the lan-
guage required for such purposes. The barriers are social and cultural.
Though linguists present this ideal of equality between the languages and 
dialects used by different ethnic and social groups, it has no social reality. 
Varieties acquire the social status of their users, and the divisions of dialects 
along racial, ethnic and social lines have been only too apparent in many coun-
tries, including the USA and Britain. We have used the terms “standard” and 
“vernacular” in describing features which characterise the speech of different 
social and ethnic groups. Some people have used the term “sub-​standard” for 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
280
vernacular features, with all the implications of deviance and inadequacy which 
that term carries, and this has often influenced people’s views of the linguistic 
features involved.
It should be clear from the description of linguistic features provided in 
­chapters 6, 7 and 8 that the differences between those features which happen to 
characterise the standard dialect and those which occur in vernacular dialects 
are entirely arbitrary. Indeed, the evidence reviewed demonstrates that the diffe-
rence between the two styles is most often simply a matter of the frequency of 
different forms in the speech of different groups. In ­chapter 10, it will become 
clear that no-​one –​ not even the Queen of England or the German Chancellor –​ 
uses standard forms all the time.
Before looking at the way people use language in different situations (in Part 
III), it will be useful to explore a little further the relationship between some 
of the social factors considered in the last three chapters and the process of 
language change. Since the 1960s, when sociolinguists began to contribute to 
studies of language change, explanations of the process have been increasingly 
illuminated by an understanding of the contribution of social factors. In the 
next chapter, the relationship between age-​grading and linguistic change will be 
explored further, and the influence of speakers’ social class and gender on the 
process of language change will be discussed.
Methods
Methods used to collect information and data in a community context (especially in a 
community to which you do not belong):
•	 A range of methods used to collect social dialect data is described at the ends of 
­chapters 6 and 7.
•	 Some people are happy to talk, and so provide a researcher with samples of their speech. 
Those who have time on their hands or who are bored or lonely are often willing to chat 
with a willing listener. Think of people in your community who might fit this descrip-
tion. For instance, parents sitting watching their kids play in the park; older people who 
are living alone or in eldercare residences; or adolescents in adventure playgrounds 
who often have plenty of time to chat (as noted in ­chapter 7). It is important not to 
make assumptions, however, and to take care not to intrude on others. Establishing a 
friendly relationship before asking for permission to record is essential. Finding some-
where which is not too noisy is also essential if the data is to be useful.
•	 Lesley Milroy’s ethnographic approach in Belfast working-​class communities illustrates 
the time commitment involved in ethnographic work, as well as the importance of 
attention to the contextual constraints when collecting data in a community you don’t 
belong to. Only a woman could move around in those communities where religio-​pol-
itical differences were an ongoing source of aggression at the time; an unknown man 
would have raised suspicion. She initially gained acceptance as a “friend of a friend” via 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
281
a trusted link who provided the names of people she could approach. Each successful 
contact passed her on to others. She eventually sat around in different kitchens recording 
the interaction of the families and friends, used her van to transport boys running a 
disco group, and her children were invited to local parties and were baby-​sat by locals. 
Her work illustrates the value of the concept of social network in an area where social 
class did not distinguish communities or their speech patterns.
•	 Penelope Eckert’s ethnographic approach in Belten High School involved gaining 
acceptance as someone who, though a little older, did not identify with adults, and 
especially with teachers. Hanging out for two years with the school kids, observing and 
recording, she too demonstrated that the locally defined units, Jocks and Burnouts, 
were far more significant than social categories such as social class. The valuable con-
cept of a community of practice in sociolinguistics can be traced back to her detailed 
ethnographic work in this context.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 8
Answer to ­exercise 1
Some of these examples will be discussed further in the next section.
(a)	 This is an example of a young African American male “playing the 
dozens”, a competitive style of speech which consists of ritual insults usu-
ally referring to the opponent’s mother. The use of mama is typical of 
African American dialect, and the pronunciation suggested by yo provides 
another ethnic clue. A grammatical clue is the omission of the verb form 
is after the word mama, another feature frequently found in the English 
of Black Americans.
(b)	 This is Scots. There are lexical clues –​ bairns for standard children, mind for 
remember, they for those, fae for from, and grammatical clues –​ the use of ah 
for standard I and cannae for standard can’t or cannot.
(c)	 This is an example of the Patois used by Black British people with Jamaican 
origins. The crucial clue is the use of fi where standard English uses to. The 
use of d [d]‌ where standard English uses th [ð] is another clue, but this is also 
found in many other dialects of English.
(d)	 Two lexical features suggest the speaker is Māori: the greeting kia ora and 
the name Hemi (the English equivalent is Jim). The use of the word broom 
as a verb and the final tag eh are additional features which have been noted 
particularly in the speech of Māori people.
(e)	 This speaker is a Jewish American as indicated by the words goyim to refer 
to non-​Jewish people or Gentiles, and bagels, a Jewish doughnut-​shaped 
bread roll. The syntactic pattern of the exclamation is also heard more fre-
quently in Jewish discourse.
(f)	 The speaker is either from Singapore or Malaysia, and probably Chinese 
or Malay in ethnicity. The omission of is provides a clue since this verb 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
282
is variably present in Singapore and Malaysian English, but this is a fea-
ture of many dialects of English. The speaker is identifiable as Singaporean 
or Malaysian by the use of the particle la and the Malay word makan 
for meal.
Answer to ­exercise 2 (a)
Each social group uses more multiple negation than the group above it, and 
within social groups African Americans from Detroit consistently use more mul-
tiple negation than do white Detroiters. The amount of multiple negation used 
by African Americans from the highest social group is the same as that used by 
white speakers from the next social group down, for instance, showing clearly 
that social and ethnic features interact with linguistic features in a complex way 
in signalling information about speakers.
Answer to ­exercise 2 (b)
Features of AAL:
•	the use of it’s for standard there was to introduce the story
•	name for standard named, live for lived, like for liked, etc.
•	deletion of who in the clause live in Washington
•	’most for standard almost
•	multiple negation: don’t . . . nothing . . . neither.
Answer to ­exercise 2 (c)
The form be has a habitual meaning in these sentences so it cannot occur in 
constructions which indicate the action took place at a particular point in time. 
Hence sentence 8 is ungrammatical and should be marked with *.
Answer to ­exercise 3
As mentioned in the previous chapter, young people’s awareness of society’s 
attitudes, including attitudes to speech, becomes particularly acute during ado-
lescence. So it is usually in their early teenage years that a person’s stylistic reper-
toire expands. Majority group children often learn more standard speech forms 
for use in more formal situations at this stage, as noted in the discussion of 
age-​graded features in ­chapter 7. For minority group adolescents, however, the 
pattern is likely to be just the opposite. They become aware at this stage of the 
wider society’s valuation and prejudice against their group, and this often leads 
to a rejection of the standard speech forms associated with the majority group. 
It seems likely that for those who used relatively few Patois features as children 
(at least in school), a greater use of Patois features in adolescence may serve the 
function of expressing negative attitudes towards the majority culture, while 
positively asserting their Black British identity.
 
 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
283
Answer to ­exercise 4
There are a number of different types of clue:
•	The expression speaking Pākehā for speaking English is more frequently used 
by Māori than Pākehā people.
•	The pragmatic particle eh is another feature which tends to be more frequent 
in the speech of Māori people.
•	The other interesting feature is the tense switching, which has also been noted 
more frequently in Māori narratives.
Note that the features discussed are matters of frequencies. They do not occur 
exclusively in the speech of Māori speakers.
Answer to ­exercise 8
The Burnouts disaffiliation from school values is evident in the high proportion 
of negative concord in their speech compared to the speech of the Jocks. The 
low proportion of this vernacular variant in the speech of Jock girls in particular 
reflects their orientation to conformist school values and their construction of a 
“good student” identity. The higher proportion of negative concord in the speech 
of Jock boys compared to Jock girls suggests that this variant may also convey 
connotations of masculinity.
Possible responses to ­exercise 10
Different networks were affected differently by the coronavirus COVID-​19 
pandemic.
•	In New Zealand during the lockdown periods, young people who use 
Facebook Messenger, Snapchat, Instagram, Whatsapp, Twitter and Tiktok 
simply increased their usage of such social media channels for various purposes 
(and many parents stopped hassling them so much about their screentime 
usage!). People found that different communication tools proved useful for 
different purposes (e.g. written vs. spoken, and synchronous or asynchronous 
communication).
•	Friends and families who formerly met regularly face-​to-​face adopted alterna-
tive means of communication, with Whatsapp a favourite. Where Whatsapp 
and Facebook had been used for communication with family and friends 
before lockdown, usage increased. Members of some groups simply stopped 
communicating with each other during lockdown. Others set up regular face-​
to-​face chat times, mainly using Zoom. People created quizzes to replicate the 
social time that was not possible face-​to-​face.
•	Most work networks, as well as schools and tertiary institutions moved to 
online communication channels such as Whatsapp, Teams and/​or Zoom to 
make it possible to continue their work and learning.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
284
•	Some new networks were established, bringing together people who didn’t 
communicate much, or at all, before 2019. In Janet’s family, for example, a 
group of cousins established a Whatsapp group to share experiences and ideas, 
and they also met sporadically by Zoom.
•	For some, the quality of visual online communication (such as Zoom) was 
considered to be inferior to face-​to-​face communication because of miniscule 
delays caused by the technology and inability to easily see all facial expressions 
and gestures. For others, not having to get dressed up for work, and not 
having to travel (with the associated environmental advantages), amongst 
other positive considerations, meant the online technology was considered 
an interactional advancement that they expect and plan to keep using in the 
future.
Concepts introduced
•	African American Language (AAL)
•	Black British English
•	Multicultural London English (MLE)
•	Māori English
•	New Englishes
•	Social network
•	Network density and plexity
•	Uniplex and multiplex networks
•	Community of practice
•	Social constructionism
•	Second-​wave variationist approach
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Androutsopoulos (2010) on German ethnolects
Bell (2000); Holmes (1997a); Jacob (1990); McCallum (1978) for data on Māori 
English
Blommaert and Dong (2020) on ethnographic methods
Bortoni-​Ricardo (1985) for data on Brasília
Downes (1998) on ethnic differences in language use
Dray and Sebba (2011) on Patois or Jamaican Creole
Eckert (1989, 2000) on Jocks and Burnouts and ethnography
Eckert and McConnell-​Ginet (1992, 1995) on Jocks and Burnouts
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ETHNICITY AND SOCIAL NETWORKS
285
Edwards (1986) for data on Patois in Britain
Gal (1979) for data on Oberwart
Gesslbauer (2003) on Patois or British Jamaican Creole
Holliday (2019) on AAL and Mainstream White American English
Kerswill, Torgersen and Fox (2007) on MLE
Kerswill and Williams (2000) on Milton Keynes
Labov (1972a, 1972b, 1972c) for data on American Black English
Milroy (1987); Milroy and Gordon (2003) on Belfast and networks
Nichols (1984) for data on South Carolina communities
Schilling-​Estes (2004) on constructionist approaches to ethnic identity
Schneider (2003), http://​cour​ses.nus.edu.sg/​cou​rse/​ellta​nkw/​hist​ory/​NE.htm on 
New Englishes
Shuy, Wolfram and Riley (1967) for data on Detroit
Wenger (1998) on community of practice
Quotations:
Exercise (1) sentence (a) is from Kochman (1972: 261); and sentence (c) is from 
Edwards (1986: 144)
Exercise 2 (c) uses data from Wolfram (1998).
Example 3 is from Bryen, Hartman and Tait (1978: 2)
Example 7 is from data collected for McCallum’s (1978) research
Example 8 and quotation in ­exercise 4 is from Jacob (1990)
Example 9 draws upon material from Freywald et al. (2011)
Example 12 is from Eckert and McConnell-​Ginet (1995: 495)
Example 13 uses material collected by Jacob (1990)
Sapir quotation is from Sapir (1921: 219)
Useful additional reading
Androutsopoulos (2010)
Chambers (2003): ­chapter 2
Crystal (2003)
Eckert (2012, 2018)
Holliday (2019)
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapter 17 by Robin Dodsworth on the concepts 
“speech community”, “social network” and “community of practice”
Labov (1972b, 1972c)
Levon (2017) on ethnographic fieldwork
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 9
Meyerhoff, Schleef and Mackenzie (2015): ­chapter 6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
286
Milroy (1987): ­chapter 3
Milroy and Gordon (2003): ­chapter 5
Paris (2011)
Trudgill (2009): ­chapter 3
Wolfram and Schilling-​Estes (2006)
 

287
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-11
Example 1
Peter:	
Why is English so illogical! Look at these words knight and 
thorough. How can I possibly explain those spellings to my 
Spanish friend? And why does changeable have an e in the 
middle when argument doesn’t?
Helen:	
It’s not just the spellings that are a problem. It’s the meanings 
of words too. My teacher told me that the real meaning of 
awesome is “inspiring awe or fear”, and I shouldn’t write “we 
had an awesome holiday”.
Michelle:	
What about pronunciation? English sounds are really hard to 
pin down. I heard this old guy on the radio and he was talking 
about an “orphan with a korf in winter”. I couldn’t make out 
a word of it till my dad explained the guy was saying that he 
often had a cough in the winter. Talk about weird!
It is very easy to demonstrate to English speakers that languages change over 
time. At the point where English spelling became relatively fixed by printing, the 
printers recorded the pronunciations current at the time. So the k in knit and 
knife was not “silent” in the fifteenth century, and knight not only began with a 
[k]‌, it had a fricative sound in the middle represented by the letters gh.
Similarly, if you look in a good etymological dictionary you will find that the 
word nice once meant precise, and before that it meant fastidious and earlier 
still it meant ignorant. Reading Shakespeare turns up many words, such as hie 
(hurry), stilly (softly) and arrant (thorough), which have disappeared or, more 
treacherously, changed their meaning. Entertain, for instance, meant keep occu-
pied, so entertaining the invading troops in Shakespeare’s time referred not to 
the efforts of singers and comedians, but to the success of the local army in 
keeping the foreigners at bay. Even since Jane Austen’s time the meanings of 
words have changed. In her books, a pleasing prospect refers to a landscape 
more often than to an expectation, and to be sensible means to be aware or 
perceptive.
Language change
9
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
288
Talk of language change, like the discussion between the young people in 
­example 1, often treats language as an entity independent of its speakers and 
writers. In reality, it is not so much that language itself changes as that speakers 
and writers change the way they use the language. Speaker innovation is a 
more accurate description than language change. Speakers innovate, some-
times spontaneously, but more often by imitating speakers from other com-
munities. If their innovations are adopted by others and diffuse through their 
local community and beyond into other communities, then linguistic change 
is the result.
Variation and change
Language varies in three major ways which are interestingly interrelated –​ over 
time, in physical space, and socially. Language change, sometimes called dia-
chronic change or language variation over time, has its origins in spatial (or 
regional) and social variation. The source of change over time is always current 
variation. So the regional and social variants described in the previous three 
chapters provide the basis for language change over time. We will see how 
this works.
Example 2
Children these days are putting the language at risk with their careless and 
sloppy pronunciations. From many possible examples I select just one. The 
distinctions between which and witch, and whether and weather, are slowly 
but surely disappearing in children’s speech. Do other listeners regret this 
loss as I do? When I heard a child asking which witch? recently, it sounded 
as if she had a stutter.
Within a monolingual community, the superficial impression may be that 
everyone speaks the same. In a small town, it often seems that everyone uses the 
same language. But a little thought will soon identify areas of variation, most 
obviously in vocabulary and pronunciation. A good source of information on 
changes which are currently in progress is the Letters to the Editor section of 
any newspaper or magazine, or online forums and blogs. People often write 
about language changes they have observed –​ usually to complain about them. 
Many of these changes will be ephemeral, but some will persist and become 
incorporated into the standard dialect. Mob was once condemned as a vulgar 
word, bus was once regarded as an uncouth shortening of omnibus, ’otel was 
once considered the only acceptable way of pronouncing hotel, and the vowel 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
289
sound in go has changed quite radically in the speech of BBC newsreaders over 
the last 30 years.
All language change has its origins in variation. The possibility of a linguistic 
change exists as soon as a new form develops and begins to be used alongside 
an existing form. If the new form spreads, the change is in progress. If it even-
tually displaces the old form, the change has become a fait accompli. One area 
of vocabulary where this is very easy to see is in the slang words used by young 
people to mean really good. As mentioned in the section on age differences in 
­chapter 7, there is a constant turnover of such words in any speech commu-
nity: super, spiffing, bonzer, groovy, neat, fantastic, magic, excellent, wicked, 
hot, rad, awesome, cool, sick, boss, epic, fire, and so on. A particular word, such 
as wicked, may first develop this meaning of really good in the usage of a par-
ticular sub-​group –​ say young men. If the young men have some kind of status 
within the speech community –​ in other words, if other groups (such as young 
boys or young women) admire them –​ then they too will start to use the new 
word and it will begin to spread. It may eventually spread through the whole 
community and become the new norm or standard for expressing the concept 
really good. More often it will spread through a number of groups and then fail 
to spread further. It may then survive, serving as an indicator of the language or 
style of those groups, or it may be replaced by the next in-​word for really good.
Similarly, a sound change occurs when one sound is replaced in people’s speech 
by another over a period of time, or when a sound disappears. The process is 
the same. In New Zealand, for example, words like new and nuclear were once 
pronounced nyew [nju:] and nyuklear [nju:kliə] by everybody. Right now, there 
is variation in the community. About 35 years ago a new variant was introduced. 
Young New Zealanders started using an American pronunciation without the 
[j]‌ in some words: i.e. [nu:] and [nu:kliə]. Over time, it seemed possible that the 
pronunciation without [j] would displace the [j] pronunciation in most people’s 
speech. But there is still variation and the reasons seem complicated by factors 
like the relative frequency of particular lexical items. Vowel pronunciations 
change too. In England, the vowel in words like trap and clap has changed over 
the last 75 years to become much more open. So current speakers of RP pro-
nounce this vowel more like people from Yorkshire.
Exercise 1
Look in newspapers and magazines for Letters to the Editor or on the internet for blogs 
on the subject of language. Do these sources provide clues to changes in progress in your 
community?
Divide them into comments on vocabulary or word meaning, comments on grammar, 
and comments on pronunciation. Which area attracts most comments?
What is the attitude of the writers to the changes which are noted?
Possible responses at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
290
The sorts of questions that sociolinguists ask about language changes are 
“why do particular changes spread”, and “how do linguistic changes spread 
through a community?” Sociolinguists try to identify the particular social factors 
which favour the spread of specific linguistic changes, and they try to explain 
how these factors influence the spread of the change. In demonstrating how to 
address these questions, we first look at a linguistic change which involves the 
spread of a sound which has prestige in New York, but interestingly has no pres-
tige in London, England.
Post-​vocalic [r]‌ –​ its spread and its status
Example 3
Elizabeth lives in the town of Ryde on the Isle of Wight, a popular British 
holiday resort off the south coast and a frequent choice for retirement. Her 
family has lived there for three generations, originally farming, but they now 
run a small grocery business. Elizabeth’s grandfather pronounces [r]‌ pretty 
consistently in words like start and car. Elizabeth’s parents pronounce [r] 
in such words too, though not all the time. Her mother uses fewer than her 
father, and both tend to use fewer when serving the mainland visitors in the 
shop than when they are talking to the locals. They use most when talking 
to older relatives and friends at home. Elizabeth, however, doesn’t use post-​
vocalic [r] at all. She did occasionally when she started school, but she soon 
stopped. Kids from London and the south who have moved to the island in 
recent years never use [r], and they know what’s what!
In standard English in many parts of England and Wales, [r]‌ pronunciation 
following vowels (post-​vocalic [r]) in words like star and start has disappeared. 
Post-​vocalic [r] does not occur in RP nor in the London Cockney dialect. The 
loss of post-​vocalic [r] seems to have begun in the seventeenth century in the 
south-​east of England, and it is still in progress, since there are areas, such as 
the south-​west of England, where [r] is still regularly pronounced. As ­example 3 
suggests, the change seems to be moving slowly westwards. (Post-​vocalic [r] is 
also pronounced in Scotland and Ireland.)
Accents with post-​vocalic [r]‌ are called rhotic accents. In large areas of England, 
rhotic English accents are regarded as rural and uneducated. In large parts of the 
USA, on the other hand, post-​vocalic [r] is alive and well and extensively used. 
Many American accents (though not AAL) are rhotic. Under the influence of 
southern British norms, however, eastern New England (e.g. Massachusetts and 
Connecticut) is generally non-​rhotic. A survey in the 1960s found that rhoticism 
was increasing in New York, where it was regarded as prestigious. Post-​vocalic 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
291
[r] was used by almost all New Yorkers in their most formal and careful speech, 
and young people from the upper middle class pronounced it even in their most 
casual speech –​ a sure signal that it was spreading. More recent research confirms 
that rhoticism is now a well-​established feature of New York speech, and there 
is some evidence that it is spreading to other cities such as Boston. It has also 
been identified as a feature which is spreading in some varieties of New Zealand 
English. So, for example, Janet hears her grandchildren pronouncing [r] in first 
and nurse, whereas her children (their fathers) did not and do not.
So the pronunciation of [r]‌ in English-​speaking communities provides a wealth 
of examples of the complexity of linguistic variation and language change, as 
well as the arbitrariness of the forms which happen to be standard in any com-
munity. While [r]-​less speech is the prestigious form which is still spreading in 
England, in some parts of the USA it is the rhotic variety which is regarded as 
prestigious and is increasing.
Changes which people are aware of have been described as changes from 
above. These are changes where people are conscious of their social signifi-
cance as desirable or prestige features of speech. People evaluate the speech of 
those who use such features highly. So in a social dialect survey undertaken 
by Labov, even New Yorkers who did not use post-​vocalic [r]‌ in conversation 
recognised it as a prestigious feature in the speech of those who did use it and 
evaluated their speech positively. A second meaning of change from above 
refers to the source of the change. In this sense, “above” refers to the fact 
that a feature is generally spreading downwards through the social groups in 
a speech community. So it appears that post-​vocalic [r] appeared first in the 
speech of upper-​middle-​class New Yorkers, and then gradually filtered down 
through the different social classes until it reached the speech of the lowest 
social class in the community. It is important to keep these two meanings dis-
tinct even though they often coincide.
Exercise 2
Mix the following words and phrases up with some others which do not involve the letter 
r. (This will reduce the likelihood of people guessing which particular sounds you are 
interested in, which could lead them to pronounce them in an unusual way.) Record ten 
people reading your list. Note whether they pronounce [r]‌ or not in each context. Can you 
account for the [r]-​pronunciations you identified?
•	 star
•	 start
•	 nurse
•	 first
•	 soaring
•	 drawing
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
292
•	 law
•	 lore
•	 law and order
•	 folklore and mythology
Answer at end of chapter
The spread of vernacular forms
It is easy to understand that a pronunciation which is considered prestigious 
will be imitated, and will spread through a community. But there are also many 
examples of vernacular pronunciations which have spread throughout speech 
communities. It is possible for changes to proceed from a variety of starting 
points in a variety of directions.
Example 4
Martha’s Vineyard is a little island about three miles off the coast of 
Massachusetts and within reach of people from Boston and New York 
as a holiday retreat. Every summer, the island is flooded with visitors 
who outnumber the residents about seven to one. In the mid-​twentieth 
century, these visitors were resented by the locals, despite the fact that 
they had become increasingly dependent on tourists for their income. 
The attitudes of the locals towards the visitors was indicated by the 
Vineyarders’ speech.
On Martha’s Vineyard, those who had lived on the island for generations, and 
especially those men who fished for their livelihood, resented the fact that the 
island had been invaded by more recent immigrants, and especially by summer 
tourists. A 1960s linguistic survey by William Labov suggested that these 
attitudes were indicated by the way locals pronounced the (ay) and (aw) sounds 
in words like light and house. Their pronunciation of the vowels in these words 
had gradually become more and more centralised. (The position of the tongue 
at the start of the vowel had moved towards the centre of the mouth.) So light 
was pronounced [ləit] (it sounds a bit like layeet) and house was pronounced 
[həus] (a bit like heyoose). This sound change, which seemed to be unconscious, 
was a change to a more conservative pronunciation associated with the area 
in the past. It had been dying out, but it was revitalised to express solidarity 
between those who identified with the island and felt loyalty to its rural values 
and peaceful lifestyle. The centralisation of the vowel in light was particularly 
significant for signalling islander identity.
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
293
Other groups on the island with similar attitudes imitated the fishermen, and 
so the use of centralised vowels spread. A group of Portuguese Americans, for 
instance, who had been on the island for several generations and who identified 
strongly with it, used centralised vowels too. And, not surprisingly, the Native 
Americans –​ the Indigenous inhabitants of the island –​ also asserted their status 
as permanent residents of the island through their speech.
So not all linguistic changes involve adopting new forms from outside the 
speech community. Nor do they always involve forms which people are con-
scious of as prestige forms. Vowel centralisation is not an overtly prestigious 
sound in American speech. On Martha’s Vineyard, however, it was clear that 
people unconsciously valued this speech feature. The spread of centralised 
vowels illustrates how a vernacular feature can acquire social significance and 
spread through a community. It acquired covert prestige as an indicator of a 
person’s status as a Vineyarder.
Replications of Labov’s Martha’s Vineyard study between 1997 and 2002 
suggest that the (ay) vowel appears to be decentralising so this sound is no longer 
such a strong indicator of island identity. But vowel centralisation in words like 
house has taken on a stronger role as a signal of Vineyarder status or identity 
and a positive attitude to the island. It is hard to know how to explain such a 
reversal. The decentralisation of (ay) could indicate that the locals recognise the 
importance of tourists to their economy and so their antagonism has abated, 
but the greater centralisation of (aw) suggests that the islanders still want to 
differentiate themselves from the summer visitors. Language change is always 
interesting, but not always predictable or easy to explain.
Changes in the pronunciation of vowels are often changes from below, in that 
they are changes below people’s level of conscious awareness. In New Zealand, 
the vowel merger of the sounds in beer and bear in the late twentieth century 
was a change from below in this sense. Again, it is important to be aware that 
this is just one meaning of change from below; another meaning refers to a 
change which spreads from lower social groups upwards through to higher 
social groups. Such changes may or may not be above the level of conscious 
awareness. People may adopt new speech features, and especially slang, from 
lower social groups relatively consciously. It seems likely that the spread of (th)-​
fronting in British English (i.e. the substitution of [f]‌ for [θ] in words like think 
and [v] for [ð] in words like bother) is an example of a vernacular change which 
is spreading upwards through different social groups, and which is above the 
level of conscious awareness for most speakers; while the spread of the glottal 
stop as a substitute for [t] in final position (in words like hot) seems to be below 
the level of consciousness for most speakers.
At this point, it is worth asking why would people substitute [f]‌ for [θ] and 
[v] for [δ] if these sounds are associated with the speech of lower social groups? 
There are at least two possible answers. One is social. The speech of the relevant 
social groups may have prestige based on a particular social identity, such as 
gang membership or a valued occupation in the community. These sounds may 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
294
index that identity for listeners. These pronunciations may be considered cool 
or anti-​establishment or innovative rather than conservative and fuddy-​duddy. 
Another possible answer is that [f] and [v] are easier to pronounce than [θ] and 
[δ]. In other words, linguistic processes may be relevant too. The relevance of 
both linguistic and social factors in accounting for language change is particu-
larly apparent when we consider the results of contact between varieties. To 
illustrate this, in the next section we use the example of koines; varieties which 
are the result of dialect contact.
Exercise 3
Can you suggest a rule for using was and were in this north of England dialect on the basis 
of the following interaction?
Jenny:	
I was planning to leave at six.
Sally:	
Yes you was supposed to pick me up.
Jenny:	
But I said I weren’t picking anyone up that day. I was sleeping in.
Sally:	
Well Mum took me in the end. She weren’t happy about it, but she did it.
Jenny:	
You was lucky then.
Sally:	
Not really. The others was all late.
How does your rule differ from the rule for standard English? Which is simpler?
Answer at end of chapter
Koines and koineisation
Example 5
Sam:	
You was late again innit.
Tom:	
Nah I was talkin’ to the teachers and they was goin’ on an’ on.
Sam:	
That’s the trouble with teachers innit.
In ­chapter 4, we described the process of creolisation: i.e. how a new language 
emerges as a result of contact between people who speak different languages. 
Something similar often happens when people who speak different dialects come 
into contact in monolingual communities –​ a new dialect or variety emerges. This 
language change process is called koineisation, and the result is a koine (pronounced 
koy-nay), a variety which is the result of dialect contact. The koine will typically 
have some features from each of the contributing dialects, with most features typic-
ally coming from the dialect of the largest group of speakers. So, in Milton Keynes, 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
295
an English town designated as a New Town in 1967, people moved into the town 
from many different regions, but most came from the East End of nearby London. 
Consequently, many of the features of the koine, or new dialect which developed 
in this town, such as the tag innit illustrated in ­example 5, could be traced back to 
Cockney, the variety used by Eastenders (people from the East End of London).
Both linguistic and social processes contribute to the emergence of a koine. 
The linguistic processes involve different types of simplification. One of these 
is known as “levelling”, a process which eliminates marked variants. Levelling 
results in the koine adopting fewer forms than the range of forms in the source 
dialects. For example, if people who speak dialects with post-​vocalic [r]‌ come 
into contact with people who do not, levelling generally leads to the disappear-
ance of post-​vocalic [r] in the koine. This happened in large parts of England, 
as described earlier in the chapter. But, of course, linguistic factors alone cannot 
explain everything; social factors are relevant too. So if the people who speak the 
dialect with post-​vocalic [r] have more prestige for some reason (as they did in 
New York), then the [r] is more likely to survive and be adopted into the koine. 
The [r] may be associated with, or index belonging to, a local in a particular 
area, for instance, in which case it will survive as a symbol of local identity.
Another linguistic process associated with koines is the simplification of 
different features or categories. Where two groups of speakers from different 
dialect areas come together, the simpler forms will usually win out. So when 
dialect speakers who make the distinction between he was swimming and they 
were swimming meet dialect speakers who don’t make this distinction (e.g. they 
say both he was swimming and they was swimming), then the process of sim-
plification suggests that the simpler form will survive. Using only was is simpler 
than changing from was to were with different pronouns. And this has been the 
result in many areas where English is spoken. Just the was form is used with all 
pronouns in many English dialects.
Again, however, social factors are relevant. People tend to accommodate to 
the speech of others if they like, respect or admire them (see ­chapter 10 for a 
discussion about speech accommodation). Local prestige and relative status are 
very relevant factors. So they was swimming will only survive if the group of 
people who use this form belong to an admired group in a community. If the 
form they was swimming becomes associated with lack of education or lack of 
“coolth”, it will disappear. Socially stigmatised forms tend to disappear in com-
munities where status and education are valued. Conservative forms tend to dis-
appear in areas where being hip, fashionable and innovative is valued.
Exercise 4
A number of koines have developed in the cities of Texas as a result of the contact between 
the people from different rural areas who have come to the city to live and work. Some 
rural Texan dialects make a distinction between [ai] and [a:] according to the sound which 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
296
follows. So speakers of these dialects use [ai] in write [rait], but [a:] in ride [ra:d]. Speakers 
of other dialects do not make this distinction.
What would you predict will happen in the city koines? Why? Consider both linguistic 
processes and social factors.
Answer at end of chapter
More recently, sociolinguists have identified a new type of koine, an immigrant 
koine which results from the mixing of linguistic features among multi-​ethnic 
groups in big cities. The speech of young migrants or the children of migrants 
provides the crucible for varieties that have been labelled multi-​ethnolects. In 
these varieties, the majority language may serve initially as a lingua franca, but 
the new multi-​ethnolect soon develops very distinctive features as a result of the 
many different languages and dialects which different speakers bring to its con-
struction. In multi-​ethnic areas of London, for instance, a variety which has been 
labelled Multicultural London English (MLE) can be heard. This new dialect has 
features such as the use of a rather than an before a noun beginning with a vowel 
(e.g. a orange); and a new quotative form this is +​ speaker. So rather than saying 
I said what a stupid idea, or even I’m like what a stupid idea, children who speak 
MLE say instead this is me what a stupid idea.
In Germany, Kiezdeutsch is another multi-​ethnolect spoken as a colloquial 
variety by the children of immigrants from Turkey, Somalia, Arabic-​speaking 
countries, and elsewhere. They use standard German when appropriate while 
the multi-​ethnolect is their streamlined in-​group language. Some of the features 
of Kiezdeutsch include the use of words from Turkish or Arabic, such as lan 
(man in Turkish), or syntactic variation such as copula deletion: ich aus berlin 
(I from Berlin) rather than ich bin aus Berlin (I am from Berlin). As immigrants 
and refugees flee to Europe from Africa and the Middle East, multi-​ethnolects 
develop in many cities, providing a rich source of linguistic innovation.
Example 6
Uptalk is a vernacular feature which seems to be increasing in many varieties 
of English around the world. It is a rising intonation pattern on utterances 
which function as statements for those who use it. Uptalk has also been 
referred to as high rising terminal or HRT, and in the USA it is often called 
Valley Talk since it was first associated with the speech of young girls 
from Southern California. Using this feature, statements such as I went to 
school in Sydney or then they played tennis are uttered with rising inton-
ation. For those who use uptalk, these utterances function as statements, 
not questions. Over the last couple of decades, uptalk has been noted in a 
number of English-​speaking communities, and even in some non-​English 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
297
speaking communities –​ probably under the influence of English. Have you 
heard this intonation pattern in your region?
A number of alternative explanations have been suggested for its 
appearance in Sydney. Most interesting is the suggestion that it may have 
arisen as a feature of the English of Australians responding to the influx of 
migrants from Europe to Australia in the 1950s. It could be seen as a some-
what negative or defensive response –​ a way of asserting Australian identity 
in the face of an influx of new ethnic groups. Alternatively, it could be seen 
more positively –​ as a way of responding to the communicative needs of 
new immigrants –​ an efficient and economical way of checking people were 
following and understanding utterances.
How do language changes spread?
Example 7
When she was about 7 years old, Greg’s daughter Sue started describing 
anything that she really liked as utter. Not utterly great or utterly fantastic –​ 
just utter! It sounded so weird. But her friends used it too, and her little 
brother soon began to describe things as utter. Greg gradually got used to 
it. He noticed Sue had even used it in a written story and the teacher hadn’t 
corrected it. He wondered if it would spread beyond her school –​ all the kids 
at the school seemed to use it. But in fact it just died out eventually. Now Sue 
describes everything as cool. Greg comments that at least that’s grammatical.
From group to group
Many linguists have used the metaphor of waves to explain how linguistic 
changes spread through a community (also known as wave theory). Any par-
ticular change typically spreads simultaneously in different directions, though 
not necessarily at the same rate in all directions. Social factors such as age, 
status, gender and region affect the rates of change and the directions in which 
the waves roll most swiftly. The wave metaphor is one useful way of visualising 
the spread of a change from one group to another –​ as ­figure 9.1 demonstrates.
In any speech community different sets of waves intersect. You belong simultan-
eously to a particular age group, region and social group, as well as different  
social networks and communities of practice. A change may spread along any of  
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
298
these dimensions and into another group. Linguistic changes infiltrate groups from  
the speech of people on the margins between social or regional groups –​ via the  
“middle” people who have contacts in more than one group. These people seem  
to act as linguistic stockbrokers or entrepreneurs. We will illustrate this point in  
more detail later in this chapter when we look at the reasons for linguistic change.
From style to style
One theory of how a language change spreads presents the process as a very  
systematic one. In the speech of a particular individual, it suggests the change  
spreads from one style to another (say from more formal speech to more casual  
Figure 9.1  The wave-​like spread of linguistic changes
Note: ABCD represent different age groups, social groups or regional groups.
Source: This diagram is based on Bailey (1973a: 159).
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
299
speech), while at the same time it spreads from one individual to another within  
a social group, and subsequently from one social group to another. Using this  
model, we would trace the spread of prestigious post-​vocalic [r]‌ pronunciation  
in New York, for instance, first in the most formal style of the young people in  
the most socially statusful group in the community. Then it would spread to a  
less formal style for that group, while also spreading to the most formal style of  
other groups, such as to older people’s speech, and to the speech of people from  
a lower social group. The change gradually spreads from style to style and from  
group to group, until eventually almost everyone uses the new form in all their  
speech styles. Figure 9.2 provides a visual representation of this process.
Figure 9.2  A model of the spread of a vernacular change through two speech styles and 
three social groups
Source: This diagram is simplified from a more complicated one in Bailey (1973a: 176).

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
300
When a change is a prestigious one, it usually starts towards the top of the 
speech community –​ in the most formal style of people in the highest status 
group –​ and spreads downwards. (As discussed earlier, it is a change from 
above.) A vernacular change, such as centralisation in Martha’s Vineyard, or 
the spread of glottal stop for [t]‌ in the middle and at the end of words, tends to 
begin in people’s more casual styles. If it is a form which is considered very non-​
standard, it may take a long time to spread, and it may never gain acceptance 
by the highest status social groups or in formal speech. Innovating groups who 
introduce new vernacular sound changes tend to be around the middle of the 
social class range –​ in the upper working class, for instance. And, as one might 
expect, younger people tend to adopt new forms more quickly than older people 
and they use them more extensively. So in the London area and East Anglia, for 
instance, the use of glottal stop for final [t] has spread very quickly in recent 
years, and it is now heard very frequently even in the more formal styles of 
young people.
Exercise 5
Many studies of the spread of a linguistic change through a population (including the 
spread of a new variety such as a pidgin or lingua franca) have used an S-​type curve to 
represent the progress of the change, as illustrated in ­figure 9.3.
Figure 9.3  The progress of linguistic change
Source: This diagram is modified from one in Bailey (1973b). Reproduced with 
permission.

LANGUAGE CHANGE
301
How do you interpret this graph? What does it indicate about the relative rate of progress 
of a linguistic change at different points in time?
Answer at end of chapter
From word to word –​ lexical diffusion
It seems that sound changes spread not only from one person to another and 
from one style to another style, but they also spread from one word to another. 
Sound changes typically spread through different words one by one. This is 
called lexical diffusion. When a sound change begins, all the words with a 
particular vowel don’t change at once in the speech of a community. People 
don’t go to bed one night using the sound [u:] and wake up using [au] in 
house, pouch, how and out. Instead, the sound change occurs first in one word, 
and then later in another, and so on. In Belfast, for instance, a vowel change 
affected the vowel in the word pull before put, and put before should. And 
in East Anglia, the vowel in must changed before the vowel in come, which 
changed before the vowel in uncle, although they all started off with the same 
vowel sound, and they all ended up with the identical different vowel sound 
at a later date. Of course, a change often does not spread to all the possible 
words which could be affected (i.e. the sound change does not go to comple-
tion), so there are often words which remain with the original pronunciation. 
In English, trough and tough got left behind with final [f]‌ compared to though 
and bough which lost their final fricative consonants as a result of a wide-
spread sound change.
In New Zealand, as mentioned above, a vowel change which seems to have 
been completed in most areas is the merging of the vowels in word pairs like beer 
and bear, which used to be distinct. This change, too, seems to have followed the 
process of lexical diffusion. Interesting recent research suggests, however, that 
these sounds may be un-​merging again in the conversational speech of some 
young people in the city of Auckland.
Exercise 6
A sound change may take many decades or even many centuries to spread. The loss of 
final [n]‌ in French words such as an (year), bon (good) and fin (end) provides an example. 
Nowadays, the preceding vowel is nasalised (pronounced with the air expelled partly 
through the nose), and the [n] has disappeared. This change began in the tenth cen-
tury, and took about five centuries to spread through the French language. The following 
table provides information on the way this sound change diffused or spread through the 
vocabulary of French over the centuries.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
302
Century
French word
English translation
Nasalised vowel
15th
chacun
each
→
[œ̃ ]
10th
an
year
→
[ã]
11th
en
in
→
[ã]
12th
non
no
→
[õ:]
13th
magasin
shop
→
[ε̃]
10th
sans
without
→
[ã]
12th
bon
good
→
[õ:]
10th
dans
in
→
[ã]
15th
un
one
→
[œ̃]
12th
bonbon
sweet
→
[õ:]
13th
pin
pine
→
[ε̃]
13th
fin
end
→
[ε̃]
15th
brun
brown
→
[œ̃ ]
Can you identify the linguistic factor which seems to account for the order in which the 
change proceeded through different words?
Answer at end of chapter
This French example above illustrates that language change is more accurately 
thought of as an accumulation of changes in the speech of individuals, rather 
than something which occurs in the language independently of its speakers.
How do we study language change?
Apparent-​time studies of language change
Example 8
By the 1970s, the word radio had completely displaced the word wireless 
to refer to the piece of equipment which broadcasts audio material. At 
that time children had never heard the word wireless, while their great-​
grandmothers had never heard the word radio. Forty years later in the 
twenty-​first century, wireless acquired a totally new meaning, and young 
people began to use wireless or wifi to refer to internet access. The question 
do you have wireless? would have sounded ungrammatical to their 
grandmothers, while for them it is crucial to their social well-​being. Wifi is 
now the expression of choice in general use, but wireless network is still a 
term used by the telecommunications industry.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
303
This rather simple example illustrates the way in which information on the lan-
guage use of different age groups may reveal the direction of linguistic change 
in a community.
A great deal of linguistic variation is stable, but some is an indication of lin-
guistic change in progress. The patterns of deletion of the regular past tense affix 
(-​ed) are stable in English-​speaking communities. In Norwich, as elsewhere, the 
forms [in] vs. [iŋ], and [h]‌-​dropping, as discussed in ­chapter 6, are also examples 
of stable variants. The patterns noted for different groups in the community 
have not changed over the last 60 years or so. The substitution of a glottal stop 
for [t] in certain positions, on the other hand, is increasing in Norwich. The use 
of [d] for the initial sound in then and than is an example of stable variation in 
New York. There is no evidence that the vernacular pronunciation with [d] is 
increasing. The challenge is to identify the clues which make it possible to predict 
which current variation will result in change and which won’t.
A steady increase or steady decline in the frequency of a form by age group 
suggests to a sociolinguist that a change may be in progress in the speech com-
munity, whereas a bell-​shaped pattern is more typical of stable variation. It 
was apparent to Labov that post-​vocalic [r]‌ was a prestigious pronunciation in 
New York, for instance, since higher social groups used more of it than lower 
social groups. It also seemed likely that it was spreading through the community, 
because younger people were using more of it than older people. At this point, 
it is important to compare this pattern with the normal patterns of different 
ways of speaking at different ages. In ­chapter 7, we pointed out that the normal 
pattern for standard or prestige forms was that people used more of them in 
their middle years, as illustrated in ­figure 7.3. Their frequency is low in adoles-
cence and declines again in old age. So when a standard or prestige form occurs 
more often in the speech of younger people than older people, this suggests that 
it is a new form which is being introduced and adopted by young people.
Comparing the speech of people from different age groups can be a useful 
clue, then, to language change. This has been called the apparent-​time method 
of studying change. Differences between the speech of older people and younger 
people are interpreted as indications of changes in progress. Younger speakers 
tend to use more of the newer or innovative forms, and the older speakers use 
more of the older, conservative forms, the ones they adopted in their own teenage 
years. When the change involves the spread of a prestige form or an admired 
usage, then, it is easy to see the evidence of its spread. An increase in the use of 
these forms in the speech of younger people is a clue that a new form is being 
introduced.
It is much more difficult to identify a change when it involves the introduc-
tion and spread of a less prestigious form, a vernacular form –​ and these are by 
far the most frequent kinds of changes in any language. The spread of a swear 
word, for example, or a slang word, the spread of a vernacular pronunciation 
such as glottal stop for [t]‌, or the use of the same vowel in words like beer and 
bear –​ which of these will result in a linguistic change is very difficult to spot 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
304
accurately at an early stage. The regular or normal age-​grading pattern for any 
form involves a higher incidence of vernacular forms among younger people. 
People normally use more vernacular forms while they are young and tend to 
use more standard forms as they get older and respond to the pressure of the 
society’s expectations. This makes it difficult to spot the spread of new vernacular 
forms by using the distribution of a form in different age groups as a clue. The 
normal age-​graded distributional pattern is very similar to the pattern for a new 
form which is spreading –​ greater use by younger people (see ­figure 7.3). In 
other words, someone looking at the normal pattern for a stable vernacular fea-
ture like consonant cluster simplification might think this was spreading because 
young people simplify clusters more than older people. In fact, the high use of 
these forms by young people is just typical for their age group (an age-​grading 
pattern), and the amount of consonant cluster simplification in their speech is 
likely to reduce as they get older.
In a social dialect survey of the Sydney community, the HRT (high rising ter-
minal) or uptalk (as described in ­example 6 above) was heard far more in the 
speech of teenagers than adults. This suggested that over time uptalk would 
become well established as a feature of Sydney speech. But the researcher had 
to ensure, before interpreting the pattern in this way, that this was not simply 
a regular pattern which would repeat itself with each generation. Interpreting 
it as a clue to change assumes that the teenagers will continue to use the forms 
they use now as they grow older, so that these forms will become the norms of 
the adult community over time. In order to resolve such problems, we need to 
examine the reasons for linguistic change, and to identify factors other than age 
as clues to the direction of changes in progress. We will examine these issues next.
Exercise 7
If you speak English, are the vowels in words like ear and air, and bear and beer merged or 
merging in your community?
You can check by using methods involving different degrees of attention to speech:
1	
observation
2	
recording casual conversation in which you discuss issues such as clean air and how 
good is your participant’s hearing
3	
using a word list such as: bear/​bear; ear/​air; fear/​fair; rear/​rare; cheer/​chair; and spear/​
spare (and you could intersperse other pairs such as moor/​more; saw/​sore; four/​for; and 
seen/​scene to distract attention from your focus words).
You can discover if there is a change in progress by comparing the results from different 
age groups (apparent-​time method). The results may indicate some pairs have merged 
and some have not.
See the Useful Additional Reading section at the end of the chapter for ways of 
interpreting your findings.
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
305
Exercise 8
A pattern which showed the frequency of occurrence of a linguistic form peaking in ado-
lescence would be very difficult to interpret accurately without further information. It 
could be:
	
1
the typical (age-​graded) pattern for a stable vernacular variable
	
2
the pattern for a vernacular variable which is being replaced by a standard or prestige 
variable (with young people resisting the new standard)
	
3
the pattern for a new vernacular variable which is spreading and replacing a standard 
variable
	
4
a temporary pattern and the form will disappear when it goes out of fashion.
However, the following patterns are much less ambiguous. How would you interpret a 
graph which showed a peak for the frequency of occurrence of a linguistic form;
(a)	
in young adults’ speech?
(b)	
in middle age?
(c)	
in old age?
Answers at end of chapter
Language change in real time
Example 9
In 1970, an American visiting New Zealand noticed with surprise that 
some children pronounced words like milk and fill with a vowel where he 
expected to hear [l]‌. Twenty years later he revisited the country and was 
fascinated to find that the pronunciation he had perceived as so odd on his 
earlier visit was now widespread throughout the community. Most people 
seemed to be using a vowel where he used [l] in words like feel, real, fool, 
fail, silk and salt. He had in the meantime discovered that this process of 
replacing post-​vocalic [l] with a vowel was well-​established in the south of 
England. “Would America be next?” he wondered.
The apparent-​time method of studying language change is a useful short-​cut 
for sociolinguists who generally cannot afford to wait around for 20 years to 
see what happens in real time. Sometimes, however, it is possible to build on 
the work of earlier linguists when studying change. Dictionaries which provide 
the date when a form was first noted can assist in tracing changes in vocabulary 
over time. The study of Martha’s Vineyard described earlier in this chapter built 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
306
on earlier descriptions of the Vineyarders’ speech. The Linguistic Atlas of New 
England provided a description of the pronunciations of an earlier generation, 
and so changes in pronunciation which had occurred on the island over a 20-​ to 
30-​year period could be identified.
One very interesting real-​time study was reported by Peter Trudgill, who 
returned to Norwich 15 years after his original study of the speech patterns of 
Norwich people. He discovered that some of the variation he had noted had 
led to linguistic change, as predicted. The vowels of beer and bear, for instance, 
which were still distinct for many speakers in 1968, had completely merged by 
1983 for all speakers except those from the highest social group.
There were other changes, however, that were well under way by 1983 but 
which had not been noticed in the 1968 speech sample. By 1983, as many as 
30% of young Norwich people had completely lost the th [θ] sound in thing from 
their inventory of consonants. They substituted [f]‌ for th [θ] in words like thing 
and thin. This seemed to have been a very rapid and dramatic sound change.
These changes were identified by comparing a sample of people in 1968 and 
another similar sample 15 years later. In other words, this was a study done in 
real time: a very reliable method of identifying changes. But where do changes 
start and how do they spread? Why do some instances of variation become the 
source of change while other variations do not? Why do some changes spread 
and others die out? Linguistic factors often play a part but as sociolinguists 
we also need to consider the social factors which affect language use. In our 
discussion, we will briefly discuss the following social factors and their rele-
vance to language change –​ language contact; social status; gender; and language 
interaction.
Reasons for language change
Contact-​induced change
In multilingual societies, change is often driven by language contact. This can 
be seen in many (and perhaps all) of the varieties of English described as “outer 
circle”, such as Indian English, Malaysian English and Philippine English. Various 
World Englishes such as these were discussed in ­chapter 4. In contact languages, 
there is continual influence from the other languages/​codes/​varieties that are 
spoken in the local environment. This means that a situation often occurs where 
variation and change within a language can best be described in terms of how 
similar it is to another language. This is of course not unique to Englishes, and 
is a common phenomenon throughout the world, since, as we have observed in 
previous chapters, most of the world’s population is multilingual. However, there 
is some research that has described changes within contact varieties that do not 
appear to have outside influences, and may be signs of a variety standardising. 
Example 10 provides a case in point.
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
307
Example 10
Linguistic descriptions of Singapore English in the 1970s assumed that 
English as spoken in Singapore consisted of varieties that ranged from basi-
lectal through mesolectal to acrolectal, in the same way that we describe 
variation in creoles. Pronunciation in the acrolectal variety was considered 
to be close to a British RP accent. Thus, vowels in words such as egg or 
beg might be pronounced in a variety of ways including a local variant and 
a variant more like that found in standard Englishes in other parts of the 
world. The vowel that was used in both words would be the same, regard-
less of which variant is used.
However, research in 2005 found that a standard Singaporean pro-
nunciation had emerged in which the vowel in egg was similar to vague, 
whereas the vowel in beg was similar to peg. This does not follow any of 
the patterns established in any inner-​circle varieties of English and suggests 
that Singaporean English has developed a distinctive standard form that 
can be described without comparison to other Englishes.
Example 10 discusses Singapore English, but it is just one of many Englishes 
that are considered to be “New Englishes” or “Post-​colonial Englishes”. These 
Englishes are thought to follow a particular pattern of development, according 
to Edgar Schneider, who has proposed a five-​step model:
1	
Foundation: a contact situation between English and local languages is 
established.
2	
Exonormative stabilisation: English begins to be widely spoken but is used 
predominately by a community of ex-​patriate speakers with reference to an 
external norm, such as standard British English and RP.
3	
Nativisation: English becomes more widespread and variation and change 
rapidly takes place, such as the development of phonological variation and 
lexical borrowing.
4	
Endonormative stabilisation: it is recognised that a distinct way of using 
English has emerged and a standard way of speaking English with reference 
to local norms emerges.
5	
Differentiation: dialects begin to form within the variety of English, reflecting 
the identity of different local groups, which may be based upon ethnicity, 
social class, or some other factor.
Exercise 9
Based upon the information in Example 10, where is Singapore English in relation to 
Schneider’s five steps of development?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
308
Social status and language change
Example 11
[D]‌uring the 1960s . . . many public schoolboys, in an effort to identify 
with their peer group in the less privileged (but more exciting) world out-
side, struggled to shake free of RP and to take on exotic accents like the 
Liverpool “Scouse” of the Beatles generation . . . all this to the dismay of 
their parents.
Note: British English “public” schools are equivalent to private schools 
elsewhere; they are expensive fee-​paying schools.
There is still a great deal of research and discussion about which social groups 
introduce linguistic changes. One answer seems to be that a linguistic change 
may enter a speech community through any social group, but that different types 
of change are associated with different groups.
Members of the group with most social status, for example, tend to intro-
duce changes into a speech community from neighbouring communities which 
have greater status and prestige in their eyes. So upper-​class London speech has 
prestige in the eyes of many people from outside London. Middle-​class people 
in Norwich who visit London regularly are therefore likely to introduce pres-
tigious new London pronunciations or “in” words from London to Norwich. 
The pronunciation of the vowel in top and dog, for instance, has changed in 
Norwich from [ta:p] and [da:g] to RP [top] and [dog]. Middle-​class speakers –​ 
and especially women (a point we return to below) –​ have been among the 
leaders in this change. Similarly, French words such as sangfroid and savoir 
faire have been introduced into English by educated middle-​class people who 
know some French. And the much-​discussed post-​vocalic [r]‌ pronunciation 
in New York was introduced by younger upper-​middle-​class speakers imi-
tating the speech of rhotic communities outside New York which had prestige 
for them.
Lower-​class speakers are more influential in spreading less conscious linguistic 
changes. Lower-​class men in particular often adopt speech forms from nearby 
local workers to express solidarity, rather than status or prestige. Interestingly, 
it is not the people at the bottom of the social heap who tend to innovate in 
this way, but rather those in the middle of the pile. The upper working class is 
how this group has sometimes been described. It may be that this is the group 
whose networks have the particular combination of openness which provides 
exposure to alternative linguistic forms, together with a level of density which 
gives the forms an opportunity to get established. This group has introduced into 
Norwich speech, for instance, a change in the pronunciation of the vowel sound 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
309
in words like hell and tell which is used by people from the surrounding coun-
tryside. Using the new pronunciation, hell sounds something like [hʌ1]. Whether 
this change will spread upwards depends on whether it infiltrates the speech 
of the upper middle class in Norwich before they are aware of its low status 
compared to the RP pronunciation of this vowel.
In Australia, the HRT or uptalk mentioned previously has spread among 
lower socioeconomic groups. People in lower-​paid jobs use this intonation 
most frequently, and it clearly functions as a solidarity marker for this group. 
However, it is regarded by some older higher status speakers, in particular, as 
vulgar, and so it may remain within the lower social echelons. Alternatively, it 
may spread into the informal speech of young people from the higher social 
groups, and gradually spread upwards in this way. In fact, uptalk is now so 
widespread in communities such as Southern California that it no longer 
attracts attention.
Exercise 10
On the basis of what you read in ­chapter 7, do you think women or men are most likely 
to lead a linguistic change?
Answer at end of chapter
Gender and language change
Example 12
At the turn of the twentieth century, Gauchat, a French linguist, decided 
to study the dialect of Charmey, a small remote village in Switzerland. He 
chose Charmey because he thought the dialect would have little or no vari-
ation, but in fact his study ended up as a study of sound change. He found 
that young people were using new pronunciations, and that among people 
of the same age, women were leading the changes. In the speech of the over-​
40s, only women used some of the new variants he identified.
Differences in women’s and men’s speech are another source of variation which 
can result in linguistic change. Sometimes women are the innovators, leading 
a linguistic change, and sometimes men. Women tend to be associated with 
changes towards both prestige and vernacular norms, whereas men more often 
introduce vernacular changes.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
310
In the 1980s in Ucieda, a small village in Spain near the provincial capital of  
Santander, it was noted that men were forced to look outside the village to find  
wives. Many of the village women would not marry the local working dairy  
farmers because they didn’t want to remain in the farming villages. The prospect 
of being stuck at home, as their mothers were, with the cows and the children 
was simply not very attractive. The women’s speech indicated their social  
aspirations. They used more of the standard Castilian final [o]‌ pronunciations  
on words, and fewer of the dialectal final [u] pronunciations, than the men. In  
general in this village, then, the women’s speech was closer to the standard or  
prestige pronunciation of Spanish than the men’s. The women had had enough  
of peasant village life. They had seen different lifestyles and been exposed to the  
standard dialect in their jobs as cooks for upper-​class families or as university  
students. They used more standard forms with people outside the village, and  
gradually these forms extended throughout their speech, reflecting not only their  
social contacts but also their values and aspirations. Women in Ucieda were  
leading change towards Castilian Spanish and introducing prestige variants into  
Ucieda speech.
Map 9.1  Ucieda, Spain
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
311
Exercise 11
In ­chapter 3, we discussed changes in the language use patterns of the town of Oberwart. 
German is gradually displacing Hungarian as the usual language of interaction in many 
families. Which gender do you think is most likely to be leading changes towards greater 
use of German in this community, and why?
Answer at end of chapter
Martha’s Vineyard, by contrast, provides an example of men leading sound 
change. As described earlier in the chapter, it was the fishermen who led the 
change to more centralised pronunciations of certain vowels. The change 
involved the revitalisation of an older, more conservative pronunciation, which 
was re-​invested with a new meaning in the light of social changes on the island. 
It was a change away from the standard to a more vernacular pronunciation, a 
pronunciation which expressed the men’s loyalty to an older set of values which 
they regarded as threatened by the influx of tourists to their island home.
We find a similar pattern in Norwich in England, as mentioned above. Upper-​
working-​class men are leading a sound change away from the RP standard pro-
nunciation of words like hell towards the vernacular norms of the surrounding 
rural area ([hʌl]). These speech norms appear to express the working-​class 
men’s loyalty to local values, and the solidarity of working men as a group. 
The Norwich women, by contrast, are leading change towards RP in a different 
vowel. In Belfast, the same pattern recurs. Women are leading changes towards 
the standard, while men are introducing new vernacular variants.
These generalisations account for differences in women’s and men’s roles in 
relation to language change in a variety of communities. But there are at least 
two types of exception to these patterns. First, women may also introduce ver-
nacular changes into a community, and, secondly, there are communities where 
women are not leading linguistic change in any direction.
The Belfast communities described in ­chapters 7 and 8 illustrate the first 
of these points, as well as the complexity of the processes of change, and the 
slipperiness of a concept like prestige. Contrary to what one might expect, 
young Clonard women are introducing into the Clonard speech community 
vernacular pronunciations such as [ba:d] for bad, which are associated with 
the Ballymacarrett community. Why? A number of factors seem to be involved 
in accounting for this apparently unusual pattern. First, it must be noted that 
prestige is a relative concept. In general, middle-​class speech has prestige and 
working-​class speech does not. But within the working-​class communities of 
Belfast, there is another hierarchy based on factors such as where jobs are avail-
able and where they are not. Within these communities, Ballymacarrett is more 
prestigious than the Clonard, partly because it has relatively full employment 
compared to other areas. So the Clonard women are introducing into their 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
312
community a speech feature which they are imitating from the more prestigious 
Ballymacarrett community. Although this is a change towards the vernacular 
rather than towards the standard dialect, it is a vernacular form used by an 
admired group within the Belfast context.
A second relevant factor accounting for the role of Clonard women in rela-
tion to these vernacular forms is their social networks, a factor discussed in 
­chapter 8. Where women work in jobs which favour the development of multi-
plex networks (for example, at jobs which involve them in interaction with their 
friends, kin and neighbours), then they are likely to develop strong solidarity 
ties with those people. This will be indicated by their speech patterns. So when 
women develop social networks which are close-​knit and multiplex, it seems 
that they too may introduce changes in the direction of vernacular norms.
The young women studied in the Clonard district were employed in a rather 
poor central city store in a shopping area serving both Catholic and Protestant 
communities. In other words, it was at a kind of community intersection. This is 
a typical situation for the introduction of a speech innovation. These women had 
also developed work and leisure patterns which resembled those of tradition-
ally male groups. They worked full-​time in workplaces outside the place where 
they lived, and socialised with workmates after work. So the introduction of 
vernacular forms into their community by these young women was an indicator 
of who they interacted with through their daily networks and broader range of 
contacts through their work (and another example of speech accommodation, 
which is discussed in ­chapter 10). It also indicates the importance of solidarity in 
favouring and consolidating vernacular forms in the speech of any group, male 
or female, who both work and play together.
Finally, the generalisation about women leading change towards the standard 
dialect applies only where women play some role in public social life. In Iran, young 
mothers in Tabriz encourage language shift by their children from Azerbaijani to 
Persian by using Persian to them before they start school, as noted in ­chapter 3. And 
these young urban women are increasingly contesting social norms. But in Iranian 
communities where the status of women is relatively fixed, such as the rural villages 
and small towns, there is little motivation for the women to lead linguistic change. 
It will not lead them anywhere socially. In such communities, women do not lead 
linguistic innovation in any direction. This is one reason why more sociolinguistic 
research is needed on variation and change in languages with non-​WEIRD cultures 
(WEIRD stands for Western Educated Industrialised Rich & Democratic).
Exercise 12
The high rising terminal (HRT), or uptalk, has been discussed as an example of a change in 
progress in some English-​speaking speech communities. Which gender would you predict 
is leading this change? Why?
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
313
Exercise 13
Figure 9.4 reports on the increasing frequency in the city of York (UK) of definite article 
reduction (DAR). For example, There was only three of us left in Ø street or There was only 
three of us left in t’ street instead of There was only three of us left in the street.
(a)	
What are the two social variables under investigation?
(b)	
Is this a typical change in progress graph? How do you know?
(c)	
Who is leading the change according to the graph? Is this typical?
(d)	
This graph reports on an apparent time study. How does it differ from a real 
time study?
Answers at end of chapter
Interaction and language change
Interaction between people is crucial in providing the channel for linguistic 
change, as previous examples have implied. In this final section we briefly iden-
tify more explicitly the ways in which interaction –​ or lack of it –​ has affected 
the progress of linguistic changes in a number of communities.
Linguistic change generally progresses most slowly in tightly knit communities 
which have little contact with the outside world. There are plenty of examples of 
places where isolation has contributed to linguistic conservatism. Scottish Gaelic 
has survived best in the Western Isles of Scotland. The far north and East Cape of 
New Zealand are the places where the Maori language has survived best. Little 
Figure 9.4  Distribution of DAR variants by speaker’s gender in apparent time
Source: Reproduced from Tagliamonte and Roeder (2009: 93).
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
314
mountain villages in Italy, Switzerland and Spain are places where older dialects 
of Italian, French and Spanish are preserved. Sardinia is another example of a 
relatively isolated area which is renowned for its conservative linguistic forms 
compared to other Italian dialects such as Sicilian.
One of the best-​known examples of linguistic conservatism is Iceland. 
Icelandic has altered relatively little since the thirteenth century, and it has 
developed very little dialectal variation. By contrast, during the same period 
English has changed radically and has been characterised by gross dialectal 
variation. What explains this contrast? Iceland is much more geographically 
isolated than England, and so it has been much freer from outside influences, 
but this is not a sufficient explanation for the relative lack of variation in the 
language. The glaciated middle of the country means that Icelandic communi-
ties are scattered around the coast, and communication between them was very 
difficult in the past, especially in winter. This kind of geographical situation nor-
mally leads to a great deal of dialect divergence. Why has Icelandic remained so 
stable and so conservative?
One answer to this question seems to be that, although they were geograph-
ically separated, the Icelandic communities had very strong political and cul-
tural ties, and, against all the odds, they therefore maintained contact with 
each other. They held regular annual assemblies at which all the important 
chiefs gathered. They attached great importance to kinship and friendship links 
and so people kept in close contact from generation to generation and over 
long distances. They talked to each other a lot. Frequent interaction, as well as 
positive attitudes to preserving homogeneity, were thus crucial factors which 
prevented the development of differences in Icelandic. Positive views about pre-
serving the language from change and aggressively protectionist policies still 
continue to prevail.
Example 13
When he was 7 years old, Frank moved from Cincinnati in the USA to Te 
Awamutu, a small town in New Zealand. The children in Frank’s class at 
school were fascinated by the way he spoke. When he found something 
interesting, for example, he said far out! Frank’s schoolmates had only 
heard Americans on TV say far out before. But evidently real people said it 
too! The expression soon spread and far out became well-​entrenched as a 
positive response in children’s speech in Te Awamutu.
Is face-​to-​face interaction crucial for linguistic change? Or is exposure to new 
forms on the media sufficient? Linguists are not yet sure about the extent to 
which the media can influence people’s speech habits. Some believe that frequent 
exposure to a pronunciation on TV can bring about change. Others argue that 
face-​to-​face interaction is necessary before change occurs. A popular compromise 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
315
is the view that the media can “soften up” listeners by exposing them to new 
forms in the speech of admired pop stars or TV personalities. When people are 
subsequently exposed to a particular form in the speech of a real person, they are 
then more likely to adopt it. To investigate this question, a group of researchers 
at the University of Glasgow, led by Jane Stuart-​Smith, compared the speech of 
Glaswegian adolescents with the speech of characters on long-​running British 
soap opera Eastenders, which is set in London’s East End. They were particularly 
interested in a change that appeared to be going on with (th)-​fronting (using [f]‌ 
for [θ] and [v] for [ð]). They found not only did the Glaswegian teenagers use 
(th)-​fronting more than the characters on Eastenders, but that the characters on 
Eastenders used much less (th)-​fronting that real Londoners. This reinforces the 
idea that while there may be some reinforcement, it is real life, not TV exposure 
that brings about language change.
Example 14
Sam lives in Norwich, but he travels to London twice a week, staying over-
night with a group of mates there at least once. He works for a small shop 
which sells DVDs and CDs. His job involves collecting orders from the 
shop’s supplier in London, but also keeping in touch with current DVDs 
and the music scene to pick up the latest trends. In London, he goes to rock 
concerts and discos with his mates, and they watch new DVDs together. In 
Norwich, he is much envied and admired by his old school mates. He goes 
to football matches with them at the weekend when Norwich is playing at 
home, and they play snooker and drink together. Sam’s speech is influenced 
by his London contacts. He uses all the latest Cockney slang: his speech 
is liberally sprinkled with glottal stops, and he talks about ’avin’ a bi’ of 
bovver, not bother.
In Norwich, many young people now say bovver [bovə] instead of bother and 
togevver [təgevə] for together. This is a change for them, but these forms have 
been used in London for decades. Has this change spread from London through 
the influence of young people who spend a lot of time in London? It is a ver-
nacular form which has covert prestige –​ it expresses solidarity with a particular 
sub-​culture represented by pop music, for example, and negative attitudes to the 
“establishment” (older, socially more statusful groups).
As indicated throughout this chapter, many linguists believe that linguistic 
changes spread through the social networks of individuals. Particularly important 
are people like Sam who acts as a kind of linguistic entrepreneur moving between 
groups. He serves an important linking function between two distinct but close-​knit 
social networks. As a link-​person, he also acts as a kind of bridge or channel for 
the spread of new linguistic forms from one group to the other. People like Sam act 
as linguistic innovators within social groups. Innovators are often marginal rather 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
316
than core members of the groups adopting an innovation. So, for an innovation to 
have a good chance of adoption by the central members of a group, it will generally 
need to be transmitted through a number of different links or bridges. One person 
is rarely adequate as the only source of a linguistic change. And the change will also 
need to have some sort of prestige attached to it –​ whether overt (expressing social 
status) or covert (expressing solidarity or counter-​culture values).
New forms can gain prestige from the media. TV may have played a part in 
explaining at least the speed with which pronunciations like [bovə] have spread. 
The use of such forms by admired individuals on TV may have made Norwich 
people more prepared to adopt these forms which are well established in London 
vernacular speech (and as noted earlier have become established in MLE). The 
fact that a form is used in the vernacular speech of the capital city is probably 
another factor contributing to its prestige or attractiveness to the ears of young 
people in other places. Vernacular London speech is generally seen as more desir-
able than the speech of other cities. But it seems likely that the actual process of 
diffusion or the spread of forms involves marginal young people like Sam who 
move between groups in each place.
The spread of glottal stops in words such as bit and bitter, where RP uses 
[t]‌, seems to have followed a similar route. This is a change which is spreading 
very rapidly out of London in all directions. Here too there is some evidence 
that the change is spreading by face-​to-​face contact rather than via the media. 
Areas closer to London have adopted this change more quickly than areas fur-
ther away. If the media were the main factor influencing change, there is no 
reason why glottal stops shouldn’t be heard in Liverpool and Leeds as quickly 
as in Oxford, Bristol and Norwich. But this isn’t what has happened. There is 
evidence that glottal stops were heard in the speech of young people in cities 
closer to London before they were heard in the speech of those further away. 
(Acknowledging, of course, that the glottal stop is also a well-​established feature 
of Scottish English; indeed, Glasgow has been dubbed “the original home of the 
glottal stop”.) The influence of the media may again explain the speed of the 
change, however. The use of London vernacular speech by popular actors and 
TV personalities may help promote positive attitudes to the form in advance of 
its adoption –​ but most sociolinguists still think that actual changes in people’s 
speech require face-​to-​face contact with real people.
Exercise 14
Look again at ­example 11 in ­chapter 8. In this community, linguistic change is being led by 
women like Mary’s mother. Compare Sam’s contribution to linguistic change (­example 14 
above) with that of Mary’s mother in the South Carolina community.
What similarities and differences can you identify?
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
317
Exercise 15
Compare the different words used to introduce quoted speech in the following utterances.
(a)	
So she says “why not?”
(b)	
So she goes “why not?”
(c)	
So she’s all “why not?”
(d)	
So she’s like “why not?”
(e)	
And this is her, “why not?”
If you speak English, have you heard these phrases used to introduce quoted speech by 
people in your speech community?
Which do you consider to be new forms and which are established forms?
How do you think the new forms are spreading?
Answer at end of chapter
Example 15
Urdu
pala
jəra
kat
ke
le
ke
a
ya
Marathi
pala
jəra
kap
un
ghe
un
a
l
o
Kannada
tapla
jəra
khod
i
təgond
i
bə
yn
greens
a little
cut
having
taken
having
come
past
I
I cut some greens and brought them.
Looking at ­example 15, you might guess that these three sentences were from 
three dialects of the same language. But this is not the case. They are from three 
different languages of India, and they do not even all belong to the same language 
family. The three languages are Kannada, a Dravidian language, and two Indo-​
European languages, Urdu, which is related to Hindi, and Marathi, a regional 
language of India. In many places, these languages are quite distinct and word-​
for-​word translation of the kind illustrated in the example would be considered 
impossible. But in Kupwar, a small Indian village on the border between these 
two language families, regular and long interaction has resulted in the merging 
of the structure of the three languages which is illustrated above.
About 3,000 people live in Kupwar and for centuries three socially distinct 
groups have lived together there, each speaking a different language as their 
home language. The Jains use Kannada, the Muslims use Urdu, and the Dalits 
(formerly labelled Untouchables) speak Marathi, the regional language and prin-
cipal literary language of the area. The villagers regularly use all three languages 
in their daily activities. Over time, with constant switching between at least 
two languages in any interaction, the languages have become more and more 
alike. The word order is now identical, and there are extensive similarities in 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
318
Map 9.2  India and surrounding countries
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
319
the structure of words and use of inflections too. A word-​for-​word translation is 
easy between the different languages.
It is the communicative needs of the people –​ their need to be able to interact 
easily –​ which has led to a merging of the grammars. On the other hand, each 
group also wants to be identifiably distinct, and this has led to the maintenance 
of differences at the vocabulary level. One pair of linguists commented that this 
is the linguistic equivalent of having your cake and eating it too.
This last example illustrates a general point: language change often operates 
within clear constraints. Language serves two very basic functions, as mentioned 
in ­chapter 1: a referential or informative function and a social or affective 
function. Most of this chapter has focused on the contribution of social factors to 
linguistic change –​ examining how and why it proceeds as it does. The functions 
of linguistic forms as indicators of social status or as signals of solidarity have 
been extensively discussed. In this last example, the requirement that language 
convey referential meaning as well as expressing social or affective functions, 
such as group identity, imposes another constraint on the linguistic developments 
in Kupwar. Language change does not proceed at a rate which results in unin-
telligibility between groups in contact –​ the referential requirements are always 
present. Though parents often complain they cannot understand their children’s 
slang, there is never any real danger that members of groups who interact regu-
larly will lose linguistic contact.
Conclusion
Tracing the progress of a linguistic change through the speech of a community 
is a fascinating exercise. It involves considering the influence of a wide range 
of social factors. This chapter has obviously drawn on the discussions of social 
class, age, gender, networks, and interaction in earlier chapters. Any of these 
factors may be relevant in accounting for where a particular change starts 
or how it spreads through a community. The discussion in this chapter has 
also demonstrated that identifying changes in progress involves considering 
different speech styles as well as the speech of people from different groups. 
A change which introduces a vernacular variant into a community (such as 
glottal stop for final [t]‌ in Britain) will infiltrate people’s more casual speech 
styles first. A new prestige variant (such as post-​vocalic [r] in New York 
speech), on the other hand, will be heard first in people’s more formal and 
careful speech styles.
As indicated in this chapter, a great deal of research on language change in 
progress has adopted a first-​wave approach to studying variation, focusing on 
macro categories such as age, gender, ethnicity and class. However, Eckert’s 
research on vowel changes in the speech of Detroit high school students 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
320
(mentioned in ­chapter 8) provides an example of how second-​wave ethno-
graphic methods can illuminate the ways in which language changes proceed. 
She demonstrated that the Burnouts (rather than the Jocks) led vernacular 
changes as a result of their greater exposure to and orientation to urban 
speech. She related this finding to the intense identity work that adolescents 
engage in. In the Interlude which follows we explicitly discuss the importance 
of the central concept of identity in sociolinguistic research. Then in Part III, 
we move on to consider research which has involved both second-​ and third-​
wave approaches to the study of sociolinguistic variation. In ­chapter 10, we 
look in more detail at how sociolinguists might distinguish different speech 
styles, for example, and at the effect of a range of contextual factors on 
people’s speech.
Methods
To collect information and data in relation to language change over time and linguistic 
change in progress:
•	 Exercise 1 suggested that newspapers, magazines and blogs can provide clues to lin-
guistic change in progress.
•	 Exercises 2 and 7 describe how a word list can be used to elicit the pronunciation of 
specific words which a linguist suspects are involved in language change. If you use this 
method, it is important to avoid indicating explicitly which sounds you are interested 
in. Most people will pronounce words rather more carefully if they know this is your 
focus and, since language change tends to occur first in less formal styles, this will not 
be helpful. (You can tell them afterwards if they are interested.)
•	 A range of methods used to collect social dialect data is described at the ends of 
­chapters 6, 7 and 8. Most of these can be used to study language change both in real 
time and apparent time but the most widely used method is a social dialect interview 
involving a schedule of questions and tasks which can be replicated with different age 
groups (apparent time) or at different points in time (real time).
•	 Consider the new vocabulary generated around coronavirus COVID-​19 such as: the 
blend word covidiot; the development of new meanings for words like bubble and lock-
down; and phrases such as managed isolation and social distancing. There are many 
sources for exploring such lexical and semantic changes: e.g. newspapers, blogs, online 
chat groups, and TV and radio programmes recorded during the period of the pandemic.
•	 An easy way to see language change over time in terms of the frequency of particular 
words is by using corpus data. One such corpus is the Google Books Ngram corpus, 
which uses all texts on Google Books as its source. It can be found here: https://​books.
goo​gle.com/​ngr​ams.
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
321
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 9
Answer to ­exercise 1
Many letters and blogs comment on linguistic changes in progress. In my obser-
vation, most comment on variant pronunciations, with word meaning changes 
next most frequent, and fewer concerned with grammatical points. This prob-
ably indicates the amount of variation to be heard in the language at any point, 
rather than the relative salience or noticeability of these different levels of lin-
guistic analysis. In many languages, there is a wider range of variation in pro-
nunciation at any one time than at other levels of analysis.
Though there is generally less grammatical variation than variation in pronun-
ciation, grammatical variation is usually more noticeable or attention-​grabbing. 
So the use of one vernacular grammatical form, such as an instance of multiple 
negation (e.g. I don’t know nothing about that), may be enough for a listener to 
classify a speaker as uneducated.
Finally, it is interesting to note that relatively few letters to the newspaper or 
internet blogs not written by linguists welcome language change or comment 
positively on a linguistic change in progress. People who seek to publish 
their opinions about language change tend to be very conservative in their 
views. Most deplore change and condemn new pronunciations and usages as 
abominations.
Answer to ­exercise 2
A number of factors affect the likelihood of [r]‌ pronunciation in the words and 
phrases provided. You may be able to identify some of them in the data you have 
collected.
1	
There are some people who have rhotic accents. Many Scottish and Irish 
people, for instance, will pronounce [r]‌ whenever it occurs in the written 
form of the word.
2	
The influence of the written form means that people who do not usually 
pronounce [r]‌ in a word like lore may do so when they see it written down, 
especially when it is near to the word law. They may do this to make the 
contrast in meaning clear.
3	
People often introduce an [r]‌ between vowels not only in a phrase such as 
folklore and mythology where there is an r in the spelling, but also in a 
phrase like law and order. Reasons such as analogy and ease of articula-
tion have been suggested for this linking [r]. It has been labelled “intrusive 
[r]”, and it is often the focus of complaint in letters to the newspapers and 
online.
4	
A study of post-​vocalic [r]‌ pronunciation in New Zealand indicated that it 
was more likely to be pronounced after the vowel in words like nurse and 
first, even when it was not pronounced in other words.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
322
Answer to ­exercise 3
The rule in this northern English dialect is: was is used in positive statements and 
were is used in negative statements, regardless of the pronoun. This rule is sim-
pler than the rule in standard English which requires different forms of the verb 
according to different pronouns, and regardless of the polarity of the statement.
North of England dialect
Standard English
I was
I weren’t
I was
I wasn’t
you was
you weren’t
you were
you weren’t
she was
she weren’t
she was
she wasn’t
we was
we weren’t
we were
we weren’t
they was
they weren’t
they were
they weren’t
Answer to ­exercise 4
If dialect contact produces a sound change, systemic linguistic factors would 
predict a process of simplification. This would result in the disappearance of 
the phonetic distinction: i.e. one sound wins out over the other and is used in 
both phonetic contexts. And this is precisely what has happened in Texan cities. 
City people use [ai] regardless of the sound which follows: i.e. [rait] and [raid]. 
Overall, the phonetic system for the koine is thus simpler.
Social factors have almost certainly made a contribution too, however. The 
dialects which retained the phonetic distinction were generally associated with 
more conservative and rural people. Abandoning the distinction helped to sep-
arate the new city people from their rural origins and contributed to the con-
struction of their social identity as city citizens.
Answer to ­exercise 5
The figure suggests that the percentage of potential adopters to accept an innov-
ation rises slowly at first, then gathers speed, and then slackens off until it reaches 
a ceiling or limit. This has been described as a slow–​quick–​quick–​slow progres-
sion. It has been suggested that the pattern for the rate of spread of a change in 
the language and the pattern of change in the speech of an individual may be 
much the same S-​type curve.
Answer to ­exercise 6
The sound change began in words where the final n (or ns) was preceded by a. 
Next it spread to words where the final n was preceded by e. So the progress of 
the change can be described as follows:
•	words ending in -​an(s)
•	words ending in -​en
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
323
•	words ending in -​on
•	words ending in -​in
•	words ending in -​un.
Although this presents the progression in a way that suggests the sound  
change was completely adopted in each group before proceeding to the next  
group, this is in fact not the way these changes are likely to have progressed.  
There would have been overlap, as suggested by the wave theory. Changes in the  
pronunciation of group 2 words would have begun before all the group 1 words  
had changed their pronunciation, and so on. This overlapping pattern describes  
the progress of changes in an individual’s speech as well as in the language as a  
whole. Figure 9.5 captures this well.
Answer to ­exercise 8
(a)	 A peak in young adult’s speech: This is a likely pattern for a socially presti-
gious form entering a community. Little children are not usually very socially 
conscious, so it won’t be high in their speech, and adolescents are less likely 
to adopt it because of their tendency to hold anti-​society values.
(b)	 A peak in middle age: This is the normal pattern for a stable standard 
variable.
(c)	 A peak in old age: This suggests a change in progress with old people using 
the highest frequencies of a form which is disappearing.
Figure 9.5  Overlapping S-​curves: French words ending in -​n affected by sound change
Source: Reproduced from Aitchison (2001: 93).
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
324
Answer to ­exercise 9
As Singaporean English has developed a new standard way of speaking that 
references local rather than external norms, it is at step 4 in Schneider’s model.
Answer to ­exercise 10
The answer depends on what kind of linguistic change is being discussed. As a 
broad generalisation, women more often than men lead changes in the direc-
tion of the standard or prestige norms; when men lead changes, they generally 
involve vernacular variants. But things are generally not so simple, as we will see.
Answer to ­exercise 11
In Oberwart, young women are leading the change towards German monolin-
gualism. Hungarian is associated with peasant networks and a rural lifestyle. 
German is the language of industrial progress and high-​status well-​paid jobs for 
women and men. Most young women in Oberwart want to marry non-​peasant 
German-​speaking men (“peasant men can’t get wives!” is how one sociolin-
guistic researcher summarised the situation).
This example illustrates that the same social forces are relevant in accounting 
for language change in multilingual and in monolingual speech communities. 
The ways in which language changes spread and the range of social reasons for 
change are similar in very different speech communities.
Answer to ­exercise 12
Since the HRT, or uptalk, began as a vernacular rather than a standard feature 
in the communities where it has been studied, it is difficult to predict whether its 
introduction is more likely to be led by women or by men. While women tend to 
lead prestige changes, vernacular changes may be led by either gender.
Data from the Sydney sociolinguistic survey of the 1980s demonstrated 
that the HRT was used three times as often by young people as by older 
people at the time of the survey. The data also suggested that women were 
leading this change.
One possible reason for women’s lead in relation to this change is the affective 
function which the HRT or uptalk serves in discourse. It has been suggested that 
uptalk is a facilitating device, inviting the addressee to participate in the conver-
sation. Such facilitative forms seem to be more frequent in women’s speech. The 
discourse function of the HRT may therefore account for its greater frequency in 
women’s speech. This point is explored further in ­chapter 12.
Answer to ­exercise 13
(a)	 The two social variables are the gender and age group of the speaker.
(b)	 The pattern shown in the graph is not easy to interpret. It seems typ-
ical of a vernacular change in progress in that young men are reported 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
325
as using more of the DAR variant. But it is also noteworthy that older 
people use this variant more than middle-​aged people which suggests it 
may be a stable vernacular feature which has recently become significant 
for young men.
(c)	 The graph indicates that young men are leading the change. But as noted 
above, social dialect research indicates vernacular changes may be led by 
either gender.
(d)	 A real time study would report on the use of the feature by the same groups 
at different points in time (ideally at least 20 years apart). This apparent 
time study reports on the use of a vernacular feature by people in different 
age groups, and so we have to infer how change is proceeding from this 
information.
Answer to ­exercise 14
Though both Mary’s mother and Sam are acting as agents of linguistic change, 
they are leading change in different directions. Mary’s mother is introducing a 
change towards the standard into the speech of her island community. Sam is 
introducing a change towards the vernacular into Norwich young men’s speech. 
Note in both cases the importance of:
1	
economic factors –​ their jobs are the reasons for their moving between two 
communities on a regular basis
2	
interaction –​ it is the speech of the people they interact with which is the 
source of the new linguistic variants
3	
attitudes –​ the speech forms they adopt and import into their home com-
munities are those of a group they see as having something they admire and 
aspire to (status, wealth, social influence, and so on).
See ­chapter 15 for further discussion of attitudes and their contribution to lan-
guage change.
Answer to ­exercise 15
The words says (a) and goes (b) are older, colloquial quotative forms for intro-
ducing reported speech. The newer quotative forms are be all (c) and be like (d). 
Since these forms were first noted in the speech of young Americans, it seems 
likely that American TV programmes, movies and music, together with increased 
mobility, especially among young people, are all factors which have contributed 
to their spread. There is some evidence that although these forms occur in the 
speech of teenage boys and girls, they are most frequent in the girls’ usage, and 
girls appear to be leading the spread of the forms. This is a nice, specific example 
of the globalisation of English. The form this is (e) as a quotative is noted in 
MLE, as discussed in this chapter and ­chapter 8. If you have heard this in another 
variety of English, it may be spreading right now.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
326
Concepts introduced
•	Speaker innovation
•	Rhotic accent
•	Change from above
•	Covert prestige
•	Change from below
•	Koines and koineisation
•	Multi-​ethnolects
•	Wave theory
•	Lexical diffusion
•	Apparent-​time method
•	HRT (high rising terminal)
•	Real-​time study
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Allan (1990);  Warren (2016) on the HRT or uptalk in New Zealand English
Cheshire et al. (2011) on MLE and its features
Clyne (2000) for the term “multi-​ethnolect”
Cooper (1982) on language change
Deterding (2005) on Singapore English
Eckert (2018): ­chapter 3
Freywald et al. (2011) on Kreizdeutsch
Gal (1978) on Hungarian
Gordon and Maclagan (2001) on ear/​air vowel merging in New Zealand English
Gumperz and Wilson (1971) on Kupwar
Guy et al. (1986) suggest the HRT is becoming a stable feature of Australian 
English
Hazenberg (2017) on the un-​merging of the vowel sounds in NEAR and 
SQUARE in Auckland
Hilmarsson-​Dunn and Kristinsson (2010) on current language policy in Iceland
Holmquist (1985) on Ucieda
Horvath (1985) for Sydney data
Irwin and Nagy (2007) for spread of rhoticism in Boston
Kerswill (2004); Kerswill and Williams (2000) on koines and koineisation
Khan (1991) on women’s linguistic patterns in India
Labov (1963); Pope (2002); Blake and Josey (2003) on Martha’s Vineyard
Labov (1966) for New York data
Labov (1972a) on Gauchat’s study of Charmey
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE CHANGE
327
Labov (1981, 1990) on sound change
Lass (1987) on rhotic accents
Leonard (2011) on homogeneity in Icelandic
Marsden (2013) for spread of rhoticism in New Zealand
Mather (2012) on replication of Labov’s New York department store study
McWhorter (2015) on multi-​ethnolects
Milroy and Milroy (1985) on language change and Icelandic
Mirvahedi (2020) and personal communication on Iran
Schneider (2003) on the Dynamic Model of New English
Stuart-​Smith (2007); Stuart-​Smith et al. (2013) on the contribution of TV to 
sound change
Tagliamonte and D’Arcy (2004) on quotatives
Tagliamonte and Roeder (2009) for discussion of definite article reduction 
(DAR) and the graph in ­exercise 11
Thomas (1997) on Texan dialects
Trudgill (1974, 1988) for data on Norwich
Tuske, Clara personal communication about current slang among young people 
in Maryland, USA in 2020
Warren (2016) reviews research which indicates that uptalk is well established 
throughout different age groups and even different social groups in some com-
munities, and he suggests it may serve different functions for women and men
Williams (1990) on the Isle of Wight
Quotations:
Example 2 is based on a contribution to “Listeners’ Views” heard on a New 
Zealand radio programme
Example 11 is from Honey (1989: 33)
The quotation that Glasgow is considered “the original home of the glottal stop” 
is from Macafee (1997: 528)
The quotation “peasant men can’t get wives” is from Gal (1978)
The comment on Kupwar residents enjoying “the linguistic equivalent of having 
your cake and eating it too” is from Finegan and Besnier (1989: 386)
Paul Warren wrote about coronavirus COVID-​19 vocabulary in the Wellington 
newspaper the Dominion Post: 4 January 2021: page 13
Useful additional reading
Aitchison (2012)
Bauer and Trudgill (1998)
Bell (2014): ­chapter 8
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USERS
328
Bell and Holmes (1992) on interpreting data on ear/​air pairs in New Zealand 
English
Chambers (2003): ­chapter 4
Chambers, Trudgill and Schilling-​Estes (2004)
Downes (1998): ­chapters 5, 6 and 7
Eckert (2018): ­chapters 3, 4 and 5
Levon and Ye (2020) on uptalk, perceptions and ideology
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 7
Meyerhoff, Schleef and Mackenzie (2015) on methodology
Romaine (2000): chapter 9
Tagliamonte (2012)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 8
Warren (2019) on ear/​air merging in New Zealand English
 

329
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-12
Sociolinguistics and identity
Identity is a central concept in sociolinguistics. You may have noticed that the 
word “identity” has been used in every single chapter of this book, which indicates 
the importance sociolinguists place on the concept. But what is identity? We have 
used the term a lot, but providing a precise linguistic definition of identity is diffi-
cult because identity can be looked at from a wide variety of perspectives.
Some people consider identity as equivalent to self: in other words, identity is 
the inner part of each of us, the bit that is doing the thinking. While this is one 
aspect of identity, sociolinguists tend to view identity as existing at the interface 
between the social world and the personal world. Language is the link between 
these two worlds. In other words, it is language in use that constructs identity. 
This means that a person constructs multiple identities through their interactions 
with different people in different contexts.
So where do we start when investigating how language constructs our social 
identity? In Part I of this book, identity was mentioned in relation to language 
choice. By choosing to speak a certain code or variety in a situation, a speaker 
identifies themselves as a member of that speech community. This may also iden-
tify a speaker in terms of national or regional identity. The way linguistic choices 
can indicate group membership was also discussed in Part II, which focused on 
language variation in monolingual communities. Looking at how language varies 
across a range of social factors, we examined how the way we speak relates to 
factors such as gender, age, social class, and ethnicity, as well as the local social 
groups with whom we interact. So we don’t construct our identity in relation to 
just one social factor, and even the way we realise or express a single linguistic 
variable can have implications for the way in which our identity is constructed.
Example 1
Danny is a teenager in Glasgow. He speaks Glaswegian Urban Scots, so he 
pronounces the words thing or think as hing and hink. This contrasts with 
the non-​standard way of pronouncing these words elsewhere in Britain, 
Interlude: identity 
in sociolinguistics
 
 
 

Interlude
330
where (th/​dh)-​fronting (/​θ/​>[f]‌ and /​ð/​>[v]) or (th/​dh)-​stopping (/​θ/​>[t] and 
/​ð/​>[d]) occurs. In other (th)-​words, Danny uses (th)-​fronting, so he says 
frow for throw.
Paul is also a teenager in Glasgow and is at the same school as Danny. 
He uses (th)-​fronting in most th-​ words. Paul and his friends think Danny 
is a ned, a local term for someone who is anti-​establishment and behaves 
anti-​socially, somewhat similar to the meaning of chav in other parts of 
Britain or more recently roadman in London. Danny thinks Paul and his 
friends are not as “hard” as he is and he often bullies them.
Andrew is another teenager from Glasgow. He goes to a different school 
and when he uses th-​ words, he tends to use the standard pronunciation 
because he speaks Scottish Standard English. He encounters Paul and his 
friends in a shopping mall in town one day and hears them talking to one 
another. Hearing the way they speak, he avoids them, thinking, “I don’t 
want any trouble from those neds”.
In ­example 1, each of the teenage boys has a different set of beliefs about 
the others. These beliefs are formed from a mixture of stereotypes and socio-
linguistic knowledge. Both Danny and Paul use (among other local vernacular 
features) non-​standard variants in the way they realise or pronounce -​th words. 
To Andrew, this makes them both appear to be from a lower social class than him. 
In Glasgow, male working-​class adolescents are often stereotypically associated 
with violence and crime, and this is why Andrew avoids Paul and his friends. 
To Paul, Andrew sounds posh, and it is Danny and people who use the more 
“Glaswegian” variants that he identifies as neds. Danny reinforces this stereo-
type with his bullying behaviour. Andrew also sounds posh to Danny, and for 
him the way somebody speaks also communicates how tough or “hard” they are.
Source: Nick Wilson.

identity in sociolinguists
331
So the way a linguistic variable is realised or expressed may be interpreted 
in different ways by different people. Listeners combine linguistic input with 
stereotypes and experience to construct the perceived identity of a speaker. At 
the same time, speakers may also be conscious of the “identity work” that their 
own linguistic practices achieve, and purposefully try to portray a particular 
stereotype in order to produce some effect on the hearer. For instance, if Paul 
wanted to sound tough, he might adopt features of the broader Glaswegian 
dialect that Danny uses, such as the [h]‌ variant for thing and think. Another 
way of putting this is that in Glasgow, saying hing indexes tough masculinity. 
Sociolinguists use the term “indexicality” to refer to the associations that a lan-
guage feature has in the mind of the hearer. So you may have noticed that we 
used the term indexing in previous chapters to refer to the way a person signals 
a particular aspect of their social identity (e.g. age, social background, ethnicity, 
gender) through the way they speak.
Exercise 1
Given the situation in ­example 1, where young working-​class male speakers use hing 
and hink to construct a form of tough masculinity, what variant might you expect young 
working-​class females to use? What could this index?
Indexicality
The concept of indexicality lies at the heart of the third wave of variationist 
research which focuses on analysing the process of social identity construc-
tion in sociolinguistics. Penelope Eckert suggests that we can think of any 
linguistic feature in its local context as existing within an indexical field. In 
other words, any particular feature has a range of possible social identity 
associations (see figure I.1). Such associations or indexicalities might be social 
categories such as age, gender, ethnicity, social class, or membership of a par-
ticular speech community.
Other more personal indexicalities or associations are also possible and 
these are often linked to a person’s beliefs about particular identity categories. 
Consider intelligence or education, for example. A hearer may make judgements 
about a speaker in terms of their intelligence based on how they speak, as in 
figure I.1. Some people who believe they only speak a standard variety may asso-
ciate regional varieties of speech with a lack of education or low intelligence. 
This type of indexicality is a part of language attitudes and is discussed further 
in ­chapter 15. Example 2 also illustrates this point.
 
 

Interlude
332
Example 2
Trainee teachers from the north of England are being asked to “tone down” 
their accents in order to be better understood in the classroom. Those with 
southern accents, in contrast, are less likely to be asked to modify their 
speech, which seems to be regarded as more acceptable.
One trainee teacher from Leicester who described her accent as 
“Midlands”, was told that if she wanted to teach phonics –​ which is used 
in primary schools to teach reading and writing –​ it would be best “to 
go back to where she came from”. If she didn’t, she was advised to use a 
teaching assistant to teach children certain sounds that differed from her 
own accent.
A trainee teacher from Nottingham who was asked to modify her accent 
said she was “quite upset ... to be told I don’t speak properly”. Another, 
who was advised to control her Mancunian accent, said: “I can still do the 
job just as well as someone else can who speaks posher … the children will 
still learn.”
And another trainee teacher from Manchester was told by the headteacher 
at the school where she was training to “be careful” regarding her accent. 
He then added, “But you are from Eccles”, and laughed.
(Sally Weale, The Guardian, Friday 13 May 2016)
Figure I.1  Indexicality, stereotypes and identity
 
 

identity in sociolinguists
333
When a speaker says something, listeners link the linguistic features they use 
to certain social stereotypes that they associate with these features. These stereo-
types may be based on real sociolinguistic patterns of variation and often have to 
do with social prestige, as discussed in ­chapter 6. However, stereotypes are often 
inaccurate or exaggerated ways of thinking about people, and a person’s identity 
is not constructed only with reference to social identity categories, even when 
these are local categories such as “jocks” and “burnouts”, or “neds”, “chavs” and 
“roadmen”. When a person talks, they also communicate their understanding of 
a situation, and the way they view the people they are talking to, and what they 
are talking about, and this contributes to their identity construction in an inter-
action just as much as the dialect features that they use. Example 3 illustrates 
this point.
In ­example 3, an excerpt from a TV comedy show, the speakers use 
Multicultural London English (MLE). This variety has developed through con-
tact between existing London dialects, such as Cockney, and incoming codes 
including some from the Carribean (e.g. Jamaican Creole) and South Asia 
(Indian English). Speakers of this variety use a range of non-​standard phonetic 
features, such as (th)-​stopping, (th)-​fronting, [h]‌-​dropping and [t]-​glottalisation. 
MLE speakers also use non-​standard syntax such as ain’t for standard isn’t. In 
addition, these features suggest that the speakers are young, because this var-
iety of English is relatively new, and white Londoners who currently use these 
features tend to be young.
Example 3
Lisa and Lauren are sitting on a bench. Both are wearing tracksuits.
Lisa:	
Alright.
Lauren:	
What you doin all dressed up for?
Lisa:	
Goin to dat party in I?
Lauren:	
You ain’t got no business wearing dat. What party?
Lisa:	
Darren’s party innit? S’gonna be mashup.
Lauren:	
I don’t know nuffin about no party.
Lisa:	
You do. You fick or summink? He told us about it las’ 
week dint ee? Party tonight, Saturday innit?
Darren:	
Alright.
Lauren and Lisa:	 Alright.
Darren:	
You ready Lis?
Lisa:	
Yeah listen right, she dint know there was a party at all.
Darren:	
I know.
Lisa:	
What d’you mean you know?
Darren:	
She ain’t invited.
 

Interlude
334
Lisa:	
What!
Lauren:	
Am I bovvered?
Lisa:	
Ah don’t worry about it. You know just come along they 
won’t mind.
Darren:	
No he will mind he don’t like you, you not invited mate.
Lauren:	
Am I bovvered though?
Lisa:	
But what are you going to do?
Lauren:	
Nuffink cos I ain’t bovvered.
Lisa:	
But yeah but you could just–​
Lauren:	
Do I look like I’m bovvered?
(The Catherine Tate Show, Episode 2)
Notes on pronunciation (some of the following are represented in the 
spelling of the transcription):
1	
all instances of word medial and word final /​t/​ are glottal stops
2	
θ→f (th-​fronting)
3	
ð→d (th-​stopping)
4	
all instances of “ing” are /​ɪn/​ unless marked as “ink” i.e. (/​ɪŋk/​)
5	
“alright” is pronounced /​ɑːɹaɪːʔ/​, usually with a high-​rising tone
6	
[h]‌-​dropping occurs in all instances of word initial /​h/​.
Linguistic features may index identity categories such as age and member-
ship of a speech community. Linguistic features also construct the speaker’s 
identity in relation to local norms or stereotypes. For instance, in this con-
text they could be heard as constructing a speaker as “cool” because they are 
using a relatively new variety of English, which has covert prestige. Cool is 
a label for something which we call a “stance”. Stance indicates a speaker’s 
position in relation to what they are saying. Other stances a person might 
convey through their language are “sarcastic”, “cooperative”, “sceptical” and 
“passionate”. Stances indicate a speaker’s evaluation of things or events, their 
attitudes towards them, and the degree to which a speaker considers something 
is certain or credible (epistemic stance). When you take a particular stance, you 
indicate similarities to or differences from the person(s) you are speaking to 
(your interlocutors).
In ­example 3, all three speakers use the vernacular features associated with 
MLE, but let’s consider Lisa’s speech in particular. By using the MLE dialect 
features, Lisa positions herself as similar to her interlocutors –​ she aligns with 
them in terms of her identity. But by using the discourse tag innit? she also 
constructs a stance in relation to what she is saying. Innit? (as well as in I? and 
dint ee?) functions as a tag question inviting a response from her interlocutors. 
The use of tag questions may express a stance of uncertainty, but they may also 
convey a stance of co-​operation with others, and these are features associated with 

identity in sociolinguists
335
a feminine stereotype in some speech communities, as we discuss in ­chapter 12. 
So all these features contribute to Lisa’s complex identity construction.
Example 4
Barbara is a middle-​aged, middle class, Pākehā (of European origin), New 
Zealand woman, and each of these social categories is indexed in her 
speech. In other words, her speech conforms to local norms for indexing 
age, social group, ethnicity and gender (e.g. in relation to variants of [-​ing] 
and [h]‌-​drop, educated vocabulary, and relatively dated slang).
But, of course, features of her speech (such as her preferred endearments) 
may also index a range of other factors, such as her sexual orientation (she 
is lesbian), and the social role she is enacting (e.g. she is the mother of 
three children, the writer of magazine articles and a media blog, the Chief 
Executive of a large organisation, and much more). Her speech style also 
varies in line with the context in which she is talking (chairing a senior 
management meeting, chatting with a friend, or responding in a media 
interview), the topic of the conversation (e.g. her children’s activities, her 
passion for art, the technical aspects of her Chief Executive role, and so 
on), and her attitude to the topic (e.g. passionate, indifferent or committed). 
Different speech styles are the topic of the next chapter where we will dis-
cuss how they contribute to identity construction.
Indexicality is therefore a crucial part of the way in which identity is 
constructed through language. And while a speaker may intend to construct a 
particular identity, it is the interpretation by their interlocutor of the way they 
talk and the strategies they use in interaction that construct their social identity. 
In other words, an identity may be constructed and perceived as intended if 
both speaker and hearer share an understanding of what the linguistic features 
in an utterance and interactional stances index. On the other hand, there is 
always the potential for either a negative identity construction based on lan-
guage attitudes, or a miscommunication of stance to occur, and this is further 
discussed in ­chapters 11 and 13. Example 4 also illustrates how a person is 
never just a woman. They are a particular woman from a particular place with 
a particular ethnicity, particular sociocultural norms, and so on. Recent socio-
linguistic research takes account of these intersections, and strives to avoid 
over-​simplification.
One further interesting way that sociolinguists analyse social identity con-
struction is by examining what people communicate both verbally and non-​ver-
bally in extended interaction (i.e. discourse), as we illustrate in ­chapter 14. This 
approach takes account of the way that people respond to a speaker as well as 
examining features of the speaker’s talk and non-​verbal communication.
 

Interlude
336
Identity can be viewed as a central sociolinguistic concept (alongside vari-
ation) which will continue to appear throughout the remaining chapters of this 
book. In the next chapter we consider style, a concept which third-​wave vari-
ationist research regards as directly associated with identity construction.
Answer to ­exercise 1
As noted in ­chapter 8, vernacular features are often associated with masculine 
identity, and ­example 12 in that chapter provided an illustration where a mas-
culine identity is constructed by a female speaker. However, it is not just the 
way we talk that constructs our identity, but also what we say, i.e. the pragmatic 
function of the discourse. In that example, the topic of conversation is fighting, 
a stereotypically male topic.
In ­chapter 7, we discussed the problem of how vernacular usage by women 
is interpreted, and that while toughness and masculinity might be one interpret-
ation, it may be equally likely that the use of vernacular features is used as a way 
of signalling membership of a particular class, age or social group. Also, we must 
remember that the construction of identity is not just about how a speaker talks, 
but also about how their way of speaking is interpreted by a hearer. In other 
words, it depends on the hearer.
For instance, a speaker might identify as Glaswegian and “not posh” (i.e. a 
speaker may not identify as working/​lower class, but also as not middle/​upper 
class). In Stuart-​Smith and Timmin’s research on th-​fronting in Glasgow, a large 
majority of speakers who used the [h]‌ variant labelled themselves as “normal”, 
while they were labelled as “neds” by other participants (including other neds 
who self-​identified as normal). This just goes to show how subjective identity 
categories can be.
References and further reading
Bucholtz (2009) on stance
Bucholtz and Hall (2005) on identity construction
Cheshire et al. (2011) on MLE
Eckert (2008, 2018) on indexicality and indexical fields
Ilbury (2020) on accommodation and identity
Karimzad (2019) on constructing multilingual identities
Kiesling (2006) on stance
Kiesling (2011) on indexicality
Lawson (2014) on (th)-​fronting in Glasgow and masculinity
Levon and Ye (2020) on gender ideologies and indexicality
Stuart-​Smith and Timmins (2010) on th-​fronting in Glasgow
Tagliamonte (2012)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Language variation: focus on uses
Part III
 


339
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-14
Example 1
Three different requests for information:
1	
From a friend:
Where were you last night? I rang to see if you wanted to come to the 
movies.
2	
In court from a lawyer:
Could you tell the court where you were on the night of Friday the 
seventeenth of March?
3	
From a teacher to his pupils in school on the day after Hallowe’en:
I know some of you went “trick-​or-​treating” last night and so I thought 
we might talk a bit today about how you got on. Did you go out last 
night Jimmy?
In each of these three utterances the speaker is trying to elicit the “same” infor-
mation from the addressee, but the context dramatically influences the form of 
the query. Each request for information is expressed quite differently.
Language varies according to its uses as well as its users, according to where 
it is used and to whom, as well as according to who is using it. The addressees 
and the context affect our choice of code or variety, whether language, dialect 
or style. The difference between the three utterances in ­example 1 are stylistic 
differences, and style is the focus of this chapter.
In the second section of this book, we looked at ways in which people’s speech 
indexes their group membership. These features can also be described as stylistic 
features. People talk of an ethnic style or a female register, for instance, referring 
to the way people speak by virtue of their ethnicity or gender, regardless of con-
text. In this chapter, however, the focus is on the ways in which speech is both 
influenced by and constructs the contexts in which language is used, rather than 
characteristics of the speakers. We first consider the influence of the addressee 
on the speaker’s language, exemplifying from less formal contexts where the 
degree of solidarity between participants is an important factor contributing to 
choice of speech style. Then we examine features of speech style in a range of 
Style, context, and register
10
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
340
contexts which vary in formality, looking at the interaction between the for-
mality and status dimensions. Finally, the way that distinctive styles or registers 
may be shaped by the functional demands of particular situations or occupations 
is considered.
Exercise 1
Record a friend telling a story from their own personal experience (i.e. something interesting 
that has happened to them) first to an adult, and then to a child of about five years old 
who is the same gender as the adult. Note any differences in the vocabulary chosen and the 
grammatical patterns used in the different contexts. Can you account for the differences in 
style by considering the characteristics of the different people they were talking to?
If you used English for this exercise, some of the features you may have noted are 
discussed in the next section.
Addressee as an influence on style
Example 2
(a)	
Excuse me. Could I have a look at your photos too, Mrs Hall?
(b)	 C’mon Tony, gizzalook, gizzalook.
The first utterance in ­example 2 was addressed by a teenage boy to his friend’s 
mother when she was showing photos of their skiing holiday to an adult friend. 
The second utterance was addressed to his friend who was looking at photos 
on his phone. The better you know someone, the more casual and relaxed the 
speech style you will use to them. People use considerably more standard forms 
to those they don’t know well, and more vernacular forms to their friends. In 
a study in Northern Ireland, for instance, people used more standard English 
forms with an English stranger visiting their village than they did talking to a 
fellow villager.
This generalisation holds across different languages, though we illustrate 
mainly with English in this chapter. In Mombasa, a city in Kenya, the kind of 
Swahili that people use when talking to their friends is quite different from the 
variety they use to a Swahili-​speaking visitor from outside the community. The 
style of Japanese that people use with colleagues at work (people who are soto 
or outside the family bubble) is different from the style they use to their family 
members who are uchi.
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
341
Example 3
Request from a male boss of an organisation to a female administrative 
assistant:
Coffee irete moraeru?           
Could I ask you to bring me a cup of coffee?
Request from the same man to his wife:
Coffee irete kureru?         
Could you bring me a cup of coffee?
Example 3 illustrates that stylistic differences are most often expressed in the 
verb forms selected and the specific suffixes used to indicate levels of politeness. 
The complexities of Japanese style are discussed further in the section on non-​
English speaking communities later in this chapter. The same pattern has been 
reported from research in a wide range of different places, including Sweden 
and Hawai’i. The speaker’s relationship to the addressee is crucial in deter-
mining the appropriate style of speaking. Relative social status is important 
as well as how well you know someone or how close you feel to them, as 
­example 3 indicates.
Many factors may contribute to determining the degree of social distance 
or solidarity between people –​ relative age, gender, social roles, whether people 
work together, or are part of the same family, and so on. These factors may also 
be relevant to people’s relative social status. We illustrate by discussing how the 
age of the person addressed may influence a speaker’s style.
Age of addressee
Example 4
Mrs N:	
Oooh, he’s walking already.
Mother:	
Oh, yes, he’s such a clever little fellow aren’t you?
Mrs N:	
Hullo coogieboo. Eeeee . . . loo, diddle diddle dur. Ohh eechy, 
weechy poo poo. Ohh eechy, peachy poo poo. There look at 
him laughing. Oh he’s a chirpy little fellow. Yeees. Whoooo’s 
a chirpy little fellow eh? Yes. Ooooh, can he talk? Can he 
talk eh eh?
(Monty Python’s Flying Circus, Episode 28)
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
342
Uttered with high pitch and a sing-​song intonation, there is little doubt about 
the appropriate addressee of utterances such as those in ­example 4. This 
example comes, however, from a Monty Python sketch where these utterances 
are addressed to the speaker’s adult son, who responds with “Yes, of course 
I can talk, I’m Minister for Overseas Development”. The humour depends on 
the audience’s perception of the inappropriateness of addressing a statusful adult 
in this way.
People generally talk differently to children and to adults –​ though some adjust 
their speech style or “accommodate” more than others. This is apparently true 
for many different speech communities. Talking to younger brothers and sisters, 
even three-​year-​olds have been heard using sing-​song intonation and “baby-​
talk” words like doggie, which they no longer use themselves. When talking 
or writing to a six-​year-​old as opposed to a 30-​year-​old, most people choose 
simpler vocabulary and grammatical constructions. Compare the excerpts in 
­example 5 and guess which letter was addressed to the child, and which to the 
adult. Note the different ways in which the same ideas are expressed to the 
different addressees.
Example 5
(a)	
Dear Paul
Thanks for your last letter and the subsequent postcards from exotic 
resorts. We were all green with envy over your trip to Rio with all 
expenses paid! How do you get to be so lucky!
Thanks also for the great T-​shirt you sent for Rob’s birthday. He has 
vowed to write to you in order to express his gratitude personally –​ but 
don’t hold your breath! He is particularly embroiled in some new com-
plex computer game at present which is absorbing every spare moment.
(b)	 Dear Michael
Thank you very much for the letter you sent me. It was beautifully 
written and I enjoyed reading it. I liked the postcards you sent me 
from your holidays too. What a lovely time you had swimming and 
surfing. I wished I was there too.
Robbie liked the T-​shirt you chose for him very much. He has been 
wearing it a lot. He has promised to write soon and thank you but he 
is very busy playing with his computer at the moment. So you may 
have to wait a little while for his letter. I hope mine will do instead 
for now.
Most of the sentences in the letter to the child (b) are short and grammatically 
simple. Longer ones consist of simple sentences linked by coordination (and, 
but). The sentences are also more explicit. Little is left for the child to infer. There 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
343
are more complex sentences in the letter to the adult (a) with more subordinate 
clauses: e.g. He has vowed [to write to you [in order to express his gratitude]]. 
(The brackets indicate the beginning and end of the subordinate clauses.)
The vocabulary in the two letters is different too. In the first letter, low 
frequency words such as subsequent, exotic, resorts, vowed, gratitude, 
embroiled and absorbing suggest the addressee is not a six-​year-​old. In the 
second letter, simpler and more common words are used, such as like, play 
and too, with phrases like a lot and a little while. The different addressees 
clearly influence the language used, even though the message in each letter is 
very similar.
Many speakers also use a different style in addressing elderly people, often 
with features similar to those which characterise their speech to children –​ a 
simpler range of vocabulary and less complex grammar, the use of we rather 
than you to refer to the addressee, and sometimes even the sing-​song intonation 
which characterises baby-​talk! The effect is generally patronising, as illustrated 
in ­example 6 which was sing-​sung by a nursing aid to an elderly woman in a pri-
vate hospital. However, this same feature can also be used to reduce the severity 
of criticism or the force of commands when talking to groups. For example, 
a rugby coach might say “we didn’t hit enough tackles today”, but the coach 
wasn’t the one supposed to be doing the tackling. This shows how similar styles 
can communicate different meanings in different contexts.
Example 6
It’s time for our [i.e. your] lunch now isn’t it Mary. We [i.e. you] better wash 
our [i.e. your] hands.
Exercise 2
The speech often used by English speakers to foreigners who do not speak English well 
is also distinctive. It has been labelled “foreigner talk”. It has features similar to those 
which characterise adults’ speech to young children. If you have the opportunity, record 
someone talking to a learner of English. Note characteristics which are similar to those 
heard in speech to young children.
Answer at end of chapter
In this section, we have shown how the age of the addressee may affect a 
speaker’s style. Most people use language differently to the very young and the 
very old. The next section illustrates how the social background of the people 
you talk to may influence the language used.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
344
Social background of addressee
Example 7
(a)	
Last week the British Prime Minister Mr XX met the Australian 
Premier Mr YY in Canberra . . . Their next meeting will not be for 
several months.
(b)	 Las’ week British Prime Minister XX met Australian Premier YY in 
Canberra . . . Their nex’ meeding won’t be for sev’ral months.
These utterances illustrate a number of linguistic features which distinguish the 
pronunciations of newsreaders on different radio stations. In (b) there is simplifi-
cation of consonant clusters, so [la:st] becomes [la:s] and [nekst] becomes [neks]. 
The pronunciation of [t]‌ between vowels is voiced so it sounds like a [d]. Hence 
meeting sounds like meeding. The definite article the is omitted before the titles 
Prime Minister and Premier and honorifics such as Mrs and Mr disappear. And 
finally, utterance (b) contracts will not to won’t.
All these features have been identified as typical of the contrasting styles of  
newsreaders on different New Zealand radio stations. Figure 10.1 shows the  
contrast between the newsreader on a middle-​of-​the-​road station (ZB) with an  
audience from the lower end of the social spectrum, compared to the prestigious 
National Radio network (YA) with its typically older, relatively affluent  
audience.
This is strong support for the importance of audience design: the influence 
of the addressee or audience on a speaker’s style. The most convincing evidence 
comes from the behaviour of the same newsreader on different radio stations. 
Where the stations share studios, a person may read the same news on two 
Figure 10.1  Linguistic features of radio announcers’ speech on different stations
Source: This diagram was constructed from data in Bell (1984).

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
345
different stations during the same day. In this situation, newsreaders produce 
consistently different styles for each audience. The news is the same and the 
context is identical except for one factor –​ the addressees. So the same person 
reading the news on the middle-​level station reads in a very much less formal 
style than on the higher-​brow radio station.
Exercise 3
Which of the following sentences would have been most likely to have been produced by a 
newsreader on high-​brow BBC Radio 4, as opposed to a newsreader on Radio 1, a popular 
music station aimed at young people. What linguistic clues can you identify?
(a)	
Despite repeated efforts to contact him, the Health Secretary, Mr Matt Hancock, 
was not available for comment this morning.
(b)	
The las’ time Maggie Fatcher visited Australia the weather wasn’t much to write 
home about. This time it’s been much be’er according to reports from Sydney.
(c)	
Enquiries have not yet provided any new leads in the investigation of the 
latest postbox robbery, according to the official police spokesman, Detective 
Superintendent Ray Huntley.
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 4
Variation in linguistic features is patterned or structured in written as well as spoken texts. 
The intended audiences of newspapers as well as radio and TV stations affect the lan-
guage used. Determiner deletion, for instance, is very much more frequent in some British 
newspapers than others. There are two columns of newspapers below. In which would you 
expect to find most determiner deletion?
1
2
The Times
Daily Mail
The Guardian
Daily Express
The Daily Telegraph
The Mirror
The Sun
If you can get access to copies of these papers, compare 1,000 words from one news-
paper from each of the columns above, and calculate the number of determiners which 
have been deleted as a percentage of the total number of determiners which could have 
been used.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
346
Exercise 5
Imagine you have a sister who has just given birth to a girl. The baby’s name is Sky and she 
weighed 3.5kg (7lbs 11oz) at birth.
•	 Write an email to your favourite aunt to tell her the news.
•	 Use your Facebook page to share the news with your friends.
•	 Text your best friend with the news.
Now examine the different ways in which you conveyed the “same” information in those 
three different media contexts. What are the distinctive linguistic features of the different 
styles?
Example 8
June works for a travel agent in Cardiff, the capital city of Wales. She sees 
a wide range of people in the course of her job. Last Tuesday she saw an 
accountant, an old friend from school, a woman who works for the council 
as a cleaner, and a local schoolteacher. As she spoke to each person, she 
pronounced words like better and matter differently, depending on the way 
her customer pronounced those words.
When June is speaking to people from the same social background as her 
own, she pronounces the consonant in the middle of better as [d]‌ about a quarter 
of the time. We could say that this is her “normal” level of [d] pronunciation 
between vowels. But when she is talking to customers from a lower social class, 
she adapts her pronunciation to their speech. For the lowest social class in 
Cardiff, the average amount of [d] pronunciation in the middle of words like 
better is about 78%. When June was planning the cleaner’s holiday for her, June 
shifted from her normal 26% of [d] pronunciations to over 60%. In other words, 
she went over halfway towards the cleaner’s speech style. It is June’s job to get on 
well with her clients and encourage them to book with her firm. Accommodating 
to their speech style is one way she signals her desire to get on well with them 
and make them feel comfortable.
There are many other examples of responsive shifts of this kind in the way a 
person speaks. Some of the most interesting from a social dialectologist’s point 
of view are those which show how people’s speech changes in response to the 
interviewer’s speech. We noted in ­chapter 7 that the speech data collected in 
social dialect surveys is inevitably influenced by the addressee’s speech style. An 
American study demonstrated that features of AAL occurred more frequently 
in an interviewee’s speech when she was interviewed by an African American as 
opposed to a white female fieldworker.
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
347
On the other hand, Peter Trudgill, interviewing people in his hometown, 
Norwich, found that his own speech shifted towards that of the people he was 
interviewing. In different interviews, the number of glottal stops he used instead 
of [t]‌ in words like better and bet mirrored very closely indeed the level of glottal 
stop usage in the speech of his interviewee. Interviewing a lower-​class person 
who used 100% glottal stops in these contexts, for instance, Peter Trudgill used 
glottal stops in 98% of the possible contexts. But when he was interviewing 
a person from a higher social group whose glottal stop level was only 25%, 
his own level dropped to just over 30%. This is pretty clear evidence that the 
interviewer was accommodating his speech to the speech of interviewees from 
different social backgrounds. Most people do this to a greater or lesser extent in 
different contexts. In the next section, we will look at some of the reasons which 
have been proposed for this speech behaviour.
Accommodation theory
The examples in the previous section have demonstrated that when people talk 
to each other their speech often becomes more similar. In other words, each 
person’s speech converges towards the speech of the person they are talking 
to. This process is called speech accommodation. It tends to happen when the 
speakers like one another, or where one speaker has a vested interest in pleasing 
the other or putting them at ease. So the travel agent in ­example 8 wanted to 
gain her customers’ orders, and the interviewer Trudgill wanted to gain his 
interviewee’s cooperation.
Speech convergence
Converging towards the speech of another person (speech convergence) is usu-
ally considered a polite speech strategy. It implies that the addressee’s speech is 
acceptable and worth imitating. Using the same pronunciation and the same 
sort of vocabulary, for instance, is a way of signalling that you are on the same 
wavelength.
Exercise 6
There are many different ways in which a person may accommodate to the speech of 
another. Make a list of as many features as you can think of.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
348
How do speakers accommodate?
At a party when you respond to and develop a topic introduced by your addressee, 
you are converging in the content of your speech. When people simplify their 
vocabulary and grammar in talking to foreigners or children, they are conver-
ging downwards towards the lesser linguistic proficiency of their addressees. 
When a complicated technical message is “translated” for the benefit of someone 
who does not know the jargon, speech accommodation is involved. When, in an 
interview with the hospital matron, a nurse adopts some of the matron’s pronun-
ciation features, she is converging upwards in her speech.
In multilingual countries, such as Singapore, India and the Democratic 
Republic of the Congo (Zaire), with many varieties to choose from, people may 
accommodate to others by selecting the code or variety that is most comfortable 
for their addressees. In the marketplace, people sometimes accommodate to the 
language of the person selling goods in order to secure goodwill and, hopefully, 
a good bargain. Conversely, in a bilingual city like Montreal, French Canadians 
in cafés and stores may use English to customers that they identify as English 
speakers in order to improve their chances of a good sale.
Exercise 7
Look at the examples provided above on the influence of the addressee on a person’s 
speech style. Can you identify two clear examples of upward convergence and two 
examples of downward convergence?
For this exercise, treat “upward convergence” as referring to convergence towards the 
speech of someone with more power or status, or someone deserving respect in the con-
text. And treat “downward convergence” as referring to convergence towards the speech 
of someone with less status or power.
In order to answer this with accuracy, you ideally need some idea of the baseline or 
“normal” style of each participant in a particular context –​ a somewhat debatable concept 
and one that is difficult to define. Nevertheless, it is possible to make some reasonable 
deductions about upward and downward convergence from the information provided.
Answers at end of chapter
Speech divergence
Example 9
A number of people who were learning Welsh were asked to help with a 
survey. In their separate booths in the language laboratory, they were asked 
a number of questions by an RP-​sounding English speaker. At one point, 
 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
349
this speaker arrogantly challenged the learners’ reasons for trying to acquire 
Welsh, which he called a “dying language which had a dismal future”. In 
responding to this statement, the learners generally broadened their Welsh 
accents. Some introduced Welsh words into their answers, while others 
used an aggressive tone. One woman did not reply for a while, and then 
she was heard conjugating Welsh verbs very gently into the microphone.
Though the situation in which this example occurred –​ a language laboratory –​ 
is somewhat artificial, it provides a very clear example of speech divergence. For 
obvious reasons, the respondents deliberately diverged from the speech style, 
and even the language, of the person addressing them. They disagreed with his 
sentiments and had no desire to accommodate to his speech.
Deliberately choosing a language not used by one’s addressee is the clearest 
example of speech divergence. When the Arab nations issued an oil communiqué 
to the world not in English, but in Arabic, they were making a clear political 
statement. They no longer wished to be seen as accommodating to Western 
English-​speaking powers. Similarly, minority ethnic groups who want to main-
tain and display their cultural distinctiveness will often use their own linguistic 
variety, even, and sometimes especially, in interaction with majority group 
members. Māori dissidents who can speak fluent English have nevertheless 
insisted on using Māori in court, making it necessary to use an interpreter. Giving 
a speech in a minority language to an audience made up largely of majority 
group monolinguals is another example of linguistically divergent behaviour. 
This, too, has sometimes been done to make a political point. Janet attended a 
conference in Spain where one of the keynote speakers delivered his presentation 
in Catalan, an official language of Catalonia which has fought for recognition 
alongside the dominant Spanish.
Accent divergence also occurs. In New Zealand, working-​class men often 
respond to the university-​educated students who join them just for the summer 
on the docks, in factories or in the shearing sheds by increasing their swearing 
and using a higher frequency of vernacular forms. On the other hand, people who 
aspire to a higher social status will diverge upwards from the speech of those 
from the same social group. In Liverpool, for example, teachers in some schools 
pronounce words like bath and grass with a back vowel more typical of southern 
than northern accents. So they say [ba:θ] and [gra:s] which distinguishes them 
from their pupils and many of their pupils’ parents, who say [baθ] and [gras]. 
And that is often precisely the point of divergent pronunciations: they may signal 
the speakers’ wish to distinguish themselves from their addressees.
Speech divergence does not always indicate a speaker’s negative attitudes 
towards the addressees. Where the divergent forms are admired, divergence 
can be used to benefit the diverger. A small difference, such as a slight foreign 
accent (provided it is one which is viewed favourably), can be appealing. Brigitte 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
350
Bardot exploited her French accent in speaking English to add to her appeal. 
Victor Borge’s Danish nationality and accent were both well-​integrated into his 
comedy performance to positive effect. The Spanish-​accented English of actress 
Penélope Cruz and tennis champion Rafael Nadal clearly enhances their public 
appeal. A foreigner can also elicit help by using an accent or vocabulary which 
signals inadequate control of the language. If a foreign visitor sounds too native-​
like it may work to their disadvantage, and even arouse suspicions. An English 
Canadian who was fluently bilingual in French and English aroused consider-
able hostility when a French-​speaking group he was talking with realised he 
could speak perfect English too. He reported that they treated him as if he was a 
spy. Perfect convergence sometimes has its costs.
Speakers may also deliberately diverge both from their own usual speech style 
and that of their addressee(s) towards the style of a third party for special effect. 
This has been labelled referee design –​ the third party is “referred to” although 
they are not present. We could describe them as a reference group. People ini-
tiate such stylistic shifts for a range of reasons. When you imitate your teacher 
to amuse your friends, or when you adopt a prestige accent to impress your 
boss, you are engaging in referee design. TV adverts sometimes include accents 
which are not those of their audience for special effects such as humour, or to 
borrow the accent’s prestige in order to enhance the attractiveness of the product 
being promoted. In New Zealand, a Scottish or north of England accent is some-
times used to exploit the stereotype of the honest and straightforward bloke 
whose word can be trusted. New Zealand and Australian singers similarly draw 
on referee design when they adopt features of overseas singers’ styles, such as 
American post-​vocalic [r]‌, or Cockney glottal stops. Presumably they believe this 
will enhance the appeal of their song for their audience, and hence boost their 
sales. In England, young white English teenagers sometimes adopt features of 
Indian or Panjabi English speech, or even AAL, “crossing” over into the other 
group momentarily for special stylistic effect –​ to identify with their music or 
alternatively to mock and distance themselves from the group.
Like metaphorical code-​switching, with which it has much in common, ref-
eree design allows the speaker to exploit the symbolic function of language, and 
allude in an economical way to more than one set of values. More recently, this 
kind of multi-​voiced discourse has been described as “stylisation”.
Stylisation
Example 10
In the year 2000, Clara was a senior manager in a commercial organisation. 
Because of her dignified and directive style, her team nicknamed her “Queen 
Clara”, a title she found amusing. At the beginning of a team meeting, her 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
351
colleagues teased her by asking how her mother was, referring to the fact 
that the British Queen Mother had recently had an accident. Recognising 
the tease, she responded by adopting a hyperlectal British accent modelled 
on that of Queen Elizabeth, saying: “My husband and I are quite confident 
that the Queen Mother is on the road to recovery.”
When someone goes beyond their usual or normal ways of speaking and 
behaving and engages in a “high” or “strong” performance of some sort, the 
term stylisation is useful. The most obvious examples of stylisation are found 
in the speech of comedians and singers who perform to entertain or amuse us. 
When the British comedian Catherine Tate performs an antagonistic teenage girl 
using the phrases am I bovvered? and I ain’t bovvered, this is stylisation. When a 
New Zealand singer uses an American accent, we can say she is styling her per-
formance, perhaps to suggest she is part of a wider international culture. Drag 
queens use features of stereotypically feminine speech to perform a differently 
gendered identity from their “real” identity.
We can all make use of linguistic resources in this way. When your friend 
adopts a “pseudo” accent to make you laugh or to be sarcastic, they are indul-
ging in stylisation. When London teenagers who normally use London ver-
nacular English use features of Asian English in their talk to distance themselves 
from or challenge their addressees, this can be described as stylisation. As 
mentioned above, Ben Rampton has described this particular type of stylisation 
as “crossing” –​ young people temporarily cross over into another group’s speech 
variety. When eight-​year-​old New Zealand girls switch to American accents 
to indicate they are “on stage” in the drama section of their after-​school pro-
gramme, they are engaging in stylisation.
Stylisation can draw on any aspect of language. A stylised performance may 
involve features of a particular regional accent, or stigmatised vernacular gram-
matical features, or very formal grammar, or very erudite vocabulary, or high 
pitch or a distinctive intonation pattern. We have many resources at our disposal 
if we choose to perform in a different style from our usual way of speaking. 
Parody and pantomime typically involve stylisation.
Exercise 8
Read the following case study and consider how it illustrates stylisation. What does 
the linguistic behaviour described have in common with code-​switching (described in 
­chapter 2)? How does it differ?
Belgian teenagers with a Moroccan migration history in a multi-​ethnic school in 
Antwerp use snippets of Antwerp dialect alongside Standard Dutch to express a range 
of different social meanings. Antwerp dialect is associated with poor, rural farmers, 
with factory workers and with older people with racist attitudes. Despite these negative 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
352
social meanings, these teenagers use the dialect for parodying and making fun of 
others, including their teachers, and to distinguish themselves from more recently 
arrived immigrants.
Answer at end of chapter
Accommodation problems
Example 11
Father:	
What’s this? (pointing to picture)
Finn:	
[maus]. (i.e. mouth)
Father:	
[maus] eh.
Finn:	
No daddy not say [maus], daddy say [maus] (i.e., daddy doesn’t 
say [maus], daddy says [mauθ]).
It is possible to overdo convergence and offend listeners. Over-​convergent behav-
iour may be perceived as patronising and ingratiating, as sycophantic, or even as 
evidence that the speaker is making fun of others. We look for possible reasons 
for changes in other people’s speech. If the reasons appear manipulative, we are 
less likely to feel positive about convergence.
Listeners also react differently to different types of convergence. A Canadian 
speaker was more favourably rated when he accommodated in speech rate and 
content (by explaining unfamiliar American terms), than when he adopted a 
“mild” RP accent. Accent accommodation was seen as going too far. People 
seemed to feel that by altering his accent the speaker was misleading his listeners 
about his “true” identity.
In general, then, reactions to speech convergence and divergence depend on 
the reasons people attribute for the convergence or divergence. If divergence is 
perceived as unavoidable, for instance, then the reaction will be more tolerant than 
when it is considered deliberate. Deliberate divergence will be heard as uncoopera-
tive or antagonistic. Someone who uses English in Montreal because their French 
is clearly inadequate will be perceived more sympathetically than someone who, 
though a fluent bilingual, deliberately chooses to use English to Francophones.
Exercise 9
It has been suggested that when women and men are talking to each other, women tend 
to converge more than men. Is this claim consistent with the discussion of differences in 
women’s and men’s linguistic behaviour in ­chapter 7?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
353
Example 12
Grant:	 The next thing he had an apoplectic fit. I didn’t know 
what to do.
Brian:	
I think you just have to stay calm, talk quietly and stay with 
them till they recover.
Should Brian correct Grant’s use of apoplectic and point out he really means 
epileptic? When people come from different backgrounds or have different 
experiences, this may cause occasional problems. When someone mispronounces 
a word in a conversation with you, for instance, how do you react? What if you 
then have to use the word yourself? Do you converge and mispronounce it too, or 
do you diverge and pronounce it the way you know it ought to be pronounced? 
An accurate interpretation of a person’s speech behaviour in such cases obvi-
ously involves considering more than just the influence of the addressee. The 
best way of solving an accommodation problem will depend on the context. The 
speech accommodation or style shifting which often occurs unconsciously in 
casual contexts may not be appropriate in more formal settings, as we shall see 
in the next section, though an ingenious sociolinguist can often elicit remarkable 
style shifts, even within an interview.
Context, style, and social class
Formal contexts and social roles
Example 13
Yesterday in the Wellington District Court . . . the All Black captain, 
Jock Hobbs, appeared as duty solicitor. Presiding was his father, Judge 
M.F. Hobbs.
Etiquette required Mr Hobbs to address his father as Your Honour, or 
Sir, and the Bench had to address counsel as Mr Hobbs . . .
[Mr Hobbs] could not remember the last time he had to call his father 
Sir . . . Said the father to son, when the son announced his appearance on 
all matters as duty solicitor: “I appreciate the difficulties you are labouring 
under, Mr Hobbs.”
Although a powerful influence on choice of style, characteristics of the 
addressee are not the only relevant factors. In ­example 3 in ­chapter 1, the way 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
354
the businesswoman was addressed was largely influenced by the relationship 
between the woman and her addressee in terms of relative status and solidarity. 
People who were very close to her used a short form of her first name (Meg), 
or an endearment. People who were less close and socially subordinate used 
her title and last name (Mrs Walker). In ­example 13 above, however, the choice 
of appropriate form is influenced not by the personal relationship between the 
participants, but by the formality of the context and their relative roles and 
statuses within that setting.
A law court is a formal setting where the social roles of participants override 
their personal relationship in determining the appropriate linguistic forms. In 
classrooms where a child’s mother or father is the teacher, the same pattern 
is usually found. Children call their parents Mrs Grady or Mr Davis rather 
than Mum or Dad. A Catholic priest will be addressed as Father even by his 
own father during a religious ceremony. People’s roles in these formal contexts 
strongly influence the appropriate speech forms. Example 14 illustrates the way 
vocabulary varies with setting.
Example 14
Judge:	
I see the cops say you were pickled last night and were 
driving an old jalopy down the middle of the road. True?
Defendant:	
Your honour, if I might be permitted to address this 
allegation, I should like to report that I was neither 
inebriated nor indeed was I under the influence of an 
alcoholic beverage of any kind.
The formal and Latinate vocabulary used by the defendant which is appro-
priate to very formal settings –​ inebriated, alcoholic beverage and allegation –​ 
contrasts for humorous effect with the inappropriately informal vocabulary used 
by the judge. Words such as pickled and jalopy are normally heard in much more 
casual contexts.
Different styles within an interview
Example 15
(a)	
Reading passage:
There’s something strange about that –​ how I can remember everything 
he did: this thing, that thing and the other thing. He used to carry 
three newspapers in his mouth at the same time. I suppose it’s the 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
355
same thing with most of us: your first dog is like your first girl. She’s 
more trouble than she’s worth, but you can’t seem to forget her.
(b)	 Minimal pairs:
tin
thin
den
then
beer
bear
pin
pen
In an interview between two strangers, we would expect the interviewee to use 
a relatively careful style of speech, as discussed in ­chapter 7. In a social dialect 
survey in New York, William Labov demonstrated some ingenuity in devising 
ways of overriding this “stranger effect” to elicit a wider range of styles within 
the interview context: the Labovian methodology.
Labov asked his interviewees to read aloud a passage of continuous speech 
and a set of word lists, one of which included words such as pin and pen (called 
“minimal pairs”) which differed only on one pronunciation feature. Example 15 
illustrates the kinds of reading material used. Both these styles were much more 
carefully monitored than the speaker’s “normal” interview style. As a result, the 
number of instances of standard variants used in these styles was considerably 
higher than in the careful interview style, or, to put it another way, speakers used 
fewer vernacular forms in these styles. One speaker, Tom, for instance, used 2% 
vernacular forms in reading minimal pairs, 30% in reading a passage and 65% 
vernacular forms in interview style.
The basis for the distinctions between the styles, Labov suggested, was the 
amount of attention that people were paying to their speech. In a situation which 
involved two strangers, an interview schedule of questions to be answered, and 
a recording device as another member of the audience, it was relatively easy to 
elicit more formal styles.
Eliciting a more casual style was more of a challenge. Labov refers to a person’s 
most relaxed style as the vernacular (using a definition of this term which was 
foreshadowed in ­chapter 4). He describes the vernacular as the style in which 
the minimum of attention is given to the monitoring of speech. In this sense, the 
vernacular is a person’s most basic style –​ the style which, if it can be captured, 
provides the sociolinguist with the most systematic and therefore most valuable 
data for analysis. In some ways, it has come to represent a kind of holy grail in 
social dialectology.
Trying to obtain an audio-​recording of this vernacular style involves the 
observer’s paradox, i.e. observing (and recording) the way a person speaks when 
they are not being observed. This is always a methodological challenge and 
researchers have used a range of strategies to distract people from concentrating 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
356
on their own speech. In order to elicit this style, Labov skilfully manipulated 
the topic of discussion within the interview. By asking questions which grabbed 
people’s attention, he managed to shift them to a less careful speech style. When 
people were emotionally involved in the story they were telling, they were not 
so aware of the factors (such as the unfamiliar interviewer and recording device) 
which contribute to a more formal style.
There has been a great deal of debate about the relationship of this ver-
nacular style to others. While it seems unlikely it is identical to the most 
relaxed style used between peers and intimates in casual contexts, it is cer-
tainly distinguishable from the more formal styles identified in the interview 
context. People consistently used more vernacular features in describing situ-
ations where they had been in danger of death, or recounting the details of 
fights they had seen, than when reading aloud or talking on more conven-
tional topics.
Exercise 10
You should note the many ways in which the term “vernacular” is used in sociolinguistics. 
Go back to ­chapter 4 (page 110) and ­chapter 6 (page 198) and read the definitions 
provided there. Are they compatible with the way the term is used in the section above? 
Do these various uses have anything in common?
Answer at end of chapter
Colloquial style or the vernacular
There are other strategies besides topic manipulation which have been used in 
order to capture people’s most relaxed or vernacular speech style. Researchers 
have, for example, recorded small groups of people rather than individuals, 
and chosen a very comfortable or informal setting. These are strategies which 
encourage people to shift towards a more vernacular style. Jenny Cheshire 
collected her data from adolescents in adventure playgrounds, and she recorded 
them in groups of two or three. Lesley Milroy recorded groups of Belfast friends 
yarning in each other’s kitchens. And Labov himself used African American 
interviewers to collect data from African American adolescents, generally in 
groups on the streets where they met. Both increasing the number of participants 
and choosing a very casual setting contributed to obtaining more relaxed speech. 
The following examples of vernacular speech were recorded by Andy Pawley in 
a family living-​room. The person making the recording was a linguist, but also 
a family member.
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
357
Example 16
Trevor is recounting a dispute over tree-​felling rights on a patch of leased 
bushland.
Trev:	
. . . but Frazer and we had a bloody row over some wood . . . 
We was up there cuttin’ and Frazer come on to us you see . . . 
“Oh well,” ’e said, “I suppose you can ’ave ’im [a tree].” But 
we already ’ad ’im, all bar a few pieces, cut up and loaded, and 
Frazer said, “I suppose you can have ’im,” he said, “Yeah, but 
don’t touch that one over there.” But we’d been passing him 
with the axe and ’e was only a bit of –​ bloody –​ papery –​ shell ’e 
wasn’t –​
Dave:	
’E wasn’t worth it.
Trev:	
No. That’s why we left ’im. We’d had ’im.
This is an excerpt from one of many anecdotes about country life recounted to 
a small group of family and friends in the home of the speakers. Telling stories of 
this kind based on personal experience is a regular pastime in the speaker’s small 
rural community in north-​east Tasmania, an island off the Australian mainland. 
The speaker’s casual style has a number of linguistic features, many of which 
also occur in informal styles of English in other English-​speaking communities.
Exercise 11
Identify two features of pronunciation and two grammatical features which mark the 
excerpt in ­example 16 as colloquial or casual speech style.
Answers at end of chapter
There are many features which distinguish colloquial from more formal styles 
of English. Two further examples, which can be found in the English of widely 
different regions of the world, are the use of me (for standard my), e.g. then 
me mate arrives, and the use of them (instead of those) as a determiner, e.g. 
there’s a cross-​piece in them old-​fashioned doors. In Tyneside, vernacular me is 
used by working-​class schoolchildren to tease or express disapproval in stylised 
performances.
One particularly interesting feature noted in the Tasmanian informal narratives 
is the use of animation for objects. Note, for instance, the use of he to refer to the 
tree in ­example 16, and the use of she to refer to the axe in ­example 17 below. It 
has been suggested that she is often used to refer to animals or inanimate objects 
which are the centre of attention in the story being told. The same feature has 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
358
been noted in rural, colloquial conversation in New Zealand: e.g. she’s a hard 
road and she was a real beauty that storm.
Example 17
Old Kit . . . ’e had the only chopping axe John B. had. Nobody ’ad two 
them days y’ know, in the bad old days, and John ’ad a pretty good axe . . .    
they got Kit entered in this Chop y’ know . . . ’e was off say three or five 
or whatever. When they said “Five!” ’e’s no sooner [. . .] than ’e hit ’er [the 
block], y’know, and ’e chopped two or three six-​inch nails clean off . . . ’e 
dug himself in too low, y’ see, and ’e fetches ’er [the axe] and ’e looks at ’er, 
y’ see . . . and ’e holds ’er round to John, and ’e’s got a great big gap clean 
through the face of ’er, and ’e said “CRIPES!” Hahaha! when he turned –​ 
when ’e showed it to John.
This pattern of animating objects and assigning them a gender in casual 
narratives has been noted in the colloquial speech of rural New Zealand men. 
It is possible that calling objects she or he is characteristic only of the colloquial 
narratives of men, but we have no comparable data on female narratives so we 
can’t be sure. Nor is it clear whether this feature occurs in the colloquial English 
of other regions. Have you heard people use it in your region?
The interaction of social class and style
Example 18
Elizabeth’s nine-​year-​old daughter, Lily, took a phone message for her. It 
read “arriving Tuesday at 10”. “Who was it?” she asked but Lily didn’t 
know. “It was a man and he sounded like a teacher” was all the informa-
tion Lily could provide. Elizabeth reviewed the possibilities without any 
inspiration, and began to worry a little about how to cater for this unex-
pected guest. In the event, the caller phoned again on Tuesday morning. 
It was the glazier who had promised to ring before arriving to put in a 
new window. He didn’t sound at all like a teacher in his conversation with 
Elizabeth. She concluded that it was his careful style while dictating his 
message to Lily which had misled her daughter.
When we combine information about the way people from different social  
groups speak with information about the way people speak in different contexts,  
it is clear that features of social class and contextual style interact. Figure 10.2  
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
359
illustrates the relationship between social class, style and linguistic variation.  
The structured hierarchy of the Norwich social classes is indicated by each of  
the distinct lines drawn on the diagram. Group 4 at the top of the graph is the  
lowest social group and uses the highest proportion of vernacular [in] pronunci-
ation. Going down the graph, each social group uses fewer vernacular [in]  
pronunciations than the one above and more than the one below, and so the  
lines are clearly distinguishable. The diagram also shows that the more formal  
the style, the fewer vernacular [in] pronunciations (or the more standard [iŋ]  
pronunciations) occur.
A low frequency of vernacular [in] pronunciations or a higher frequency of 
standard [iŋ] pronunciations may therefore signal that the speaker belongs to a 
high social class, or indicate that they are speaking in a more formal context, 
or both. This interaction between social group membership and style seems to 
be very widespread. If a linguistic feature is found to occur frequently in the 
speech of people from lower social groups, it will often be frequent in the casual 
speech of those from higher social groups too. In other words, the same linguistic 
feature often distinguishes between speakers socially (inter-​speaker variation), 
while within the speech of one person it distinguishes different styles (intra-​
speaker variation). Example 18 illustrates the effect that this overlap and inter-
action between stylistic features and social group features can have. As Labov 
has said, it may be difficult with any particular linguistic feature to distinguish 
“a casual salesman from a careful pipefitter”.
Generally, this two-​pronged pattern involving social group and style is quite 
regular. The speech of each social group remains in the same relationship to 
other groups whatever the style. So, as ­figure 10.2 shows, in every style, social 
group 4 uses more vernacular [in] pronunciations than every other group. In 
fact, it has been suggested that the stylistic variation derives from and echoes the 
variation between speakers from different social groups. When you want to shift 
Figure 10.2  Vernacular [in] for four social groups and four styles in Norwich
Source: This diagram was modified from one in Trudgill (1974: 92). Reproduced with permission.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
360
style, the obvious way to vary your speech is to imitate the speech of another 
person. Often this is in response to the presence of people from the other group 
in the situation. In order to sound more casual, for instance, in the pub or at a 
party, people tend to adopt features of the speech of a lower social group. In 
order to sound more formal in an interview or when giving a formal speech, 
they use people from a higher or more sophisticated social group as their speech 
models. So when they shift styles, people often adopt the linguistic features of 
a different group. And, in general, the lower social groups shift their speech 
more as they move from one style to another than the higher social groups –​ as 
­figure 10.2 illustrates.
Hypercorrection
Example 19
I remember where he was run over, not far from our corner. He darted out 
about four feet before a car and he got hit hard. We didn’t have the heart to 
play ball or cards all morning. We didn’t know we cared so much for him 
till he was hurt.
Example 19 is another of the reading passages used by Labov in his study of 
New York City speech. You can doubtless guess the variable it was designed to 
elicit. The results for the distribution of this variable –​ post-​vocalic [r]‌ –​ over 
five speech styles for four social groups is probably the most widely reproduced 
diagram from Labov’s research, see ­figure 10.3. The reason for its popularity 
is no doubt the fact that it illustrates so many fascinating points about the 
relationships between language use, social group membership and style.
First of all, the diagram provides another example of the patterned relationships 
between social group and linguistic variation discussed in ­chapter 6. The 
structured hierarchy of New York social classes is indicated by each of the distinct 
lines drawn on the diagram. In fact, Labov comments that [r]‌ is such a sensitive 
sociolinguistic variable that he could have drawn as many lines as he could dis-
tinguish social groups. Because it is a prestige variable which is spreading through 
the community, it stratifies the New York community very accurately and finely.
The diagram also illustrates variation in speech style. People’s pronunciation 
of post-​vocalic [r]‌ increases as they pay more attention to their speech. Within 
reading style, this diagram identifies the two further degrees of formality that 
Labov distinguished. These involved two types of word lists, the most formal 
being a list of minimal pairs where the variants under study were the explicit 
focus of attention: e.g. beer/​bear, tin/​thin, then/​den and, in the case of r, god/​
guard, pa/​par.
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
361
So post-​vocalic [r]‌ pronunciation is a very sensitive marker of class and of  
style in New York. Overall, the higher the social class you belong to, the more  
post-​vocalic [r] you pronounce, and the more formal the context, the more often  
you pronounce post-​vocalic [r] regardless of your social class.
There is an exception to this generalisation, however. The third interesting point 
the diagram illustrates is the tendency of group 2, the lower middle class (LMC), to 
pronounce [r]‌ even more often than group 1, the upper middle class (UMC) in the 
two most formal styles. LMC speakers outperform UMC speakers when they are 
reading isolated words. This is hypercorrect behaviour –​ the LMC are overdoing 
it. UMC speakers serve as a model for the LMC, but in the styles where they can 
most easily monitor their speech, the LMC go beyond the UMC norms to produce 
a style which can be described, perhaps somewhat ironically, as “more correct” 
than the standard –​ “hypercorrect” speech. Some have called it “super-​standard”.
Hypercorrection goes beyond the norm; it involves extending a form beyond 
the standard. The use of I rather than me in constructions such as between you 
and I illustrates structural hypercorrection. So does he asked for you and I. These 
examples of hypercorrect behaviour are the product of linguistic insecurity, 
and tend to occur when people are involved in unfamiliarly formal situations. 
The origins of these instances of structural hypercorrection lie in the insecurity 
introduced by the Latin-​based English grammars used by schoolteachers in an 
earlier era. I is over-​extended from contexts such as It was I who rang you last 
night, where one could argue it is formally and technically “correct” (though pom-
pous!) to contexts which appear similar but are in fact grammatically different.
Figure 10.3  Post-​vocalic [r]‌ for range of social groups and five styles in New York
Source: From Labov (2006: 160). Reproduced by permission of Cambridge University Press.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
362
Exercise 12
Comment on the following Letter to the Editor. Which does it suggest the writer considers 
the formal, standard or correct form, and which the vernacular or casual form in the phrase 
for you or I/​me?
King George VI wrote to Churchill “It would be wrong for either you or I to be there”, 
but I am sure that chatting over the port at Sandringham, he would have said “for you 
or me” –​ like the most rough-​hewn of us.
Answer at end of chapter
Though the pattern of interaction we have described between social group (or 
inter-​speaker) variation and style (or intra-​speaker) variation seems to be very 
widespread, it is not universal. In some communities, such as Tyneside, and in the 
town of Radès in Tunisia, speakers signal stylistic and social group differences 
using distinct linguistic variables. In other words, the linguistic features that 
signal their group membership (features which Labov calls “indicators”) are 
quite different from the linguistic features which are responses to the social con-
text they are speaking in (which Labov called “markers”). In English, another 
pattern is evident when we examine the features of particular registers –​ the lan-
guage associated with particular contexts such as finance, science, music, the law 
or horse-​racing. The stylistic features which identify these ways of speaking are 
generally distinct from social class variables, as illustrated in the final section of 
this chapter. But first a brief summary of three important terms used by Labov 
which have been discussed in this chapter, followed by a consideration of how 
third-​wave variationists approach the concept of style.
Stereotypes, markers and indicators
The paragraph above illustrated what Labov labelled markers; linguistic 
features which indicate people’s social class and style, and index their identity. 
As illustrated in ­chapter 6, some English-​speaking people use -​in’ rather than 
-​ing ([in] rather than [iŋ]) at the end of words like sleeping and running, and 
some use [in] even in formal contexts. As a result, others may evaluate them as 
uneducated or lower class or inappropriately informal. When New Yorkers pro-
nounce post-​vocalic [r]‌ in more formal contexts, they will usually be evaluated 
as educated and as speaking appropriately. These features qualify as markers 
since they stratify for both style and social group.
Labov used the term stereotypes for linguistic features which are generally 
negatively evaluated or stigmatised. People are aware of them and most avoid 
them. Ain’t is a classic stereotype feature of lower class or uneducated speech in 
much of the USA. Labov’s example of a feature which is a stereotype is the pro-
nunciation of th as [t]‌ in words like toity-​toid (thirty-​third) in New York City. 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
363
Liverpool dead (very) is a stereotype feature of the Liverpool dialect, Scouse. 
Uptalk is a stereotype feature of Californian Valley Girl speech. Everyone is 
aware of such stereotypes and consequently they do not show stylistic stratifica-
tion and are often consciously avoided.
A third term, indicator, mentioned above, was used by Labov to refer to a 
feature which (unlike a stereotype and a marker) does not have any overt social 
evaluation attached to it. It generally does not attract overt attention within 
the speech community. An indicator may distinguish different regional or social 
groups or communities but not different styles. Vowels which distinguish regional 
groups are good examples: e.g. in the north of England, the vowel in words like 
grass and bath is short and produced at the front of the mouth, like the vowel 
in trap. It is a regional feature and not stigmatised or involved in change in the 
communities which use it. Similarly, the pronunciation of the word bed in a way 
that sounds to outsiders like bid is an indicator in New Zealand. In some parts 
of North America speakers merge the vowels in cot and caught but this has no 
social implication.
Indicators may turn into markers, which may become stereotypes –​ and this 
is usually regarded as a one-​way process. New Zealand eh may be an exception 
to this generalisation in that it was a stereotype feature of vernacular Māori 
English which has spread to other ethnic and social groups and now seems to be 
spreading to more formal styles.
Third-​wave variationist approaches to the concept   
of style
Example 20
Heath is a North American gay white doctor who uses a range of linguistic 
features, including different forms of [t]‌ in words like bet and what, to 
convey different social meanings depending on the kind of social identity he 
aims to construct in a specific context. In his clinic he uses more instances 
of [th] (i.e. voiceless and released with aspiration) than he does at a bar-
becue with his friends. But at the barbecue he enacts a gay “bitchy diva” 
identity conveyed through long and strong bursts of [thhh] release which, 
together with other features, convey stances such as prissy, style-​conscious, 
critical and flamboyant, according to the researcher Rob Podesva.
In a third-​wave variationist approach, linguistic features index social meanings 
rather than social categories such as class, gender, age and ethnicity. These social 
meanings are expressed through stances, such as angry, elegant and articulate, 
or personae and social types, such as nerd, jock, chav, diva and schoolteacher. 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
364
Using this approach, style is regarded as mediating between linguistic variables 
and identity categories such as gender and ethnicity. Scholars examine the social 
significance of an individual’s stylistic choices in different contexts, as well as 
what those choices may suggest about their ideological values –​ their political 
and moral beliefs, for instance. They focus on individual agency in specific inter-
actional contexts, and study the individual’s manipulation of linguistic features 
to convey social meanings such as “tough”, “educated”, “feminine”, “relaxed” 
and “pretentious”. Scholars describe how individuals draw on different values 
indexed by linguistic forms (such as medial glottal stops in better, or [in] for 
-​ing in talking) to construct their own specific style. And they also pay careful 
attention to how an individual’s identity performance is interpreted by others. 
“Stylistic practice is a process of bricolage”, as Penelope Eckert says.
This approach emphasises the dynamic nature of stylistic choices. Every use 
of a linguistic feature by a particular individual to convey a particular meaning 
in a particular context subtly changes or reinforces the social meaning of the fea-
ture. Every use also contributes to the speaker’s identity construction. So using 
a standard rather than a vernacular variant for [-​ing] or [h]‌-​drop may convey a 
range of different social meanings depending on features of the context, such as 
who you are talking to, on what topic, and in what kind of social setting.
Exercise 13
What kind of social meanings would you attribute if you heard a male high school teacher 
say to a student in the playground “you’re late so stop muckin’ around and ged in that 
classroom pronto my lad”?
Answer at end of chapter
Now that we have discussed style in English, let’s consider some non-​English 
speaking societies. Do all languages use the same features to signal social group 
membership as those they use to signal different social contexts? Or are the lin-
guistic features which mark social group membership and style quite distinct?
Style in non-​English speaking societies
Example 21
When he first visited Tokyo, Neil found his Japanese was fine for reading 
and for talking to other young men of his own age, but in any other 
interactions he found himself floundering. He knew that he needed to 
express the appropriate degree of respect to his hosts, and to the various 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
365
business contacts he was introduced to. Yet his control of the complex 
system of Japanese styles and honorifics was not yet good enough. He 
struggled along in a “basic” or “plain” style, occasionally inserting features 
of “polite” style, and frustrated that the subtleties of Japanese interpersonal 
interaction seemed beyond him.
(Inoue, 1979)
Japanese is one of a number of languages with a special set of grammatical 
contrasts for expressing politeness and respect for others. Before deciding 
which style of Japanese to use, Japanese speakers assess their status in relation 
to their addressees on the basis of such factors as family background, gender 
and age (and even one day’s age difference can be important), as well as the 
formality of the context. They then select from plain, polite and deferential 
styles. The choice of appropriate style involves consideration of a range of 
word forms and syntax. The appropriate form of the verb, for instance, varies 
in different styles.
Map 10.1  Japan and North and South Korea

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
366
Example 22
(a)
Sakai-​ga
watashi
ni
chizu-​o kai-​
te-​
kure-​
ta
Sakai-​Subject me   
marker
for map-​Object 
marker
draw
gerund-​ plain 
form
past 
tense
Sakai drew a map for me.
(b) Sakai-​senpai-​ ga
watashi ni
chizu-​o
Sakai-​respect 
form
Sub 
marker
me
for map-​Obj 
marker
kai-​te
kure-​mashi-​ta.
draw-​gerund
polite-​past tense 
form
Mr Sakai drew a map for me.
The basic straightforward non-​deferential utterance represented by 
(a) contrasts with the politer style used in (b) where the polite verb ending  
-​mashi is added to the verb. Utterances can also be modified in a variety of ways 
according to the attitude and relationship of the speaker to the subject matter 
of the utterance. In (b) the speaker uses the respect form (or honorific) -​senpai 
(appropriate to older colleagues) to express respect for the person mentioned. 
In addition to these morphological means, there are also other strategies for 
increasing the politeness of one’s style, such as using negative construction 
(analogous to English wouldn’t you like to . . .), using longer sentences, avoiding 
dialect words, and using Chinese loan words.
Knowledge of the complexities of stylistic variation in countries like Japan 
and Korea is a sign of a person’s educational level and social status. Better-​
educated people have greater control of the various styles. So the social status 
of a speaker can be deduced from the skill with which they select and use the 
various styles of Japanese or Korean.
Although the Islamic revolution has increased the use of reciprocal forms of 
address, ritual courtesy is still very important in Iranian society too. Relative 
status must be carefully assessed on every occasion in order to select the correct 
combination of grammatical forms, vocabulary items and pronunciation –​ in 
other words, the appropriate style for the context and the addressee. Expressing 
deference in Tehran Persian involves choosing from clusters of particular verb 
forms, as well as carefully selecting the appropriate high, neutral or low alterna-
tive from 24 personal pronoun forms.
Here, too, context is a relevant factor and Iranian reading styles, in particular, 
contrast dramatically with other styles of speech. In all social groups, there is a 
dramatic increase in the percentage of standard variants in people’s reading and 
word-​list styles, compared to their careful and casual styles. For at least some 
linguistic features, then, this society marks speech style differently from social 
group membership. The choice between the vernacular and standard variants of 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
367
some sounds is influenced by the social context in which a person is speaking, 
independently of their social group membership. In these cases, the standard 
variants signal reading style rather than social group membership. In other com-
munities, too, reading style contrasts markedly with other styles. Where reading 
aloud is not a common activity, it may be best measured along a different dimen-
sion than that of formality.
Javanese is another example which illustrates the complexity of stylistic  
variation which can be found in languages. As mentioned in ­chapter 6, the  
choices facing a speaker of Javanese involve two ranked social dialects, within  
each of which there are three stylistic levels. In other words, both social group  
membership and social context influence a speaker’s linguistic choices. In add-
ition, there is also the possibility of raising any utterance an additional “half-​ 
level” by various linguistic means. Each level involves different pronunciations,  
different grammatical forms and different items of vocabulary. There are three  
words for house, for example: omah, grija and dalem; and five forms for  
you. Once you have selected the appropriate stylistic level, you must follow  
the rules for which forms may occur with which. You cannot jump around  
between levels.
Example 23
Menapa
nandalem
mundhut
sekul
semanten?
3a
HIGH
Menapa
panjenengan
mendhet
sekul
semanten?
3
Napa
sampéyan
mendhet
sekul
semonten?
2
Napa
sampéyan
njupuk
sega
semonten?
1a
Map 10.2  Java, Indonesia

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
368
Apa
sliramu
mundhut
sega
semono?
1b
Apa
kowé
njupuk
sega
semono?
1
LOW
queSTION 
MARKER
you
take
rice
that much
Did you take that much rice?
The Javanese sentences in this example are ordered from the most formal 
“high” style (level 3a, known as krama inggil) to the least formal “low” style 
(level 1, known as ngoko). Though there is a great deal of overlap –​ especially 
between half-​levels –​ every sentence is different from each of the others, and not 
a single word-​form is common to all of them.
Selecting the appropriate “level” of Javanese for a particular interaction 
involves, as elsewhere, taking account of your relationship to the addressee in 
context. As elsewhere, too, solidarity (or degree of friendship) and relative status 
(assessed by such factors as age, wealth, descent, education and occupation) are 
important in assessing the relationship. The result may be that each participant 
selects a different level of Javanese. If I am an ordinary educated citizen speaking 
to a high government official, I will use the highest level 3a to express respect, 
but the official will use only level 1, ngoko, to me. Two very high-​status Javanese, 
on the other hand, will both use level 3 to each other. Faced with this array 
of levels and the social consequences of a wrong choice –​ insult or embarrass-
ment, for instance –​ one can readily understand the popularity of Indonesian, 
the national language. In a society where social divisions are not so clear as they 
once were, Indonesian offers much simpler stylistic alternatives.
Javanese provides a graphic example of a language where the stylistic choices 
are much more clear-​cut than in English, i.e. the co-​occurrence rules can be 
explicitly specified. The discussion of diglossia and situational code-​switching 
in ­chapter 2 provided further examples of linguistic variation motivated by con-
textual features. In its narrow definition, diglossia involves two distinct styles 
or varieties of a language –​ a High variety and a Low variety –​ distinguished 
by features of pronunciation, grammar and vocabulary, and appropriately 
used in different contexts. The broader definition of diglossia adopted by some 
sociolinguists includes situational switching between dialects of a language, 
such as a regional dialect and a standard language, or even between distinct 
languages. So the shift by Norwegian students from Ranamål in their village 
homes to standard Norwegian with less regionally marked pronunciation when 
at university is a style shift motivated by features of the context –​ addressee, 
topic and setting. Similarly, the switch from Greek at home to English at uni-
versity by Maria, a linguistics student at La Trobe university in Melbourne, can 
equally be regarded as an example of a style switch. Situational code-​switching 
and diglossia are therefore further examples of the effect of contextual factors 
on linguistic behaviour.

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
369
I have illustrated that linguistic features which signal social group member-
ship are often, but not always, signals of contextual variation too. A high level 
of education and familiarity with using language in more formal contexts fre-
quently go hand-​in-​hand, and so it is scarcely surprising that the features which 
characterise each tend to overlap. However, particular pronunciations, syntactic 
constructions or vocabulary items may simply indicate a person’s social group 
without also patterning for style. Conversely, linguistic features may serve pri-
marily as markers of particular social contexts rather than particular groups. This 
pattern is illustrated in the final section of this chapter on register differences.
Exercise 14
Is the choice between tu and vous in French (or equivalent pronouns in other languages 
that you are familiar with) an example of a choice between different styles?
Identify the factors discussed in this chapter which may be relevant in choosing the 
appropriate pronoun.
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 15
Identify the contexts in which you would expect to see or hear the following, and one fea-
ture of each which served as a linguistic clue.
(a)	
NO NUKES
(b)	
Who’s a lovely little girl then eh? Who’s a lovely little girl?
(c)	
Where any registered security interest is discharged, the person entered in the 
register as the secured party shall, within 10 working days of the date on which the 
security interest is discharged, apply to . . .
(d)	
txt 4 lift b gr8 2 c u
(e)	
I have no desire to be a party to this on-​going useless debate. I therefore wish to 
UNSUBSCRIBE from this list.
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 16
Text messages and certain other forms of electronic communication often use a set of 
abbreviations to fit a message into the limited number of characters available to the sender. 
They also use additional features such as emoticons to communicate feelings. However, 
the way a text message is written may communicate something about the sender. Look 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
370
at the following text messages and decide who you might expect to have sent each one. 
What are the features that lead you to this decision?
(a)	
c u l8r
(b)	
will you be home soon?  ☹
(c)	
r u going out later?
(d)	
lol 😋
(e)	
Do you want me to get milk on my way home?
(f)	
see you soon xxx
Answers at end of chapter
Register
Example 24
In our gerontological sociolinguistic context, we would argue that when, 
in inter-​generational encounters, contextual features trigger an elderly (or 
even “aged”) identity in people, they will assume communicative strategies 
they believe to be associated with older speakers.
This is an example of the kind of jargon which a group of specialists often 
develop to talk about their speciality. It could be described as an occupational 
style. The label Corporate Responsibility Analyst, to describe a role that involves 
examining the effects of an organisation on the environment, provides another 
example. We have used the term “style” in earlier sections to refer to language 
variation which is influenced by changes in situational factors, such as addressee, 
setting, task or topic. Some linguists describe this kind of language variation as 
register variation. Others use the term “register” more narrowly to describe the 
specific vocabulary associated with different occupational groups. The distinc-
tion is not always clear, however, and many sociolinguists simply ignore it.
Styles are often analysed along a scale of formality, as in the examples from 
social dialect research discussed above. Registers, on the other hand, when they are 
distinguished from styles, tend to be associated with particular groups of people 
or sometimes specific situations of use. Journalese, baby-​talk, legalese, the lan-
guage of auctioneers, race-​callers and sports commentators, the language of airline 
pilots, criminals, financiers, politicians and disc jockeys, the language of the court-
room and the classroom, could all be considered examples of different registers. 
The term “register” here describes the language of groups of people with common 
interests or jobs, or the language used in situations associated with such groups.
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
371
We discuss just one ­example –​ sports commentator talk –​ to illustrate the kind 
of linguistic features which may distinguish different registers.
Sports commentator talk
Example 25
Cooley –​ steaming in now, –​ bowls to Waugh again, –​ stroking it out into 
the covers, –​ just thinking about a single, –​ Tucker taking a few ah stuttering 
steps down the wicket from the bowler’s end but Waugh sending him back.
Note: –​ marks a short pause; commas indicate non-​final intonation contour.
When people describe a sporting event, the language they use is quite clearly distin-
guishable from language used in other contexts. The most obvious distinguishing 
feature is generally the vocabulary. Terms like silly mid-​on, square leg, the covers 
and gully, for instance, to describe positions, and off-​break, googly and leg break 
to describe deliveries, are examples of vocabulary peculiar to cricket. But the 
grammar is equally distinctive. This is especially true of the kind of sports com-
mentator talk which is known as “play-​by-​play” description.
Play-​by-​play description focuses on the action, as opposed to “colour com-
mentary” which refers to the more discursive and leisurely speech with which 
commentators fill in the often quite long spaces between spurts of action in some 
sports. Play-​by-​play description is characterised by telegraphic grammar. This 
involves features such as syntactic reduction and the inversion of normal word 
order in sentences. Each feature contributes to the commentator’s aim of com-
municating the drama of the moment. In colour commentary, by contrast, where 
there is more time, nouns tend to be heavily modified. In both types of commen-
tary, as well as in the “state of the play” score or summary, sports commentators 
make extensive use of linguistic formulas and routines. Each of these features is 
illustrated in turn.
Syntactic reduction
Example 26
From baseball or cricket commentaries. [The words in brackets were not 
uttered.]
(a)	
[It] bounced to second base
(b)	 [It’s] a breaking ball outside
(c)	
[He’s a] guy who’s a pressure player
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
372
(d)	 McCatty [is] in difficulty
(e)	
Tucker [is] taking a few ah stuttering steps down the wicket from the 
bowler’s end but Waugh [is] sending him back
While describing the action they are observing, sports commentators often omit 
the subject noun or pronoun, as in (a), and frequently omit the verb be as well, 
as utterances (b) and (c) illustrate. Utterances (d) and (e) omit only be. There is 
no loss of meaning as a result of this syntactic reduction because the omitted 
elements are totally predictable in the context. The referent is unambiguous –​ in 
(a) it refers to the hit, and in (b) it could not refer to anything other than the 
bowler’s pitch.
Syntactic inversion
Example 27
From baseball or cricket commentaries.
(a)	
In comes Ghouri
(b)	 And all set again is Pat Haden
(c)	
On deck is big Dave Winfield
(d)	 Pete goes to right field and back for it goes Jackson
Reversal or inversion of the normal word order is another feature of sports com-
mentator talk. This device allows the commentator to foreground or focus on 
the action and provides time to identify the subject of the action –​ an important 
piece of information for listeners.
Heavy noun modification
Example 28
From baseball or cricket commentaries.
(a)	
David Winfield, the 25-​million-​dollar man, who is hitting zero, five, 
six in this World Series . . .
(b)	 First-​base umpire Larry Barnett . . .
(c)	
This much sought-​after and very expensive fast bowler . . .
People –​ rather than action –​ are the focus of interest at certain points during the 
sports commentator’s spiel. When this is the case, the subject nouns which are 
 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
373
the focus of interest are often heavily modified both after the noun as in (a), and 
before the noun as in (b) and (c).
These examples are taken from cricket and baseball commentary, but similar 
sorts of features characterise commentaries in other sports, including soccer 
and rugby.
Exercise 17
Classify the following utterances from an English soccer match commentary according to 
which of the three syntactic features identified above they illustrate:
(a)	
and here’s Clark, the new Chelsea skipper and a player worth every penny they paid 
for him . . .
(b)	
Dickens a marvellous through-​ball
(c)	
combining well the two defenders
(d)	
pitch very slippery
(e)	
looking for a hat-​trick remember Rush
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 18
Record a commentary from your favourite team sport and see if any of the features identi-
fied above occur. Are there any other features in your data which you consider distinguish 
sports commentary from everyday chat?
Routines and formulas
An interesting feature of sports commentaries, including race calling (the com-
mentary accompanying a horse race), is the use of routines to reduce the memory 
burden on the speaker. The same feature has been identified in other situations 
where the memory burden from information which must be simultaneously 
processed and communicated is potentially very high, such as livestock auctions 
in New Zealand, tobacco auctions in the USA, and North American ice hockey 
commentaries. These registers are all characterised by the extensive use of oral 
formulas. The formulas involve a small number of fixed syntactic patterns and a 
narrow range of lexical items.
The following excerpts come from a race commentary by Reon Murtha, a 
Christchurch race commentator. He is commentating on a 2,000-​metre heat for 
the Lion Brown Championship.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
374
Example 29
(a)	
a little wider on the track the favourite Race Ruler
Twilight Time is in behind those
Breaking up behind is Noodlum’s Fella
and he went down
and one tipped out was My Dalrae . . .
(b)	 El Red the leader by two lengths from Speedy Cheval
the favourite Race Ruler parked on the outside
followed by Florlis Fella
Twilight Time’s up against the rail
Each of these examples is composed of a set of pre-​determined formulas into 
which the horses’ names are slotted. The whole of the play-​by-​play commentary –​ 
the description of the race while it is in progress –​ is constructed in this way.
The narrow range of syntactic and lexical choices made by the commentators 
can be illustrated by looking at the possible ways of communicating (1) that the 
race has started, and (2) where the horses are positioned. These are both elements 
of the play-​by-​play description of the race and both are conveyed formulaically. 
The “start” formula and the “horse locator” formula can be described as follows:
(a)	 Start formula:
and they’re away (and racing now)
or
and they’re off (and racing now)
(b)	 The horse locator formula:
(horse’s name) wide out on the outside (horse’s name)
or
(horse’s name) over on the outside (horse’s name)
or
(horse’s name) parked on the outside (horse’s name)
Quite clearly this register, too, is characterised by a very restricted range of 
lexical and syntactic variation. Moreover, the specific features of the formulas 
are not arbitrary, but motivated by the demands of the context. For example, the 
syntactic inversion which was noted above as a feature of baseball and cricket 
commentary also occurs as a feature of race-​calling formulas, e.g. one tipped out 
was My Dalrae. It gives the speaker time to identify the person or horse before 
having to name them. The use of passives allows the speaker to follow the nat-
ural order in naming the horses. Taro is followed by Sunny, rather than out of 
order Sunny follows Taro.
Finally, the sound patterns of race calling are also distinctive. Race callers 
use particular intonation patterns or “tunes” as they call the race. In New 
Zealand and Australia, the distinctive sound pattern used by race callers has 
been described as a “drone”, for reasons obvious from ­figure 10.4.
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
375
If you have a piano available, you might find it interesting to play this tune  
while reciting the alphabet. This will give you some idea of its effect. The New  
Zealand race caller’s voice pitch rises by about an octave during the race and  
drops rapidly back to the initial pitch after the finish. So the distinctive inton-
ation contours used by different sports commentators in the course of their work  
are another feature of this easily identified linguistic register.
Sports commentators are expected to give the impression of fluency. Pauses 
and hesitations in race calling, for instance, are unacceptable. Race callers must 
keep talking –​ and fast! They speak at four to five syllables per second. The use 
of formulas enables them to convey information with the minimum demand on 
short-​term memory. Sports commentators must also retain the listener’s interest 
and convey the drama of the action. For this they tend to use volume and inton-
ation –​ hence the dramatically rising drone used by race callers. The linguistic 
features which develop as characteristic of a register are clearly functionally 
motivated. The demands of the particular context in which the language is used 
influence its shape.
The specialised registers of occupational groups develop initially from the 
desire for quick, efficient and precise communication between people who share 
experience, knowledge and skills. Bricklayers, butchers, carpenters, dentists, 
doctors and linguists all adopt specialised terminology to express shared meanings 
concisely and precisely. Over time, the language of such groups develops more 
Figure 10.4  Intonation contour of a typical New Zealand race-​caller’s chant
Source: Modified from Kuiper and Austin (1990: 205). Reproduced with permission.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
376
and more characteristics –​ lexical, syntactic and even phonological (as the race-​
caller example illustrated) –​ which distinguish their communications from those 
of other groups. Eventually these specialised registers may be very difficult for 
outsiders to penetrate.
Exercise 19
The language of after-​match interviews is also formulaic and predictable in some respects. 
Examine the text below and identify three features which distinguish these sports interviews 
from other media interviews. How do you think such interviews might close?
Context: Opening of an after-​match interview with Tomas Berdych, tennis star.
Interviewer:	
Tomas your first Wimbledon semi final
 	
what emotions are you feeling right now?
 	
you look like you don’t believe it
Tomas Berdych: 
yeah I mean it’s it’s really tough to play in front of this crowd
 	
but I’m er or or how I’m just feeling right now
 	
I mean it’s amazing you know
 	
to play in this stadium you know
 	
to play such a great player as Roger [Federer] is
 	
I mean and come here and be here as a winner
 	
I mean this is really amazing for me
Answers at end of chapter
Example 30
Text messaging was especially common in the first decade of the twenty-​
first century and is still a common means of interaction for many older 
people. In the following rather amusing exchange one participant is less 
familiar with texting conventions than the other.
Joe:	
Hi sweetie what does idk, gtgn, syl mean?
Sue:	
I don’t know, got to go now, see you later.
Joe:	
OK I will ask your sister.
Conclusion
People’s styles of speech and written communication index not only aspects of 
their identity such as their ethnicity, age, gender and social background, they 
also indicate the contexts in which language is being used. The way people 
 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
377
talk in court, in school, at business meetings and at graduation ceremonies is 
influenced by and simultaneously contributes to the formality of those contexts 
and the social roles people take in them. The way people write letters, emails, 
text messages and blog entries similarly indicates awareness of the different 
audiences of these different genres. We use more relaxed language at home with 
those we know well. When we talk differently to babies and adults, or to people 
from different social backgrounds, we are adapting or accommodating our lan-
guage to our audience.
Stylistic variation of this sort can be observed in all languages. In multilin-
gual communities, it is often signalled by the choice of a specific language, as 
well as by choice of linguistic variants within a particular language. The lin-
guistic distinctions between styles within a language are more clear-​cut in some 
languages, such as Javanese, Korean and Japanese, than in others, such as 
Tasmanian English. The reasons people choose one style rather than another 
can be related once again to the scales described in ­chapter 1. How well does 
the speaker know the addressee(s)? What is their relative status? How formal 
is the context? All these factors have proved important in the discussion of lin-
guistic variation in this chapter. The fourth dimension introduced in ­chapter 1 
concerned the functions of an interaction. The discussion of register differences 
introduced the idea that style may be influenced by the function which the lan-
guage is serving. This functional dimension of language and its effect on lin-
guistic choice is the main focus of ­chapter 11.
Methods
Many of the points noted in the methods sections of earlier chapters are also relevant in 
the study of stylistic differences. Here are some suggestions for interactional methods to 
collect data:
•	 With their permission, record one person in interaction with different interlocuters (e.g. 
brother, mother, friend, teacher, child), ideally telling the same story to each (e.g. a 
recent sporting success or failure). Examine the linguistic differences in each interaction 
(vocabulary, grammatical structures, pronunciation, speed of speech, pitch, volume, 
etc). Can you relate the differences to characteristics of the different addressees?
•	 With their permission, record a friend who also speaks your first language telling you 
about an interesting experience. Then record the friend telling the same story to 
someone who is a second language speaker of your first language. Examine the linguistic 
differences in each interaction (e.g. vocabulary, grammatical structures, pronunciation, 
speed of speech, pitch, volume etc). Can you relate the differences to characteristics of 
the different addressees?
•	 Record the same news material as delivered by broadcasters on different media sources. 
Examine the linguistic differences in each case (e.g. vocabulary, grammatical structures, 
pronunciation, speed of speech, pitch, volume etc). Can you relate the differences to 
the intended audience?
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
378
•	 Examine written media sources aimed at different audiences (e.g. national and local 
newspapers, digital bulletins, Facebook, blogs, Tweets, Instagram posts). Examine the 
linguistic differences in each case (e.g. vocabulary, grammatical structures, form of 
greetings, etc). Can you relate the differences to the intended audience? (See answer to 
­exercise 6 for further ideas).
•	 To overcome observer’s paradox (observing (and recording) the way a person speaks 
when they are not being observed), researchers have used a range of different strategies 
(e.g. recording in comfortable and familiar settings, recording small groups of people 
rather than individuals –​ note, however, that more than three or four people makes 
transcription and analysis more difficult as voices often overlap and are not always easy 
to distinguish from one another).
•	 Record different sports commentaries and identify the distinctive linguistic features of 
each, checking with those identified in the relevant section in this chapter.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 10
Answer to ­exercise 2
You may find some of the following features, among others:
•	high frequency vocabulary
•	fewer contractions (e.g. must not rather than mustn’t)
•	use of nouns rather than pronouns so referents are clear (e.g. then you open 
the oven and you put the cake into the oven rather than then put it in the oven)
•	shorter sentences with simple grammar
•	use of tag questions like don’t you? and isn’t it? (which are easy to respond to)
•	repetition.
Answer to ­exercise 3
(a)	 Radio 4. Clues: use of the determiner the before Health Secretary; use of 
Mr  before Matt Hancock; and use of uncontracted was not rather than 
wasn’t.
(b)	 Radio 1. Clues: consonant cluster reduction in word last; use of familiar form 
Maggie with no title; use of contracted form wasn’t and colloquial phrase 
wasn’t much to write home about; pronunciation of th as [f]‌ in Thatcher; 
and standard [t] as [d] inter-​vocalically in better.
(c)	 Radio 4. Clues: use of uncontracted have not; no consonant cluster reduc-
tion in words like latest, postbox; use of determiner before spokesman; and 
full title with first name Detective Superintendent Ray Huntley.
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
379
Answer to ­exercise 4
The papers in column 2 illustrate higher percentages of determiner deletion than 
those in column 1. The figures in table 10.1 support this claim.
Once again this provides evidence that the patterning of a linguistic feature  
is influenced by the social structure of the intended audience –​ in this case the  
papers’ readerships.
Answer to ­exercise 6
People may converge or adapt their speed of speech, the length of their utterances, 
the frequency of their pauses, the grammatical patterns used, their vocabulary, 
the verbal fillers or pragmatic particles (such as sort of, you know and you see 
in English) that they use, their intonation and their voice pitch. People may also 
converge in their pronunciation of a wide variety of different sounds, as was 
illustrated by the examples of the travel agent in Cardiff and the interviewer in 
Norwich.
In text messaging and email communication, people may also converge in 
style, e.g. omitting greetings and sign-​offs and using shorthand spelling and 
emoji. There are also conventions of punctuation that vary by the age of the 
person messaging. For instance, using a full-​stop (period) at the end of a message 
is considered as signalling anger, or abruptness by younger people, whereas older 
people often tend to use punctuation in text messages in the same way as they 
would in any other written genre. There are many other possibilities too.
Answer to ­exercise 7
•	Example 2: the teenage boy converges upwards in addressing his friend’s 
mother (a); but speech to his friend is speech to an equal (b).
•	Example 4: the baby-​talk example involves downward convergence by the 
adults to the imaginary baby.
•	Example 5 (b): the letter from an adult to a child illustrates downward 
convergence.
Table 10.1  Percentage of determiner deletion in British newspapers
Newspaper
%
The Times
5
The Guardian
10
The Daily Telegraph
12
Daily Mail
73
Daily Express
79
The Mirror
80
The Sun
89
Source: From Bell (1991: 108).
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
380
•	Example 6: the utterance from a staff member to an elderly patient illustrates 
downward convergence.
•	Example 7: this shows the newsreaders converging towards the predicted 
norms of their audiences, but without information on the background of the 
newsreaders we cannot tell whether this involves upwards or downwards 
convergence.
•	Example 8: this describes June involved in both upward and downward 
convergence.
Answer to ­exercise 8
The Antwerp teenagers’ behaviour can certainly be described as stylisation. 
When we perform in a different style from our usual way of speaking, exagger-
ating particular linguistic features, or adopting features associated with different 
social or cultural groups, or different situations, this is stylisation.
This kind of linguistic performance could be described as using language meta-
phorically. As discussed in relation to metaphorical code-​switching in ­chapter 2, 
those who are listening make connections to the values and beliefs associated 
with the different groups or situations associated with our styles of speaking. 
So stylisation is a kind of shorthand, allowing people to indirectly refer to more 
than one set of values in an economical way.
The differences between stylisation and metaphorical switching are subtle: styl-
isation seems to be more often used for entertainment or parody, and it generally 
involves a strong element of conscious “performance” which is not always the 
case for metaphorical switching, where speakers often integrate the components 
of more than one code seamlessly.
Answer to ­exercise 9
The answer must be “it all depends!” –​ on which women and which men, and 
in which contexts, and talking to whom? A woman who uses more standard 
forms when talking to an interviewer than when talking to a friend is conver-
ging towards the interviewer’s speech provided that the interviewer’s speech 
uses more standard forms than the friend’s speech. Women who maintain the 
level of vernacular forms in speech to an interviewer that they would use in 
speech to a close friend could be regarded as diverging from the interviewer’s 
standard forms. The answer must always be relative and depend on evidence of 
contrasting usage to different addressees or in different contexts.
Answer to ­exercise 10
In ­chapter 4 the term “vernacular language” was discussed. In a multilin-
gual context, a vernacular language is usually a language which has not been 
standardised and which does not have official status. Vernaculars are generally 
the first languages learned by people in multilingual communities, and they are 
often used for a relatively narrow range of informal functions.
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
381
In ­chapter 6, it was pointed out that social dialectologists also use the term 
vernacular to refer to linguistic forms which are not used in the standard dialect. 
So within social dialectology, vernacular forms are non-​standard forms.
In the section above, the term vernacular is used to refer to a particular style 
in a monolingual community –​ the style used in the most relaxed circumstances. 
Because of this association with casual speech, people sometimes use the term 
facetiously to describe the use of swear words, for example, I’d really like you to 
leave me in peace now –​ or, to use the vernacular –​ bugger off.
The various uses do have some elements of shared meaning. In monolingual 
communities, vernacular refers to the style which is most obviously parallel to 
the ethnic language for a polyglot –​ in other words, the variety learned first and 
used in the most relaxed circumstances. Vernacular forms are those which char-
acterise people’s most relaxed style.
Answer to ­exercise 11
Linguistic features of colloquial or casual style:
•	Pronunciation features:
1	[h]‌-​dropping: e.g. “Oh well,” ’e said, “I suppose you can ’ave ‘im.”
2	[in] (vs. formal [iŋ]): e.g. We was up there cuttin’.
•	Grammatical features:
1	was with plural subject we: e.g. We was up there cuttin’.
2	come (vs. came): Frazer come on to us.
Answer to ­exercise 12
This is an interesting example of confusion about stylistic variation and standard 
usage. The writer seems to be suggesting that either you or I is the formal variant 
and therefore presumably the standard or “correct” form. It is the form appropri-
ately used in writing, the writer claims. Yet, in fact, “correct English usage” here 
requires you or me, since these pronouns follow the preposition for. Compare, 
for example, It would be wrong for us to be there with it would be wrong for we 
to be there. This makes it clear that the object pronoun (us, me) is usual after a 
preposition rather than the subject pronoun (we, I).
To make matters even more complicated, however, the letter writer goes on 
to argue that the more standard or correct form is the one which would have 
been used in an informal chat between the two people concerned. The confusion 
arises from the Latin-​based insecurity, already described, over when to use me 
and when to use I. As a result of its association with Latin-​influenced forms such 
as It is I, people assume that I is generally more correct and formal than me, and 
so they substitute I for me in all kinds of contexts.
Answer to ­exercise 13
It would be reasonable to assume on the basis of the forms muckin’, ged in (for 
get in) and my lad that the teacher was conveying a relaxed, easygoing, informal 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
382
stance, and avoiding being too “heavy” with his message. The utterance would 
also contribute to a social identity which did not take the student’s misbehaviour 
overly seriously.
Answer to ­exercise 14
The choice between tu and vous is often, but not always, a matter of style. When 
talking to a group of people, tu is not a possibility, for instance. When addressing 
one person, however, the choice is typically influenced by the relationship between 
the speaker and the addressee, and the social context in which they are speaking. 
Among the factors mentioned in this chapter, the age of the addressee relative 
to the speaker may be relevant, relative social status will generally be taken into 
account, and so will the formality of the context. So, for example, tu will gener-
ally be used to a child as well as to an intimate. Vous will generally be used to an 
older person, especially someone the speaker does not know well. Vous is used 
in more formal situations such as graduation ceremonies and in law courts. Vous 
is used to express respect –​ it is the polite pronoun. The various strategies which 
speakers use to express politeness are discussed further in ­chapter 11.
Answer to ­exercise 15
(a)	 Graffiti. Clues: alliteration, short phrase, simple syntax, colloquial abbrevi-
ation of nuclear weapons, capital letters, and political message.
(b)	 Baby-​talk. Clues: repetition of whole clauses, simple syntax, use of tag (eh), 
and simple vocabulary.
(c)	 Legal text. Clues: passive constructions (e.g. is discharged), repetition of 
noun phrases rather than use of pronouns (e.g. security interest), and subor-
dinate clauses. Note that the main clause . . . the person . . . shall . . . apply 
to is both preceded by, and interspersed with, subordinate clauses which 
qualify it.
(d)	 Phone text message (from father to daughter). Clues: minimal brief text 
with all redundancies eliminated; short phrases with no articles or auxiliary 
verbs; elimination of vowels; use of figures for words such as for and to, and 
even for parts of words with the same sound (e.g. gr8 for great); use of single 
letters with sound of a whole word (e.g. c for see and u for you); no punctu-
ation; and no greeting or sign off.
(e)	 Entry in a publicly accessible email list (instance of CMC: Computer-​
Mediated Communication). Clues: lexical items such as list, UNSUBSCRIBE 
and debate. The capitals used in UNSUBSCRIBE are the standard means of 
leaving an email list. The rather formal syntax and lexis, I have no desire to 
be a party to, therefore, suggests the list is probably an academic one.
Answer to ­exercise 16
You may have said that the texts with abbreviations came from younger people, 
while the less abbreviated versions came from older people, and this may be true 
in some cases. However, phone technology encourages not just the use of full 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
383
text, but also the use of emoticons, so it is more of a personal choice about how 
we style our messaging persona. By choosing to use an emoticon, a texter might 
be trying to convey that they are “fun”, or to ensure that the receiver does not 
take the content of the message too seriously. In fact, other textual features, such 
as lol, mainly function to signal the tone of a message. This, however, only works 
if you know the code. Former British Prime Minister, David Cameron, admitted 
in evidence given to the Leveson Inquiry that he thought that lol stood for lots of 
love rather than laugh out loud. And more recently it has been noted that it may 
serve as an empathy marker.
Answer to ­exercise 17
(a)	 Post-​noun modification of Clark.
(b)	 Syntactic reduction: the verb is omitted –​ it is predictably kicks or provides 
or something similar in meaning.
(c)	 Syntactic inversion: the subject the two defenders follows the predicate com-
bining well.
(d)	 Syntactic reduction: the definite article the is omitted before pitch and the 
verb form is is omitted after pitch. Both words are totally predictable.
(e)	 Syntactic reduction and inversion: the unreduced sentence in normal word 
order would be remember that Rush is looking for a hat-​trick.
Answer to ­exercise 19
Features of the opening of after-​match interviews which recur in many interviews 
include:
•	the interviewer begins with the sportsperson’s name: Tomas
•	the relevant event or match outcome is often named: your first Wimbledon 
semi final
•	the interviewer asks the sportsperson how they are feeling at this point: what 
emotions are you feeling right now?
•	the sportsperson names one or more reasons why the game was tough: it’s 
really tough to play in front of this crowd
•	the sportsperson makes positive comments about the situation and the oppos-
ition using positive adjectives: amazing, great.
Here is the closing from the Tomas Berdych interview:
Interviewer:          brilliantly played today, well done
Tomas Berdych:  thank you very much, thanks
This is very typical. Interview closings usually involve: (1) good wishes, 
congratulations or compliments from the interviewer: brilliantly played 
today, well done; and (2) thanks from the sportsperson: thank you very much, 
thanks.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
384
In this exercise, the function of the interaction is clearly a very important 
influence on the utterances of the participants. It is a kind of “display” event 
with a rather predictable structure. The next chapter explores the relationship 
between speech functions and linguistic choices in more detail.
Concepts introduced
•	Audience design
•	Speech accommodation
•	Speech convergence
•	Speech divergence
•	Referee design
•	Stylisation
•	Labovian methodology
•	Observer’s paradox
•	Hypercorrection
•	Linguistic insecurity
•	Indicators, markers and stereotypes
•	Third-​wave variationist approach
•	Register
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Barrett (1999) on the features of the speech of drag queens
Bell (1984, 1991, 2001) on audience design, referee design and media language
Broesch and Bryant (2015) on baby-talk
Cazden (1972) on children’s language
Coupland (1981) for data on Cardiff
Coupland (2007) on style and stylisation
Douglas-​Cowie (1978) on Northern Ireland
Drummond and Schleef (2016) on third-​wave variationist approach
Eckert (2018): ­chapter 9 on style and third-​wave variationist approach
Errington (1988) on Javanese
Ferguson (1983) on baseball commentary
File (2012, 2013) on after-​match interviews
Giles and Smith (1979), Ylänne (2008) on accommodation theory
Hatch (1983) on foreigner talk
http://​edit​ion.cnn.com/​2013/​04/​30/​opin​ion/​mcwhor​ter-​lol/​index.html?hpt=​
hp_​t5 on “lol” as a discourse marker
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

STYLE, CONTEXT, AND REGISTER
385
Jahangiri and Hudson (1982), Keshavarz (1988) on Tehrani Persian
Jaspers (2011) on Antwerp dialect and stylisation
Kuiper and Austin (1990) on race calling
Kuiper and Haggo (1984) on oral formulas
Labov (1972a) on style, and on markers, stereotypes, and indicators
Labov (2006) on New York speech
Milroy (1989) for data on Tyneside and Tunisia
O’Hanlon (2006) on accents used in Australian hip-​hop
Pawley (1991) on language of cricket commentary
Rampton (1995) on “crossing”
Rickford and McNair-​Knox (1994) on AAVE interviewer style
Russell (1982) on Mombasa Swahili
Snell (2010) on stylisation and me in Tyneside English
Tagliamonte (2012) on style and third-​wave variationist approach
The ManyBabies Consortium (2020) on baby-​talk
Trudgill (1974, 1983) especially for data on Norwich
Vine and Marsden (2016) on the spread of eh in New Zealand English
Wolfram and Fasold (1974) on stylistic variation
www.psychologytoday.com/​us/​blog/​the-​athletes-​way/​202004/​baby-​talk-​is-​  
universal-​language
Quotations:
Example 3 was provided by Kazuyo Murata
Example 4 is an excerpt from a Monty Python sketch
Example 8 is based on Coupland (1981)
Example 9 is from Giles and Smith (1979: 53)
Example 10 is based on an example in Holmes and Marra (2006)
Example 13 is from the New Zealand Herald, 31 December 1986
Example 14 is from Finegan and Besnier (1989: 431)
Examples 15 and 19 are from Labov (1966: 426)
Examples 16 and 17 are from Pawley, Syder and He (1989: 2–​5)
Example 20 is based on Podesva (2006, 2008)
Example 21 is modified from Inoue (1979: 287–​9)
Example 23 is from Errington (1988: 90–​1)
Example 24 is from Coupland et al. (1988: 25)
Example 25 is slightly edited from Pawley (1991: 3)
Examples 26, 27, 28 are from Ferguson (1983) and Pawley (1991)
Example 29 from Kuiper and Austin (1990)
The data in ­exercise 4 is from Bell (1991)
The data in ­exercise 8 is based on Jaspers (2011)
The “casual salesman” and the “careful pipefitter” quotation is from Labov 
(1972a: 240)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
386
“Stylistic practice is a process of bricolage” is a quotation from Eckert (2018: 147)
The example in ­exercise 15 (e) is modified from Harris (2004: 69)
The data in ­exercise 17 is from File (2013); the interview was transcribed from 
http://​news.bbc.co.uk/​sport2/​hi/​8775961.stm
The data in ­exercise 19 is from File (2013)
Useful additional reading
Bell (2014): ­chapter 11
Bennett (2012) on stylisation of chavspeak
Blommaert and Dong (2020) on ethnographic methods
Coupland (2007)
Coupland and Jaworski (2009): Part III
Crystal (2006, 2008) and (2010): ­chapter 11
Cutler (2010) on accommodation and identity construction
Downes (1998): ­chapter 4
Eckert and Rickford (2001)
Giles and Smith (1979)
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapter 19 by Nikolas Coupland discusses how to 
approach the analysis of style, which is very important in social identity 
construction
Ilbury (2020) on style and Twitter
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 3
Trudgill (2009): ­chapter 5
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

387
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-15
Chapter 10 discussed ways in which linguistic choices are influenced by social 
contexts. We adapt our talk to suit our audience and talk differently to children, 
customers and colleagues. We use language differently to construct different 
kinds of social identity, and we speak differently in formal and casual contexts. 
The purpose of talk also affects its form. This chapter begins by considering the 
range of functions that language may serve, and the variety of ways in which the 
“same” message may be expressed.
Why do we select one way rather than another to convey our message? Given 
a choice between Mr Shaw, Robert and Bob, for instance, how do we decide 
which is appropriate? One relevant factor is politeness. The second part of this 
chapter illustrates how considerations of politeness influence the choice between 
different address forms, and discusses the social dimensions which influence what 
is considered polite in different situations and communities. Being considered lin-
guistically polite is often a matter of selecting linguistic forms which are perceived 
as constructing an appropriate degree of social distance or which acknowledge 
and reinforce relevant status or power differences.
Norms for polite behaviour differ from one speech community to another. 
Linguistic politeness is culturally based. Different speech communities empha-
sise different functions, and express particular functions differently. How, if at 
all, should one express appreciation for a meal in another culture? Is it possible 
to refuse an invitation politely? How should one greet people in different speech 
communities? These are the kinds of questions touched on in the final section of 
this chapter where some examples of cross-​cultural differences in the expression 
of speech functions are discussed.
Source: Garfield ©1991 Paws, Inc. Reprinted with permission of Andrews McMeel Syndication. 
All rights reserved.
Speech functions, politeness, 
and cross-​cultural 
communication
11

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
388
The functions of speech
Example 1
Boss:	
Good morning Sue. Lovely day.
Secretary:	
Yes it’s beautiful. Makes you wonder what we’re doing here 
doesn’t it.
Boss:	
Mm, that’s right. Look I wonder if you could possibly sort 
this lot out by ten. I need them for a meeting.
Secretary:	
Yes sure. No problem.
Boss:	
Thanks that’s great.
This dialogue is typical of many everyday interactions in that it serves both an 
affective (or social) function and a referential (or informative) function. The 
initial greetings and comments on the weather serve a predominantly social 
function; they establish rapport between the two participants. The exchange 
then moves on to become more information-​oriented or referential in function, 
though the social function of constructing an appropriate level of rapport and 
respect is still relevant. Chapter 1 described just these two broad functions of 
speech –​ the affective and the referential. It is possible, however, to distinguish a 
great variety of different functions which language serves.
There are a number of ways of categorising speech functions. The following 
list has proved a useful one in sociolinguistic research.
1	
Expressive utterances express the speaker’s feelings, e.g. I’m feeling 
great today.
2	
Directive utterances attempt to get someone to do something, e.g. Clear 
the table.
3	
Referential utterances provide information, e.g. At the third stroke it will be 
three o’clock precisely.
4	
Metalinguistic utterances comment on language itself, e.g. “Hegemony” is 
not a common word.
5	
Poetic utterances focus on aesthetic features of language, e.g. a poem, an 
ear-​catching motto, a rhyme, Peter Piper picked a peck of pickled peppers.
6	
Phatic utterances construct solidarity, rapport and empathy with others, e.g. 
Hi, how are you, lovely day isn’t it!
Though we have provided a very brief indication of what the function labels 
mean, and an example of each in the form of a single utterance, it is important 
to remember that any utterance may in fact express more than one function, and 
any function may be served by a stretch of discourse which doesn’t exactly coin-
cide with an utterance.
The first three functions are recognised by many linguists, though the precise 
labels they are given may differ. They seem to be very fundamental functions 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
389
of language, perhaps because they derive from the basic components of any 
interaction –​ the speaker (expressive), the addressee (directive) and the message 
(referential). The phatic function is, however, equally important from a sociolin-
guistic perspective. Phatic communication conveys an affective or social message 
rather than a referential one. One of the insights provided by sociolinguists has 
been precisely that language is not used to convey only referential information, 
but also expresses information about social relationships.
Exercise 1
Identify in ­example 1:
(a)	
an utterance which serves a primarily expressive function
(b)	
an utterance which serves a primarily directive function
(c)	
an utterance which serves a primarily referential function.
Answers at end of chapter
The categories are useful as guides for analysis, but they are not mutually 
exclusive. A love poem, for example, is both poetic and expressive. An advert, as 
the sentences in ­example 2 demonstrate, may be poetic, directive, amusing and 
possibly informative!
Example 2
(a)	
A Mars a day helps you work, rest and play.
(b)	 Beanz Buildz Kidz.
(c)	
Put a tiger in your tank.
(d)	 San Antonio, sans delay.
(e)	
Go to work on an egg!
(f)	
Drinka pinta milka day.
(g)	
Brace. Space. Pace.
(h)	 Get some pork on your fork!
(i)	
Maybe she’s born with it. Maybe it’s Maybelline.
(j)	
Slip Slop Slap.
(k)	 Bucket. Why not?
Note: ®Mars slogan is a registered trademark.
Sometimes notices are intentionally ambiguous in order to attract attention:
SLOW DOWN!
CHILDREN ROUND THE BEND
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
390
This notice, positioned before a bend in the road in a small village, serves to 
convey information and act as a warning and directive. It is also amusing to 
readers because the expression round the bend has the colloquial meaning of 
being “crazy” as well as its literal meaning.
The list of functions provided above is not definitive or all-​encompassing. Other 
speech function categories have been identified, often arising from the particular 
interests of a researcher, or the focus of a particular study. Michael Halliday, for 
instance, identified a function of language concerned with learning, which he 
labelled “heuristic”, and glossed as the “tell me why” function. The need for this 
function arose from his study of the acquisition of language by his son, Nigel. 
Many of Nigel’s utterances seemed to be aimed at learning more about the world.
Other researchers have added categories to deal with promises and threats 
(commissives), and with marriage vows, bets and declarations of war (performatives 
or declarations). Each category has its distinctive characteristics. The precise lin-
guistic form used is crucial to bets, for instance. By uttering the words I bet ... 
we “perform” the bet. Similarly, the precise words uttered at particular points are 
crucial in a wedding ceremony. So it is possible to add a variety of further cat-
egories which may prove useful and illuminating for particular analyses.
Researchers have analysed the ways that particular speech functions are 
expressed in a variety of contexts, identifying the range of linguistic forms they 
take. They have also been interested in the way different functions are distributed 
in a speech community. Who uses which forms to whom and in what contexts? 
To illustrate this kind of research, we discuss the directive function in more detail.
Exercise 2
Directives are linguistic utterances intended to get someone to do something. Think of 
five obvious and five less obvious verbal ways of getting someone to sit down in English.
Answer at end of chapter
Directives
Example 3
Teacher:	
What are you doing over by the window Helen?
Helen:	
Looking at the birds Miss.
Teacher:	
And what should you be doing?
Helen:	
(No answer)
Teacher:	
Go and sit down now and get on with your writing.
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
391
The directive function is concerned with getting people to do things. The speech 
acts which express directive force vary in strength. We can attempt to get people 
to sit down, for instance, by suggesting or inviting them to do so, or by ordering or 
commanding them to sit down. Orders and commands are speech acts which are gen-
erally expressed in imperative form. Polite attempts to get people to do something in 
English tend to use interrogatives or declaratives, as the following examples illustrate.
Sit down.
Imperative
You sit down.
You imperative
Could you sit down?
Interrogative with modal verb
Sit down will you?
Interrogative with tag
Won’t you sit down?
Interrogative with negative modal
I want you to sit down.
Declarative
I’d like you to sit down.
Declarative
You’d be more comfortable sitting down.
Declarative
The list could go on and on. There are many ways of expressing this “sit 
down” directive. And although we can say that in general the interrogatives and 
declaratives are more polite than the imperatives, a great deal depends on inton-
ation, tone of voice and context. A gentle sit down may be far more polite than a 
thundered I want you all sitting down now. In a shop, utterance (a) in ­example 4 
will be considered normal, while (b) might well be regarded as sarcastic.
Example 4
(a)	
Box of matches.
(b)	 Could you possibly give me a box of matches?
Source: ©2016 Keely Kidner, reproduced by kind permission.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
392
How do people decide which form to use in a particular context? What are the 
social factors which affect a speaker’s choice of the appropriate form of directive? 
A number of factors have been suggested. The social distance between participants, 
their relative status and roles, and the formality of the context (the social dimensions 
discussed in ­chapter 1) are usually relevant. People who are close friends or intimates 
use more imperatives, for instance. The utterances in ­example 5 were all produced 
within a family, were (almost!) all said without rancour, and caused no offence.
Example 5
(a)	
Roll over.
(b)	 Shut up you fool.
(c)	
Set the table, Finn.
(d)	 Clap hands Nico.
(e)	
Wash your hands for dinner, children.
(f)	
Turn that blessed radio down.
(g)	
Bugger off idiot.
Note: Bugger off is not usually regarded as an offensive expression in New 
Zealand: it can be used in a friendly way between family members.
Where status differences are clearly marked and accepted, superiors tend to 
use imperatives to subordinates. Teachers often use imperatives to pupils, for 
instance, as in ­example 6.
Example 6
(a)	
Open your books at page 32.
(b)	 Shut the door.
(c)	
Stop talking please.
Teachers can use very direct expressions of their meaning because of their 
high status relative to their pupils. On the other hand, the rights and obligations 
in a relationship such as teacher–​pupil are so clear-​cut that teachers can also use 
minimally explicit forms and be confident they will be interpreted accurately as 
directives, as shown in ­example 7.
Example 7
(a)	
Blackboard! (Clean the blackboard)
(b)	 Bus people! (Those who get the school bus should now leave)
(c)	
I hear talking. (Stop talking)
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
393
So clear-​cut are the rules for classroom behaviour that it has been suggested 
that pupils operate with a very general rule of the form: “Scan every utterance of 
the teacher for directive intent.” In other words, pupils consider everything the 
teacher says as a possible directive. New entrant Jason in ­example 8, however, 
has obviously not learned this rule yet, so his teacher’s attempts to gently direct 
him to the appropriate behaviour are initially far too indirect.
Example 8
Teacher:	
Jason, why have you got your raincoat on inside?
Jason:	
(Smiles)
Teacher:	
It’s not raining inside.
Jason:	
(No response)
Teacher:	
What are you going to do about it?
Jason:	
(No response)
Teacher:	
Go and hang it up.
Formality and status may be very relevant in choosing an appropriate directive 
form. The choice of one form rather than another contributes to constructing 
these dimensions of interaction. At a graduation ceremony, the University 
Chancellor gave the Vice-​Chancellor the directive in ­example 9.
Example 9
I now call on the Vice-​Chancellor to read the citation for our distinguished    
guest.
The required action (read the citation) is embedded as a subordinate clause 
in the second part of the declarative sentence, and this is a common grammat-
ical means of expressing directives less directly and more politely. A study which 
looked at the directives used between medical professionals in a meeting also 
demonstrated the influence of relative status on the form of directives in a formal 
setting. Imperatives were overwhelmingly used by superiors to those of subor-
dinate status. The only imperatives used “upwards” were greeted with laughter, 
and regarded as humorous because they so clearly flouted this sociolinguistic 
rule. The general rule was that directives upwards were couched as indirect 
forms, such as modal interrogatives, as in ­example 10 (a). Others took the form 
of hints as illustrated by the exchange in ­example 10 (b).
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
394
Example 10
Medical professional of lower status to person of higher status:
(a)	
Could you ring his mother and find out?
(b)	 A:  We’ve got a referral from Dr T. He’s your neighbour Jody.
		
B:  OK I’ll take him.
The relevance of status in a less formal context was nicely demonstrated in a 
study of children’s directives in a New Zealand childcare centre. Relative status 
in this centre was strongly influenced by age and size. The oldest, biggest and 
strongest child used by far the most imperatives, while attempts by the other 
children to get him to cooperate involved less direct forms, such as I think I need 
that now and Could I borrow that?
Another factor which is relevant to the form of a directive is the routineness 
or reasonableness of the task. A boss might produce utterance (a) in ­example 11 
to his mechanic when giving her a routine task. If, however, he is expecting her to 
do something out of the ordinary or especially difficult, he is far more likely to 
use a less direct form such as (b), or even a hint such as (c).
Example 11
(a)	
Get those brake pads in by five o’clock Sue. That car’s needed first 
thing in the morning.
(b)	 Could you stay a bit later tonight, do you think, and finish this job?
(c)	
That job’s taking longer than we predicted. I don’t know what we’ll 
do if it isn’t ready for tomorrow.
In general, imperatives are used between people who know each other well 
or to subordinates. Interrogatives and declaratives, including hints, tend to be 
used between those who are less familiar with each other, or where there is 
some reason to feel the task being requested is not routine (see also the dis-
cussion of politeness in ­chapter 14). But there are many qualifications to these 
generalisations. Hints may also be used for humorous effect between people who 
are close friends, as ­example 12 illustrates.
Example 12
(a)	
To someone blocking the light out:
		
You make a better door than a window.
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
395
(b)	 Mother to teenage son:
		
I’m not sure that a couple of smelly socks in the middle of the lounge 
floor can be beaten as a centre piece for our dinner party. What do 
you think, Tim?
It has also been noted that girls and women tend to favour more polite and 
less direct forms of directives than males –​ at least in many of the (mainly middle-​
class) social contexts investigated. (Though there are many social factors which 
may lead to different patterns of course.) Example 13 lists children’s utterances 
to each other in a play centre.
Example 13
(a)	
Tom:	
Give me that. I need it now.
(b)	 Seymour:	 Get off that car.
(c)	
Grant:	
Get out of my house.
(d)	 Maria:	
You finished with that rolling pin now?
(e)	
Lisa:	
My turn now eh?
(f)	
Meg:	
It’s time for tea so you’ll have to go home now.
The forms used by the girls (d to f) are clearly less direct and more polite than 
those used by the boys (a to c). In a study of doctors’ directives to patients, male 
doctors typically used imperatives (e.g. eat more fruit), while female doctors 
tended to use less direct forms (e.g. maybe you could try fresh fruit for dessert). 
There are many other influences on the form of directives: the addressee’s gender 
is often significant, for instance. In many English-​speaking contexts, women not 
only use less direct forms of directive, they also typically receive less direct forms. 
Relative power or status and social distance clearly influence the form of direct-
ives in many communities, as some of the examples above have demonstrated. 
And in many societies, women as a group have less power and occupy less 
statusful positions than men, a point discussed further in ­chapter 12. There is 
not space to illustrate all the possible contextual influences, but you might find 
it interesting to investigate some of them for yourself in your own community.
In ­chapter 10 we noted the way in which personal pronouns can be used to 
reduce the force of criticisms and directives. Example 14 illustrates this in the 
context of a rugby team in New Zealand.
Example 14
Coach addressing players at half-​time in a rugby match.
[The personal pronouns have been highlighted in bold.]
we can’t afford to go to deck so quickly ’cos these guys are very good over 
the ball
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
396
so just wh-​ when you’re carrying and you’re going into contact
fight fight fight as hard as you can to stay up until you feel the the maroon 
wave hit us eh?
What we can see is that the coach uses we as a personal pronoun when making 
an indirect ciriticism about going to the deck (meaning falling to the ground with 
the ball). By including himself through the use of we the coach softens the criti-
cism. In contrast, when he gives advice on what the players should do, he uses 
you, although note that he also prefaces this with just, another softening device. 
In the final line he uses both you and us, even though he is certainly not the one 
being hit by the maroon wave (a figurative expression used to refer to the rest 
of the team arriving to help the player who has fallen to the ground –​ the team 
colours include maroon). Overall, this example demonstrates how strategies such 
as personal pronouns can be used to balance solidarity with power. In the rugby 
team the coach maintains a position of hierarchical power, but there is very little 
social distance between him and the players. His linguistic choices reflect this.
Exercise 3
Consider the form of directives (i.e. how people get others to do things) in your community.
(a)	
Make some observations in a range of different contexts, writing down the form 
of the directives and the situations in which they occur. Then try to make some 
generalisations about the reasons for any patterns you observe.
(b)	
Note the form of the directives used in your family by both adults and children 
during a different two-​hour period on three different days. List the different social 
factors (e.g. relative status/​power, degree of solidarity/​formality, routine nature 
of the task) which you consider influence and are influenced by the forms of the 
directives.
Not all communities follow the patterns described. In a study of a commu-
nity of lower-​class male migrant agricultural workers on the eastern coast of the 
USA, for instance, it was found that almost all the directives took the form of 
imperatives, regardless of differences in social status, social distance, the presence 
of outsiders and the setting or location.
Example 15
(a)	
Stay away from them social workers.
(b)	 Well if you don’t want to work, get out of the field.
(c)	
Grab that there hand truck.

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
397
(d)	 Now get to it.
(e)	
[Overseer assigns a farmworker the wrong row to hoe:]
Farmworker: Go to hell. Two times you have told me what to do –​ 
each time it’s been wrong. I’m staying in this row. You put somebody 
else there.
The researchers in this study considered that the insecure and unpleasant 
work conditions of the participants in this community of practice (a concept 
introduced in ­chapter 8) accounted for the antagonism evident in many of 
their social interactions. Relations between the workers and their bosses were 
characterised by mistrust and tension on both sides. Their language enacted these 
unhappy social relationships in that the great majority of directives, whether 
from bosses to workers or vice versa, took the form of unmodified imperatives. 
The last section of this chapter provides further examples of differences in the 
way different communities express particular speech functions.
Clearly getting what you want from someone else requires knowledge of the 
norms for expressing yourself appropriately in the relevant sociocultural con-
text. A successful outcome may be considered a real sociolinguistic accomplish-
ment. Even by three years of age, some children have worked out that a threat 
can sometimes be more effective than any directive. The following example 
illustrates the sociolinguistic skills of both parties to this exchange. (Jake will no 
doubt be a great diplomat some day!)
Example 16
Mischa:	
Can I borrow your biscuit?
Jake:	
No, it’s my lunch.
Mischa:	
I won’t be your friend if you won’t let me.
Jake:	
OK.
Jake gives her the biscuit but looks miserable.
Mischa:	
Here, it’s OK you have it.
Jake:	
No. You won’t be my friend.
 	
Mischa starts eating.
Jake:	
My turn.
Mischa gives it back and they then finish the biscuit taking turns.
Discussing the ways in which speech functions are expressed in different 
contexts has repeatedly involved considerations of politeness. Choosing the 
appropriate linguistic form for directives to family, friends and foreigners 
involves taking account of the dimensions of solidarity (or social distance) and 
social status (or power) within a specific sociocultural context. These dimensions 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
398
are at the heart of politeness behaviour and are discussed further in ­chapter 14. 
Below we focus explicitly on linguistic politeness, using terms of address for 
exemplification. But first, we provide a short reflection on identity construction 
as a more abstract function of interaction.
Exercise 4
At the bus stop in a small Italian town, two local bikers wanted to get their bikes taken up 
to the top of the St Bernard Pass so they could have the thrill of the ride down without the 
pain of the slog up. They waited till all the foot passengers were on board and it was clear 
there was sufficient space for the bikes. Then they began to discuss their request with the 
driver –​ who refused repeatedly. Undeterred, they started to argue, pointing to the space 
and explaining that they would pay. Back and forth went the discussion with increases in 
the volume and gesturing until it was well past the time for the bus to leave. The driver was 
adamant, but the bikers were irrepressible. Suddenly, when it seemed certain they would 
come to blows, the driver capitulated, the bikers smiled, thanked the driver, and profusely 
apologised for the inconvenience. The bikes were loaded and the bus set off.
Consider how the bikers negotiated their request. Propose a set of rules to describe the 
components of the Italian speech act of request here.
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 5
For the purposes of the discussion in this chapter, we have simplified and treated most 
utterances as if they expressed just one speech function. But when we interact, we gener-
ally use language in complex ways, and this often involves expressing several functions of 
language simultaneously. Identify at least two functions which could be expressed simul-
taneously by each of the following utterances.
(a)	
Fire!
(b)	
Keep up that excellent work.
(c)	
I’d like to see Sam in my office at four.
(d)	
I’m very tired.
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 6
Swear words serve many different functions in different social contexts. They may express 
annoyance, aggression and insult, for instance, or they may express solidarity and con-
struct a friendly relationship (see ­example 5 (g) above). Identify the main functions of the 
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
399
word fucking in the following excerpt from the pre-​match rev-​up talk by the captain of a 
regional New Zealand rugby team. (Remember as a sociolinguist, you need to be able to 
analyse the use of such words without being offended by them.)
Jon:	
we’re in teams boys right?
  	
we got fucking nothing to lose here
  	
it’s a fucking game today alright?
  	
let’s fucking go out there and we’ll show them
  	
how fucking mean and how fucking good we are boys eh
  	
we put forty minutes together last week
  	
let’s put fucking eighty together this week eh
Answer at end of chapter
Identity construction: a more abstract function 
of interaction
We have so far discussed how different linguistic forms contribute to constructing 
or threatening solidarity or rapport, maintaining or challenging status 
distinctions, and how they may influence the formality of an interaction. But 
it is also important to consider how relatively high-​level, more abstract social 
dimensions of interaction such as social identity and politeness are constructed 
through language. Identity construction was discussed in some detail in the 
Interlude before ­chapter 10. Here we again draw explicit attention to the way 
that language functions to construct the different social identities and personas 
that people enact in different situations.
Identity construction is influenced by the social setting, one’s social role and 
particular goals and responses to others in a specific situation. So macro-​level 
social categories such as African American, middle class, and female will be 
indexed linguistically, as well as more ephemeral stances such as competent, 
intelligent, extrovert, and fun loving, which will be signalled through more subtle 
and fleeting moves in dynamic interaction in a specific setting.
Some linguistic features can simultaneously construct a speaker’s identity 
in terms of macro-​level social categories as well as interactional and local 
identity categories. Consider Heath’s choice of linguistic and paralinguistic 
features, described in ­example 20, ­chapter 10, on page 363. Heath dynamically 
constructed different kinds of identity in his medical clinic and at a barbecue 
with friends. He drew on particular combinations of features to index macro-​
level categories such as gay, white, professional, and male, and stances such as 
competent and meticulous or flamboyant and prissy, to enact different personas 
(reliable physician vs. gay diva) in interaction with different interlocuters in 
different settings.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
400
When online in a chatroom, individuals may construct rather different identities 
than those they enact in face-​to-​face interaction within their family. A person’s 
tweets may construct a critical, sarcastic, witty persona which is different from 
their enactment of their roles as a mother in the kitchen or a business manager 
in the workplace. Identity construction is a dynamic and responsive process. 
Reading research about how people use a particular linguistic variable we can 
easily forget that people use language in a variety of styles and for a variety of 
functions across a range of different situations. In other words, we should talk 
about identities, since we rarely present the same identity to all people in all 
situations.
Like identity construction, politeness is a higher-​level function than directive 
or greeting or compliment. In the next section we discuss some of the complex-
ities of this important concept.
Politeness and address forms
Example 17
Israeli passenger and driver on an inter-​city bus:
Passenger:	
Turn the light on, please.
Driver:	
What?
Passenger:	
Turn the light on, please.
Driver:	
It disturbs me.
Passenger:	
I want to read.
This exchange between two Israelis seems very direct and blunt to those from 
other cultures. Being polite is a complicated business in any language. It is dif-
ficult to learn because it involves understanding not just the language, but also 
the social and cultural values of the community. We often don’t appreciate just 
how complicated it is, because many think of politeness mainly as a matter of 
saying please and thank you in the right places. In fact, it involves a great deal 
more than the superficial politeness routines that parents explicitly teach their 
children, as the earlier discussion of directives and expressives suggested.
Take the word please for example. Children are told to say please when they 
are making requests, as a way of expressing themselves politely. But adults use 
please far less than one might suppose and, when they do, it often has the effect 
of making a directive sound less polite and more peremptory. Compare the pairs 
of utterances in ­example 18, for instance.
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
401
Example 18
(a)	
Could you take my bags up?
Could you take my bags up, please.
(b)	 Answer the phone Jo.
Please answer the phone Jo.
As always, a great deal depends on intonation and tone of voice, but please 
does not necessarily increase the politeness of these directives.
This raises the bigger question of what exactly is “politeness”. Generally 
speaking, politeness involves contributing to social harmony and avoiding social 
conflict. More specifically, linguistic politeness involves discourse strategies or 
linguistic devices which are intended and perceived or evaluated by others as 
having been used to maintain harmonious relations and avoid causing trouble. 
In many cases, being polite involves adapting sensitively to evolving social 
relationships, as illustrated in ­example 19.
Example 19
Nurse:	
Good morning Mr Grant.
Mr G:	
Morning dear.
Nurse:	
I’m going to change that dressing. Is that OK?
Mr G:	
Gonna torture me again are you sweetie?
Nurse:	
Third degree, no mercy mate.
The nurse begins the interaction with a polite greeting using the patient’s 
title and last name. He responds using the friendly form dear as an address 
form. The nurse continues politely, signalling her intentions and checking 
that he is agreeable. Mr Grant then uses humour and an even more informal 
address form sweetie. In response, the nurse shifts to a more casual style, also 
using humour and a casual address form mate. In this interchange, then, we 
see the two participants actively negotiating a comfortable way of relating to 
each other.
Being linguistically polite involves speaking to people appropriately in light 
of their relationship to you. Inappropriate linguistic choices may be considered 
rude. Using an imperative such as stop talking or shut that door to a superior at 
work is likely to earn the office junior a reprimand. Calling the managing dir-
ector Sally or sweetie when you do not know her well and have only just started 
work as a stores assistant in the department is likely to be considered impolite. 
Making decisions about what is or is not considered polite in any community 
of practice therefore involves assessing social relationships along the dimensions 
of social distance or solidarity, and relative power or status in a specific social 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
402
context. We need to understand the social values of a community in order to 
speak politely.
These dimensions also provide the basis for a distinction between two 
different types of politeness. Positive politeness is solidarity or rapport oriented. 
It emphasises shared attitudes and values. When the boss suggests that a sub-
ordinate should use first name (FN) to her, this is a positive politeness move, 
attending to her positive face needs, her need to be appreciated and feel a sense 
of belonging; it constructs solidarity and minimises status differences. A shift 
to a more informal style using slang, endearments (as in ­example 19) or swear 
words (as in ­exercise 6) may function similarly to express positive politeness. By 
contrast, negative politeness pays respect to people’s negative face needs –​ their 
need not to be intruded upon. Indirect directives such as those in ­example 11 
(b) and (c) express negative politeness. Negative politeness involves expressing 
oneself appropriately in terms of social distance and respecting status differences. 
In British English, using title +​ last name (TLN) to your superiors, and to older 
people that you don’t know well, are further examples of the expression of nega-
tive politeness.
Being polite may also involve the dimension of formality. In a formal situ-
ation, the appropriate way of talking to your brother will depend on your social 
roles in the context. If he is acting as the judge in a law court, then calling him 
Tom will be considered disrespectful, while at the dinner table calling him Your 
honour will be perceived as inappropriate, sarcastic or humorous.
Figure 11.1 is a useful summary of the kinds of factors which were considered 
relevant in accounting for people’s choice of appropriate address forms in British 
English in the 1970s. The model accounts for the forms used as address terms in 
an utterance attracting attention such as Hey (address term), or in an utterance 
such as I’m sure you will find it interesting (address term).
The diagram assumes the speaker knows the addressee’s name and the first 
box takes account of whether the addressee is a child or an adult. Where the 
line between adult and child is drawn differs between communities, and even 
within communities for different purposes (e.g. baby-​sitting, buying fireworks, 
marrying, owning a firearm or voting). If the addressee would be classified as a 
child in the relevant social interaction, then, following the minus exit from the 
box, the flow chart indicates FN is used in British English, e.g. Hey Jill. Box 2 
(Marked setting) refers to formal settings such as Parliament and law courts 
where people act in role, and where speech is governed by relatively explicit 
discourse rules. Forms of address are derived from identity in the context, e.g. 
Your honour or Prime Minister. Boxes 3 (Kin) and 6 (Well acquainted) are 
self-​explanatory –​ though who qualifies in each case will of course be culture-​
dependent and context-​dependent. Box 7 (Higher rank) refers to social superiors 
or people of higher status in a hierarchy. Box 4 (Ascending generation) is the gen-
eration above the speaker –​ parents and parents’ sisters, brothers and cousins, 
for instance. Box 9 (Dispensation) refers to the fact that a superior may absolve 
the speaker from the obligation of using TLN and permit them to use FN, e.g. Dr 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
403
Figure 11.1  Factors constraining the polite choice of address terms in British English
Source: Laver (1981: 207). Reproduced with permission.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
404
Worth is far too formal. Please call me Helen. Box 10 (Profession title) refers to 
occupational or courtesy titles such as Doctor, Professor, Sister for a nun, Father 
for a priest, and so on.
Exercise 7
Modify ­figure 11.1 (which is based on outdated British English usage) to account for the 
current norms of address usage in your speech community. What are the dimensions 
which are relevant to constructing social distance and solidarity or rapport in your 
community?
•	 Is the formality of the setting relevant? Consider a law court, Parliament, a formal 
prize giving or graduation ceremony, or a very formal annual meeting of a society 
or union.
•	 Do you use kin-​titles such as grandad or aunt which indicate a person’s kinship relation-
ship to you? Is age or generation relevant in selecting kin titles? What do you call your 
mother’s cousin, for instance, if she is the same age as you? (See ­chapter 13 for some 
discussion of cultural differences in the area of kinship.)
•	 Is relative status or rank relevant in selecting an appropriate term in your community? 
What do you call the most senior person at the place where you work or study? What 
do you call your equals or peers?
•	 What, if any, is the age difference between people which is considered relevant in deter-
mining address usage? What do you call your neighbours, for instance? Is their age 
relative to your age relevant? If they were 20 or 30 years older than you, would this be 
different? What do you call your parents’ friends?
•	 Are the elements in the diagram organised in a way which accurately indicates their 
relative importance in your community? Is status more important than social distance, 
for instance, in your community or vice versa? Would you call a friend by first name in 
all contexts (except marked settings) even if they were of very much higher status than 
you? Would you call an equal by first name on first meeting?
How might such a model be extended? What, for instance, would you use to attract the 
attention of a stranger who had dropped something in the street? What additional address 
terms are available in your community (e.g. sir, madam, dear, mate, bro), and what factors 
influence their occurrence?
Example 20
(a)	
Post Office delivery man to elderly upper-​class British woman:
Can I have your signature, my love?
(b)	 Director to colleague at a meeting where first names are gener-
ally used:
I think it’s time you let someone else contribute, Mr Morgan.
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
405
We can cause offence by treating someone, from their perspective, too famil-
iarly, as in ­example 20 (a), or by treating them too distantly as in (b). Being 
polite means getting the linguistic expression of social distance “right” as far 
as your addressee is concerned. This is very variable from one speech com-
munity to another. In the north of England, many newspaper vendors, bus 
conductors and people selling railway tickets call everyone love regardless of 
how well they know them, and often regardless of their gender. By contrast, 
mutual TLN (Mrs Landy, Mr Duncan) was once the norm between upper-​
working-​class neighbours who lived close to each other, but who were not 
friends and did not see each other socially. In North America, it is usual to use 
first names (FN) to people you work with, regardless of how little or much you 
like them. In some other English-​speaking cultures, mutual FN is experienced 
as too familiar. Mutual TLN is appropriate until you have worked together for 
a period of time or developed a friendship. Issues like how long you need to 
know someone, or how close a friendship needs to be, in order to use FN raise 
further complications, of course. The answers will be different for different 
communities.
In earlier centuries, the norms were simpler. Status was the major consider-
ation. In general, people used TLN (or an appropriate kin-​term) upwards to 
superiors, and FN downwards to subordinates, no matter how well they knew 
them. Solidarity became relevant only between equals. Equals used mutual 
TLN with people they did not know well, and they used mutual FN to friends. 
In addition, between some (mainly male) people, mutual LN was the norm 
(Elementary my dear Watson!), and there was also a non-​reciprocal pattern 
involving madam/​sir upwards and LN downwards to subordinates (clean that 
blackboard, Hadley).
Today, however, the interaction between social status and social distance in 
many Western societies is more complicated. This results in a conflict of norms 
in two situations: (1) high status with high solidarity and (2) low status with low 
solidarity. If your addressee is of lower status and you know them well (ignoring 
for the moment the issue of how well counts as “well”), then either way you 
use FN to them. But what form do they use to you? The norms conflict. Because 
they know you well, they could assume FN is appropriate, but their subordinate 
status predicts TLN. How can this dilemma be resolved? One common solution 
is to avoid address terms altogether. When an address term must be used, how-
ever, FN is generally used in such a situation. In other words, in many Western 
communities in the twenty-​first century, the solidarity dimension has tended to 
be given greater weight. So secretaries, for instance, generally use FN to their 
bosses if they have worked for them for some time. Workers use FN to the fac-
tory floor supervisor. Civil servants use FN to their policy-​making bosses if they 
talk to them regularly.
What of the second conflicting situation? There is no problem when you do 
not know someone well, and they are your superior. Both factors predict that 
you will use TLN. But when someone is your subordinate and you don’t know 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
406
them well, what do you use? This is a tricky area but, in general, once again the 
solidarity dimension tends to win out: degree of solidarity (or social distance) 
is what counts most. British office workers tend to use TLN to the caretaker 
whom they rarely see. Middle-​class women generally use TLN to their cleaning 
women, especially when the woman is older and rarely encountered face-​to-​face. 
The following American example describes a different pattern, however, and 
illustrates the complexity of the factors which may be relevant.
Example 21
Interviewer:	
How do you address the custodian of your building?
Professor:	
We have a young college boy now, so I call him by 
his first name, John. Now our housekeeper, I call her 
Mrs Talbot, and she calls me Miss Robinson. Once in a 
great while I call her by her first name. But I want the 
students to know that I respect her, so in public, I call her 
Mrs Talbot. And she’s not in the category of a cleaning 
lady. She wears a uniform and makes a vital contribution 
to the department.
Another factor which contributes to the assessment of social distance, and 
hence to the appropriate way of being polite, is the type of relationship involved. 
In many communities, as illustrated in ­example 21, transactional relationships 
favour TLN. Shopkeepers and customers in many British communities may 
exchange mutual TLN even when they have known each other for a long time. 
Doctors and patients similarly tend to use mutual TLN in Britain, but not in 
New Zealand where the solidarity dimension is generally weighted more heavily 
than the status dimension. In Britain, people involved in these relationships tend 
to put the emphasis on the social distance dimension since, even when they are 
long-​standing relationships, they do not involve intimacy. To know someone 
“well” in these communities involves more than just knowing them for a long 
time. Mutual TLN is also a marker of mutual respect, as ­example 21 indicates, 
and it may be especially relevant to express this in certain contexts. Transactional 
relationships are usually one-​dimensional. When they shift to become more 
personal, they often also shift to mutual FN.
One factor which seems to override these patterns –​ as indicated by its pri-
mary position in ­figure 11.1 –​ is relative age. Adults generally use FN to children 
on first meeting. Young people are more likely to receive FN in any context. 
A young shop assistant, hairdresser or cleaner, or an office junior will receive FN 
from a customer or client, and will often be expected to use TLN back, especially 
if the person is older by a generation or more.
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
407
Exercise 8
Consider the complications introduced into the interaction of solidarity and status by 
languages which have a choice of pronoun such as tu and vous in French, or du and Sie in 
German. What kind of social relationship is implied by mutual vous between two people?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 9
(a)	
When a subordinate is using TLN to a superior and receiving FN back, how could a 
change to mutual FN be achieved politely?
(b)	
When people are using mutual TLN, who do you think has the right to suggest a 
move to FN?
Answers at end of chapter
In addition to the patterns of address term usage that involve names, there is 
the use of familiarisers such as mate, dude, babe, bro, sis, cuz, love, etc. Just as 
with the use of titles and names, the effect of using these is very much dependent 
on the context of a conversation. In a situation where one person is performing 
a face-​threatening act such as issuing a directive, a familiariser can mitigate this 
by indexing the solidarity between the speakers.
In many communities, norms of address usage have changed over time to 
place more emphasis on solidarity and less on status. But this is not the case 
universally. In many Asian societies, such as Japan, Korea and Indonesia, the 
emphasis remains on status differences. Being polite involves using language 
which recognises relative status very explicitly, and hence constructs both the 
speaker’s and the addressee’s identities appropriately in specific contexts.
The Javanese example discussed in ­chapter 10 illustrated this point. The 
choice of an appropriate style reflected the speaker’s assessment of the relative 
status of the two participants. The higher the addressee’s status, the more com-
plex the level of Javanese selected. As well as choosing between low style (ngoko 
or 1), middle style (krama madya or 2) and high style (krama or 3), Javanese 
speakers also add another dimension of politeness to the high and the low style 
by using high or low honorifics. These are alternative words for people, body 
parts, possessions and human actions which can be used to raise the high style 
one notch further up (to 3a, so to speak), and the low style two notches further 
up (to 1a and 1b).
Being polite in Javanese is obviously a complex linguistic matter. The factors 
which influence the choice of appropriate level, however, include all those rele-
vant to the choice of an appropriate address form in English (as well as some 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
408
extra factors, such as the status of one’s family, which is irrelevant in many 
English-​speaking communities these days). Age, gender, kinship relationship and 
social status (usually determined by occupation and education) are all relevant. 
Even the formality of the context is relevant –​ a Javanese speaker would use a 
different level to the same person when they met in the street as opposed to at a 
wedding. Social status, social distance or solidarity, and the degree of formality 
of the interaction are relevant dimensions in all societies influencing what are 
considered appropriate ways of speaking politely.
Finally, it is important to remember that interaction is not static. What is 
considered polite at the beginning of an interaction may be considered rather 
stuffy and formal as the interaction proceeds and people engage in lively conver-
sation and negotiate their relationship in the process. On the other hand, an inter-
action that starts politely may deteriorate as it progresses if the participants find 
they disagree. In other words, what is considered polite or impolite may emerge, 
change and develop throughout an interaction, as illustrated in ­example 22, a 
telephone conversation between two women whose husbands work together and 
who do not particularly like each other.
Example 22
June:	
Hi. June speaking.
Frances:	
Hi June. Happy New Year. Just ringing to check if you and 
Ricky are coming to our barbecue tomorrow.
June:	
Oh, sorry erm didn’t Ricky tell you, we’re busy tomorrow.
Frances:	
No he didn’t. Would have been useful to know a little earlier. 
We were expecting to be able to use your barbecue as well 
as ours.
June:	
Well too bad I guess since we won’t be there.
Frances:	
Ok. Thanks for letting us know (sarcastically).
June:	
Bye (puts phone down).
This conversation starts in a sociable manner with a friendly greeting from 
Frances, but deteriorates as June indicates they are not coming to the bar-
becue without providing a convincing or detailed excuse. Frances’ complaint 
that this will upset their planning elicits a rather unsympathetic response from 
June too bad. Frances then indicates that she is offended with her sarcastic 
comment Thanks for letting us know, and June abruptly ends the conversation 
without the standard closing telephone sequence of OK from each partici-
pant. So while this conversation begins politely, it does not end so. Interpreting 
politeness as well as impoliteness involves sensitivity to continually changing 
social relationships.
In ­example 22, the participants used language in ways intended to convey dis-
satisfaction. This was accomplished without overt insult or explicit verbal abuse. 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
409
Deliberate rudeness is very marked or noticeable in middle-​class Western culture, 
and is more common in some contexts than others. The TV programme The 
Weakest Link is one example, and flaming on the internet is another. Consider 
also how reality shows (especially those involving celebrities) construct situ-
ations in which people cannot avoid conflict. This typically results in insults and 
verbal abuse which attracts more media attention for the show, and hence more 
publicity.
Sometimes, however, people unintentionally offend others as a result of 
different norms and expectations about how to express friendliness or respect. 
Though the relevant dimensions (solidarity and status) may be universal, the 
ways in which they are realised tend to differ in different communities. People 
from culturally different speech communities often express particular speech acts 
differently, and use different rules of interaction. As a result, misunderstandings 
may arise and they may unwittingly offend one another, as we illustrate in the 
next section of this chapter.
Exercise 10
Consider these three consecutive emails sent between university administrators. Identify 
linguistic clues that suggest changes in the ways that the participants are relating to each 
other in terms of status and solidarity.
Email from Pauline Griffiths, Faculty Manager to Heads of Departments
Cc Jean Hanson, Scholarships Officer
17 March
Morning all
You will shortly be sent applications for PhD scholarships to assess. When you have
completed the assessment we would be grateful if you could return hard copies to
the Faculty Office by close of business on 29 March. We will then forward them to the
Scholarships Office by 7 April.
Many thanks for your cooperation in processing these in such a short time.
Pauline
Manager, Faculty Office
Email from Jean Hanson, Scholarships Officer to Faculty Manager
Dear Pauline
Your memo to the Heads of Departments is inaccurate.
The date for forms to be returned to the Faculty Office is 24 March not 29 March.
Our office requires them by 1 April not 7 April.
This time frame has been published and available since late last year.
If the Scholarships Office does not receive applications by 1 April it will not be possible 
to consider them for scholarships.
Jean Hanson, Scholarships Officer, Research Office
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
410
Email from Faculty Manager to Scholarships Officer
Cc Faculty Dean
Dear Miss Hanson
I appreciate the dates stated in the brochure are 24 March and 1 April, but these dates 
are unreasonable since they do not allow for the Easter break.
We will endeavour to provide forms by 1 April, but it is likely some forms will not be 
sent to your office until 7 April.
Yours sincerely
Dr Pauline Griffiths, Faculty Manager, Faculty Office.
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 11
Tino, a young Samoan boy who had recently arrived in New Zealand, was summoned to 
the office of the school principal for being repeatedly late for school. He knocked on the 
door of the principal’s office. When he was told to come in, he walked in with hunched 
shoulders, scuttled over to a chair and sat down without being asked to do so by the 
principal. In response to the principal’s questions, he either said nothing or he muttered 
I don’t know. He looked down at the floor throughout the interview and never met the 
principal’s eyes.
What impression do you think he gave?
Answer at end of chapter
Source: A Fish called Wanda (edited still). ©1988 Metro-​Goldwyn-​Mayer Studios Inc. All rights 
reserved. Courtesy of MGM Media Licensing. Reprinted with permission.

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
411
Linguistic politeness in different cultures
Example 23
Christina Paulston, a Swede, returned home after living in America for 
some time. One evening soon after arriving back she invited some people to 
dinner, including her brother and his wife. She was in the kitchen when they 
arrived, and when she came through into the lounge she said to her sister-​
in-​law, in impeccable Swedish, “do you know everyone?” An American or 
an English person would assume that Christina, as hostess, was checking 
that her sister-​in-​law had been introduced to anyone she had not previ-
ously met. In Sweden, however, etiquette requires a new arrival to intro-
duce themselves to anyone they do not know. Her sister-​in-​law was very 
offended by Christina’s question, assuming Christina was implying she did 
not know the rules for greeting people politely.
Christina encountered a cross-​cultural communication problem on returning 
to her home culture. The potential areas of misunderstanding are even greater 
when we venture into new cultures. Anyone who has travelled outside their 
own speech community is likely to have had some experience of miscommuni-
cation based on cultural differences. Often these relate to different assumptions 
deriving from different “normal” environments. A Thai student in Britain, for 
example, reported not being able to understand what her hostess meant when 
she asked On which day of the week would you like to have your bath?. Coming 
from a very hot country with a “water-​oriented culture”, the notion that she 
might have a bath only once a week was very difficult to grasp. Learning another 
language usually involves a great deal more than learning the literal meaning 
of the words, how to put them together and how to pronounce them. We need 
to know what they mean in the cultural context in which they are normally 
used. And that involves some understanding of the cultural and social norms of 
their users.
We automatically make many unconscious sociolinguistic assumptions about 
what people mean when they ask a particular question or make a statement. When 
we ask someone to introduce an honoured guest at an important formal dinner, we 
expect something more elaborate than This is Dr Kennedy. When we ask someone 
to dinner, we assume they will know the norms concerning appropriate dress, time 
of arrival and acceptable topics for discussion during the evening. Detailed discus-
sion of the cat’s latest operation or the innards of your new car are generally not 
considered appropriate, for instance, unless the guests are very close friends and 
thus free to ask the speaker to shut up when they have heard enough.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
412
Exercise 12
Note the assumptions about appropriate topics that operate at your family dinner table. 
Are there some topics which are acceptable or “safe”, and others which are taboo?
Example 24
Hostess:	
Please do have another helping?
Guest:	
No thanks I am thoroughly fed up.
There are sociolinguistic norms for polite acceptance and refusal which differ 
cross-​culturally. Refusing an invitation appropriately in Western culture can be 
a challenging task. How do you refuse a lift home from someone you don’t like? 
How do you refuse an invitation to a meal from someone who is your social 
superior? An excuse is mandatory, and in many Western cultures it needs to be 
plausible and reasonably specific. In some cultures, there are very general vague 
formulas such as I’m busy that night I’m afraid, which are perfectly acceptable. 
But in Britain and New Zealand, most people expect to be provided with a 
more specific reason for a refusal. Where solidarity is the dominant social dimen-
sion, privacy is reduced and vagueness about one’s activities is seen as evasive. 
Being polite in such contexts involves knowing how to express a range of speech 
functions in a culturally appropriate way.
Example 25
When Rebecca arrived in New Zealand from Nottingham in England, she 
and her family were invited to a Christmas party at a neighbour’s house. 
Bring a plate she was told, and, thinking her hosts must be having a very 
big party if they expected to run out of plates, she obligingly brought four. 
Empty ones! When she arrived, she was embarrassed to discover that bring 
a plate meant bring a contribution to the food. Fortunately, she had some 
flowers with her to cover her confusion.
Rebecca’s experience is not unusual. The phrase bring a plate is a common 
trap for unsuspecting new arrivals in New Zealand. A commonly quoted (though 
now very dated) phrase is Ladies a plate, gentlemen a crate, meaning women 
should bring some food and men some beer.
Having accepted an invitation to dinner, what are the sociolinguistic rules 
which then apply? What is the appropriate linguistic formula for the begin-
ning of the meal? Buon appetito in Italy, bon appétit in France, smakelijk eten 
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
413
in Holland, Guten Appetit in Germany. At a Māori gathering a prayer always 
precedes the meal, as it does in the rather different Liverpool household of the 
Catholic Boswell family portrayed in the old British TV programme Bread.
Then there is the problem of how you get enough to eat. In some parts 
of India and Taiwan, as well as in parts of the Arabic-​speaking world, it is 
considered impolite to accept food when it is first offered. Only on the third 
offer is it appropriate to accept and, correspondingly, only a third refusal is 
considered definitive by the offerer. There are many stories of over-​replete 
Western visitors who had not worked out this cultural norm. On the other 
hand, overseas visitors who operate with such norms are likely to perceive 
their English hosts as ungenerous, because a second helping is offered only 
once. Once again, the sociolinguistic norms express cultural values. Plying 
someone with food is regarded as positively polite behaviour, especially in 
cultures with sharp economic differences between social groups. In many 
countries, however, a high BMI index is not regarded as a sign of wealth. 
Indeed, thinness is highly valued and sociolinguistic dinner norms tend to take 
account of the possibility that guests are dieting. Being forced to repeatedly 
refuse offers of food may be experienced as embarrassing.
These examples illustrate that ways of expressing the same speech act may 
differ quite markedly from one culture to another. These differences may 
seem totally random and unpredictable, but in fact they are not. They indi-
cate the different social values and attitudes of different societies. Greeting 
routines, which are discussed in the next section, provide further illustrations 
of this point.
Exercise 13
At the end of a telephone conversation which he had initiated, a German professor said to 
his English colleague, Tom: That is very good then. Good evening.
What might be considered odd about this form of farewell from Tom’s perspective?
Answer at end of chapter
Greetings
Example 26
(a)	
How are you?
(b)	 Where are you going?
(c)	
Have you eaten?
(d)	 Where do you come from?
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
414
(e)	
Are you married?
(f)	
How much do you earn?
(g)	
What do you weigh?
In different cultures, each of these questions is perfectly acceptable as part of 
a normal greeting routine. They are formulas, and the expected answer is ritu-
alistic. Just as a detailed blow-​by-​blow description of the state of your cold 
would be unexpected and inappropriate in response to How are you?, so the 
South-​East Asian questioner does not expect a detailed and specific account of 
your intended journey and destination in reply to Where are you going?. Just as 
fine is enough of an answer to the first question, so along the way or just a short 
distance is an appropriate and polite response to the second. Greeting formulas 
universally serve an affective function of establishing non-​threatening contact 
and rapport, but their precise content is clearly culture specific.
The sociolinguistic rules governing more formal meetings are usually equally  
culturally prescribed. The Māori ritual of encounter, for instance, is a complex  
procedure. The bare structure of the ritual is represented by a sequence of speech  
events, as illustrated in ­figure 11.2. The elements in brackets are not used on  
all occasions, while the other elements, however brief, are observable at most  
Māori formal meetings. The figure specifies the order in which the elements usu-
ally occur.
There are rules governing which particular elements occur on any particular 
occasion. A wero, for example, is a ritual challenge which involves actions and 
fearsome noises, but no words. It is appropriate only in welcoming a very high-​
ranking visitor such as the Prime Minister or the Governor-​General. The British 
Queen faces a wero every time she visits New Zealand. There are also rules 
about who is eligible to contribute different elements, according to gender, age 
and status of appropriate participants. The wero is performed by a young man 
(a warrior in earlier times). The karanga is the prerogative of the oldest and 
most respected woman on each side. The women exchange high chanted calls 
of greeting and invoke the dead in a series of calls, often improvised to fit the 
occasion. The length of some contributions is also dependent on the occasion. 
Figure 11.2  Māori formal greeting ritual
Source: Simplified from Salmond (1974: 201). Reproduced with permission.
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
415
The more formal and important the occasion, the more speeches (whaikōrero) 
there are, for instance, and the longer they are.
Both the visitors and the hosts have to proceed through all stages of the 
ritual greeting (with slightly different rules for the ordering of hosts’ and guests’ 
whaikōrero or speeches in different tribes), until all have spoken. The hongi –​ the 
greeting between the two groups –​ is then the final stage of the formal encounter. 
In a long queue with the most respected elders at the front, the visitors file past 
the hosts. They greet each in turn by gently pressing noses and uttering a greeting 
such as kia ora or tēnā koe. This “sharing of breath” indicates that the visitors 
are now regarded as tangata whenua or one of us. The next stage in proceedings 
may be a discussion, a debate or an exchange of views on an important political 
issue, or it may simply be time to relax. The occasion will always conclude with 
a meal, however.
The importance of appropriately welcoming visitors in Polynesian culture has 
widespread repercussions. These formal events are not isolated set pieces which 
Polynesian people produce for special occasions. The values they represent per-
vade Polynesian culture. Māori and Samoan parents often feel uncomfortable 
at school meetings, for example, where the principal, with the good intention 
of “dispensing with formalities”, does not bother with any formal welcome or 
introductions. To the Polynesian parents, this is getting priorities all wrong, put-
ting business ahead of people. Welcoming someone properly, even in a relatively 
informal context, is very important, and sharing food is also an important sign 
that the occasion has been concluded appropriately.
Exercise 14
At a formal meeting where a number of new courses were being formally ratified by a 
group of teachers, a Māori contributor commented that the lack of discussion, the silence 
with which the proposals were met, would have been regarded as an ominous sign in his 
culture. Most of those present were Pākehā New Zealanders (of European origin). Knowing 
that the preparatory discussion had already taken place elsewhere, they interpreted the 
lack of talk as a sign that all were in agreement and there were no problems. By contrast, 
as indicated by the Māori contributor’s comment, a group of Māori people would have 
seen it as appropriate at this stage to welcome the proposals and explicitly record their 
consent to them.
When silence contrasts with speech it can be very communicative. In different cultures 
and contexts, silence may convey respect, consent, disagreement, attention, disapproval, 
anger or boredom.
For each of the contexts below there are some cultures where silence is the appropriate 
response, and others where talk is the appropriate response. Is silence or speech more 
appropriate in these contexts in your culture? If speech is appropriate, then what message 
does silence convey?
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
416
(a)	
On first meeting someone.
(b)	
When someone has put forward a proposal at a meeting.
(c)	
At the dinner table.
(d)	
When you are accused of wrongdoing.
(e)	
While listening to someone talk.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have discussed a number of different speech functions, and 
the ways in which they may be expressed, as well as some of the reasons why 
people express the same speech function differently on different occasions and 
in different cultures. Social context, formality and the relationship between 
participants have proved important influences in this area as elsewhere. The effect 
of these influences on the linguistic form of a speech act is often perceived as a 
matter of identity construction and politeness. The relevance of social factors to 
the linguistic construction of identity and expression of politeness have therefore 
been further important threads throughout this chapter.
The sociolinguistic norms or appropriate ways of speaking in different com-
munities are clearly quite distinctive in a range of areas. Speech functions are 
expressed differently in different communities. Being polite, or deliberately 
impolite or rude for that matter, involves understanding the social values which 
govern the way social dimensions such as status, solidarity and formality are 
constructed. A sociolinguistic description aims to identify the different weight 
put on these factors in different cultures.
In the next chapter, these themes will be developed further as we examine 
how, in some communities and sociocultural contexts, women and men tend 
to differ in the way they express specific speech functions. We discuss gendered 
interactional norms and ways of indexing politeness, as well as considering how 
gender identity is constructed in interaction.
Methods
You can use a wide range of data sources to research how people express different speech 
functions in different communities.
•	 Exercise 3 suggested observing how people express directives in different contexts and 
provided some ideas about possible social factors which might influence the strategies 
and linguistic forms selected to express the directive. You could observe and take notes 
in cafés, shops, your classroom, your sports centre etc. With permission, you could 
record your family at different times of the day: e.g. before work and class, at dinner 
time, at the weekend etc.
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
417
•	 You could use the same methods to research how other speech functions are expressed 
in different contexts: e.g. compliments, refusals, apologies, reprimands, criticisms, 
insults etc. Again, consider the social factors influencing the choice of strategy or lin-
guistic form.
•	 Exercise 12 suggested considering which topics are appropriate in different contexts 
such as the family dinner table. You could observe in other contexts and note which 
topics are appropriate and which would not be acceptable.
•	 With permission, record a telephone conversation, WhatsApp or Zoom exchange. These 
can also provide interesting data on the conventions of different means of communica-
tion. How do people sign on or join and sign off or leave a conversation with different 
interlocutors? How many turns are required to politely leave a Zoom meeting?
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 11
Answer to ­exercise 1
(a)	 Any of the following utterances could be categorised as primarily expressive, 
though the first four could probably be most usefully labelled as phatic in 
function.
Good morning, Sue.
Lovely day.
Yes it’s beautiful.
Makes you wonder what we’re doing here doesn’t it.
Mm, that’s right.
Thanks that’s great.
No problem.
Had it occurred without the utterance which precedes it, the last utterance 
could have served as referential in function, conveying information 
that the task could and would be achieved in the time. However, in the 
context of the previous utterance, it is more likely to be intended and 
interpreted as reassurance, i.e. expressive.
(b)	 An example of an utterance which serves a primarily directive function:
Look I wonder if you could possibly sort this lot out by ten.
(c)	 Examples of utterances which serve a primarily referential function:
Yes sure.
I need them for a meeting.
In a different context, the last utterance could serve as a directive, but in the 
context of the previous utterance, which is clearly directive, it is more 
likely to be intended and interpreted as informative or referential. It may 
also be expressive –​ apologising indirectly for the short notice by pro-
viding a reason.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
418
Answer to ­exercise 2
There are an infinite number of possible utterances which could express this dir-
ective. There are many obvious and relatively direct ways, such as:
sit down
please take a seat
would you please sit down?
would you mind sitting down?
could you possibly sit down?
There are also many indirect forms, such as:
your legs must be tired
you must be worn out
here’s a seat
do you want to rest?
or even:
I can’t see
The last example was addressed to someone standing in front of the speaker 
when they should have been sitting down.
The context influences the appropriate form of a directive. Context may also 
contribute to deciding the most likely interpretation of an utterance. Further 
examples are discussed in the next section of this chapter.
Answer to ­exercise 4
The components of this negotiated speech act seem to be:
1	
X makes a request which is in the power of the addressee Y to grant, but is 
not part of “normal service”.
2	
Y refuses.
3	
Steps 1 and 2 are repeated as many times as those engaged have the energy 
for, with increasing volume and numbers of gestures.
either
4	
Y accedes.
5	
X effusively provides thanks and apologies.
or
4	
X decisively finishes the exchange by leaving it.
or
4	
Y closes the bus doors and drives away!
In this case in ­exercise 4, the driver complied with the request. But such a nego-
tiation would take a very different form in other cultures. Discussion with 
local Italians indicated that use of local dialect and especially dialect insults 
give speakers an advantage in such negotiations. Our proposed rules for the 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
419
components of this complex speech act can be tested by others and we will be 
pleased to have feedback on our observations.
Answer to ­exercise 5
(a)	 Could act as an informative, as well as a directive to run or get out (or to 
shoot!).
(b)	 Declares admiration (expressive), as well as encouragement to continue 
behaving in a particular way (directive).
(c)	 Could be expressing a wish, but is more likely to be a directive which also 
provides information.
(d)	 Expresses how the speaker feels, but is simultaneously informative, and 
could be directive if it serves as a hint that it is time to leave.
Answer to ­exercise 6
The main linguistic function of the word fucking in this excerpt is intensifica-
tion; we can generally substitute a word such as really, just or absolutely. More 
important, however, is the sociolinguistic function of the swear word as a soli-
darity marker in this very masculine environment. Its use contributes to the con-
struction of the men’s identities as members of a tough team working together to 
win a match. Note the high frequency of the pronoun we and the solidarity tag 
eh which support this analysis.
Answer to ­exercise 8
Mutual vous generally expresses some social distance between two people, so in 
France complete strangers generally use mutual vous, for instance.
Vous is also used non-​reciprocally to express the speaker’s respect for the 
addressee. A younger person would generally use vous to an older person with 
higher status, for instance, even if they knew them as an acquaintance.
The patterns vary from one speech community to another, however, and in 
many communities mutual tu is spreading to more and more contexts.
Answer to ­exercise 9
The answer to both these questions for many communities is that where one 
person has higher status or is superior, they have the right to initiate a change. 
The subordinate person may suggest a change, but in doing so they risk causing 
offence, since they may be regarded as trying to increase the intimacy of the 
relationship. This is usually to their advantage, so it is often not considered 
polite for them to make such a move. The superior can suggest the move with 
impunity since it is generally to the addressee’s advantage to be on closer terms 
with a superior. Where both participants are of equal status, either may suggest 
or try out a move to first names, though the risk of rebuff is always present. In 
many English-​speaking communities, the move to FN between equals is now so 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
420
rapid that this problem rarely arises. The issue is discussed further later in this 
chapter.
Answer to ­exercise 10
There are a number of linguistic clues which indicate the evolving relationship 
between the participants:
•	The greetings. In the first email, Pauline uses the informal phrase Morning 
all. In the second email, Jean uses the more formal salutation Dear +​ FN 
(Pauline). In the last email, Pauline uses the rather formal Dear +​ TLN (Miss 
Hanson).
•	The functions of the speech acts. In the first email, which mainly expresses 
a polite directive, there are also two expressions of gratitude: we would be 
grateful if; and many thanks for your cooperation. In the second email, which 
predominantly expresses annoyance and perhaps an indirect reprimand, there 
is no positive component, and no mitigation of the very direct statements 
which indicate what is required. The direct and unattenuated statements 
convey a message that Jean is displeased with Pauline’s earlier email. Since 
Jean and Pauline have equal status, this could be regarded as a rather discour-
teous message.
•	The vocabulary choices. In the last email, Pauline responds in a very formal 
style: e.g. appreciate rather than know; endeavour to provide rather than 
try to send you; and it is likely rather than perhaps or may. Yours sincerely 
is a very formal closing in an email, and Pauline then signs off with her 
title Dr and follows her name with her formal position, Faculty Manager, 
Faculty Office.
•	Note finally that Pauline copies her final email to her boss, the Faculty Dean, 
suggesting she feels justified in her position and expects support from her boss.
We would not expect these two administrators to greet each other warmly 
when they next met on campus!
Answer to ­exercise 11
This is an example where cross-​cultural differences in the rules of polite inter-
action have the potential to cause grave difficulties for the Samoan child in a 
New Zealand school.
Non-​verbal messages are particularly powerful, but also particularly vulner-
able to misinterpretation. A hunched posture may be seen as an uncooperative 
stance, possibly expressing resentment. It is polite to wait to be asked to sit 
down in the office of a superior. Avoiding the questioner’s eyes is likely to be 
interpreted as evasive behaviour.
In fact, these communicative patterns are culturally appropriate ways of 
expressing respect to a superior in Samoan culture. A bowed posture is respectful 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
421
because one must attempt to keep oneself at a lower level than the superior. 
This also accounts for Tino’s sitting down quickly. Keeping one’s eyes lowered 
is similarly a signal of respect. Finally, it is not appropriate in Samoan culture 
for Tino to “answer back”. He should hear the principal’s reprimand in silence. 
His monosyllabic answers indicate his wariness in a situation where he is unsure 
how to respond appropriately. In his own culture, shame might well keep him 
appropriately silent in a parallel context.
In contrast, note that looking at people fixedly for several seconds (“staring”) 
is not polite in British or New Zealand culture, whereas in places like Slovenia 
it is perfectly acceptable.
Answer to ­exercise 13
There are two odd features of the German professor’s farewell from Tom’s point 
of view:
1	
There is no opportunity for Tom to respond to the professor’s pre-​closing 
formula. A pre-​closing formula checks out that the other person is ready to 
close the conversation. It often takes the form of OK? or right? to which the 
other person responds similarly, but with a falling intonation. The professor 
pre-​closes with a slightly odd but recognisable formula That is very good 
then. But he then proceeds immediately to a final closing formula without 
giving Tom a chance to respond.
2	
The use of the phrase Good evening, which is a greeting formula, not a fare-
well. Goodbye would be more appropriate. Note that good night, which 
closely resembles good evening in its form, is a farewell formula, but not one 
generally considered appropriate on the telephone between acquaintances. 
The reasons appear to be that good night has connotations of intimacy, or 
perhaps it implies that the call has been unreasonably late.
The conventions of telephone behaviour are another fascinating area for cross-​
cultural investigation, as well as those governing greetings and farewells.
Concepts introduced
•	Speech functions
•	Phatic communication
•	Directive function
•	Address forms
•	Positive politeness and negative politeness
•	Impoliteness
•	Cross-​cultural communication
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
422
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Brown and Gilman (1960) on address forms
Brown and Levinson (1987) on politeness
Bucholtz (2009) on identity
Ervin-​Tripp (1972) on address forms
Geertz (1960) on Javanese
Goodwin (1980) on girls’ and boys’ directives
Halliday (1973, 1975) on speech functions and children’s language
Holmes (1983) on teachers’ directives
Holmes (2012) on politeness
Hymes (1974) on speech functions
Johnston and Robertson (1993) on New Zealand address system
Laver (1981) on British address usage
Leech (1983) on politeness and pragmatics
Mooney (1980) on directives
Richards and Schmidt (1983) on cross-​culturally different speech acts
Salmond (1974) on Māori greeting rituals
Searle (1976) on speech acts
Weigel and Weigel (1985) on American directives
West (1990) on doctors’ directives
Wilford (1982) on children’s directives
Wilson (2010) on familiarisers and directives
Wilson (2011) on swear words in rugby players’ discourse
Wilson (2019) on personal pronouns and criticism
Quotations:
Example 4 is from Haupt (1970: 101–​2) cited in Spender (1980: 41)
Example 8 is from Holmes (1983: 110)
Example 10 is based on Mooney (1980)
Examples 13 and 15 are based on Wilford (1982)
Example 14 is based on Wilson (2019)
Example 15 is from Weigel and Weigel (1985)
Example 17 is from Blum-​Kulka, Danet and Gherson (1985: 135–​6)
Example 21 is modified from from Blocker (1976: 9)
Example 23 is based on Paulston (1974)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

FUNCTIONS, POLITENESS, AND COMMUNICATION
423
Useful additional reading
Bucholtz (2009)
Clyne, Norrby and Warren (2010)
Culpeper (2011)
Daly et al. (2004) on solidarity and swearing
Holmes (1995, 2012)
Jackson (2014)
Kiesling and Bratt Paulston (2005): Part 2
Lakoff and Ide (2005)
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 5
Saville-​Troike (2003): ­chapter 2
Scollon, Scollon and Jones (2012)
Spencer-​Oatey (2008) for a critique of standard politeness theory
Spencer-​Oatey and Kádár (2020) on politeness and culture
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

424
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-16
In this section of the book, where we examine styles and registers, the way lan-
guage is used, the relationship between language, thought and culture, and lin-
guistic attitudes, the topic of gender and language is one which illustrates all 
these concepts. It is a topic which has generated many questions. Do women 
speak differently from men, and if so how, why, and in what contexts? Are 
women more polite than men? Are there any differences in the ways that women 
and men interact? How do we signal our gender identity through our linguistic 
choices? Do gay men and lesbian women signal their sexuality through their 
linguistic choices? How is language used to refer to queer and non-​binary indi-
viduals? What message does language convey about the status of women in the 
community? These are some of the questions addressed in this chapter.
Chapter 7 reviewed evidence that women speak differently from men in 
some communities and in some contexts. Many of the studies described in that 
chapter could be viewed as first-​wave approaches to language variation, as they 
treat male and female as simple categories. This chapter reconsiders gender in a 
way more aligned with third-​wave approaches and a social constructionist per-
spective on gender and identity. We first summarise early language and gender 
research which examined claims that women and men use language differently. 
Although much of this research was undertaken in the late twentieth century, 
the methodological questions raised are important and still relevant. Moreover, 
more recent research re-​examining the issues tends to confirm the disturbing 
findings. We then present a more dynamic approach to analysing how language 
contributes to the construction of gender identity, and finally we consider what 
language suggests about the way a society categorises women.
“Women’s language” and confidence
Example 1
[...] a girl is damned if she does, damned if she doesn’t. If she refuses to 
talk like a lady, she is ridiculed and subjected to criticism as unfeminine; 
if she does learn, she is ridiculed as unable to think clearly, unable to take 
Gender, politeness,  
and stereotypes
12
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
425
part in a serious discussion: in some sense, as less than fully human. These 
two choices which a woman has –​ to be less than a woman or less than a 
person –​ are highly painful.
While some social dialectologists suggested that Western women were status 
conscious, and that this explained their use of standard speech forms (see 
­chapter 7), Robin Lakoff, an American linguist, suggested almost the opposite. 
She argued that women were using language which reinforced their subor-
dinate status; they were “colluding in their own subordination” by the way 
they spoke.
Social dialect research tends to focus on differences between women’s and 
men’s speech in the areas of pronunciation (such as [in] vs. [iŋ]) and morph-
ology (such as past tense forms), with some attention to syntactic constructions 
(such as multiple negation). Robin Lakoff shifted the focus of research on gender 
differences to syntax, semantics and style. She suggested that women’s subor-
dinate social status in American society is indicated by the language women use, 
as well as by the language used about them. She identified a number of linguistic 
features in “women’s language” which she claimed were used more often by 
women than by men, and which in her opinion expressed uncertainty and lack 
of confidence.
Example 2
(a)  Lawyer:       What was the nature of your acquaintance with the late 
Mrs E.D.?
Witness A:  Well, we were, uh, very close friends. Uh she was even 
sort of like a mother to me.
(b)  Lawyer:      And had the heart not been functioning, in other words, 
had the heart been stopped, there would have been no 
blood to have come from that region?
Witness B:  It may leak down depending on the position of the body 
after death. But the presence of blood in the alveoli 
indicates that some active respiratory action had to take 
place.
The speech of the two female witnesses in ­example 2 contrasts in that witness 
(a) uses features of what Lakoff labelled “women’s language”, while witness 
(b) does not. Before we describe these features, you might like to see if your 
intuitions about what constitutes what Lakoff labelled (English-​speaking) 
“women’s language” agree with hers (­exercise 1).
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
426
Exercise 1
For the following sentences, put F beside those you think were said by a woman, M beside 
those you think were said by a man, and F/​M beside those you think could have been said 
by either:
(a)	
Close the door.
(b)	
That’s an adorable dog.
(c)	
Oh dear, the TV set’s broken.
(d)	
I’ll be damned; there’s a friend of mine!
(e)	
I was very tired.
(f)	
Won’t you please get me that pencil?
(g)	
They did the right thing didn’t they?
(h)	
You’re damn right!
(i)	
I was just exhausted.
(j)	
My goodness, there’s the Prime Minister!
(k)	
I was so mad.
(l)	
Damn it, I’ve lost my keys!
Answers at end of chapter
Features of “women’s language”
Lakoff suggested that women’s speech was characterised by linguistic features 
such as the following.1 [Note: /​ indicates rising intonation.]
(a)	 Lexical hedges or fillers, e.g. you know, sort of, well, you see.
(b)	 Tag questions, e.g. she’s very nice, isn’t she?
(c)	 Rising intonation on declaratives (also called the HRT and uptalk, see 
­chapter 9), e.g. it’s really góod.
(d)	 “Empty” adjectives, e.g. divine, charming, cute.
(e)	 Precise colour terms, e.g. magenta, aquamarine.
(f)	 Intensifiers such as just and so, e.g. I like him so much.
(g)	 “Hypercorrect” grammar, e.g. consistent use of standard verb forms.
(h)	 “Superpolite” forms, e.g. indirect requests, euphemisms.
(i)	 Avoidance of strong swear words, e.g. fudge, my goodness.
(j)	 Emphatic stress, e.g. it was a BRILLIANT performance.
Many of these features are illustrated in the list of sentences in ­exercise 1. 
Lakoff’s claims were based on her own intuitions and observations, but they 
sparked off a spate of research because they appeared to be so specific and easy 
to investigate.
Much of this initial research can be considered methodologically unsatisfac-
tory from the perspective of many current sociolinguists. Speech was recorded 
in laboratory conditions with assigned topics, and sometimes rather artificial 
constraints (such as a screen between the speakers). Most of the subjects were 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
427
university students. Consequently, it was difficult to generalise from the results 
to natural informal speech in the community as a whole. In addition, the lin-
guistic analysis of the data was often rather unsophisticated.
Example 3
The final syntactic category is imperative constructions in question form, 
which are defined as alternatives to simple and direct ways of ordering 
action. They are questions which are substituted for commands. “Will you 
please close the door?” instead of “Close the door” is an example of an 
imperative in question form.
This quotation illustrates the kind of statement which betrayed lack of lin-
guistic expertise among these early investigators of Lakoff’s claims about 
women’s speech. No linguist would describe will you please close the door? 
as an imperative construction, and the expression imperative construction in 
question form confuses form and function. (It is an interrogative construction 
expressing directive function.) Yet this was not untypical. Many of the categor-
isation systems devised by nonlinguists to measure features of “women’s lan-
guage” seem rather odd or arbitrary to linguists. Another study, for instance, 
made a distinction between “fillers” and “hedges”, with sort of classified as a 
hedge, while well and you see were described as “meaningless particles” and 
assigned to the same category as “pause fillers” such as uh, um and ah. But this 
is a complicated area where form alone is never an adequate guide for classifica-
tion, and function and meaning need careful analysis.
As well as lacking linguistic expertise, many researchers also missed Lakoff’s 
fundamental point. She had identified a number of linguistic features which were 
unified by their function of expressing lack of confidence. Her list was not an 
arbitrary conglomeration of forms. It was unified by the fact that the forms iden-
tified were means of expressing uncertainty or tentativeness. Other researchers, 
however, ignored this functional coherence, and simply listed any forms that 
produced a statistical difference between women and men, without providing 
any satisfactory explanation for why these differences might have arisen. One 
study, for example, analysed short sections from formal speeches by American 
female and male college students and found they differed on a range of features 
including the number of prepositional phrases, such as at the back (women 
used more) and progressive verb forms, such as was walking (men used more). 
Without a theoretical framework, it is difficult to know how to interpret such 
apparently arbitrary differences.
Nor did Lakoff claim her list was comprehensive. But because they ignored 
the underlying functional coherence which unified Lakoff’s list of features, 
many researchers treated it as definitive. The internal coherence of the features 
Lakoff identified can be illustrated by dividing them into two groups. Firstly, 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
428
there are linguistic devices which may be used for hedging or reducing the force 
of an utterance. Secondly, there are features which may boost or intensify a 
proposition’s force. Researchers who recognised the functional unifying factor 
included in their analysis any form which had a hedging or boosting effect on 
an assertion. Those who didn’t tended to stick to Lakoff’s list as if it had been 
handed down like Moses’ tablets.
Exercise 2
Allocate as many as possible of the features in the list provided by Lakoff to one of the 
following columns:
Hedging devices                  Boosting devices
Answer at end of chapter
Lakoff argued that both kinds of modifiers were evidence of an unconfident 
speaker: hedging devices explicitly signal lack of confidence; while boosting 
devices express the speaker’s anticipation that the addressee may remain uncon-
vinced and therefore supply extra reassurance. So, she suggested, women use 
hedging devices to express uncertainty, and they use intensifying devices to per-
suade their addressee to take them seriously. Women use boosting devices to 
add force to their utterances because they think that otherwise they will not be 
heard or paid attention to. Thus, according to Lakoff, both hedges and boosters 
express women’s lack of confidence.
It is not surprising, given the range of methods used to collect and analyse 
the data, that the research results were often contradictory. In some studies, 
women were reported as using more tag questions than men, for instance, while 
in others, men used more than women. Some researchers reported that women 
used up to three times as many hedges as men, while others noted no gender 
differences. Most, but not all, claimed women used more boosters or intensifiers 
than men.
One pair of researchers recorded the speech of witnesses in a law court and 
found that male witnesses used more “women’s language” features than women 
witnesses with more expertise in court or higher occupational status. Example 4 
illustrates this.
Example 4
Lawyer:	
And you saw, you observed what?
Witness C:	
Well, after I heard –​ I can’t really, I can’t definitely 
state whether the brakes or the lights came first, but I 
rotated my head slightly to the right, and looked directly 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
429
behind Mr Z, and I saw reflections of lights, and uh, 
very very instantaneously after that I heard a very, very 
loud explosion –​ from my standpoint of view it would 
have been an implosion because everything was forced 
outward like this, like a grenade thrown into the room. 
And, uh, it was, it was terrifically loud.
Witness C is a male witness who uses a relatively high number of hedges 
and boosters. These researchers suggested the forms be relabelled “powerless 
forms” to emphasise a point made by Lakoff herself, that the patterns she had 
noted were characteristic of the speech of the powerless in society rather than of 
women exclusively. (It is also worth noting that one could argue the witness was 
simply being cautious about his claims.)
Overall, however, Lakoff’s claim that women used more hedging and boosting 
devices than men was borne out in a number of studies in English-​speaking 
Western societies. But a more detailed analysis sometimes showed that these 
forms were not always expressing uncertainty.
Exercise 3
A Washington Post reporter Pia de Jong wrote in 2015 that the use of the suffix -​ish as 
a hedge like sort of is spreading in American English speech. She gives the following 
examples:
“Make that 7-​ish” (discussing a pick-​up time)
Senator Rand Paul calls himself “libertarian-​ish”
A new book is described as “memoir-​ish”
That dress “makes you look old-​ish”
Note that these examples suggest a range of functions for this hedge, including its use 
as an approximator and as a softener of a critical comment. As we noted in ­chapter 9, 
by the time a linguistic feature is noticed in the media it has usually already been well 
established. In this case, de Jong writes about a suffix that has existed in English as a way 
of meaning sort of for centuries (it comes from Old English -​isc). However, it is the change 
in function rather than the invention of a new suffix that is what appears to have attracted 
de Jong’s attention.
If you are an English speaker, have you noticed the spread of -​ish in your speech commu-
nity, or is it already a well-​established feature? What functions does it serve? If you speak 
other languages, is there an equivalent hedge in your language(s)?
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
430
Source: © Mark Parisi, permission granted for use, www.offthemark.com.

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
431
Lakoff’s linguistic features as politeness devices
Example 5
Susan is a university student. She is telling her friend and flatmate about her 
experiences at school.
[/​ indicates rising intonation.]
I did my exams in sixty-​three was ít.
The tag question is a syntactic device listed by Lakoff which may express uncer-
tainty, as ­example 5 illustrates. Susan is uncertain about the date, and she 
indicates this with a tag with rising intonation which signals doubt about what 
she is asserting. This tag focuses on the referential meaning of Susan’s assertion –​ 
the accuracy of the information she is giving. But tags may also express affective 
meaning. They may function as facilitative or positive politeness devices, pro-
viding an addressee with an easy entrée into a conversation, as illustrated in 
­example 6.
Example 6
Margaret is holding a small party to introduce a new neighbour, Frank, to 
other people in the street. She introduces Frank to an old friend, Andrew.
[\ indicates falling intonation.]
Margaret:	
Andrew this is our new neighbour, Frank. Andrew has just 
changed jobs, havèn’t you.
Andrew:	
Yes I am now a well-​paid computer programmer instead of 
a poorly paid administrative assistant.
Teachers, interviewers, hosts at parties and, in general, those roles where a 
person is responsible for the success of an interaction tend to use tags in this 
facilitative way. The host provides the guests with a topic of conversation. In 
­example 7, the teacher makes it easy for the child to participate.
Example 7
Mrs Short is a primary school teacher working with a group of five-​year-​
olds. They are preparing for a nature walk by looking at pictures of birds, 
flowers and leaves that they hope to see on their walk.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
432
Mrs Short:	
Here’s a pretty one, what’s this one called Simon?
Simon:	
Mm, erm [pause]
Mrs Short:	
See its tail, look at its tail. It’s a fantail, isǹ’t it?
Simon:	
Mm a fantail. I seen one of them.
A tag may also soften a directive or a criticism, as in ­example 8.
Example 8
Zoe and her mother Claire have just come home from the supermarket. 
Zoe empties the shopping basket all over the kitchen floor.
Claire:  That was a bit of a daft thing to do, wasǹ’t it?
Here the tag’s function is not to express uncertainty, but rather affectively to 
soften the critical comment, indicating concern for Zoe’s feelings.
Tags may also be used as confrontational and coercive devices. Example 9 is 
an example of a tag used to force feedback from an uncooperative addressee.
Example 9
A police superintendent is interviewing a detective constable and is 
criticising the constable’s performance.
A:	 ... you’ll probably find yourself um before the Chief Constable, okay?
B:	 Yes, Sir, yes, understood.
A:	 Now you er fully understand that, don’t you?
B:	 Yes, Sir, indeed, yeah.
The tag in this exchange functions not to hedge but rather to strengthen the 
negative force of the utterance in which it occurs. So here we have a tag which 
could be classified as a boosting device. Treating all tags as signals of uncertainty 
is clearly misleading.
Table 12.1 summarises the patterns found in a 60,000-​word corpus containing 
equal amounts of female and male speech collected in a range of matched contexts. 
It is clear that in this corpus the women used more tags than the men, as Lakoff 
predicted. But more interesting is the fact that women and men used them more 
often for different functions. Women put more emphasis than men on the polite 
or affective functions of tags, using them as facilitative positive politeness devices. 
Men, on the other hand, used more tags for the expression of uncertainty.
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
433
Exercise 4
Using the contextual information together with the information provided on intonation, 
how would you characterise the functions of the tags in the following examples?
(a)	
The teacher is talking to Sam, a pupil who is looking at a picture of a butterfly in a 
cocoon in a book:
Teacher:	
What’s this called Sam?
Sam:	
[No answer.]
Teacher:	
It’s a cocoon is`n’t it?
(b)	
Conversation in kitchen between flatmates:
Thomas:	
This isn’t Bridget’s egg beater i﻿́s it?
Michael:	
No, it’s ours. We still haven’t found hers.
(c)	
Older child “tutor” to younger child who is reading to her:
Fran:	
That’s not right is ìt? Try again èh.
(d)	
To a visitor who has called in for a chat with a group of neighbours:
Sally:	
Ray had some bad luck at the races yesterday didǹ’t you Ray?
(e)	
One friend to another in a relaxed conversation at her home:
Fiona:	
But then it would pass on to the rest of your family woùldn’t it?
Jim:	
No, not necessarily.
Answers at end of chapter
What has emerged from this discussion of tag questions is not peculiar to 
tags. Many linguistic forms have complex functions. Similar results have been 
found when other so-​called “hedges” such as you know and I think have been 
analysed. They are used differently in different contexts. They mean different 
things according to their stress and intonation, their position in the utterance, 
Table 12.1  Distribution of tag questions by function and gender of speaker
Function of tag
Women %
Men %
Expressing uncertainty
35
61
Facilitative
59
26
Softening
6
13
Confrontational
–​
–​
Total
100
100
N
51
39
Source: Based on Holmes (1984a: 54).
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
434
what kind of speech act they are modifying and who is using them to whom for 
what purposes and in what context. Like tags, they are often used as politeness 
devices rather than as expressions of uncertainty.
Analyses of the function of features that typically characterise women’s speech 
more often than men’s often note that women could be considered facilitative 
and supportive conversationalists, rather than unconfident, tentative talkers. This 
proposal is consistent with the explanation suggested in ­chapter 7 for the use of 
more standard speech forms by many women. In using standard forms, these 
women could be seen as responding positively to their addressees by accommo-
dating to their speech. When any speaker uses more politeness devices, this could 
be viewed as a way of showing consideration for the addressee.
Of course, this does not apply to all women in all contexts. But it does suggest 
that explanations of different tendencies in women’s and men’s speech behaviour 
which refer only to the status or power dimension are likely to be unsatisfactory. 
The social distance (or solidarity dimension) is at least as influential. Many of 
the features which have been identified as characteristic of “women’s language” 
are positive politeness devices expressing solidarity. And as illustrated in the dis-
cussion below, there are many other factors which are relevant when comparing 
women’s and men’s use of language, including culture, social role, identity con-
struction, and the formality of the context.
Exercise 5
A study of the language used by prospective jurors in law courts in Tucson, Arizona, iden-
tified interesting grammatical differences between women’s and men’s utterances. It was 
found that men deleted what were described as “non-​essential” words more often than 
women –​ especially in monologues. The first utterance is an example of what was regarded 
as “non-​essential” elements deleted.
•	 “I’m employed with the city of Tucson. Aah been there over nine months.”
In this utterance I have has been deleted before been.
•	 “My name is Sophia K. Jacobs. I’m employed by Krable, Parsons and Dooley. I’ve been 
employed there for ten years as a bookkeeper an’ junior accountant. My husband is 
employed by [Amphitheater] school district. He’s a teacher. And he’s worked there for 
ten years. I have never been on a trial jury before. I don’t have any formal legal training.”
This utterance illustrates the kind of utterances that women jurors typically produced.
•	 “Herb R. Beasley, senior. President of Beasley Refrigeration Incorporated. Do commercial 
refrigeration. And my wife’s name is Lillian an’ she works in the office. I’ve never been 
on a trial jury and no legal training.”
This utterance illustrates the kind of utterances that male jurors typically produced.
Overall, in this study, men deleted “non-​essential” words more often than women.
(a)	
Compare the last two utterances. Identify places where so-​called “non-​essential” 
elements may have been deleted.
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
435
(b)	
How would you interpret the significance of this data?
(c)	
What extra information would you need in order to support your preferred 
interpretation?
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 6
In recent times, social media has become a rich source of information for companies looking 
to effectively market their products and find new customers. As a result, researchers have 
created artificial systems that can analyse the content of someone’s social media posts in 
order to find out information about them. One outcome of this is the ability to identify 
gender based on the use of particular lexical items and punctuation. Some systems have 
been developed which claim to be able to do this with some accuracy, but most rely upon 
a large amount of data from a single author or focus on a social media profile description 
rather than the content of posts from it.
Aside from the technical constraints of such a system, what sort of questions might a 
sociolinguist ask about such an automated analysis of gender?
Answer at end of chapter
The data reviewed in this part of the chapter has been collected in English-​ 
speaking Western communities. To what extent, if any, can the patterns described  
be generalised to different cultures? This interesting question is gradually being  
addressed by a number of researchers. There are some indications, however,  
Map 12.1  Madagascar

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
436
that we should be cautious in interpreting patterns observed in other cultures  
through Western spectacles. In a study of a Mayan community in Mexico, for  
instance, overall the women used more politeness devices than the men, so the  
pattern seemed to resemble the Western pattern. But, interestingly, the men  
used far fewer politeness forms to each other than to women, so male talk to  
males was relatively plain and unmodified. In all other contexts, everyone used  
more politeness devices. In this community, “men’s talk” could be seen as the  
unusual variety. So-​called “women’s talk” was the norm, used by everyone in  
most contexts.
In the language spoken in Madagascar, Malagasy, it is the men rather than 
the women who qualify and modify their utterances, and who generally use 
less direct language. Since indirectness is generally equated with politeness, 
Malagasy men are correspondingly considered the more polite speakers. This 
provides another clear contrast with Western norms, but one which is accounted 
for by the specific social roles of women and men in that community, where 
women are typically the ones who bargain in the marketplace while men are 
expected to avoid confrontation.
In other communities, too, factors such as social role, and social identity 
or status are relevant to the different patterns of language use by women and 
men. A study of Samoan personal narratives, for example, found that status 
and social identity were more important than gender in accounting for the use 
of certain positive politeness devices. Statusful women with a Samoan title, for 
instance, used fewer such devices than young untitled men. On the other hand, 
titled Samoan men used the highest frequency of negative politeness devices, 
expressing social distance. In order to interpret such patterns, researchers must 
look carefully not only at the relationships between women and men in different 
cultures, but also at the contribution of factors such as status, role, social iden-
tity, interaction patterns and the meanings conveyed by particular patterns of 
linguistic behaviour in particular social contexts and cultures.
Interaction
Example 10
A good guiding dinner party principle is given by Mrs Ian Fleming. She says 
that guests can be roughly divided into “shouters” and “listeners”, and the 
best assortment is three shouters to five listeners.
If you had to put money on the likely gender of the shouters vs. the listeners, what 
would you venture? Despite the widespread stereotype of women as the talk-
ative gender, and proverbs which characterise women as garrulous (“Women’s 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
437
tongues are like lambs’ tails; they are never still”), most of the research evidence 
points the other way. In a wide range of contexts, particularly non-​private ones 
such as TV interviews, staff meetings and conference discussions, where talking 
may increase your status, men tend to dominate the talking time.
There are many features of interaction which have been shown to differ-
entiate the talk of white middle-​class Western women and men in particular 
contexts. Mrs Fleming’s distinction identifies one of them. This section discusses 
two others which have been researched for this group: interrupting behaviour 
and conversational feedback.
Interrupting behaviour
Example 11
Wanda:	
Did you see here that two sociologists have just proved that 
men interrupt women all the time? They –​
Ralph:	
Who says?
Wanda:	
Candace West of Florida State and Don Zimmerman of 
the University of California at Santa Barbara. They taped a 
bunch of private conversations, and guess what they found. 
When two or three women are talking, interruptions are 
about equal. But when a man talks to a woman, he makes 
96% of the interruptions. They think it’s a dominance trick 
men aren’t even aware of. But –​
Ralph:	
These people have nothing better to do than eavesdrop on 
interruptions?
Wanda:	
–​ but women make “retrievals” about one third of the 
time. You know, they pick up where they were left off after 
the man –​
Ralph:	
Surely not all men are like that Wanda?
Wanda:	
–​ cuts in on what they were saying. Doesn’t that –​
Ralph:	
Speaking as a staunch supporter of feminism, I deplore 
it Wanda.
Wanda:	
(sigh) I know, dear.
Ralph here illustrates a pattern for which there is a great deal of research evidence. 
The most widely quoted study, and the one referred to by Wanda in ­example 11, 
collected examples of students’ exchanges in coffee bars, shops and other public 
places on a tape-​recorder carried by one of the researchers. The results were dra-
matic, as table 12.2 illustrates. In same-​gender interactions, interruptions were 
pretty evenly distributed between speakers. In cross-​gender interactions, almost 
all the interruptions were from males.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
438
These researchers followed up this study with one which recorded interactions  
in soundproof booths in a laboratory. The percentage of male interruptions  
decreased to 75% in this less natural setting, but there was no doubt that men  
were still doing most of the interrupting. In other contexts, too, researchers have  
found that men interrupt others more than women. In the US Senate and in  
Senate Committee public hearings in 2017, female senators were systematically  
interrupted by male senators, while the reverse was rare and typically attracted  
condemnation. In academic conferences, departmental meetings, and doctor–​ 
patient interactions, the pattern holds. Women were interrupted more than men,  
Table 12.2  Average number of interruptions per interaction
Interruptions %
Same-​gender interaction
Speaker 1
43
Speaker 2
57
Cross-​gender interaction
Woman
4
Man
96
Source: From Zimmerman and West (1975: 116).
Source: Reproduced by kind permission of Tom Scott.
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
439
for instance, regardless of whether they were the doctors or the patients. In  
exchanges between parents and children, fathers did most of the interrupting,  
and daughters were interrupted most –​ both by their mothers and their fathers.  
And a study of pre-​schoolers found that some boys started practising this strategy  
for dominating the talk at a very early age. Women are evidently socialised from  
early childhood to expect to be interrupted. Consequently, they often give up the  
floor with little or no protest, as ­example 12 illustrates.
Example 12
A conversational interaction between a man and a woman.
[The words within the square brackets were uttered simultaneously.]
Woman:	
How’s your paper coming?
Man:	
Alright I guess. I haven’t done much in the past two weeks.
Woman:	
Yeah. Know how that [
can
Man:	
                                     Hey] ya’ got an extra cigarette?
Woman:	
Oh uh sure (hands him the pack)
  	
like my [
pa-​
Man:	
              How] ’bout a match
Woman:	
’Ere ya go uh like my [
pa-
Man:	
                                    Thanks]
Woman:	
Sure. I was gonna tell you [
my-
​]
Man:	
                                          Hey  I’d really like ta’ talk but 
I gotta run –​ see ya
Woman:	
Yeah.
(West and Zimmerman, 1977)
In summary, as Deborah Cameron points out, the systematic interruption of 
women by men, especially in public contexts, can be labelled “microaggression”. 
She also argues that the general and well-​documented pattern of male conver-
sational dominance in many contexts is connected to the tendency for both 
genders to give men’s opinions and expertise more respect, and to privilege their 
verbal contributions.
Exercise 7
With their permission, record a relaxed conversation between a small group of your 
friends. Include both males and females if possible. Listen to the recording and count the 
interruptions. Do the men interrupt more than the women? What kinds of problems arise 
in attempting this exercise? Discuss your findings with your friends.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
440
Conversational feedback
Example 13
Mary:	
I worked in that hotel for –​ ah 11 years and I found the patrons 
were really really you know good
Jill:	
Mm.
Mary:	
You had the odd one or two ruffian’d come in and cause a fight 
but they were soon dealt with.
Jill:	
Right, really just takes one eh? To start trouble.
Mary:	
Yeah, and and it was mostly the younger ones
Jill:	
Mm.
Mary:	
that would start you know.
Jill:	
Yeah.
Mary:	
The younger –​ younger ones couldn’t handle their booze.
Jill:	
Mm.
Another aspect of the picture of women as cooperative conversationalists is 
the evidence that (white middle-​class, Western) women typically provide more 
encouraging conversational feedback to their discourse partners than men.
One New Zealand study which examined the distribution of positive feed-
back (noises such as mm and mhm) in casual relaxed interaction between young 
people found that women gave over four times as much of this type of sup-
portive feedback as men. American studies of informal speech as well as talk in 
classrooms and under laboratory conditions have also demonstrated that women 
typically provide significantly more encouraging and positive feedback to their 
addressees than men. One researcher noted that women students were also more 
likely than men to expand on and develop the ideas of a previous speaker rather 
than to challenge them.
In general, then, research on conversational interaction suggests women 
behave as cooperative conversationalists, whereas men tend to be more com-
petitive and less supportive of others. Why are women’s patterns of interaction 
different from men’s? Is it because they are subordinate in status to men in most 
communities so that they must strive to please? Or are there other explanations?
Exercise 8
Compare the transcript provided in ­example 12 with the one provided in ­example 13. 
Identify specific examples in these transcripts of the patterns of interaction discussed in 
the preceding section.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
441
Explanations for gender differences in interaction
In an interesting range of relevant research, it seems to be gender rather 
than occupational status, social class or some other social factor which most 
adequately accounts for the interactional patterns described. Women doctors 
were consistently interrupted by their patients, while male doctors did most of the 
interrupting in their consultations. A study of women in business organisations 
showed that women bosses did not dominate the interactions. Males dominated 
regardless of whether they were boss or subordinate. The societally subordinate 
position of women indicated by these patterns has more to do with gender than 
role or occupation. For this data at least, women’s subordinate position in a 
male-​dominated society seems the most obvious explanatory factor.
Women’s cooperative conversational strategies, however, may be explained 
better by looking at the influence of context and patterns of socialisation. The 
norms for women’s talk may be the norms for small group interaction in private 
contexts, where the goals of the interaction are solidarity stressing –​ maintaining 
good social relations. Agreement is sought and disagreement avoided. By con-
trast, the norms for male interaction seem to be those of public referentially 
oriented interaction. The public context is often an adversarial one, where 
contradiction and disagreement is as likely as agreement and confirmation of the 
statements of others. Speakers typically compete for the floor and for attention; 
and wittiness, even at others’ expense, is highly valued. These patterns seem to 
characterise men’s talk even in private contexts, as will be illustrated later in the 
chapter.
Exercise 9
If one accepts the generalisation that in informal contexts women’s interactional goals are 
often aimed at maintaining good social relations and emphasising solidarity, while men’s 
talk is more often referentially oriented and competitive, whose norms prevail in mixed-​
gender informal interaction in your experience?
Answer at end of chapter
Differences between women and men in ways of interacting may be the result 
of different socialisation and acculturation patterns. If we learn ways of talking 
mainly in single-​gender peer groups, then the patterns we learn are likely to be 
gender-​specific. And the kind of miscommunication which often occurs at times 
between women and men may well be attributable to the different expectations 
each gender has of the function of the interaction, and the ways it is appropri-
ately conducted. Some of these differences are illustrated in the second part of 
this chapter.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
442
Gossip
Example 14
Three women chatting as they work.
Maryanne:	
Well I don’t know how she puts up with him.
Chris:	
God he’s awful –​ a real dickhead, I’m not kidding.
Maryanne:	
And he’s so rude. He interrupts her all the time and he puts 
her down –​ even in front of her friends.
Fran:	
She must be nuts.
Maryanne:	
Exactly –​ but he’s rolling of course. He gets two thousand 
dollars a shot as an after-​dinner speaker.
Fran:	
Yeah?
Chris:	
(singing) Can’t buy me love, can’t buy me love!
Gossip describes the kind of relaxed in-​group talk that goes on between people 
in informal contexts. In Western society, gossip is defined as “idle talk” and 
considered particularly characteristic of women’s interaction. Its overall function 
for women seems to be to affirm solidarity and maintain the social relationships 
between the women involved.
Women’s gossip focuses predominantly on personal experiences and personal 
relationships, and on personal problems and feelings. It may include criticism 
of the behaviour of others, but women tend to avoid criticising people directly 
because this could cause discomfort. A common male reaction to this behaviour 
is to label it two-​faced, but this is to mistake its purpose which is often to relieve 
feelings and reinforce shared values, rather than simply to communicate refer-
ential information. In gossip sessions, women provide a sympathetic response to 
any experience recounted, focusing almost exclusively on the affective message –​ 
what it says about the speaker’s feelings and relationships –​ rather than its refer-
ential content. Jennifer Coates’ recordings of a women’s group over a nine-​month 
period, for instance, showed how women built on and developed each other’s 
topics, told anecdotes in support of each other’s points, and generally confirmed 
the attitudes and reactions of other participants.
Not surprisingly, women’s gossip is characterised by a number of the lin-
guistic features of “women’s language” described above. Propositions which 
express feelings are often attenuated and qualified, or alternatively, intensified. 
Facilitative tags are frequent, encouraging others to comment and contribute. 
Women complete each other’s utterances, agree frequently and provide sup-
portive feedback. The following example of shared turns from a gossip session 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
443
between women who worked together at a bakery illustrates the cooperative and 
positive nature of their talk.
Example 15
Jill:	
Perhaps next time I see Brian I’ll PUMP him for information. 
Brian tells me all
Fran:	
the gossip.
Jill:	
I know it’s about 6 years old but
Fran:	
[laugh] it doesn’t matter.
Jill:	
It doesn’t matter at all.
Fran:	
True, true, it’s the thought that counts.
The male equivalent of women’s gossip is difficult to identify. In parallel situ-
ations, the topics men discuss tend to focus on things and activities, rather than 
personal experiences and feelings. Topics like sport, cars and possessions turn 
up regularly. The focus is apparently on information and facts rather than on 
feelings and reactions.
In a study of a parallel group of men working at the bakery, the linguistic 
features of the interaction were also quite different. Long pauses were tolerated 
and were apparently not interpreted as discouraging following a contribution, 
even one which seemed to invite a response. Responses frequently disagreed 
with or challenged the previous speaker’s statements in any case, as ­example 16 
illustrates.
Example 16
Bernard:	
And er they’re very smart.
Con:		
Well, then, how come they keep getting caught all the time.
Judd:	
Maybe that’s why they
Bernard:	
(interrupts) They don’t. You’ve got to be really clever to pull 
one you know.
The men provided conflicting accounts of the same event, argued about a 
range of topics, criticised each other constantly for apparently minor differences 
of approach to things, and changed topic abruptly. Their strategies for amusing 
each other were often to top or out-​do the previous speaker’s utterance or to put 
them down. In other words, their talk contrasted completely with the coopera-
tive, agreeing, supportive, topically coherent talk of the women in exactly the 
same context –​ working in the bakery –​ on a different night.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
444
The following excerpt illustrates the competitive verbal abuse which was typ-
ical of the male interaction in the bakery.
Example 17
Greg:	
Crate!
Jim:	
Case!
Greg:	
What?
Jim:	
They come in cases Greg, not crates.
Greg:	
Oh same thing if you must be picky over every one thing.
Jim:	
Just shut your fucking head Greg!
Greg:	
Don’t tell me to fuck off fuck (...)
Jim:	
I’ll come over and shut yo
Allan:	
(laughingly using a thick-​sounding voice) Yeah I’ll have a crate of 
apples thanks
Greg:	
No fuck off Allan.
Allan:	
A dozen.
Con:	
(amused tone) Shitpicker!
It seems possible that for men mock-​insults and abuse serve the same function –​ 
expressing solidarity and maintaining social relationships –​ as compliments and 
agreeing comments do for women. This verbal sparring is reported by others 
who have examined all-​male interaction, and in some groups verbal insult is an 
established and ritual speech activity.
Evidence of this kind makes it easier to understand why some researchers 
have suggested that women and men belong to different cultural groups. It also 
helps explain why women and men sometimes miscommunicate.
Exercise 10
The exchange in ­example 18 took place at a camping ground. The man was fiddling with 
his radio attempting to tune in to a station; the woman was passing by and stopped to 
talk to him.
What do you think is the woman’s primary aim in the conversation below? Is her focus 
mainly referential or social? How do you know?
Does the man interpret her intention accurately do you think? What is his primary 
concern?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
445
Example 18
Woman:	
You’ve got a radio there then.
Man:	
Yes (pause) I’m trying to get the weather.
Woman:	
I’ve been trying on mine but I can’t get a thing.
Man:	
Mm.
Woman:	
We really need to know before we leave (pause) we’re on 
bikes you see.
Man:	
Mm.
Woman:	
I’ve got a handicapped kiddie too (pause) we’re from 
Hamilton and we’re cycling to Taupō. (pause) Where are you 
going then?
Man:	
Taupō.
You should note once again, that most of the research referred to describes 
women’s and men’s interaction patterns in Western English-​speaking communi-
ties, and most of the data comes from white middle-​class adult speakers. While 
there is some evidence that women tend to be more supportive and men more 
competitive conversationalists in other cultures too, there is an increasing amount 
of research describing alternative patterns of interaction. In the rural Malagasy 
community mentioned above, women take more confrontational roles and their 
speech is more direct than men’s. It is women who handle the bargaining neces-
sary in the marketplace, for instance, and it is the women who deal with family 
arguments and disagreements. Men’s speech in this community is indirect and 
circumlocutionary. Not surprisingly, given that men hold the positions of power 
in the community, it is indirect allusive speech which is most highly valued in the 
Malagasy community. The direct information-​oriented style so highly prized in 
Western society would be regarded as unspeakably rude –​ and feminine! Thus a 
community’s attitudes towards different speech styles may provide social infor-
mation about the status of those who use them, a topic which will be pursued 
further in ­chapter 15.
The Malagasy example leads to a consideration of the fact that there is vari-
ation within Western communities too. Generalisations are useful in the search 
for patterns, norms, and explanations, but it is very important to remember 
that not all men behave like those in ­examples 12 and 17, and even Greg and 
Jim undoubtedly interact differently in different contexts. The next part of this 
chapter outlines an approach which is much more dynamic in considering gen-
dered language behaviour.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
446
Exercise 11
Reflect on the interaction patterns described in this chapter. Are they accurate depictions 
of the ways in which women and men speak in your experience? Are these patterns chan-
ging as women’s social roles diversify? Check out your intuitions by recording and ana-
lysing examples of relevant interaction in different social contexts.
Source: Cartoon by Jan Eliot. Reproduced with permission of CartoonStock.
The linguistic construction of gender identity
Example 19
Ed:  he’s I mean he’s like a real artsy fartsy fag he’s like [indecipherable]
 	
 he’s so gay he’s got this like really high voice and wire rim glasses
The final section of ­chapter 8 and the Interlude following ­chapter 9 considered 
ways in which individuals draw from a range of linguistic resources to construct 
particular aspects of social identity, including gender. Much of the early research 
discussed above tended to treat gender as “given” and unalterable, classifying 
every person unproblematically as female or male. Sometimes, however, our 
assumptions are challenged and we have to re-​think. In ­example 19, Ed criticises 
a man who fails to fit the established masculine norms, but, ironically, Ed’s criti-
cism uses features associated with or indexing a more feminine speech style, 
such as frequent use of the particle like, hedges, such as I mean, and intensifiers, 
such as real, so and really. Yet Ed is talking in a male-​only context. This example 
clearly challenges some of the generalisations in earlier sections, and encourages 
a more dynamic and subtle analysis of the interaction between gender and talk. 
More recent research recognises that gender is a social construction as well as a 
contested category with permeable borders.
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
447
Approaching gender identity as a construction, rather than as a fixed cat-
egory, is also useful in accounting for examples where women adapt to mas-
culine contexts, and men adapt to feminine contexts, by using features which 
indirectly index or are associated with masculinity and femininity. Women in the 
police force, for instance, are sometimes advised to portray a masculine image –​ 
to wear bulky sweaters suggesting upper-​body strength, and well-​worn boots to 
suggest they are used to hard work. They also adopt a cool distant style; they 
don’t smile much, and they talk “tough”. Men who work in clothing shops and 
hairdressing salons, on the other hand, often construct a more feminine iden-
tity in these contexts than when they are in the pub or the sports club changing 
room. They use features which index femininity, such as affectionate terms of 
address and other characteristics of the cooperative discourse style associated 
with “gossip”; they avoid strong swear words, and they act as responsive and 
facilitative conversationalists, encouraging their addressee to talk.
Example 20
Helen describes her daughter’s attempt to learn to swim:
she looked like a goldfish you (laughs) know there’s a little head a –​ a 
rolling in the water (laughs) and legs sort of sagging in the water and 
breaststroking away you know
One of the more obvious ways in which people construct particular kinds of 
social identity is through their narratives of personal experience. In answer to a 
question about her father’s health, one woman, Helen, gave her friend an account 
of what she had been doing all day, including the information that she had visited 
her father. Helen’s long story constructs a very conservative gender identity for 
herself. She recounts that she had taken her children swimming, encouraged her 
younger daughter’s attempts to swim (­example 20 is a snippet from the story), 
persuaded her oldest daughter to cook her grandfather’s lunch, and put her own 
needs consistently last. The identity constructed is “good mother” and “dutiful 
daughter”. The discourse style is characterised by interactive pragmatic particles 
such as you know and you see, appealing to shared experience, hedges like sort 
of, and even stereotypically “feminine” adjectives such as cute, little and sweet 
to describe her daughters. In other contexts, however, Helen constructs a more 
contestive and less conformist gender identity. At work, for instance, where she 
is a senior manager, she often challenges ideas that she disagrees with, using a 
very assertive discourse style characterised by few hedges and unmitigated direct 
questions.
In recounting her story, Helen constructs not only her own gender identity, but 
she also presents very “gendered” identities for her daughters. Example 20 presents 
Helen’s youngest daughter, Andrea, as a sweet little girl, gamely swimming along 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
448
with her admiring mother alongside. Andrea wasn’t present when the story was 
told, but four-​year-​old Ian was part of the audience in the next example.
Example 21
June and Mike are Ian’s parents. Mary is his auntie who is visiting them 
after work.
Mary:	
Hi Ian what have you been up to today?
June:	
Oh he’s been just terrible (laugh). Unbelievable. First he emptied 
all the kitchen cupboards before we were even out of bed –​ 
absolute chaos with everyone rushing round trying to get ready 
for work –​ pans and soap powder all over the floor. (General 
laughter) Then later he got himself into the bathroom and what 
does he do? He empties all my expensive bubble bath into the 
bath with the water running. So we’ve got bubbles everywhere –​ 
the bathroom was just full of soap (laugh). Mike nearly broke 
his neck just trying to switch off the tap. He’s just too much –​ a 
real monkey (laugh).
Mike:	
(laugh) Yes he’s a real little rascal –​ a real bad lad –​ eh Ian!
Exercise 12
Consider the discourse in ­example 21.
What messages is Ian getting about his behaviour? How are these signalled in the 
excerpt?
Answer at end of chapter
Narratives are just one means of constructing particular gender identities. 
Approaching the construction of gender as a process, rather than regarding 
gender as a given category, leads to a view of individuals as constantly “doing” 
gender. As illustrated in earlier chapters, every phonological, lexical and syn-
tactic selection conveys social information. Ways of expressing solidarity 
or informality may also be gendered as well as expressed differently among 
different social and ethnic groups. The form that teasing or “joshing” takes, for 
instance, is often quite distinctive for particular communities of practice. This 
approach encourages us to view every linguistic (and nonlinguistic) choice as 
meaningful. Every time we speak, we are either reinforcing existing norms or 
we are challenging them. People who do not neatly fit into normative gender 
categories, such as transgender and non-​binary people, are particularly aware 
of this process.
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
449
The linguistic construction of sexuality
Example 22
When did you first realise you were heterosexual?
Example 22 will be considered a strange utterance in communities where hetero-
sexuality is considered “normal” and unmarked. In many societies, the discourse 
of gender conveys a message that heterosexuality is the norm, and that people who 
desire same-​sex partners are in some ways odd or deviant. The English word queer 
when used to refer to such people used to convey this derogatory assumption of devi-
ancy. It was reclaimed in the late twentieth century by the groups that it was used 
to describe, so that it is now generally not regarded as insulting, at least in the USA 
and New Zealand, and it has developed new meanings. For some, the term queer 
now includes all those who reject orthodox assumptions about what is considered 
“normal” in the area of sexuality and desire: e.g. gay men, lesbian women, cross-​
dressers, and transgendered and inter-​sex people. For others, it has simply become an 
alternative to gay, though perhaps with less unambiguously positive connotations. It 
will no doubt continue to develop new meanings as new labels develop to describe 
what the wider society regards as non-​normative sexuality and desire.
Example 23
Norms are often unmarked, treated as the default category or as identities 
which do not need a label. Resistance to the dominance of such taken-​
for-​granted identities has led to the promotion of the form cisgender to 
identify “someone whose gender identity is unchanged from that assigned 
at birth”.
(Oxford English Dictionary, 2015)
Examining the relationship between language and sexuality involves 
considering how people construct their sexual identity –​ as gay, heterosexual, 
lesbian or bisexual, for instance. But it also involves considering how people 
use language to learn about sex, talk about sex and desire, and engage in sexual 
activities. How do young women indicate to young men that they are interested 
in them as potential sexual partners? What are the features of the courtship 
rituals in different societies? What are the discourse features of “coming out” 
stories? Who tells “dirty” jokes to whom, why and how? How is the discourse of 
sex education managed in schools? These are the kinds of topics that researchers 
in the area of language and sexuality consider relevant and important.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
450
The earlier sections of this chapter described some of the linguistic features con-
ventionally used to index gender in English. As ­example 19 suggested, these features 
are available as resources for expressing sexual identity. Heterosexual or cisgender 
people typically make normative choices in most contexts, constructing themselves 
as “feminine” or “masculine”, and thereby signalling their sexuality. Gay and lesbian 
or queer people may use the same linguistic features to convey the same meanings 
in many contexts, but there is a good deal of research, especially on features of the 
speech of gay men, which indicates that they may draw on additional linguistic 
resources for indicating their sexual orientation through their speech.
Researchers have identified a number of features associated with English 
“gay” speech, including the use of stereotypically feminine vocabulary items, 
such as divine, features of pronunciation, such as affrication so that /​t/​ sounds 
like [ts], “wavy” intonation, and dramatic variations in pitch. Heath, whose 
different pronunciations of final (-​t) were discussed in ­chapter 10, signalled his 
“gay diva” identity using a number of such features when mixing with friends 
in an informal context. But, of course, it is not the case that all and only gay 
people use such features. Moreover, many of these features prove to be ephem-
eral, since they are based on the speech of people from particular social, regional 
and ethnic backgrounds at a particular point in time. Variation in the sexualities 
constructed by lesbians in Japanese bars and by Hindi-​speaking lesbians in New 
Delhi further emphasises the fact that there is no such phenomenon as a uni-
versal gay variety, even when researchers focus on just one language.
Equally interesting is the suggestion that certain rhetorical strategies can 
index sexuality. “Camp talk”, for example, is widely regarded as indexing male 
homosexuality through features such as exaggeration, parody, paradox, inver-
sion of expected relationships, and linguistic playfulness. So, for example, camp 
talk may deliberately mix registers, or refer to males as she, or challenge well-​
established cultural values, as in the quotations in ­example 24, or make use of 
clever double meanings in amusing insults, as in ­example 25.
Example 24
The one charm of marriage is that it makes a life of deception absolutely 
necessary for both parties.
(Oscar Wilde)
If love is the answer, could you please rephrase the question?
(Lily Tomlin)
Example 25
My dear, your hair looks as if you’ve dyed.
(Bruce Rodgers)
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
451
This kind of talk is often amusing but also deliberately disrespectful and 
disturbing; it challenges hegemonic heterosexual culture and the dominant 
ideology, or the gender order; and constructs those who use it as non-​con-
formist. Intimate talk is another area which often breaks taboos in expressing 
sexuality and sexual desire. Couples may address and refer to each other as 
animals, or use baby-​talk to express intimacy and desire. At the other extreme, 
telephone sex operators serving heterosexual clients typically construct sexual 
identities which are completely conformist and predictable. They make exten-
sive use of the features identified by Lakoff as “women’s language” (described 
earlier) to convey a powerless, vulnerable and thus, in the context of the 
transaction, erotic femininity. Personal ads aimed at attracting a heterosexual 
partner are similarly very conventional in what they focus on in the few words 
available.
Example 26
(a)	
Gorgeous, blonde, female 22, seeks smart, rich, generous male for fun 
and friendship.
(b)	 Male IT programmer, 26, honest and caring, seeks curvy blonde 
female 23–​28, fun to be with, for lasting relationship.
As these two typical ads illustrate, heterosexual women tend to describe them-
selves in terms of their looks, and they specify that they want men who are clever 
and wealthy, while heterosexual men characteristically inform their readers 
about their occupations and state their desire for women who are considerate 
and physically attractive. In other words, these ads draw on well-​established, 
familiar indices of cultural value, such as physical attractiveness for women and 
economic security for men.
Exercise 13
Example from The London Review of Books:
I am Mr Right! You are Miss Distinct Possibility. Your parents are Mr and Mrs Obscenely 
Rich. Your Uncle is Mr Expert Tax Lawyer. Your cousin is Ms Spare Apartment on a 
Caribbean Hideaway that She Rarely Uses. Your brother is Mr Can Fix You Up a Fake 
Passport for a Small Fee. Man, 51.
Collect ten examples of personal ads from a magazine or newspaper published in your 
speech community. Identify any linguistic features which signal the sexuality of the adver-
tiser. Do these conform to the norms of your community or do they contest them in 
some way?
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
452
Exercise 14
When I am good I am very good. But when I am bad I am better.
Mae West
This quotation has been described as an example of “camp talk”. In what ways does this 
quotation conform to the description above and in what ways does it challenge it?
Answer in next paragraph
The quotation in ­exercise 14 is clever and funny and involves a double entendre 
with a sexual innuendo. It also involves a subversion of the predictable pattern in the 
unexpected choice of last word. These are typical features of camp talk. However, 
camp talk has often been associated with gay men’s talk while Mae West is a very 
feminine sexual icon. Including Mae West’s comedy style as an example of camp 
talk recognises that we are discussing a style of talk, not a variety restricted to a 
particular social group with a particular sexual orientation. Linguistic resources are 
available to everyone to use for a range of social effects. This approach encourages 
us to view every linguistic (and nonlinguistic) choice as meaningful. As noted above, 
every time we speak, we either reinforce existing norms or we contest them. This 
belief explains why feminists object to sexist language.
Example 27
More Mae West quotes:
A dame that knows the ropes isn’t likely to get tied up.
Anything worth doing is worth doing slowly.
Between two evils, I always pick the one I never tried before.
Don’t keep a man guessing too long –​ he’s sure to find the answer some-
where else.
Sexist language
In 1980, an American linguist, Dwight Bolinger, published a book called 
Language: The Loaded Weapon. In it he explored the wide variety of ways in 
which the English language provides categories and ways of encoding experience 
which could be regarded as “loaded” –​ in other words, carrying an implicit value 
judgement or manipulating responses. Alongside discussions of the language 
used in advertising and politics, he also considered the area of sexist language. 
Sexist language is one example of the way a culture or society transfers its values 
from one group to another and from one generation to the next.
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
453
Language conveys attitudes. Sexist attitudes stereotype a person according 
to gender rather than judging on individual merits. Sexist language encodes 
stereotyped attitudes to women and men. In principle, then, the study of sexist 
language is concerned with the way language expresses both negative and posi-
tive stereotypes of both women and men. In practice, most research in this area 
has concentrated on the ways in which language conveys negative attitudes 
to women.
Can a language be sexist?
Feminists have claimed that English is a sexist language. At first sight, it may 
seem odd to suggest that a language, rather than its speakers, are sexist. Sexism 
involves behaviour which maintains and reinforces social inequalities between 
women and men. Can a language contribute to the maintenance of social inequal-
ities between women and men?
There are a number of ways in which it has been suggested that the English 
language discriminates against women. Most obviously, perhaps, in the semantic 
area, are the English metaphors available to describe women which include an 
extraordinarily high number of derogatory images compared to those used to 
describe men.
Example 28
The chicken metaphor tells the whole story of a girl’s life. In her youth she 
is a chick, then she marries and begins feeling cooped up, so she goes to 
hen parties where she cackles with her friends. Then she has her brood and 
begins to hen-​peck her husband. Finally, she turns into an old biddy.
Animal imagery is one example of an area where the images of women seem 
considerably less positive than those for men. Consider the negativity of bitch, 
old biddy, old bat, dog and cow, compared to stud and wolf. Animal imagery 
which refers to men often has at least some positive component (such as wiliness 
or sexual prowess). Birds are widely regarded as feather-​brained and flighty! 
Even the more positive chick and kitten are sweet but helpless pets.
Women may also be described or referred to in terms of food imagery, which 
is equally dehumanising and insulting. Saccharine terms, such as sugar, sweetie, 
honey, are mainly, though not exclusively, used for addressing women. Less com-
plimentary terms such as crumpet and tart, however, are generally restricted to 
female referents. They illustrate a common evolutionary pattern in the meaning 
of words referring to women. Terms which were originally neutral or affec-
tionate eventually acquire negative connotations as they increasingly refer only 
to women and as their meanings focus on women as sexual objects. By contrast, 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
454
there appears to be less food imagery which is appropriate for referring only to 
men, though there are insulting terms such as veg and cabbage, and, according to 
one 11-​year-​old, parsnip, which he claimed may be used to abuse girls or boys!
Exercise 15
If you are familiar with a language other than English, do some research to see whether 
there is any evidence of sexism expressed through the vocabulary and imagery of that 
language.
For ideas to consider, see:
www.bbc.com/​future/​article/​20210408-​the-​sexist-​words-​that-​are-​harmful-​to-​women.
Many words reinforce a view of women as a deviant, abnormal or subor-
dinate group. For example, English morphology –​ its word-​structure –​ generally 
takes the male form as the base form and adds a suffix to signal “female”: e.g. 
lion/​lioness, count/​countess, actor/​actress, usher/​usherette, hero/​heroine and avi-
ator/​aviatrix. This is true for a number of other European languages, such as 
French and German, too. The male form is the unmarked form, and therefore, it 
is argued, implicitly the norm. The use of an additional suffix to signal “female-
ness” is seen as conveying the message that women are deviant or abnormal. It 
has also been suggested that suffixes like -​ess and -​ ette trivialise and diminish 
women, and convey connotations of lack of seriousness. This attitude doubtless 
derives from the meaning of the associated diminutive suffixes in terms such as 
laundrette (a little laundry) and maisonette.
Generic structures provide further evidence to support the claim that the 
English language marginalises women and treats them as abnormal. In fact, 
words like “generic” he and man can be said to render women invisible.
Example 29
Mountainland ecosystems are fragile, and particularly vulnerable to the 
influence of man and his introduced animals ... Life in the mountains is 
harsh. Storms are common, and temperatures are low ... Into this scene 
comes man, with his great boots, ready to love the mountains to death.
Man loves to hunt. He sees it as a tradition and a right. He believes that 
deer herds should be managed so he, and his son after him, can hunt them. He 
cannot understand his brother’s claim that deer diminish the range of plants. 
After all, his brother couldn’t name a single plant that deer had made extinct.
The basis for claims that English renders women invisible is the use of forms 
such as he and man as generic forms, as illustrated in ­example 29. Since these 
forms are also used with the specific meanings of “third person singular male 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
455
subject pronoun” and “male human being”, the satisfactoriness of their use 
to convey the meanings “third person human subject pronoun”, and simply 
“human being” or “humanity” has increasingly been challenged. One can see 
why. Reading ­example 29, with its references to man, his great boots, his son 
and his brother, it is difficult to believe that the writer had ever conceived of the 
possibility that women too might venture into the mountains.
The use of man as a generic form has a long history. But its generic use is no 
longer acceptable to many English speakers because this meaning has become 
overshadowed by its masculine meaning. Others avoid it as clumsy or misleading 
for the same reason: man has become increasingly ambiguous between the gen-
eric and the masculine meaning. In a sentence such as Man loves to hunt, for 
instance, readers may be genuinely unsure whether women are meant to be 
included or not.
It is also clear that the word man is associated with male images, even when 
it is used generically. The best-​known experiment asked college students to select 
pictures to illustrate the chapters of a sociology textbook. Chapter titles such as 
Social Man, Industrial Man and Political Man evoked male images to a much 
greater extent than headings like Society, Industrial Life and Political Behaviour. 
Those who claim man can still be used generically are ignoring the fact that for 
many readers the term man is firmly established as meaning “male”.
Generic he raises exactly the same issues, with even more challenging problems 
when writers want to avoid it. Attempts to solve the problem by introducing 
a new epicene (gender-​neutral) pronoun can be traced back to the eighteenth 
century when grammarians were concerned not with the invisibility of women 
caused by generic he, but by the grammatical inefficiencies and confusions of 
gender and number it caused. More than 80 gender non-specific pronouns have 
been proposed since the eighteenth century, including tey, thon, et, ip, ou, co, per, 
ne and hiser.
Though generics survive in some outer-​circle Englishes, there is evidence that 
newspapers, magazines, journals and books in countries such as the USA, Britain 
and New Zealand have become increasingly aware of attitudes to the use of (so-​
called) generic he and man, and writers use a variety of strategies to avoid these 
terms. The magazine, The New Zealand Women’s Weekly, for example, used 
only a quarter as many of these forms in 1984 as it did in 1964. An American 
study of a wide range of magazines and newspapers found a dramatic drop in 
the use of generic forms from twelve to four per 5,000 words between 1971 
and 1979. A study of generics in formal New Zealand Department of Labour 
documents revealed a drop from 98% use of generic he in the 1960s to 7% in 
the 1990s, with a complementary rise from 0% to 81% for generic (singular) 
they. The use of generic they has risen even further since then, with a 2015 study 
of generics across ten different New Zealand newspapers finding that 97.5% of 
generic pronouns were they. In fact, generic they has now been endorsed as the 
preferred option by a number of style guides, which means that its use will con-
tinue to increase in public media.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
456
Some writers adopt the strategy of using he and she in alternate chapters or 
even in alternate paragraphs. Others use she consistently as a generic “to even 
things up” or to draw attention to the sexist implications of using he. (Note 
this is interesting evidence that people are not just passive language users; some 
demonstrate “agency” or active engagement with language for social and pol-
itical reasons.) Generic they is by far the most widespread solution in English, 
and it has been used since at least the fourteenth century and by well-​established 
authors including Shakespeare, Jane Austen, Chesterfield, George Bernard 
Shaw and Doris Lessing. It was opposed virulently by some nineteenth-​century 
grammarians who were delighted when an Act of Parliament in 1850 legislated 
that in all acts “the masculine gender shall be deemed and taken to include 
females”. Nevertheless, they is nowadays the most frequently heard generic pro-
noun in informal speech, and it is spreading to more formal contexts too, as 
indicated above. Its use is not always problem-​free, however, as the following 
tongue-​in-​cheek example illustrates.
Example 30
Someone who, like me, is trying to eliminate gender-​laden pronouns from 
their speech altogether can try to rely on the word “they”, but they will 
find themself in quite a pickle as soon as they try to use any reflexive 
verbal phrase such as “paint themselves into a corner”, and what is worse 
is that no matter how that person tries they will find that they can not 
extricate themself gracefully, and consequently he or she will just flail 
around, making his or her sentence so awkward that s/​he wis/​hes s/​he had 
never become conscious of these issues of sexism. Obviously using “they” 
just takes you out of the frying pan into the fire, since you have merely 
exchanged a male–​female ambiguity for a singular–​plural ambiguity. The 
only advantage to this ploy, I suppose, is that there is/​are to my knowledge, 
no group(s) actively struggling for equality between singular and plural.
Exercise 16
The following examples are based on material from textbooks and a newspaper. What is 
your reaction to them?
(a)	
Alone among the animals, man uses language to communicate.
(b)	
“Speech” wrote Benjamin Lee Whorf “is the best show man puts on.” Language 
helps man in his thinking. The average student might hear 100,000 words a day. 
If he has a modest reading speed, he would cover 90,000 words a day. He could 
easily be exposed to three quarters of a billion words a year. And anyone could easily 
increase that if he wanted.
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
457
(c)	
Man has been civilised for centuries. He no longer needs to hunt for food for his 
women and children.
(d)	
The two Oxford Union debaters, most ably supported by a woman debater from 
Victoria, made entertaining contributions.
(e)	
The pioneers who established the farms of this country, who toiled together with 
their wives and children to break in the land, knew little of what was happening in 
the towns.
Can you translate the sentences above into non-​sexist terms? What strategies did you use?
Answers at end of chapter
More recently, generic they has been adopted by some who identify as gender-​
diverse or non-​binary: i.e. neither strictly male nor female.
Example 31
Sandy:	
How’s Sam doing at school these days?
Carol:	
Oh they’re loving it, their teacher is so much better than last 
year!
In this interaction, Sam’s aunt and mum are talking about how Sam is doing 
at school but, rather than using the gendered personal pronouns she or he to 
refer to Sam, Carol uses the gender-​neutral pronoun they.
Because it makes such a big contribution to identity construction, language 
is an important vehicle of social change for gender-​diverse people. Anyone can 
perform acts of linguistic identity (e.g. by saying I use they/​them pronouns), but 
identity is co-​constructed, which means we rely on others to reflect our identities 
back to us. Third person pronouns (she, he, they, ze, xe, etc) are particularly 
interesting in this regard, because we seldom use them to refer to ourselves. 
Claiming singular they allows Sam, who identifies as non-​binary, to describe 
and thereby make visible a gender identity that is often ignored within majority 
society. When Sam’s family use it too, this is a powerful way of showing their 
support for Sam and for gender-​diverse people in general.
Some institutions in the USA now routinely ask students for their “preferred 
gender pronouns” (PGPs) indicating respect for every individual’s identity 
choices. Recently however non-​binary individuals have requested that this term 
be modified since preferred implies non-​normative. Overall, it is important to 
be aware that assigning she/​her or he/​him pronouns when the person concerned 
considers the relevant pronouns are they/​them may cause discomfort and could 
be perceived as a microaggression.
Politicians and official agencies often get involved in arguments around sexist 
language. The Spanish Language Academy, la Real Academia Española, opposes 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
458
the government’s recommendations for non-​sexist usages. In France, there was 
a furore among conservative groups, including the French Academy, when the 
French Ministry of Education ordered schools to use the term la professeur rather 
than the grammatically correct le professeur. The Ministry was responding to a 
directive from the Prime Minister to feminise labels for posts in the French civil 
service. The reform was a response to criticism that grammatically masculine 
forms discriminated against women by reducing their chances of being perceived 
as appropriate appointees to positions such as school principal and computer 
programmer which were grammatically masculine in gender.
Exercise 17
(a)	
Job adverts in New Zealand may not specify the gender of the required employee 
unless aspects of the job require the attributes of a particular sex: e.g. wet-​nurse 
or sperm-​donor. Do you think that the suffix -​man could be regarded as generic in 
job adverts, or is it an example of sexist language? Consider postman, milkman, 
fireman, salesman, foreman, warehouseman, storeman. What alternatives would you 
suggest?
(b)	
Do you consider phrases like master plan, master key, to man the desk and a princely 
sum to be sexist? Why/why not?
(c)	
Can a woman be addressed as: dude? mate? bro? If so, could these be considered 
examples of sexist address terms or are they rather gender-​specific like girl and sheila?
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 18
Do you consider the term guys to be sexist in utterances like (a) and (b) if the groups 
addressed and referred to include women? Why/​why not?
(a)	
Hey you guys, it’s time we got started.
(b)	
I saw those guys in the library last week.
Answers at end of chapter
Exercise 19
(a)	
Why do you think some women adopt the title Ms or Mx rather than Mrs or Miss?
(b)	
Are Ms and Mx used by women in your speech community? What do you think of 
these usages?
Answers at end of chapter
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
459
Conclusion
Linguistic categories are one source of evidence regarding sociocultural values. 
Gender is undoubtedly a category that many cultures regard as significant, and 
people’s notions of gender-​appropriate behavior, including language, are there-
fore an important focus for research. What has been called the “gender order”, 
the established hegemonic pattern of power relations between males and females 
in many societies, accounts for many of the interactional patterns described in 
this chapter. Through early socialisation, we all learn how to behave appropri-
ately as gendered individuals in our society. The gender order acts as a constraint 
which we are all aware of, whether we conform to it or challenge it.
The categories discussed in the final section of the chapter indicate society’s 
view of women and men in many English-​speaking communities. Once those 
views are encoded, they support the gender order, and it takes considerable 
time and effort to alter the language, even when social attitudes are changing. 
Guidelines and even legislation requiring people to use non-​sexist language cer-
tainly help, but most changes take a considerable time to become established as 
the new norm. And of course, they do not address the fundamental issue which 
is the power imbalance between women and men in most societies.
The examples discussed in this chapter illustrate some of the ways in which 
language can provide insights about a community’s perceptions and stereotypes, 
and aspects of its culture. Relative status may be indicated not only in the ways 
in which women and men use language, but also in the language used about 
women and men. What is more, the sociolinguistic data supports the view that 
women are often assigned subordinate status by virtue of their gender alone, and 
treated linguistically as subordinate, regardless of their actual power or social 
status in a particular context. English, at least, appears to collude in the subor-
dination of women. But can a language contribute to social repression? Can we 
escape the view of reality presented by the categories of our language? These are 
questions addressed in the next chapter.
Methods
Research methods to collect information and data for analysing the relationship between 
language and gender:
•	 As described in previous chapters, the standard research methods of observation, ques-
tionnaire, interview, and recording can be used to study gender and language. Corpus 
analysis is also useful in studying written and spoken usage. See relevant chapters in 
Harrington et al (2008).
•	 With permission, recordings of friends and family in conversation provide rich material 
for studying a range of potentially gendered features, such as interruptions and audible 
feedback (but see answer to ­exercise 7 for the caution needed in interpreting overlapping 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
460
speech). Gendered topics and adjectives are also possible targets for study, as well as the 
subjects and objects of verbs (see Baker 2010). Gender identity construction is another 
area for which such recordings can provide data, as indicated in ­examples 20 and 21.
•	 As illustrated in ­example 26, newspapers, blogs and online classified adverts are sources 
of personal ads which can be studied for linguistic signals of gender identity as well as 
sexuality. How do the linguistic signals in these older methods compare with the infor-
mation on dating sites such as Tinder and Grindr?
•	 Newspapers and online news sources provide an accessible source for corpus research. 
Such research can provide information on a wide range of gendered discourse including 
titles (eg. Ms, Mrs, Mr, Miss, Mx), pronouns, and imagery depicting different groups in a 
community. A study by Matilda Neyland (2019) examining the ways in which migrant 
sex workers are depicted in media discourse provides an example. Additionally, Paul 
Baker (2005) uses corpus-based methods to investigate public discourses of gay men. 
(See also ­exercise 4 in the next chapter).
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 12
Answer to ­exercise 1
These sentences were devised to incorporate features which Lakoff suggested 
distinguished women’s and men’s speech. The precise claims were not always 
supported by research, as will become clear in the next part of this chapter. They do 
indicate people’s stereotypes of women’s usage, however. The stereotype suggests 
that sentences (b), (c), (f), (g), (i), (j) and (k) were produced by women, while (a), 
(d), (e), (h) and (l) were men’s utterances. The reasons for this particular division 
of the sentences will become apparent in the next part of this chapter, where the 
features identified by Lakoff as features of “women’s language” are listed.
Answer to ­exercise 2
Features which may serve as:
Hedging devices
Boosting devices
lexical hedges
intensifiers
tag questions
emphatic stress
question intonation
superpolite forms
euphemisms
The hedging devices can be used to weaken the strength of an assertion, while 
the boosting devices can be used to strengthen it. For example, it’s a good film 
can be strengthened by adding the intensifier really (it’s a really good film) or 
 
 
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
461
weakened by adding the lexical hedge sort of (it’s sort of a good film). However, 
some of these devices serve other functions too, as we will see in the next section 
of this chapter.
Answer to ­exercise 4
The tags in (a) and (d) are most obviously facilitative in function, offering the 
addressee an opportunity to contribute. The tag in (b) seems to be an uncertainty 
tag, asking for confirmation of an assertion. It could also be a way of encour-
aging talk, but this seems unlikely given the context. There are two tags in (c) and 
both serve a softening function. The first softens a criticism, the second softens 
a directive. Finally, in (e) the function of the tag is much less clear-​cut. Is Fiona 
asking for confirmation of her claim, or is she simply facilitating more talk? One 
cannot be sure. More contextual information and more extensive surrounding 
text would probably help, but finally one might need to recognise that her tag 
is achieving both functions at once. A primary function is often identifiable, but 
not always. Different functions often overlap and classification into different 
types is not always straightforward.
Answer to ­exercise 5
(a)	 The last utterance (by the male juror) provides more possible places for the 
insertion of “non-​essential” elements than the utterance by the female juror:
(I am) Herb R. Beasley, senior. (I am) President of Beasley Refrigeration 
Incorporated. (I or we) do commercial refrigeration. And my wife’s name is 
Lillian an’ she works in the office. I’ve never been on a trial jury and (I have) 
no legal training.
(b)	 This exercise illustrates an important point relevant to any research: the 
importance of the stage where the researcher interprets the meaning of 
patterns identified in the data. Whatever the patterns identified, they can 
often be interpreted in different ways. The interpretation can be influenced 
by the assumptions, preconceptions and attitudes of the interpreters. In this 
case, for instance, there are at least two possible interpretations:
1	 The women juror’s speech contains more redundancy than the men’s. It 
contains more non-​essential elements. Some might describe it as verbose.
2	
Women jurors make less demand on the addressee by making things 
more explicit. This could be regarded as more considerate.
(c)	 Information on whether deleted constructions were appropriate in the par-
ticular context would be helpful, as well as information on how much pro-
cessing such deletions involved for the listener, and how much effort that 
processing involved. For instance, deletion tends to occur in more informal 
speech. In informal contexts where people know each other well, it would 
often be considered inappropriate and unnecessary, and possibly even insulting 
to close friends, to spell everything out and make it explicit. One could suggest 
that the men, by reducing redundancy, were trying to reduce the formality 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
462
of the interaction, then. Alternatively, one could argue that the women were 
responding more appropriately in a context that was unalterably formal.
This exercise illustrates nicely that identifying gender differences in language use 
is just one step in the research process. Interpreting their significance is equally 
important, and requires a theoretical framework which will make sense of the 
findings. Earlier in this chapter, Lakoff’s framework, which used women’s subor-
dinate social status and relative “powerlessness” to explain “women’s language”, 
was contrasted with a framework which focused on women as solidarity-​oriented 
participants in interaction.
Answer to ­exercise 6
A sociolinguist would ask questions such as the following:
•	What kind of sample has the software used to identify the so-​called gender-​
significant features?
•	What was the range of social backgrounds of the contributers? Does the pro-
gramme provide accurate results for people from different social and regional 
backgrounds?
•	Can an intelligent person fool the programme by using stereotypically gen-
dered features?
These questions suggest that simple correlations between linguistic features 
and gender are based on assumptions of linguistic homogeneity which are very 
contestable. See Cameron (2007) for further discussion of such issues and also 
Deborah Cameron’s blog: https://​debuk.wordpr​ess.com/​2015/​07/​05/​just-​dont-​
do-​it/​. You can also follow her on Twitter @wordspinster.
Answer to ­exercise 7
The issue of what counts as an interruption is the first and most difficult problem. 
How long does overlapping speech need to be before it counts as an interrup-
tion? The answer may be context-​dependent and culture-​dependent.
It is also possible to distinguish between “disruptive” interruptions and 
“supportive” overlaps. Both overlap the current speaker’s turn, but disruptive 
interruptions throw the first speaker off course and often take over the floor, 
while supportive overlaps generally do not. The people involved generally do not 
regard supportive overlaps as interruptions at all.
Another issue is the difference between what the speaker intends and what the 
others perceive and experience. Different participants often interpret the “same” 
behaviour differently.
All these problems have obvious implications for claims about whether 
women or men interrupt most. See Deborah Cameron’s blog on this issue in rela-
tion to politicians’ interactions: https://​debuk.wordpr​ess.com/category/women-
in-politics/​.
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
463
Answer to ­exercise 8
In ­example 12, there are four instances where the man interrupts the woman, 
and no examples where he provides encouragement to her to develop her topic. 
He does not give her an opportunity to talk about her paper. He answers her 
question and then, as she responds sympathetically, he interrupts with a request 
for a cigarette. When she begins to tell him about her paper he interrupts again 
with a request for a match. He interrupts her third attempt to tell him about her 
paper with an excuse and leaves.
In ­example 13, on the other hand, there are five instances of encouraging 
feedback from Jill to Mary, including a confirming comment (really just takes 
one eh?).
Answer to ­exercise 9
Your answer will no doubt be very context-​dependent, and may differ for 
different social and cultural groups. On the evidence collected so far among 
white middle-​class speakers, it seems that male rules often predominate in a var-
iety of mixed-​gender informal interactions.
However, there is also some evidence of a hybrid style –​ jointly constructed 
collaborative talk which combines some features of both male and female inter-
action. This style involves several speakers contributing to and developing a 
topic in a supportive rather than a competitive way. Interruptions and overlaps 
occur, but are not disruptive, and the amount of talk contributed by each gender 
is much more equal.
There is also some evidence that conflict between women’s and men’s use of 
language in informal contexts can result in miscommunication, as illustrated in 
­example 18.
Answer to ­exercise 10
There is some evidence that the woman’s conversational aims are primarily 
social or affective. Her opening gambit is almost certainly phatic in function. The 
answer is self-​evident and her utterance simply suggests that she wants to talk. 
Despite lack of encouragement from the man she persists, and she volunteers a 
number of pieces of information which, though related, are not essential to her 
declared aim of finding out the weather forecast.
It is possible that the man simply does not want to chat. He may be feeling 
unsociable. Alternatively, he may not recognise the “real” function of the interaction 
from the woman’s point of view. This conversation, which the woman regards as 
primarily social or affective in function, may be perceived by the man as essentially 
referential. He may genuinely assume that she only wants a weather report. This 
would explain his infrequent and monosyllabic responses. He may be ignoring the 
repeated attempts by the woman to draw him into a conversation because he is 
concentrating on what he thinks she is concerned about –​ getting the radio to work.
Other interpretations are also possible of course.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
464
Answer to ­exercise 12
Ian is being given mixed messages. His behaviour is described as terrible, bad 
and as a cause of chaos. But there is extensive mitigation at all levels of the 
discourse. The word bad is collocated with the friendly word lad, for instance. 
Phrases like real monkey and little rascal suggest that Ian is regarded affection-
ately and tolerantly, and his bad behaviour is perhaps regarded as typical of a 
“real lad”.
It is also clearly a source of amusement, as the laughter throughout indicates. 
Whatever the reaction at the time he caused the chaos, Ian’s exploits are here 
presented as mock-​heroic. Note also that Ian’s mother answers his auntie’s 
question on his behalf, modelling for him one way to present his day’s activities, 
and his father invites him to agree he is a real bad lad, using a softening laugh 
and a friendly tag eh. So although Ian is being constructed here as a “naughty 
boy”, he is also presented as the hero of an amusing narrative. He is learning 
how boys are expected to behave.
Answer to ­exercise 16
The first two sentences use generic man. Alternative expressions that would 
avoid suggesting that these characteristics do not include women are perfectly 
possible. For example:
(a)	 Alone among the animals, human beings use language to communicate.
(b)	 “Speech,” wrote Benjamin Lee Whorf, “is the best show humankind puts on.” 
Language helps people think. The average student might hear 100,000 words 
a day. With a modest reading speed, a student would cover 90,000 words a 
day. Students could easily be exposed to three quarters of a billion words a 
year. And anyone could easily increase that if they wanted.
Sentences (c), (d) and (e) are more subtly discriminatory. They begin using 
apparently non-​sexist and generic terms but the maleness of the writer’s 
image of the supposedly gender-​neutral protagonist is later betrayed. This 
has been called “slippage”. The solution may be to make the male image 
explicit or to eliminate all references to gender.
(c)	 Human beings have been civilised for centuries. Men no longer need to hunt 
for food for their women and children.
or
Human beings have been civilised for centuries. They no longer need to hunt 
for food.
(d)	 The two Oxford Union male debaters, most ably supported by a woman 
debater from Victoria, made entertaining contributions.
or
The two Oxford Union debaters, most ably supported by a debater from 
Victoria, made entertaining contributions.
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
465
(e)	 The men who established the farms of this country, who toiled together 
with their wives and children to break in the land, knew little of what was 
happening in the towns.
or
The pioneers who established the farms of this country, who toiled to break 
in the land, knew little of what was happening in the towns.
Which alternatives do you prefer and why?
Answer to ­exercise 17
(a)	 There are many (including us) who consider the suffix -​man to be 
as sexist as generic man and he. We advocate forms such as postie (a 
well-​established term in Australasia), milk vendor, firefighter and sales 
assistant. Alternatives for the last three terms are more difficult to find. 
Some people use -​person as an alternative to -​man, but this is not always 
considered a happy solution.
(b)	 Some argue that these phrases express a “male as superior” or “male as 
best” ideology which underlies many so-​called neutral usages. It should 
be recognised, however, that for many people they do not have such 
connotations. There is some evidence that men are less likely than women 
to consider such phrases as sexist. It is also worth noting that when men 
dominated these occupations, the use of -​man reflected reality. This argu-
ment is clearly no longer valid, however. Alternatives such as main plan, pass 
key, to staff the desk and a handsome sum are preferred by many.
(c)	 There is some research evidence that mate is expanding in Australasia to 
include women, and anecdotal evidence suggests that dude and bro are 
also increasingly used to address women as well as men. These could be 
considered further examples of male terms being used to include females, 
while sheila, by contrast, is a term used only for women.
Answer to ­exercise 18
Janet has long argued that the term guys is sexist when it is used to address or 
refer to women. The same semantic mechanism is at work in the case of generic 
man and he: the extension of meaning of a word originally denoting only men to 
refer to women as well. While most people recognise the sexism involved in the 
use of man and he to refer to women, they resist the label of sexism when guys 
is used in this way. One possible reason for this resistance is that this process is 
relatively recent, and so people have not reflected much on it yet. Another is that 
guys is a term that tends to characterise informal interaction, so it is considered 
friendly rather than sexist. Another is that this is a case of completed language 
change and that people do not think the usage reflects a “male as norm” attitude. 
But consider that if the term guys may refer to women, then why isn’t it accept-
able for gals to include men?
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
466
Answer to ­exercise 19
(a)	 Ms and Mx have been introduced by English-​speaking feminists as genuine 
parallels to Mr. (Its origins date back to 1901 and the wish to solve the 
problem of how to address a woman whose marital status you do not know, 
according to this source: www.nytimes.com/​2009/​10/​25/​magazine/​25FOB-​
onlanguage-​t.html?_​r=​0).
  Like Mr, these terms do not signal the marital status of the person referred 
to, and hence do not define a woman in terms of her relationship with a man. 
However, despite some success, Ms has not achieved its intended aim. Rather 
than replacing Mrs and Miss, Ms has typically become a third term in the 
system of titles for women and it has developed a wide range of different 
meanings. Mx has had some success as a gender-​neutral title, especially in 
Europe, and is often used by non-​binary people.
(b)	 In 2003, Tina Chiles undertook a survey in the New Zealand cities of 
Wellington and Christchurch and found Ms was used more often in the 
capital Wellington than in more conservative Christchurch. Women tended 
to avoid using titles where possible, but, if pushed, unmarried women pre-
ferred Miss. She also found a tendency for Ms to be more popular once 
women married. Her findings also confirmed earlier research indicating that 
Ms is frequently interpreted as a title for a divorced, separated or widowed 
woman, or a woman in a de facto relationship, and that for some people it 
signals “feminist” or “lesbian”.
  In 2010, Paul Baker published the results of a corpus study of written 
British English which suggested that while Ms and Miss had increased in use 
between 1991 and 2006, overall, as Chiles reported for New Zealand, the 
use of titles was declining.
  A 2020 survey reports on the use of titles by non-​binary people in different 
countries (https://​gende​rcen​sus.com/​resu​lts/​2020-​tit​les/​). The survey reports 
that although 28% of respondents said they used Mx, 34.4% used no title 
at all.
Concepts introduced
•	“Women’s language”
•	Gossip
•	Construction of gender identity
•	Narratives
•	Constructing sexuality
•	Gender order
•	Sexist language
•	Generic forms
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
467
Note
1	 These are all Lakoff’s terms from the 1970s and it should be noted that most linguists 
(including Lakoff) would not now endorse the use of terms such as “empty”, “hypercor-
rect”, and “superpolite”, since they consider them misleading.
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Abe (2011) on lesbian bar talk in Japan
Baker (2010) on corpus studies of sexist terminology
Bengoechea (2011) on non-​sexist language policy in Spain
Bodine (1975) on sexist language
Bolinger (1980) on sexist language
Brown (2000) on generics in NZ Department of Labour documents
Cameron (2006: 170) on language and sexuality
Cameron (2020) on male dominance in interaction
Cameron and Kulick (2003)
Cameron, McAlinden and O’Leary (1988) on tag questions
Chiles (2003) and Pauwels (1998) on Ms-​usage
Coates (1988) on gossip
Coates (2004) on gender and language
Crosby and Nyquist (1977) investigating Lakoff’s hypotheses
Dubois and Crouch (1975) on tag questions
Eakins and Eakins (1979) on interruptions in meetings
Eckert and McConnell Ginet (2013) on the gender order
Freed (2020) on sexist interactional patterns in public contexts
Hall (1995) on telephone sex workers
Hall (2011) on lesbian talk in New Delhi
Holmes (1984a) on tag questions
Holmes (1984b) on methodology
Holmes (1990) on pragmatic particles
Holmes (2017) on gender identity construction
Hyndman (1985) on interruptions
James and Clarke (1993) on interruptions
Lakoff (1975) on “women’s language”
Louhio (2015) on generic they in New Zealand newspapers
McConnell-​Ginet (2011: 242); Cameron and Kulick (2003) on the meaning of 
“queer”
McConnell-​Ginet (2011: 170, 223, 231) on “guys”
McConnell-​Ginet (2020) on “cisgender” and generic they
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
468
McElhinny (1995) on women in the police force
McMillan et al. (1977) investigating Lakoff’s hypotheses
Miller and Swift (1991) on sexist language
Mulac, Lundell and Bradac (1986) for differences in linguistic forms between 
women and men
Neyland (2019) on media depictions of migrant sex workers
O’Barr and Atkins (1980) investigating Lakoff’s hypotheses
Ochs (1987) for data on Samoan personal narratives
Ochs (1992) on the concept of “indexing” gender
Pauwels and Winter (2004) on generics in varieties of English
Preisler (1986) on women’s and men’s language
Rendle-​Short (2009) on mate in Australian English
Spender (1980) on gender and language
Stewart, Verstraate and Fanslow (1990) on attitudes to sexist language
Stollznow (2020) on sexist language (­chapter 2)
Thorne, Kramarae and Henley (1983) on language and gender
West (1984) and Woods (1988) on interaction of status and gender
West and Zimmerman (1983) on interruptions
www.stuff.co.nz/​manawatu-​standard/​opinion/​300051257/​genderdiverse-   
​language-​something-​to-​celebrate
Zimmerman and West (1975) on interruptions
Quotations:
Example 1 is from Lakoff (1975: 6)
Example 2 is from O’Barr and Atkins (1980: 98–​9)
Example 3 is from McMillan et al. (1977: 548)
Example 4 is from O’Barr and Atkins (1980: 99)
Example 9 is from Thomas (1989:152)
Example 10 is from Edwards and Beyfus (1969: 4)
Example 11 is from TIME, 25 September 1978
Example 12 is from West and Zimmerman (1977: 527–​8): it has been slightly 
edited for ease of reading
Example 13 is from data collected for a New Zealand social dialect project: it 
has been edited for ease of reading
Examples 14, 15, 16 and 17 are based on Pilkington (1989)
Example 18 is from Holmes (1985: 28)
Example 19 is from Cameron (1997: 56)
Example 20 is from Holmes (1997b)
Example 24 is from Oscar Wilde’s play, The Picture of Dorian Gray
Example 25 is from Rodgers (1972: 207), cited in Cameron and Kulick 
(2003: 100)
Example 26 has ideas from Coupland (1996)
Example 28 is from Nilsen (1972:102)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

GENDER, POLITENESS, AND STEREOTYPES
469
Example 29 is from Mountain Management, a publication of the New Zealand 
Department of the Environment, 1986. It is perhaps only fair to note that 
deer-​hunting is a predominantly male activity in New Zealand.
Example 30 is from Hofstadter (1982:18)
Example 31 and its discussion was provided by Julia de Bres
Exercise 1 uses sentences from Edelsky (1977)
Exercise 4 is based on Philips and Reynolds (1987)
Exercise 3 cites an article from the Washington Post which was syndicated to the 
New Zealand Dominion Post: Tuesday 7 October 2015
Exercise 14 draws on Cameron and Kulick (2003: 100–​5)
Paragraph (b) in ­exercise 16 is edited from Carroll (1965: 1–​2)
Useful additional reading
Baron (2020) on epicence pronouns
Bengoechea (2011)
Caldas-​Coulthard (2020) on the persistence of sexist patterns of interaction
Cameron (2007)
Cameron’s blogsite provides regular incisive commentary on current issues 
around language and gender: https://​debuk.wordpress.com/​
Cameron and Kulick (2003)
Coates (1996, 2003, 2004, 2013)
Coates and Pichler (2011)
Eckert and McConnell-​Ginet (2013)
Ehrlich, Meyerhoff and Holmes (2014)
Harrington et al. (2008)
Jule (2018)
Litosseliti (2006)
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 10
Miller and Swift (1991)
Morrish and Saunston (2007)
Stormbom (2020) on epicene pronouns in open access journals
Sunderland (2006)
Talbot (2019)
Tannen (1990)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

470
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-17
Example 1
A:  Why are all dumb blonde jokes one-​liners?
B:  So men can remember them.
Jokes like this encode culturally specific assumptions, e.g. that blonde typically 
refers to a woman not a man, and that the categories “dumb blonde” and “dumb 
blonde jokes” are familiar to the addressee. But the joke also challenges the 
assumptions of typical dumb blonde jokes, in making men rather than women 
the butt of the humour. Feminists argue that such challenges are important 
because they provide alternatives to the dominant social stereotype. They help 
create new grooves for people’s thinking habits.
Earlier chapters have demonstrated that the way a person speaks generally 
signals at least some social information about their background, such as what kind 
of social group or class they belong to. A person’s ethnicity, age and gender are also 
often indexed by linguistic features of their speech. In discussing gender, it became 
clear that it is possible to view the relationship between social factors and language 
as more dynamic than is often assumed. Sociolinguists who adopt a social con-
structionist approach argue that language not only reflects and expresses our mem-
bership of social categories, it also contributes to the construction of our social 
identity. So, as she interacts with others in a variety of social contexts, a young 
woman’s linguistic choices actively construct her age, class, ethnic and gender iden-
tity, as well as conveying her attitudes to different people and topics. She “chooses” 
to portray herself as a young, working-​class, Māori woman –​ or not –​ through the 
linguistic features which characterise her talk. Her stylistic choices communicate 
that she is relaxed and nerdy or perhaps smart and confident –​ or not.
The discussion of sexist language in ­chapter 12 introduced another per-
spective on the relationship between language and society. Language provides 
information about society’s attitudes and values, an area that is further pursued 
in ­chapter 15. But some researchers in the area of language and gender have 
argued that language may also determine what people notice, what categories 
they establish, what choices they believe are available and, consequently, the way 
they behave. In other words, language may strongly influence perception and 
behaviour.
Language, cognition,  
and culture
13
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
471
Exercise 1
Consider the phrase routine pelvic examination used in a book on women’s health. What 
kind of perspective does such a phrase suggest?
Answer at end of chapter
Language and perception
Example 2
... it has been said that “bad girls get babies, but good girls get myomata”.
Surgery is also indicated when ... hormone treatment has failed to control 
the symptoms ...
Since many women erroneously believe that following hysterectomy, their 
sexual urge ceases, that coitus is not possible and that obesity is usual, the 
physician must explain that removal of the uterus has no side-​effects ...
... hysterectomy is the treatment of choice when ... the patient has completed 
her family ...
The operation of choice in all women under the age of 40 ... who wish to 
preserve their reproductive function ...
As you may have guessed, these quotations occur in a textbook written for med-
ical students by a (male) medical expert. But they also provide clues about the way 
doctors view patients. Perhaps the most obvious feature of the text is its imper-
sonal and detached tone which is achieved through the use of agentless passive 
constructions (surgery is ... indicated), impersonal nouns (the physician, the patient) 
and formal devices such as nominalisations. So, for example, surgery is indicated, 
rather than doctors think that people need surgery when ... or even I think that... 
. This construction also permits the author to neatly avoid drawing attention to 
reasons for the failure of the treatment to control symptoms. Hysterectomy is 
described as the treatment of choice, allowing the author to avoid the issue of whose 
choice. Women are depicted as at least ignorant, if not gullible with their erroneous 
beliefs, and primarily in their role as potential child-​bearers, since invasive surgery is 
to be avoided as long as the woman’s reproductive function needs to be maintained. 
And the opening sentence presents a patronising, if not insulting, saying as if it is 
common knowledge, although its technical word myomata (benign fibroid tumour 
of the uterus) indicates it could only have been produced by physicians.
Does this language simply reflect the social context in which it is produced, 
i.e. the relationship between the writer and intended audience, and its function 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
472
of instruction? Or does it convey or construct a worldview or perspective which 
may affect the perceptions of the students and their behaviour towards the 
women who consult them? Can language determine the way we perceive reality?
Exercise 2
Examine the problem page or advice column in a local or community newspaper or 
blog, or google Dear Abby for examples. Can you identify any of the taken-​for-​granted 
assumptions which lie behind the the advice provided? Consider:
(a)	
Who is the intended audience? How can you tell?
(b)	
Does the writer prescribe appropriate ways for parents, children, women or men to 
behave? Are transgender or gender-​diverse individuals considered?
(c)	
What do the vocabulary items and the grammatical constructions suggest about 
the author’s assumptions concerning the way the world should be arranged, or the 
author’s attitudes to particular groups?
Example 3
Note the underlying assumptions exposed in this dialogue.
Lawyer:	
Was anybody with you in the boat?
Rural guy:	
No there weren’t.
Lawyer:	
Then what was that grandson of yours doing?
Rural guy:	
Oh him. He was with me. I thought you meant was there 
somebody else, that didn’t ought to have been there.
Verbal hygiene
Example 4
Angela:	
I was sitting quietly drinking my tea, minding my own business 
when suddenly the foreperson burst in and shouted “what are 
you doing here? get back to work –​ you know that shipment’s 
overdue.” Bloody cheek. I’m entitled to my tea-​break!
Jim:	
You are. She’s a vampire –​ but what’s all this “foreperson” 
stuff? I bet you wouldn’t use that term for a man. Political 
correctness gone mad eh.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
473
Verbal hygiene is the thought-​provoking term used by Deborah Cameron to 
describe how people respond to “the urge to meddle in matters of language”. It 
covers a wide range of activities, from writing Letters to the Editor complaining 
about the “deterioration” and “abuse” of language (discussed in ­chapter 15), 
through prescriptions and proscriptions about what constitutes “proper”, 
“correct” and “acceptable” usage in a range of contexts, to using language as a 
political weapon. The discussion of sexist language in ­chapter 12 illustrated an 
area where feminists have enthusiastically engaged in verbal hygiene, reflecting 
their beliefs that achieving a change in linguistic usage is itself a worthwhile form 
of public, political action and consciousness raising.
As ­example 4 illustrates, the deliberate adoption of overtly non-​sexist usages 
such as foreperson and chairperson often leads to accusations of “political 
correctness”. While issues of political correctness extend well beyond linguistic 
concerns, linguistic terminology has often become the focus of the debate. The 
Crippled Children’s Society in New Zealand now refers to itself only by its 
acronym CCS. In the past the term crippled was an acceptable way of describing 
someone with a physical disability in New Zealand. As elsewhere, the term grad-
ually grew to be regarded as tasteless and unacceptable, so the terms handicapped 
and then disabled were substituted. But it was then pointed out that phrases 
such as handicapped person or disabled person defined the individual in terms 
of just one characteristic, and one that was irrelevant in many contexts, such as 
chatting to friends or watching TV. Those who work in this area currently use the 
phrase person with a disability or person with an impairment. It is likely, however, 
that these phrases too will be displaced over time. Some disability rights activists 
use the acronym TAB, Temporarily Able-​Bodied, as a reminder that for various 
reasons many people will develop disabilities at some point in their lives.
This topic is especially hotly debated when talking about disabilities such as 
autism, a condition which can have a massive impact on the way a person interacts 
with the world, as well as on their personality. Members of the autism commu-
nity argue that the use of person-​first rather than disability-​first language suggests 
that there is a “normal” person underneath the autism, when in fact it is a funda-
mental aspect of an individual’s personality and identity. A study carried out in 
the UK found that while healthcare professionals tended to use person-​first lan-
guage (person with autism/​ASD), autistic people themselves preferred disabilty-​
first language (e.g. autistic person). Example 5 is a quote from one of the autistic 
respondents to this survey, emphasising the point that it is always important to con-
sult people about what they want to be called, and how they want to be addressed.
Example 5
Separating the person from their autism is damaging, as it reinforces 
opinions about autism being a “thing” that can be removed, something that 
may be unpleasant and unwanted, and something that is not just another 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
474
aspect of a whole, complete and perfect individual human being. Describing 
oneself as autistic is an extremely important and positive assertion about 
oneself, it means that one feels complete and whole as one is.
(Kenny et al., 2016: 448)
For those who do not have a disability, and who have little contact with those 
who do, such changes often seem “precious” word-​mongering, substituting 
one euphemism for another basically because the concept itself is uncomfort-
able. This dismissive attitude is indicated by exaggerations such as vertically 
challenged to refer to short people, or cosmetically different as a way of avoiding 
the term ugly. Such constructions are an obvious source of humour, as in the 
transformed title of a well-​known fairy tale Melanin Impoverished and the Seven 
Vertically Challenged Individuals. But for those centrally concerned, the issue 
is not humorous nor just one of political correctness, as the parodists claim. It 
is as important as the issue of the use of broad or bird to refer to a woman, or 
nigger or munt for a person of colour. For those who are the butt of deroga-
tory labels, linguistic interventions usefully challenge taken-​for-​granted offensive 
assumptions.
We have now reached the point where are you being politically correct? 
must be regarded as a trick question. If you say yes, you may be regarded as 
over-​concerned with political orthodoxy. If you say no, you put yourself in the 
politically suspect, non-​conformist camp. An ironic confirmation of the polit-
ical power of language! And an indication, Deborah Cameron suggests, of the 
extent to which right-​wing commentators have captured and redefined a phrase 
introduced by the liberal left.
Example 6
(a)	
All reactionaries are paper tigers.
(b)	 People of the world, unite and defeat the US aggressors and all their 
running dogs!
(c)	
We should check our complacency and constantly criticise our 
shortcomings.
(d)	 Lack of achievement in work may breed pessimism and depression, 
while achievement may breed pride and arrogance.
Maoist China provides many further examples of the co-​option of language 
for political purposes. Mao Zedong was well aware of the power of language in 
furthering revolutionary goals, and he took control of channels of public com-
munication, including the education system, at an early stage. The central text 
of the Cultural Revolution (1966–​76) was a pocket compendium of Quotations 
from Chairman Mao Zedong, first produced in 1964 and labelled the Little Red 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
475
Book by the rest of the world. These quotations came to permeate everyday 
life, and the phrase da yulu zhang (fight a quotation war) became established in 
the Chinese lexicon. Quotation and counter-​quotation were even heard in the 
marketplace as people bargained for goods.
Newspapers filled their columns with extracts from Mao’s works and with 
articles stitched together around quotations from Mao. One analysis identified 
an average of 17 quotations from Mao on just the first two pages of The People’s 
Daily, the government’s official newspaper, throughout 1970. Even English lan-
guage textbooks used mainly political material for exemplification. This often 
resulted in some odd pedagogical practices. Relatively unusual grammatical 
forms were introduced early, for instance, because of their widespread use in 
slogans such as Long Live Chairman Mao! and Down with capitalist imperi-
alism! And English–​Chinese dictionaries illustrated the meaning of words such 
as unemployment with the citation Unemployment is increasing in the capitalist 
countries; and luoshi (fulfil) with the sentence Fulfil the task of consolidating the 
dictatorship of the proletariat down to every grassroots organisation!
Mao obviously believed that language had an important role to play in 
educating people, and in shaping their attitudes and values. To achieve this, 
powerful groups were established, explicitly labelled Mao Zedong Thought 
Propaganda Teams. Critics argue that Mao’s quotations provided an ideal 
method of “brain-​washing” or unfairly influencing the thinking of a huge and 
largely illiterate population. They consisted of short formulae which were 
easily remembered and repeated. They encoded a particular political position 
which was that of the dominant political party, and which was reinforced by 
materials used in the education system, making it difficult to take an opposing 
position, and even more difficult to express such a position. Many analysts 
argue that Mao’s revolution owed at least as much to his outstanding skills 
as a propagandist, as to his military and political prowess. They suggest he 
used formulaic language to promote conformist attitudes and thinking. This 
approach assumes a close relationship between language and thought. In this 
context, let’s consider how language may influence the way we construct and 
perceive the identity of others.
Exercise 3
(a)	
What labels are used in your community to refer to:
•	 members of ethnic or racial groups?
•	 women?
•	 homosexual people?
•	 people with an intellectual disability?
A simple questionnaire asking one or two friends and family members to provide as 
many labels as they can for these groups usually elicits a wide range of items. Are 
there any patterns concerning who uses particular labels and in what kinds of social 
contexts?
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
476
(b)	
One source of social and community information is the graffiti written on public walls 
and in toilet cubicles. A small study of toilet cubicles in one university suggested that 
male toilets were more likely than female to provide such data. Is this true in your 
community?
Terms such as coots and coconuts for ethnic minorities and queer and gay for 
homosexual people provide further food for thought about the exact relation-
ship between language, society, attitudes and perception. If language reflects and 
shapes society’s perceptions of particular groups, then what is the implication 
of the vast array of derogatory terms (sometimes called dysphemisms) used for 
people of colour and homosexual individuals, for instance, and especially for 
trans individuals and homosexual men? It is important to reflect on the effects 
such labels may have on young people’s attitudes and ways of thinking about 
members of such groups.
Exercise 4
Paul Baker’s (2005) book on discourses about gay men illustrates how corpus analysis 
can be useful in demonstrating public perceptions of and attitudes towards members of 
minority groups. He examines a range of texts including public political debates, tabloid 
newspapers, a TV sitcom, and personal advertisements. Corpora of newspaper discourse 
are generally accessible to students through the library of their tertiary institution.
Examine the discourse of a popular newspaper in your community to explore 
perceptions and attitudes to members of a specific minority group: e.g. immigrants, sex 
workers, people of colour or politicians.
Whorf: the relationship between language and 
thought
Vocabulary and cognition
Example 7
Frank:	
Don’t throw your cigarette butts in there. It’s dangerous.
Bill:	
Why not? The label says “empty”.
Frank:	
Well there’s no gasoline in them but there’s plenty of explosive 
vapour –​ so watch out.
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
477
This example and those discussed previously in this chapter suggest that there 
is a close relationship between language and perception. But what is the exact 
nature of this relationship? Does language constrain perception or vice-​versa? 
Is thought independent of language or do the categories of language pre-​deter-
mine what we can think about or conceive of? Do the categories we learn to 
distinguish as we acquire language provide a framework for ordering the world? 
And if so, is it possible to think outside that framework? Do different languages 
encode experience differently? And how can we ever tell since it seems impos-
sible to escape from the circle?
The relationship between language, thought and “reality” has fascinated 
linguists and philosophers for centuries. Among linguists, the person whose 
name is most closely associated with investigations of the relationship between 
language and thought is Benjamin Lee Whorf. Whorf was an anthropological 
linguist who began his career as a chemical engineer working for a fire insurance 
company. He first investigated Native American languages as a hobby, but later 
studied with Edward Sapir at Yale University. In the course of processing insur-
ance claims, he noticed that the particular words selected to describe or label 
objects often influenced people’s perceptions and behaviour. So, as ­example 7 
illustrates, around gasoline drums labelled as empty, people would smoke, or 
even toss in cigarette stubs, despite the fact that they were full of potentially 
explosive vapour.
This perception was a graphic illustration of something that Whorf had noted 
in his analysis of Native American languages, such as Hopi. Example 8 is a well-​
known quotation which summarises his position.
Example 8
We dissect nature along lines laid down by our native languages. The cat-
egories and types that we isolate from the world of phenomena we do 
not find there because they stare every observer in the face; on the con-
trary, the world is presented in a kaleidoscopic flux of impressions which 
has to be organized in our minds –​ and this means largely by the lin-
guistic systems in our minds. We cut nature up, organize it into concepts, 
and ascribe significances as we do, largely because we are parties to an 
agreement to organize it in this way –​ an agreement that holds throughout 
our speech community and is codified in the patterns of our language. The 
agreement is of course an implicit and unstated one, BUT ITS TERMS 
ARE ABSOLUTELY OBLIGATORY; we cannot talk at all except by sub-
scribing to the organization and classification of data which the agreement 
decrees.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
478
Exercise 5
Make four points which counter Whorf’s position as expressed in this quotation. Consider, 
for example, experiences which suggest that thought is independent of language: e.g. the 
experiences of bilinguals, responses to music or searching for le mot juste.
Answer at end of chapter
Linguistic determinism: the medium is the message
Example 9
A consequence of intellectual seismic shifts is that, by shifting the language 
too, they impede one’s efforts to think, write, and speak about a time before 
they had taken place.
Jessica Riskin here makes Whorf’s point in a more subtle way in 2020, neverthe-
less suggesting that language constrains our cognitive abilities. The strong form 
of the Sapir–​Whorf hypothesis is generally labelled linguistic determinism. This 
holds that people from different cultures think differently because of differences 
in their languages. A speaker of Hopi, Whorf claimed, perceives reality dif-
ferently from a speaker of English because she uses a different language. Few 
sociolinguists would accept such a strong claim, but most accept the weaker 
claim of linguistic relativity, i.e. that language influences perceptions, thought 
and, at least potentially, behaviour.
The main problem in assessing Whorf’s argument is the danger of inescap-
able circularity. We observe that languages differ and conclude that the thought 
patterns of their speakers also differ. But the only evidence we have that their 
thought patterns differ is the language they use. So investigating the relation-
ship between language and thought is a real challenge because the most obvious 
way to access thought is through language. How can we test how language 
influences ways of thinking without using language as evidence of thought 
processes?
Some ingenious experiments have been devised to test the Sapir–​Whorf 
hypothesis. If Whorf is right, it should be difficult to identify colours which your 
language does not have a name for. But although the Dani, a New Guinea tribe, 
use only two colour terms (corresponding to black and white, or, more accur-
ately, dark and light), it was found that they could recognise and distinguish 
between subtle shades of colours that their language had no names for (e.g. pale 
blue vs. turquoise). This suggests that the strong form of the hypothesis can’t be 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
479
maintained. Other experiments suggest, however, that people remember colours 
that are coded in their language more easily than those which are not, and they 
tend to classify together coloured chips which are labelled as the “same” colour 
by their language, even if objective measures like wavelength suggest they are 
different.
Some languages have linguistic categories which take account of the shape 
of objects. The form of Navajo verbs, for example, is sometimes determined by 
the shape of the object: e.g. long or short, thin or thick, round or not, and so 
on. Not surprisingly, Navajo-​speaking children are typically much faster than 
English-​speaking children in categorising blocks by shape. And given a choice 
of ways of putting objects into groups, Navajo children tend to group them 
according to shape, while English-​speaking children group them according 
to colour. These interesting findings based on experiments with colours and 
shapes all support the weaker principle of linguistic relativity, i.e. the cat-
egories provided by a language may make it easier to draw certain conceptual 
distinctions.
Exercise 6
Examine the data in table 13.1.
(a)	
What is the likely form of the name of number 16 in French, Chinese and Japanese?
(b)	
How do you know?
(c)	
What are the implications of your answer for learners of these languages?
Answers at end of chapter
Table 13.1  Names for numbers 1–​6 and 10–​15 in four languages
Number
English
French
Chinese
Japanese
1
one
un
yi
ichi
2
two
deux
er
ni
3
three
trois
san
san
4
four
quatre
si
shi
5
five
cinq
wu
go
6
six
six
liu
roku
10
ten
dix
shi
juu
11
eleven
onze
shi-​yi
juu-​ichi
12
twelve
douze
shi-​er
juu-​ni
13
thirteen
treize
shi-​san
juu-​san
14
fourteen
quatorze
shi-​si
juu-​shi
15
fifteen
quinze
shi-​wu
juu-​go
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
480
The Chinese word for eleven, shi-​yi, is literally ten-​one, and for twenty the 
Chinese word is er-​shi, literally two-​ten. Consequently, learning to count beyond 
ten is easier for Chinese-​speaking children than for English-​speaking children. 
More recently, it has even been suggested that Chinese, Japanese and Korean 
children understand number concepts earlier than English and French children 
because of the ways their respective languages code numbers above 10. If true, 
this is interesting support for the idea that language facilitates particular kinds 
of thinking, or at least speed of processing. Like the colour experiments, this 
evidence suggests that the categories provided by a language may favour cer-
tain ways of perceiving “reality” or “the world”, and make certain behaviours 
easier. However, we must also recognise the limitations of such evidence. Colours 
and numbers constitute very limited semantic fields. Is there evidence in other 
areas too?
Exercise 7
What kind of perception of time do the following expressions encode? Are all the 
metaphors consistent?
don’t waste time
we used up all our time
you’ve run out of time
that would save a lot of time
I’ve spent too much time on it
I gave her all the time available
he needs to budget for how much time it will take
they invested a lot of time in that project
how much time do we have left?
I can’t devote any more time to it
Can you think of alternative ways of encoding time? This exercise could provide a 
basis for interesting cross-​language and cross-​cultural comparisons if you have access 
to appropriate data. For example, you could make a list of time-​related expressions in 
another language you know and compare them with those used in English. Do both 
languages use similar or different metaphors? What does this suggest about the way 
time is perceived?
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
481
Grammar and cognition
Example 10
Suzanne Romaine comments that:
no particular language has a privileged view of the world as it “really” 
is. The world is not simply the way it is, but what we make of it through 
language. The domains of experience which are important to cultures get 
grammaticalized into languages.
Grammatical categories such as tense, aspect and gender encode aspects of reality 
differently in different languages. Whorf’s analysis of the Hopi verb system 
led him to argue that the Hopi conception of time is fundamentally different 
from that of Western cultures. Speakers of European languages often conceive 
time as a road, for instance, with the future ahead and the past behind. Whorf 
suggested this is because of the verb tense system of Indo-​European languages. 
Appropriately conjugating Hopi verbs, however, requires an analysis of events 
in terms of dynamic motion, expressed by aspect markers, rather than by tenses 
marking their distribution in time. This led Whorf to conclude that the Hopi think 
in terms of cycles of events and sets of processes rather than units of time. He 
even argued that Hopi was better equipped to deal with the wave processes and 
vibrations of modern physics than English was. These basic concepts of physics 
for which English needed metaphors such as waves and vibrations were directly 
and obligatorily coded in the verb morphology of Hopi and this, according to 
Whorf, “practically force[d]‌ the Hopi to notice vibratory phenomena”.
In fact, later analyses of Hopi indicated that Hopi does have tenses and words for 
time units. But, while Whorf’s detailed claims do not hold up, most sociolinguists 
consider that his general point is an interesting one with implications for the way 
speakers of different languages and cultures filter or “cut up” reality. It is widely 
accepted that certain concepts may be more codable or easier to express in some 
languages than in others. And, as the quotation in ­example 10 suggests, the areas 
of experience which are important to cultures tend to undergo a grammatical-
isation process in their languages. (Something is said to be grammaticalised or 
grammaticised when it functions less and less like an independent lexical item, 
and more and more like an element in the grammatical system, such as an affix 
or an auxiliary verb.) To what extent, then, does culture intersect with language 
and cognition? It has been suggested, for instance, that communities with little 
technological development employ the fewest colour terms, while their pronoun 
and noun classification systems are often much more complex than those of 
European languages.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
482
Exercise 8
Consider the potential cognitive and cultural implications of the following observations.
English people and horses eat; German people essen while horses fressen.
English has a general word ant; the Garo of Assam, India, have many words for different 
types of ant but no single-​word equivalent to ant.
Mandarin Chinese has a single cover term for fruit and nuts. English has no such term.
In English the noun stone must be either singular or plural; in Chinese number is only 
expressed if it is relevant.
In Aymara, a language of the Andes, time is conceptualised as running the opposite 
way to the way it is described in most languages, with the past ahead and the future 
behind.
Kwakiutl speakers must indicate whether the stone is visible or not to the speaker at the 
time of speaking, and its position relative to the speaker or the listener.
In nineteenth-​century Russian, there was a distinct term shurin for your wife’s brother; in 
modern Russian the phrase brat zheny (brother of wife) is used.
Japanese and Korean speakers must pay attention to the distinction between what is 
knowable by introspection and what is knowable by external observation.
The issues raised by these examples are discussed later in the chapter
Exercise 9
Discussions of the relationship between language and thought often make the ethnocen-
tric assumption illustrated by the cartoon in ­chapter 2 (page 43), i.e. they assume most 
people speak only one language. What are the implications of Whorf’s ideas for bilingual 
and multilingual people?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 10
We have used the word culture throughout the book so far without defining it explicitly. 
Given the way it has been used, how would you define the meaning of culture?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
483
Linguistic categories and culture
Native American and Australian Aboriginal languages are often cited as examples 
which roundly refute popular misconceptions about so-called ­“primitive” 
languages, e.g. mistaken claims that “simple societies can’t have complex 
grammars” (an issue touched on at the end of ­chapter 8). Kwakiutl, a Native 
American language, for example, requires a grammatical classification of nouns 
based on whether they are visible or not. And while French requires every noun 
to be assigned to one of two genders or grammatical categories, Dyirbal, an 
Australian Aboriginal language, has four such categories or classes.
Using Western criteria, the traditional nomadic lifestyle of the Aboriginal  
people of Australia is often mistakenly regarded as relatively simple. However,  
their culture is thousands of years old and very complex, and their languages  
are amongst the most interesting and grammatically complex that have been  
researched. Every noun in Dyirbal belongs to one of the four classes, as illustrated  
in table 13.2. Consequently, whenever a Dyirbal speaker uses a noun in a sen-
tence, the noun must be preceded by one of the four classifiers: bayi, balan,  
balam or bala. Can you identify any semantic coherence or meaning relationships  
between the items in the different classes?
While there is some basis in perceived shared semantic features for the allo-
cation of Dyirbal nouns to different classes, the answer to this question is not at 
all obvious to those from other cultures. The general patterns Dyirbal speakers 
seem to use to learn the system can be summarised as follows:
I	
bayi: (human) males; some animals
II	 balan: (human) females, birds, water, fire, fighting
III	 balam: non-​flesh food
IV	 bala: everything else
Table 13.2  Dyirbal noun classes
(I) Bayi
(II) Balan
(III) Balam
(IV) Bala
men
women
edible fruit
parts of the body
kangaroos
bandicoots
fruit plants
meat
possums
dogs
tubers
bees
snakes
platypus
ferns
mud
fishes
birds
cigarettes
grass
insects
spears
wine
wind
storms
water
cake
noises
the moon
fire
honey
language
fishing spears
stars
boomerangs
sun

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
484
Particular types of experience establish associations which determine the class 
membership of some items. So, for instance, fish are in class I because they are 
animate, and fishing implements are also in class I because they are associated 
with fish. This also explains why sun and stars are in the same class as fire. 
However, Dyirbal myths and cultural beliefs also make a contribution to class 
allocation. So, contrary to Western mythology, the moon is male and husband 
of the sun, which is female. Hence moon is in class I with men, while sun is in 
class II with women. Birds are believed to be the spirits of dead human females, 
and hence they are also in class II. The system is of course totally automatic for 
Dyirbal speakers, and one should not necessarily expect a speaker to be able to 
explain it to an outsider. Nor should we expect the relationship between categor-
isation and cultural beliefs to be direct, transparent or available to reflection. 
After all, a German speaker would be hard pressed to explain why the word 
Mädchen meaning girl is in the same category as inanimate objects such as book 
(Buch), while English speakers would have difficulty interpreting the significance 
of the fact that the English demonstratives this vs. that code degrees of proximity 
to the speaker.
Even at the lexico-​semantic level, Aboriginal languages challenge Western  
preconceptions about “primitive” languages, as table 13.3 illustrates. Clearly  
Kunwinjku has many more terms to label distinctions among kangaroos and  
wallabies than English. The reasons are obvious: kangaroos are an important  
part of Aboriginal people’s environment. In cultures which use rice as a staple  
of the diet, there are distinct terms not only for different types of rice, but also  
for many different ways of cooking rice. Bird watchers, skiers, geologists and  
gardeners are similarly able to lexically identify distinctions of importance to  
them. This suggests an alternative to Whorf’s position, then: rather than lan-
guage determining what is perceived, it is the physical and sociocultural environ-
ment which determines the distinctions that the language develops.
Table 13.3  Kunwinjku kangaroo terms
Kunj (general term covering all kangaroos and wallabies)
Linnean and English 
names
Male
Female
Child
Macropus antilopinus 
(antilopine wallaroo)
karndakidj kalaba (large 
individual male)
karndayh
djamunbuk 
(juvenile male)
Macropus bernardus 
(black wallaroo)
nadjinem baark
djukerre
Macropus robustus 
(wallaroo)
kalkberd kanbulerri (large 
male)
wolerrk
narrobad 
(juvenile male)
Macropus agilis (agile 
wallaby)
warradjangkal/​ kornobolo 
nakurdakurda (very large 
individual)
merlbbe/​ 
kornobolo
nakornborrh 
nanjid (baby)

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
485
From this perspective, language provides a means of encoding a community’s 
knowledge, beliefs and values, i.e. its culture. Tahitians don’t make a distinc-
tion between sadness and sickness, for instance, using the same word for both. 
This accurately represents their belief that sadness/​sickness can be attributed to 
an attack by evil spirits, a belief that may initially seem odd to someone from 
Western culture. However, Western medical practice now recognises depression 
as an illness, and English uses many metaphorical terms for depression which no 
doubt appear just as strange to those from other cultures, e.g. feeling blue, in low 
spirits, feeling down, under the weather, and so on. The word mate covers a con-
tinuum from sick to dead in Māori, a continuum that Western culture perceives 
as a sharp division, as indicated by the use of two quite different words. But 
Māori culture does not make a sharp distinction between the living and the 
dead. The dead are considered to watch over the living and are in this sense 
always present. Dead kinsfolk are always explicitly referred to in any ritual, and 
treated as an extension of the living family.
Example 11
Aboriginal English speakers convey respect by referring to people as Auntie 
or Uncle, including senior people that the speaker has never met before.
Exercise 11
Maˉori kinship terminology distinguishes between siblings in different ways from 
English:
teina	
younger sister of a female, younger brother of a male
tuakana	
older sister of a female, older brother of a male
tuahine	
sister of a male
tungaˉne	
brother of a female
(a)	
What semantic distinctions do the translations of the Maˉori kinship terms suggest 
are important in Maˉori culture?
(b)	
Given that these terms can also be used to refer to cousins, how would you expect 
to refer to your cousin Mere (Mary)?
Answers at end of chapter
Less tangible concepts such as kinship further illustrate the complexities of 
the relationship between language and culture. In Māori culture, relative age 
is very important. Even the status of the tribe or iwi to which you belong will 
be identified in teina and tuakana terms relative to other tribes. The import-
ance of the extended family or whānau as an important social unit is also 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
486
evident in the kinship system. Kinship labels indicate the mutual rights and 
obligations of different members of the whānau towards each other. In rural 
areas of New Zealand, Māori children typically grow up in close contact 
with their grandparents, aunties and uncles, and they may spend extended 
periods of time living in the households of relations other than their parents. 
These traditional social relationships are indicated by the use of the same term 
whaea both for a child’s mother and for the mother’s sisters, while the term 
pāpā refers not only to a child’s father but also to his father’s brothers. The 
same pattern holds for terms used to refer to a child’s siblings and cousins; 
in these cases, gender and relative age are semantically marked, but degree 
of kinship (as viewed through Western eyes) is not lexically distinguished. So 
the lexical labels identify those with similar social rights and obligations in 
relation to the speaker. Clearly, linguistic terminology here indexes important 
cultural relationships.
It has been suggested that all kinship systems are likely to encode distinctions 
based on genealogy and biology: so parenthood, marriage relationships, gender 
and generation are distinctions expressed in some way in most systems that have 
been studied. But the precise ways in which they are encoded and the fineness 
of the distinctions and their cultural significance differ dramatically from one 
culture to another. In Njamal, an Australian Aboriginal language with no more 
than 100 speakers in the 1950s when the data was collected, the complex and 
intricate kinship system provides insights into the ways in which the tribe’s activ-
ities were organised. Like Māori, Njamal has distinct terms for younger vs. older 
siblings and younger cousins. Maraga, for example, refers to a younger brother 
or sister, and to some younger cousins. And in Njamal, there is a specific kinship 
term for every member of the tribe, however distantly they are related to you. 
This clearly indicates the importance of kinship relationships in the social organ-
isation of the tribe.
Every Njamal person belongs to one of two distinct moieties (descent groups), 
and in this tribe your moiety membership is determined by your father. Moiety 
membership is signalled explicitly throughout the kinship system, reflecting and 
reinforcing the fact that for Njamal people, moiety membership is a fundamental 
distinction of tribal life. Shared moiety membership creates obligations to care 
for people when they need it. Moiety membership also restricts your marriage 
options since you may only marry someone from the other moiety. This makes 
sense of the fact that some cousins have the same kinship terms as brothers 
and sisters, while others do not. You can marry your father’s sister’s children 
(opposite moiety), but not your father’s brother’s children (same moiety). Thus 
kinship terms signal your potential marriage partners. Again, the lexical labels 
serve as indicators of the complex mutual social rights and obligations of com-
munity members.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
487
Exercise 12
Some languages, including Navajo and Ojibwe, make a grammatical distinction between 
categories of noun on the basis of the semantics of possession. The distinctions are often 
subtle and we have simplified them considerably for this exercise (see table 13.4).
(a)	
How would you describe the difference between the semantic categories A and B 
in table 13.4?
(b)	
What cultural factors might be relevant in the maintenance of such a distinction?
Answers at end of chapter
The cost of language loss
Example 12
In October 1992, the last speaker of Ubykh died. Ubykh is a language 
of the northwestern Caucasus and it is famously linguistically complex. 
A French linguist, George Dumézil, managed to gather together enough 
native speakers in the 1930s to describe the 81 consonants and 20+​ verb 
prefixes of this language. Some of these sounds are not known in any 
other language. And the complex morphology of Ubykh allows one-​word 
expressions such as aqhjazbacr’aghawdœtwaaylafaq’ayt’madaqh which 
translates as “if only you had not been able to make him take it all out 
from under me again for them”.
Without George Dumézil’s commitment to language description, we would 
never have known about the linguistic complexities of Ubykh. In ­chapter 3, 
Table 13.4  Semantic categories of possession
List 1: category A words
List 2: category B words
arm
car
grandmother
house
land
money
niece
food
face
cow
family
fence
field on my land
flower
leg (of a person)
leg (of lamb)
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
488
we discussed some of the social, economic and political reasons which account 
for language loss, recognising at the same time the high linguistic and sociocul-
tural cost of language loss for minority groups. The fact that every language 
offers some new interesting linguistic and often cognitive distinctions, a unique 
“window on the world”, provides yet another reason to lament language loss.
Until 1959, when outsiders encountered the Amazonian tribe who speak 
Hixkaryana, a Carib language, linguists had speculated that no human language 
used a word order which involved the object (O) at the beginning of the sen-
tence and the subject (S) at the end, with the verb (V) in between: i.e. OVS. 
Hixkaryana scuttled that theory and forced descriptive and theoretical linguists 
to think again about linguistic possibilities. And perhaps even more importantly, 
this discovery forced descriptive and theoretical linguists to reconsider the range 
of formal constraints on human cognition, and the kinds of linguistic rules that 
the human brain can cope with. Information on possible cognitive limitations on 
human thinking is relevant in a number of areas, including research on the brain, 
where it suggests ways of treating brain damage, and in information technology, 
where the limits of what human beings can conceptualise affects what is possible 
in computer programming. In terms of the environment too, language loss can 
be costly, as Nick Evans incisively notes in the following comment.
Example 13
All around the world Indigenous people transmit, through the words and 
expressions of their language, the fruits of millennia of close observation of 
nature and experimentation with its products.
The Kunwinjku kangaroo terms in table 13.3 provide an example of such 
observation. Languages encode information about the environment. When we 
lose a language which makes subtle distinctions between plants on the basis of 
their medicinal properties, or which encodes important biological and environ-
mental knowledge which may not be obvious to outsiders, we lose information 
which may be very difficult to retrieve. Australian Aboriginal people know how 
to survive in the desert because encoded in their languages is information about 
which plants to eat and which to cook, which provide water, and so on. The 
Arnhem-​land Aboriginal people name the spangled grunter fish with the same 
word as the native white apple tree because the fish eats the fruit as it falls into 
the creek or water hole. So if you want to find the fish you know where to look. 
Another tribe names grubs, important sources of food, after the bushes where 
you can find them. As the languages disappear, the information is harder to 
retain, and it gradually disappears too. The costs may be high. A quarter of the 
prescriptive medicines used in the USA derive from plants which grow in the 
world’s rainforests, and which are most easily identified in languages which are 
at great risk of disappearing.
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
489
Language loss also entails the loss of insights about human perception. 
Example 14 provides just three examples from a number of semantic distinctions 
available to Tuyuca speakers through their grammar to indicate how much trust 
the listener should put in the information being offered.
Example 14
1	 díiga apé-​wi [visual affix]:           I saw him play soccer with my own 
eyes.
2	 díiga apé –​yi [apparent affix]:      I have seen evidence that he played 
soccer (e.g. the shoe print on the 
playing field, but didn’t see him play).
3	 díiga apé-​hiyi [inferential affix]:  It is reasonable to assume he played 
soccer.
Similar semantic distinctions requiring speakers to specify the source of 
their evidence are obligatory in the grammars of some of the languages of the 
Amazon and New Guinea Highlands. Ngalakan, an Australian Aboriginal lan-
guage, has a special “compassion” prefix which attaches to the verb to indicate 
the speaker’s sympathy for someone in the event being described. As indicated 
in ­exercise 8, there are many examples of such subtle differences in the ways in 
which languages encode experience.
Finally, as mentioned in ­chapter 3, another important reason for deploring 
language loss is the fact that when people lose their language, their distinctive 
sociocultural identity is also put at risk. Language and culture are clearly closely 
related, as the discussion above has indicated. These are crucial symbols of iden-
tity and the loss of a language and the related erosion of cultural identity is 
often devastating. People whose language has been swamped by another often 
lose confidence in their abilities and develop poor self-​esteem. While many other 
factors are also relevant, language loss in such cases is at least a contributing 
factor in educational and socioeconomic under-​performance, an issue discussed 
further in ­chapter 15. In the next part of this chapter, the focus broadens from 
lexical and grammatical distinctions to the distinctive discourse and interaction 
patterns which characterise different languages.
Discourse patterns and culture
Example 15
Robyn Kina grew up in difficult family circumstances in an Aboriginal 
environment in Australia. By 19 years old, she had a criminal record as a 
result of a number of encounters with the police in which she had come 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
490
off worst. In her mid-​twenties, she lived with a non-Indigenous man Tony 
Black, who regularly beat her up and subjected her to other horrific attacks, 
especially when he was drunk. During an argument one morning in 1988, 
Black threatened to rape Kina’s 14-​year-​old niece who was living with 
them. Kina stabbed him once in the chest as he came towards her with a 
chair raised above his head. She was shocked to see him fall to the ground. 
He died in hospital shortly afterwards. Robyn Kina pleaded not guilty to 
murder since she had not intended to kill Black. She did not give evidence 
and no witnesses were called. After one of the shortest trials in Australian 
history, Kina was found guilty and sentenced to life imprisonment with 
hard labour.
The intertwining of language, culture and perception is evident when we 
examine research on patterns of interaction. Cultural differences between the 
discourse patterns of the majority and minority culture can often have serious 
consequences, as the research of Diana Eades, comparing Aboriginal and non-​
Aboriginal Australians, demonstrates. Even, and perhaps especially, when both 
groups apparently use the same language, culturally different patterns of inter-
action can be a source of misunderstanding.
Regardless of the particular language being spoken, Aboriginal society 
throughout Australia places great importance on indirectness; it is important to 
avoid being intrusive. This involves giving other people interactional privacy, a 
crucial mechanism in a society where there is frequently little physical privacy. 
In discourse, this sociocultural norm is indicated in a number of ways. If you 
want information from an Aboriginal person, it is important to follow the dis-
course rules. Factual information relating to location and time, and how people 
are related to each other, for instance, is typically elicited in Aboriginal English 
using a statement with rising intonation, e.g. you were at the store? In other 
words, the questioner presents a proposition for confirmation or correction. On 
the other hand, direct questions of this kind are not used for eliciting “substan-
tial” information such as important personal details, reasons for behaving in a 
particular way, and so on. A much less direct method is necessary in this case, 
with the information seeker volunteering some of their own knowledge on the 
topic, and then waiting patiently until the addressee is ready to respond, e.g. I 
heard there was a big argument at the store yesterday. It is important to realise 
that this is the normal everyday way of seeking information. Direct questions 
are totally inappropriate in such situations, and are likely to be responded to by 
silence or by a formulaic response such as I don’t remember or I don’t know. 
Answers in this case could be glossed as meaning “This is not an appropriate 
way for me to provide information of that nature”. It is also important to realise 
that in Aboriginal society, some kinds of information are not freely shared, but 
may be restricted to those who have the right to it, and silence is much more 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
491
common as an acceptable component of interaction than in non-​Aboriginal 
exchanges.
Exercise 13
Five years after Robyn Kina’s imprisonment for life, as described in ­example 15, her case 
was re-​opened, and the Appeal Court found that her conviction was the result of a mistrial.
Using the information on Aboriginal patterns of interaction provided above, suggest 
some reasons which might account for the mistrial.
Answer is contained in the discussion below
In 1992, some years after Robyn Kina was imprisoned, she was interviewed in 
prison by TV journalists for documentaries which raised legal and moral issues 
concerning victims of domestic violence who kill violent partners in situations 
of self-​defence. The information she gave to the interviewers, David Goldie 
and Debbie Richards, about the horrific violence perpetrated by Black, and his 
threat to rape her niece, had never been presented at her trial. Consequently, the 
jury never knew of the provocation and need for self-​defence which led to her 
fatal knife-​attack on Black. As a result of the TV documentaries, an appeal was 
initiated which resulted in the quashing of Robyn Kina’s murder conviction, and 
she was released after five years in prison. The question which puzzled people 
was “why was she willing to tell a TV interviewer what happened but not her 
lawyers?”
The sociolinguist’s answer to this question is that Robyn Kina responded to 
her lawyers in an Aboriginal way. She had no opportunity to establish a rela-
tionship with the lawyers, and they did not share information about themselves. 
Providing embarrassing details about her personal life was therefore not pos-
sible. She certainly could not handle direct questions about personal matters, 
and so responded with silence. At that point, she did not have the ability to 
communicate any other way, and her lawyers knew nothing about Aboriginal 
ways of communicating. The approach used by the TV journalists, on the other 
hand, was very similar to Aboriginal ways of communicating. They established 
a good relationship with Kina over a period of time, shared information about 
themselves, used indirect strategies for eliciting her story, listened patiently and 
without interruption, and tolerated long silences. TV journalism does not always 
involve such time-​consuming information-​gathering strategies. Robyn Kina was 
lucky that this investigative TV programme placed a priority on people feeling 
comfortable about telling important stories.
Since non-​Aboriginal norms dominate Australian society, Aboriginal people 
are often disadvantaged and misunderstood or misinterpreted in interaction. 
This is especially true in institutional contexts such as law courts where direct 
questions are the norm, and silence can be interpreted as evasive and even 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
492
as evidence of guilt. Chapter 11 included further examples of cross-​cultural 
differences in ways of interacting. Where there is a power imbalance between the 
groups involved, such differences can create serious communication problems 
for minority group members.
Cultures described as solidarity-​oriented or “positive politeness” cultures 
value involvement with others, while distance-​oriented or “negative politeness” 
cultures emphasise respect and minimise intrusion (see ­chapter 11 for further 
discussion of these terms). On the basis of the description so far, Aboriginal 
society seems a classic negative politeness culture. In fact, however, Aboriginal 
society is characterised by high interactional involvement, and on-​going serial 
and open-​ended conversations, and people place great value on group activities 
which build solidarity. Things are never as simple as they seem, and the analysis 
of interaction patterns in Aboriginal communities raises questions about the 
adequacy of the simple negative/​positive politeness framework. (In ­chapter 14, 
the concept of “rapport” provides a more sophisticated approach to the analysis 
of politeness.)
This example also raises questions about the precise relationship between 
discourse and worldview. Can different discourse patterns be regarded as evi-
dence of a different perspective on reality? Research on Aboriginal communities 
suggests that a feature such as a preference for indirect ways of conveying infor-
mation reflects a distinctive perception of sociocultural relationships. As Robyn 
Kina’s behaviour illustrated, Aboriginal interactions give personal relationships 
priority over information-​oriented goals; they prioritise the affective over the 
referential dimension. Indirectness is an obligatory indication of respect for 
the other person when important personal information is at stake. And long, 
non-​intrusive silences are tolerated, even when one party is clearly gathering 
information. Moreover, a social constructionist approach suggests that preferred 
discourse patterns and linguistic usages not only reflect but also shape or con-
struct a particular view of social reality and sociocultural relationships.
Exercise 14
(a)	
Language death is an inevitable symptom of people coming together and reduced 
isolation. English is already the lingua franca of popular culture, scholarship and 
international discourse. It is a logical choice as an international means of communi-
cation, a world lingua franca.
(b)	
The strength and richness that comes from distinct traditions ... can never be 
straightforwardly mapped onto a single value system speaking a world language.
Consider these two contrasting points of view. As indicated in statement (a), some people 
believe that linguists and activists are being unrealistic in trying to save endangered 
languages. They argue that globalisation, the transnational distribution of goods and ser-
vices, ideas, languages and popular culture, will inevitably result in a reduction in the 
number of languages used globally. Some also advocate the adoption of English as an 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
493
international lingua franca. Do you agree with their position? Or do you consider that 
the examples discussed in this chapter provide a convincing basis for countering such 
arguments, as suggested in quotation (b)?
Exercise 15
In 2009, the World Affairs Journal published an article by John McWhorter on “The cosmo-
politan tongue: the universality of English” in which he questions whether “it would be 
inherently evil if there were not 6,000 spoken languages but one”. You can read the article 
here:  www.worldaffairsjournal.org/​2009%20-​%20Fall/​full-​McWhorter-​Fall-​2009.html.
The New York Times Week in Review followed up the article with a blog headed “Why 
Save Dying Languages?”: http://​ideas.blogs.nyti​mes.com/​2009/​10/​29/​why-​save-​dying-​
langua​ges/​.
After reading this section, what arguments can you provide to respond to these articles?
Language, social class, and cognition
Example 16
(a)  Emmie, the daughter of a wealthy Scottish family, was enrolled at an 
English public (i.e. private fee-​paying) boarding school in the south of 
England. At the end of her first month, she failed all the oral progress 
tests. The school assumed she lacked intellectual ability.
“This is outrageous,” her mother declared, “she is an outstandingly 
intelligent young woman. What is the problem?”
“Her English is deficient; she can’t communicate properly,” responded 
her form teacher. “We can’t understand a word she says.”
“Well, that’s your problem,” announced Emmie’s mother. “You had 
better learn to!”
(b)  Middle-​class children do well in school.
Working-​class children don’t do well in school.
Middle-​class children speak a different variety of English than working-​
class children.
Usual conclusion: working-​class children should change the way they speak.
Can you spot the faulty logic?
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
494
The previous section in this chapter provided an example of the potentially puni-
tive social implications of culturally different ways of interacting, even when 
both groups are using varieties of the same language. Others have been interested 
in whether there are possible cognitive implications where groups use different 
varieties of a language.
Basil Bernstein was a sociologist who asked this question in the 1960s. Like 
many educationalists, he was concerned that British children from working-​class 
backgrounds were not progressing well at school. It was also widely recognised 
that working-​class children spoke English differently from middle-​class children. It 
was easy to conclude that these two observations were related. Rather than dedu-
cing that teachers tended to favour children who used more standard varieties (an 
issue explored further in ­chapter 15), researchers began to examine features of 
working-​class children’s speech, looking for an explanation there. Unfortunately, 
they (mistakenly) assumed that the kind of language working-​class children used 
in a formal interview with a middle-​class adult was an accurate representation of 
their sociolinguistic competence. In such situations, not surprisingly, the children 
used short, even monosyllabic, responses which suggested to the interviewers that 
their linguistic resources were “restricted”. (The complexities of this issue are also 
more fully discussed in the section on language deficit in ­chapter 15.)
In this early research, Bernstein went further, however. He suggested that a 
restricted code might also constrain the cognitive abilities of those who used it. In 
other words, extending the principle of linguistic determinism, he argued that the 
language which children use might affect what they were capable of perceiving 
and even their thinking abilities. We should first say that there is no research 
support whatsoever for such a claim. Bernstein himself later rejected this extreme 
position, and developed a much more socially sophisticated version of his theory 
which took account of different patterns of socialisation. But unfortunately, the 
early version had great appeal as a way of accounting for working-​class children’s 
lack of school success. It placed the blame on the children and their language 
rather than on the schools’ failure to adequately identify their educational needs.
Bernstein’s hypotheses forced sociolinguists to examine Whorf’s claims about 
the relationship between language, thought and society really thoroughly. One 
of the benefits was a more detailed study of vernacular varieties, and a very 
clear recognition that dialect differences were comparatively superficial aspects 
of language which could not conceivably have consequences for different ways 
of thinking. Though Bernstein phrased his claims with care, they were often 
oversimplified and misinterpreted. His research appeared to support a view of 
working-​class children as linguistically deprived, and their use of vernacular 
forms as evidence of cognitive deficit. This is clearly nonsense. Whether you use a 
single or multiple negative construction, whether you mark past tense explicitly 
or not, which pronoun you use in the phrase between you and I/​me –​ these are 
certainly not linguistic differences which can support an argument about cog-
nitive deficiency. They are relatively superficial examples of language variation 
with no possible serious cognitive consequences.

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
495
Exercise 16
Show the set of pictures below to a friend or family member and ask them to tell you the 
story portrayed by the pictures. Record what they say. Identify the number of nouns they 
used and the number of pronouns they used in telling you the story.
Source: Te Reo journal. Reproduced with permission.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
496
The point of this exercise is to provide an example of the kind of data which has been 
used to assess children’s linguistic abilities. Picture description tasks like this have been 
used to compare the linguistic abilities of middle-​class and working-​class children. The 
underlying assumption in some of this testing has been that children who use more nouns 
have better linguistic resources than those who use more pronouns in such a task. Using 
nouns is being more explicit and expects less of the listener. The following (hypothetical) 
examples were provided by one researcher to illustrate the kinds of differences which 
might turn up.
1	
Three boys are playing football and one boy kicks the ball and it goes through the 
window –​ the ball breaks the window and the boys are looking at it –​ and a man 
comes out –​ and shouts at them –​ because they’ve broken the window –​ so they 
run away –​ and then that lady looks out of her window –​ and she tells the boys off.
•	 No. of nouns: 13
•	 No. of pronouns: 6
2	
They’re playing football and he kicks it and it goes through there –​ it breaks the 
window and they’re looking at it and he comes out and shouts at them because 
they’ve broken it –​ so they run away –​ and then she looks out and she tells them off.
•	 No. of nouns: 2
•	 No. of pronouns: 14
Recognising that these versions are parodies, it is nevertheless true that some children 
use more pronouns and some use more nouns in telling the story.
How might one critique the claim that using nouns is “better” than using pronouns in 
such a context?
Answer at end of chapter
Conclusion
This chapter has discussed various ways in which language, thought and culture 
interrelate. Most sociolinguists agree that language influences our perceptions 
of “reality”. There is little doubt that consistent use of pejorative terms for 
a group, for instance, affects people’s perceptions of the group’s members. 
This is the basis of arguments against (and legislation proscribing) sexist and 
racist language and hate speech. There is also psycholinguistic evidence that 
the existence of particular categories in a language may predispose speakers 
to classify reality in one way rather than another. So, for instance, sorting out 
coloured items into categories is easier when our language provides distinct 
lexical labels for the relevant categories. Language clearly influences percep-
tion in such cases.
There is also undisputed evidence, however, that the physical and cultural 
environment in which it develops influences the vocabulary and grammar of a 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
497
language. Languages develop the vocabulary that their speakers need, whether 
to label different kinds of kangaroo or to identify different ways of cooking rice. 
Important, frequently occurring distinctions tend to get incorporated into the 
grammar. The creolisation process described in ­chapter 4, for example, indicated 
that future time was initially lexically marked in Tok Pisin as baimbai but even-
tually became grammaticalised in the form of a regular prefix [bə]. Grammatical 
gender is another such category which often signals both physical and cultur-
ally important distinctions, with roots deep in the mythology and belief systems 
of a community, as illustrated by the Aboriginal language Dyirbal. Culturally 
important semantic distinctions are thus typically encoded in many aspects of 
the structure of languages, even though current users may not always be able to 
consciously articulate the underlying rationale.
When cultural and social change occurs, the linguistic system generally 
adapts. So, as noted in ­exercise 8, there was a distinct term shurin for your wife’s 
brother in nineteenth-​century Russian, while in modern Russian the phrase brat 
zheny (brother of wife) is used. Other distinctive, precise Russian kinship terms 
for in-​law relationships have also been replaced by broader descriptive phrases, 
indicating that family structures have radically changed in Russia over the last 
century, and it is no longer necessary to be so precise about these particular 
relationships.
On the other hand, the language and discourse patterns associated with a 
particular culture may not only represent existing social relationships, they may 
also influence the way one group interacts with another, as the Robyn Kina 
case illustrated. When different cultures meet, conflicting discourse rules can 
result in miscommunication with potentially severe social consequences. As 
Whorf pointed out, it is important to be aware of the extent to which we may 
be constrained, if not trapped, by the norms of our own familiar systems of 
interaction.
Finally, it is worth considering the enormous influence of the majority group 
in any society on what is perceived as normal, standard, appropriate, and accept-
able linguistically as well as in other areas of behaviour. Where cultural and 
social values differ, the perspective of the majority tends to define social reality, 
as this chapter has illustrated. We can call this the culture order –​ the taken-​for-​
granted presuppositions about what constitutes appropriate sociocultural behav-
iour. These expectations influence every interaction, defining what is considered 
“normal” as what the majority group considers normal, even in intercultural 
contexts.
This chapter has identified some of the complex ways in which linguistic 
systems and specific ways of using language can provide insights into the 
perceptions, values and beliefs of a community. The next chapter describes a 
range of ways of analysing discourse or the ways of talking which are appro-
priate in different social and cultural groups in different conversational and 
institutional contexts.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
498
Methods
Methods to collect data to illuminate the relationship between language and social 
perceptions:
•	 Examine the labels used in your community for minority groups and groups who 
are out of power, as suggested in ­exercise 3. Questionaires and interviews can be 
used to gather data as described in earlier chapters. Baker (2005) suggests many 
sources of publicly available data on perceptions of gay men, for example, as noted 
in ­exercise 4.
•	 If you speak a language other than English, collect examples of metaphors for time and 
space in your language(s) and reflect on what insights they provide about perceptions 
of and attitudes to these concepts in your culture, as suggested in ­exercise 7.
•	 If you speak a language other than English, consider the associations of different colours 
in your language(s): e.g. white and red have very different associations in Chinese and in 
English. Consider the possible effects such differences might have on intercultural com-
munication. You could search corpora to assist with this.
•	 The Black Lives Matter movement provides a great deal of material on the relation-
ship between language and social perceptions. You can use social media to collect 
a corpus of such material and analyse what insights the analysis provides about this 
relationship.
•	 Hidden, implicit or unconscious bias are terms that have been used to identify the ways 
in which our use of language can disadvantage minority groups. Sexist language and 
interactional behaviours provide examples, but there are many other ways of (uncon-
sciously) putting others down: e.g. complimenting an Asian person on their English 
when English is their first language; and advising a person from a minority culture to 
change their behaviour to conform to the majority group ways of doing things. These 
could be described as microaggressions. You can use media and internet resources to 
identify examples of hidden bias which provide insights into the ways particular groups 
are perceived and subtly disadvantaged.
•	 Verbal hygiene is rarely universally approved of, whether this takes the form of pre-
scriptivist attitudes to informal language use, or when there is perceived censorship 
of language. Sociolinguists face a difficult situation in that we aim to avoid language 
prescriptivism and we promote language diversity, yet we also aim to promote gender 
neutral language and combat hate speech. We therefore find ourselves in the position 
of being both for and against censorship of language, depending on the context. One 
explanation for this situation is that, for very good reasons (as discussed in ­chapter 15), 
many sociolinguists study groups who lack power or privilege. You can examine the 
two debates that link to people’s views on how language should be used by delving 
into online discussions:
(a)	
Search discussion forums such as Reddit or Quora for analysis on how particular 
gramatical forms should be used (or not), such as whom, singular they, and fewer. 
What attitudes do these discussions reveal and how are they challenged?
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
499
(b)	
Find an online news article about an organisation making a policy of avoiding 
culturally insensitive terms, and read the comments. What attitudes do they 
reveal about language use? Are these attitudes challenged? How do these com-
pare with attitudes about “correct” language usage?
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 13
Answer to ­exercise 1
A simple phrase such as routine pelvic examination represents a particular 
perspective –​ that of the doctor rather than the person being examined. Pelvic 
examinations may be quick and unproblematic procedures for doctors, but they 
are not part of most people’s daily routine. The word routine also creates the 
impression that there are no grounds for concern, constructing a reality in which 
medical examinations are everyday events and not a cause for worry. Critical 
discourse analysts suggest such usages betray particular attitudes and ideological 
positions.
Answer to ­exercise 5
Common sense and reflection on experience suggest the following points:
•	The experience of knowing there is a word for something but not being able 
to find it.
•	We can translate between languages.
•	The same ideas can be expressed in many different ways.
Most linguists would add the following points:
•	All languages have the same broad functions.
•	Languages share important basic structural properties.
More philosophical, and possibly more contentious, points include the 
following:
•	People’s experiences and perceptions are more similar than different.
•	We are capable of identifying “objective” reality.
•	Human reasoning relies on universal logical principles.
You may of course have additional or different points which are equally valid.
Answer to ­exercise 6
(a)	 The number 16 is called seize in French, shi-​liu in Chinese and juu-​roku in 
Japanese.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
500
(b)	 You should have been able to work out the Chinese and Japanese from the 
information provided, but if you got the correct name for 16 in French you 
must have learned French or used a dictionary.
(c)	 The implications are discussed in the next paragraph following the 
exercise.
Answer to ­exercise 7
These expressions suggest that English speakers perceive time as a resource; the 
way these expressions “package” time represents it as a valuable and scarce com-
modity. Like money, it can be wasted or wisely invested.
There are also a couple of examples which treat time as a gift (devote time to/​
give time to).
Answer to ­exercise 9
The possibility of translation indicates language cannot be a total conceptual 
straitjacket, and tests of some bilingual children suggest they may develop 
greater cognitive flexibility than monolinguals, but we know relatively little 
about the extent to which bilingual and multilingual people think differently in 
each language.
One experiment suggested that the bilinguals tested were more likely to assign 
people to stereotypes which fitted categories provided by the language they were 
using at the time. So, for example, using English, the bilinguals described an 
artistic person as “unreliable”, a feature which fits the English stereotype of the 
artist as a temperamental, intense person. Using Chinese, however, which has no 
such stereotype of the artist, they didn’t refer to this characteristic. This suggests 
that the social and cultural perceptions of bilinguals may be influenced by the 
particular language being used at any point.
Answer to ­exercise 10
In everyday use, culture tends to mean appreciation of the arts, literature, music, 
theatre, and so on. But for sociolinguists and anthropologists, culture refers 
to whatever one needs to know or believe in order to function in a particular 
society. Culture is the basic “know-​how” we draw on in everyday life. Ting-​
Toomey (1999: 10), for example, defines culture as:
a learned meaning system that consists of the patterns of traditions, beliefs, 
values, norms, and symbols that are passed on from one generation to the next 
and are shared to varying degrees by interacting members of a community.
But culture is not a fixed system and language does not just encode these 
patterns. Because of its dynamic role in interaction, language provides a means 
of maintaining, shaping and changing culture. So from a social constructionist 
perspective, culture is constantly being constructed and negotiated in interaction.
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
501
Answer to ­exercise 11
(a)	 The fact that different terms are used for same gender vs. different gender 
siblings suggests that relative gender is important within the family in Māori 
culture.
  The fact that different terms are used for younger vs. older siblings of the 
same gender suggests that relative age is important, especially between same-​
gender siblings.
(b)	 If you are female and she is younger, use teina.
If you are female and she is older, use tuakana.
If you are male, use tuahine.
Answer to ­exercise 12
(a)	 The semantic distinction between the words in category A and those in 
category B represents the difference between inalienable and alienable 
possession. Category A words are inalienably possessed: they are always 
possessed and cannot exist apart from the possessor. Category B words may 
be possessed or not. This semantic distinction generally has implications for 
the grammar of the language.
(b)	 The cultural significance of the distinction becomes evident when we con-
sider the concepts and items which different cultural groups place in different 
categories. So, for instance, land is inalienably possessed for some peoples; 
and clothes may be in category A for some groups but not for others.
Answer to ­exercise 16
The high value placed on explicitness indicates the norms of the school test and, 
to some extent, the priority attached to written language in school. Explicitness 
is not “good” in any absolute sense. There are many contexts in which it would 
be offensive or imply lack of understanding or trust. It is possible then that 
different children interpret the demands of the situation and the needs of the 
listener differently.
Telling the story to a friendly person with the pictures in front of both of you 
is very likely to result in pointing at the pictures and the use of more pronouns 
and fewer nouns. The influence of the context is therefore important, and the 
way it is perceived and interpreted may be different for different children. Some 
children may fail to recognise the academic “game” they are being expected to 
play. They are expected to pretend that their listener can’t see the pictures and 
hence to use a high proportion of nouns as opposed to pronouns. They may fail 
to be explicit because they cannot imagine what they can tell the interviewer 
about their own pictures that they don’t already know.
Since many tasks demanded of children in school require great explicitness, 
children who have learnt to play the game of spelling out and displaying what 
they know are likely to be at an advantage when faced with such tasks.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
502
Concepts introduced
•	Social constructionist approach
•	Verbal hygiene
•	Sapir–​Whorf hypothesis
•	Linguistic determinism
•	Linguistic relativity
•	Grammaticalisation
•	Culture
•	Kinship systems
•	Restricted code
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Bernstein (1973) for early discussion of “restricted code”
Burling (1970) on kinship terms and Njamal in particular
Cameron (1995) on verbal hygiene and political correctness
Carroll (1956) for Whorf’s writing
Eades (1994, 1996) for Robyn Kina case and features of Aboriginal culture, 
including ­example 15
Evans (1998: 164) for Kunwinjku kangaroo terms
Evans (2010) on distinctive semantic categories in a range of languages, espe-
cially Australian
Fengyuan (1998) for analysis of influence of Maoist propaganda in China
Green (1999) on graffiti
Harres (1993) on medical textbooks and the perspectives they suggest
Holmes (2018a) on the culture order
Kenny et al. (2016) on terms preferred by the autism community
Lakoff (1987) on Dyirbal data
McConnell-​Ginet (2020) on hidden bias
Metge (1995) on Māori (Māori data checked by Mary Boyce)
Miriam Meyerhoff (personal communication) on grammatic(al)isation
Nettle and Romaine (2000) on the costs of language loss
Stubbs (1997) for discussion of Whorf’s influence on sociolinguistics
Talbot (2010: 241) cites politically correct translation of Snow White and the 
Seven Dwarfs
Whitney (1998) for psycholinguistic experimental evidence on colours and 
numbers, bilinguals and stereotypes, etc.
www.health.qld.gov.au/​_​_​data/​assets/​pdf_​file/​0021/​151923/​communicating.pdf 
on Aboriginal English and cultural values
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE, COGNITION, AND CULTURE
503
Quotations:
Example 2 quotations are from Llewellyn-​Jones (1982: 205–​9)
Example 3 is from a novel Have His Carcase published in 1932 by Dorothy Sayers
Example 6 quotations are from Mao Zedong (1976: 72, 82, 266, 239)
Examples 7 and 8 are from Whorf’s writings in Carroll (1956: 135, 213–​14)
Example 9 is a quote from Jessica Riskin’s article in the New York Review of Books: 
www.nybooks.com/​articles/​2020/​07/​02/​just-​use-​your-​thinking-​pump
Example 10 is from Romaine (2000: 29)
Example 11 is from https://​theconversation.com/​10-​ways-​aboriginal-​australians-​    
made-​english-​their-​own-​128219
Examples 12 and 13 are from Evans (2010: 52, 21)
Exercise 4 is from Baker (2005)
Exercise 8 is based on a table in Whitney (1998: 124)
Exercise 14 statement 1 is based on McWhorter (2009); quotation 2 is from 
Evans (2010: 19)
Exercise 16 is based on Hawkins (1967–​68)
Quotation “the urge to meddle in matters of language” is taken from the Preface 
in Cameron (1995: i)
Claim that their language “practically force[d]‌ the Hopi to notice vibratory phe-
nomena” is from Whorf’s writings (Carroll 1956: 60)
Useful additional reading
Bauer, Holmes and Warren (2005)
Cameron (1995, 2007)
Crystal (2003)
Evans (2010)
Harris (2007)
Kiesling and Bratt Paulston (2005)
McConnell-​Ginet (2020)
McWhorter (2014)
Nettle and Romaine (2000)
Trudgill (2011)
Wardhaugh and Fuller (2015): ­chapter 9
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

504
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-18
Example 1
[Phone rings.]
Lesley:	
4766091
Mother:	
Hello (second syllable is stressed and slightly lengthened)
Lesley:	
Oh hello, how’re you?
Mother:	
Very well thank you love and you?
Lesley:	
Yes thank you.
Mother:	
That’s good.
At first glance, this looks like a normal telephone conversation. But a closer look 
at the way the discourse develops indicates that it has some interesting features. 
Often when people answer the phone both parties identify themselves, typically 
in the first turn, e.g. hello, Janet Holmes speaking; and the caller may respond 
hi Janet, it’s Mary here. In ­example 1, neither Lesley nor her mother self-​iden-
tify in their first turns, so we can deduce that they recognise each other’s voices, 
and hence they can dispense with that step. (Interestingly, speaker-​ID on phones 
means such patterns have become more common.)
A second unusual feature relates to the first topic of the call. It is typically the 
caller who asks how are you? when they ring someone. It is the caller’s prerogative 
to select the first topic, and how are you? is a frequent way of filling this slot in 
Western English-​speaking cultures. In ­example 1, however, it is Lesley, the person 
called, who asks how’re you? The reason for this deviation from a typical telephone 
turn sequence is that this is a regular or routine weekly call between mother and 
daughter. Lesley, the person called, knows that the “business” of the call is simply 
to keep in touch and so she can safely take the lead in anticipating an appropriate 
first topic. Clearly, when we analyse even a short conversational exchange, we 
bring to bear a great deal of background knowledge about the discourse norms or 
rules of speaking which characterise different kinds of social interaction.
In ­chapter 1, we introduced four dimensions for analysing language in social 
interaction (social distance or solidarity, status, formality, and function), and 
Analysing discourse
14
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
505
identified some important components of a speech event (participants, setting or 
social context, topic, and aim or purpose of an interaction). This chapter builds 
on those components, and introduces some further tools, and especially those 
of the discourse analyst, for describing how people use language in different 
social contexts. The kinds of questions addressed in this chapter include: How 
do we know when the question is it six o’clock? is a directive to switch on the 
TV rather than a request for information? How do we know when a nega-
tive remark is a tease as opposed to an insult? How is it possible to infer the 
interviewer’s assumptions from what is said and what is not said in a job inter-
view? What is the difference between a disruptive interruption and a supportive 
overlap? And, can the tools of the discourse analyst assist in uncovering evidence 
of bias or prejudice?
Discourse analysis provides a tool for sociolinguists to identify the norms 
of talk among different social and cultural groups in different conversational 
and institutional contexts, and to describe the discursive resources people use 
in constructing different social identities in interaction. This rather long chapter 
is divided into sections to illustrate different approaches to the analysis of dis-
course. These contrasting approaches are just a selection from a wide array of 
ways of analysing discourse (others include genre analysis, discursive psych-
ology, and speech act theory) –​ but they will serve to illustrate what discourse 
analysis offers to the sociolinguist.
Among sociolinguists, the term “discourse” is generally used to refer to stretches 
of spoken or written language which extend beyond an utterance or a sentence. 
Among those from other disciplines, and especially philosophers, discourse is a 
broader term. For these researchers, discourse is regarded as a means of struc-
turing knowledge and social practice, and language is just one symbolic form of 
discourse. This very theoretical approach, in which discourse constitutes social 
relations, is particularly associated with the French social theorist, Foucault. It 
is useful to be aware of this more theoretical approach to discourse, since it is 
widely referred to, but it is not the approach explored in this chapter. Rather, this 
chapter focuses on discourse as a stretch of spoken or written text and describes 
a number of ways in which it can be analysed. The first section of the chapter 
illustrates a pragmatic approach to the analysis of discourse.
Pragmatics and politeness theory
What is pragmatics?
Example 2
you didn’t buy a paper?
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
506
What does this sentence mean? Even if we know the meaning of each of the words, 
realising that paper refers to a newspaper, and recognising that it is an interroga-
tive structure, these are not enough to unambiguously decode its meaning. It 
could be interpreted as a request for information, or as a complaint, or even a 
rebuke, depending on the social relationship between participants and the back-
ground expectations regarding newspaper-​buying in the household. Similarly, 
although ­example 3 could be treated as a declarative, a simple statement of fact, 
it may convey considerably more meaning, depending on who said it to whom.
Example 3
I can hear someone talking
Consider, for instance, the difference in meaning conveyed if this utterance 
was said by a teacher in a classroom as opposed to two police officers inves-
tigating an “empty” house. Context is clearly crucial in interpreting what is 
meant, and pragmatics extends the analysis of meaning beyond grammar and 
word meaning to the relationship between the participants and the background 
knowledge they bring to a situation. Pragmatics is concerned with the analysis 
of meaning in interaction.
Example 4
Lionel is lying in a hospital bed after an accident. Kirsty is visiting him.
1	 Kirsty:	
[pointing to the pain relief drip] are you sure that thing’s
2	 	
	
giving you enough pain relief
3	 Lionel:	
yeah heaps
4	 Kirsty:	
you are using it?
5	 Lionel:	
any time I need it
6	 Kirsty:	
you’re not using it
(Shortland Street [TV soap shown in New Zealand],   
©South Pacific Picture Serials Ltd 1995)
Exercise 1
Consider the brief conversational exchange in ­example 4.
What possible interpretations can you provide for Lionel’s responses to Kirsty’s questions 
in lines 3 and 5? What do you think Lionel intends Kirsty to understand? On what basis 
does she infer that he is not using the pain relief?
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
507
Conversational maxims and implicatures
Example 5
Ken:      what time is it?
Hana:  three o’clock
This exchange between a pair of friends follows the pragmatic rules or con-
versational maxims that Paul Grice, a British philosopher, proposed to account 
for our basic assumptions about interaction. He suggested that, unless we have 
reason to think otherwise, we assume people are following a basic cooperative 
principle and being succinct, truthful, relevant and clear. He formulated this pro-
posal as four maxims of cooperative talk which can be summarised as follows:
1	
Quantity: say as much as but no more than is necessary.
2	
Quality: do not say what you believe to be false, or that for which you lack 
evidence.
3	
Relation: be relevant.
4	
Manner: be clear, unambiguous, brief and orderly.
In fact, of course, for many different reasons, people do not always follow these 
rules. They may deliberately want to mislead the other person, as in ­example 6.
Example 6
Sally’s father, Sam, has promised to give Sally a lift to the gym when she has 
finished her homework.
Sam:	
Have you finished your homework?
Sally:	
(with a smile) I’ve got my kit and I’m ready to go
Sam:	
Ok we’re off.
Sally does not say anything false here. But her statement implies she has 
fulfilled the conditions for the lift. Assuming that her answer follows the 
maxims, her father (wrongly as it turns out) infers that she has finished her 
homework.
Another common reason for not following the maxims is to avoid responsi-
bility for saying something unpleasant. Grice gives the example of writing a job 
reference for someone who does not fulfil the job requirements. By commenting 
on irrelevant characteristics while omitting mention of skills crucial for the job, 
the reference writer generates the inference that the applicant does not have the 
required skills.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
508
Example 7 looks like a perfectly normal conversation, but if you look carefully 
at Joyce’s utterance, you will see that it does not actually answer Harry’s question.
Example 7
Harry does not like lending the family car to the children. Joyce knows this 
but she has just lent their car to their son Dan.
Harry:	
Where’s the car?
Joyce:	
Dan needed to do some shopping
Joyce’s answer does not follow Grice’s conversational maxim of relevance, 
and hence it generates a conversational implicature (i.e. we can infer more than 
is literally said). Again the addressee infers, on the basis of logic and knowledge 
of the world, that something additional is being conveyed to what is explicitly 
stated.
There has been some discussion about whether the conversational rules that 
Grice proposed can be considered as universals. Do the maxims apply in all 
cultures? In some communities, for instance, such as the Malagasy community, 
for a variety of cultural reasons people are systematically uninformative. So, 
for example, they deliberately avoid providing precise information about their 
relatives and friends, since by doing so they believe that they may attract the 
attention of evil spirits. However, since all members of the community know 
about this constraint, it generates no conversational implicatures. Similarly, 
in cultures where one does not utter the name of a person who has died, or 
refer to one’s husband by his given name, one could say the quantity maxim is 
“suspended” in such contexts.
Conversational maxims and politeness
Very often the reasons why people do not follow the conversational maxims 
relate to considerations of politeness, and this is one place where pragmatics 
overlaps with sociolinguistics. Politeness, as discussed in ­chapter 11, entails 
taking account of social factors, such as how well you know somebody, what 
their social role or relative status is in relation to yours, and the kind of social 
context in which you are interacting. Robin Lakoff, an American pragmatics 
researcher who has been called “the mother of modern politeness theory” 
introduced three rules of politeness.
1	
Don’t impose: e.g. use modals and hedges: I wonder if I might just open the 
window a little.
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
509
2	
Give options: e.g. use interrogatives including tag questions: do you mind 
if I open the window? It would be nice to have the window open a little 
wouldn’t it?
3	
Be friendly: e.g. use informal expressions, endearments: e.g. Be a honey and 
open the window darling.
The first two rules express the notion of negative politeness which was 
introduced in ­chapter 11, while the last rule relates to the concept of positive 
politeness. The concepts of negative and positive politeness are components 
of a politeness theory associated with the pragmatics researchers, Brown and 
Levinson, as referred to in ­chapter 11.
Brown and Levinson identified three social factors which they suggested 
qualified as universal influences on linguistically polite behaviour. The first two 
are very familiar to sociolinguists: they are how well you know someone (the 
social distance/​solidarity dimension introduced in ­chapter 1) and what is their 
status relative to yours (the status dimension). The third factor is illustrated in 
­example 8.
Example 8
Rick makes a request to his mother in the family living room.
[Pauses are indicated in seconds: e.g. (0.5) is half a second.]
Rick:	
um mum (0.5) um do you think um I could possibly just 
borrow your car (2)
Mother:	
[frowns]
Rick:	
um just for a little while (1)
Mother:	
um well [frowns]
Rick:	
it’s just that I need to get this book to Helen tonight
In this example the two participants know each other well and, since the son 
is a young adult, the status or role difference is not huge. Both of these factors 
would predict that Rick’s request could be expressed relatively directly. However, 
there is another factor which influences the way he expresses his request. He is 
asking a big favour; his mother’s car is an expensive sports car and she does not 
generally allow her children to borrow it. Hence, in making his request, Rick 
includes a number of negative politeness strategies in the form of mitigating 
devices or hedges (hesitation markers um, modal verb could and particle pos-
sibly, and minimisers just, a little), as well as the positive politeness strategies of 
using an in-​group identity marker (mum) and providing a reason for the request. 
In other words, simply the cost of the request (what Brown and Levinson call 
“the ranking of the imposition”) can influence the kind of politeness strategies 
which are appropriate: e.g. compare asking your best friend if you can borrow 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
510
their newspaper to check the sports results, as opposed to asking to borrow their 
brand-​new mountain bike.
Example 9
Small talk between workers in a New Zealand plant nursery at the start of 
the day. Des is the manager. Ros is the plant nursery worker.
Des:	
be a nice day when it all warms up a bit though
Ros:	
yeah (pause) it’s okay today
Des:	
what did you get up to at the weekend? anything exciting?
Exercise 2
Using the terms provided in this section of the chapter, what pragmatic rule is illustrated 
in ­example 9?
What kind of politeness is illustrated in this example?
Would Des’ comments be considered polite in your sociocultural group? If not, why not?
Answer at end of chapter
Sociolinguistics, politeness and rapport management
Example 10
Igbo proverb
O ji isi kota ebu ka ebu ga agba
He who disturbs the hornet’s nest gets stung by hornets.
[i.e. Expect negative consequences from unwise behaviour.]
The concepts of positive and negative politeness, and the idea of rules or strat-
egies for expressing politeness, have generated a good deal of research, some of 
it very critical regarding claims to their universality. One area of this research has 
involved exploring how different speech acts are expressed appropriately and 
politely in different social and cultural contexts. In Nigeria, for instance, the Igbo 
people use proverbs as one indirect and socially acceptable way of criticising the 
behaviour of others. The proverb in ­example 10 could serve as an admonition to 
 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
511
someone with a serious drinking problem, for instance. In some Asian cultures, 
it is inappropriate, and regarded as very odd, to say thank you for service in a 
shop. Chapter 11 illustrated how speech acts such as directives and requests, 
compliments, refusals, and apologies vary cross-​culturally.
Chapter 11 also illustrated a range of linguistic politeness devices, 
including: choice of pronoun (e.g. tu/​vous, du/​Sie), endearment terms (e.g. love, 
honey, dear), modal verbs (e.g. could, might, may) and modal particles (e.g. per-
haps, possibly). All these features may be relevant in the analysis of discourse 
in context. Sociolinguists examine the patterning of such pragmatic politeness 
devices in the usage of different social groups in particular social contexts, 
or in the construction of particular social identities. So, for example, certain 
pragmatic devices, or even speech acts, may be used more frequently by par-
ticular ethnic or social groups in specific contexts: e.g. until the beginning of the 
twenty-​first century, the tag eh was particularly associated with conversations 
involving Māori people in New Zealand, and contributed to the construction 
of a Māori ethnic identity. It has become more widespread, however, and cur-
rently tends to signal informality and New Zealand identity, rather than Māori 
identity in particular.
Modal devices are widely associated with feminine discourse in many speech 
communities. Patterns of minimal feedback or back-​channelling (mm, yeah, 
right) in discourse also tend to pattern differently for different groups: Japanese 
conversationalists provide a great deal more than Anglo-​Americans, and Māori 
conversationalists tend to provide less than Pākehā (of European origin) in New 
Zealand. Among middle-​class, Western people, it is often the case that women 
give more compliments than men, especially relating to appearance, and this 
can be seen as positively polite linguistic behaviour. Such devices thus become 
important discourse resources, for example, in conveying a particular kind of 
social identity, as illustrated in ­chapter 8. Knowing how to use them and to 
interpret their social significance is part of our socio-​pragmatic competence (see 
­chapter 16 for further discussion of this concept).
Politeness theory has come in for a good deal of criticism in recent years, 
especially from sociolinguists. Researchers studying Asian cultures, for instance, 
point to evidence of Western bias in what is categorised as linguistically polite, 
as opposed to required conventional behaviour. The use of address forms and 
honorifics, for example (see ­chapter 11), in languages such as Chinese, Japanese 
and Korean, is typically a matter of social convention or linguistic etiquette, 
rather than strategic choice. Respect or deference is encoded in certain linguistic 
forms which are required when talking to one’s elders or those of higher status, 
for instance. While such features are typically optional in Western languages, 
they are entirely predictable on the basis of the social characteristics of the 
participants in many Asian languages.
Rather than focusing on the social distance or solidarity dimension, polite-
ness in Asian cultures tends to emphasise sociocultural values such as “sin-
cerity”, “respect” and “consideration”, and negative politeness strategies of 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
512
avoidance and mitigation are favoured to express these values. So, for example, 
in asking a friend for a loan of some money, a Chinese speaker will typic-
ally express reluctance, and provide reasons, as ways of mitigating the request. 
Example 11 illustrates how a Chinese person reported that they would express 
such a request.
Example 11
1	
Shizai bu hao yisi,
It’s truly quite embarrassing,
2	
you ge shiqing xiang he ni shangliang yixia.
but I’d like to discuss a problem with you.
3	
Wo erzi jiu yao qu Aodaiya shang xue le.
My son is about to go to Australia to study.
4	
Xianzai qian hai mei chouji.
Right now the money is insufficient.
5	
Bu zhi nimen shoutou shi bu shi fangbian?
I was wondering if it would be convenient for you people to help us out.
The request is introduced with an explicit statement in line 1 indicating reluc-
tance to impose on the addressee. Then the speaker prepares the way for his 
request in line 2. The next discourse move in line 3 involves providing a reason 
for the request, a discourse move known as a “grounder”. The reason for the 
need is expressed rather obliquely, a strategy which saves the speaker’s face, 
while it is also suggested that this is a temporary situation, right now the money 
is insufficient. Line 5 finally presents the request in a very mitigated form, using 
a negative politeness strategy which provides a way out for the addressee if it is 
not convenient to provide some financial help. The request thus expresses respect 
for the addressee and consideration for both participants’ face, important values 
in Chinese culture.
By contrast, in other communities, such as Greek, Turkish and Moroccan 
Arabic, politeness typically involves positive politeness strategies, and the expres-
sion of concern, consideration, friendliness and intimacy, rather than imposition-​
avoidance and distance maintenance strategies. Example 12 illustrates requests 
from a Greek study of politeness. In both cases, the speaker explicitly expresses 
positive feelings towards the addressee.
Example 12
(a)	
Little sister, I love you so much, give me your ear-​rings. I’ll look after 
them.
(b)	 Mum I wish I was drinking a coffee now from your little hands.
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
513
In Greek, the phrase from your little hands is a compliment on the high quality 
of the coffee that the mother makes.
Example 13
A:	 A thousand apologies for continuously disturbing you
B:	 yes you’re indeed disturbing but it gives us great pleasure to see you
Exercise 3
Consider B’s response to A’s apology in ­example 13.
Is this a likely response to an apology for disturbing someone in your community? If so, 
in what contexts might it occur?
Answer at end of chapter
Another approach to analysing politeness in interaction is offered by Helen 
Spencer-​Oatey’s rapport management framework. This emphasises the dynamic 
character of interaction in context, and examines how we use language to main-
tain, enhance, or challenge harmonious social relationships. In particular, this 
approach develops the notion of “face sensitivities”, and pays attention to soci-
ality rights and obligations –​ the right to fair treatment, social inclusion, and 
respect, which differ in different sociocultural contexts. Interactional goals, both 
transactional and relational in a specific exchange are also considered. A rapport 
management approach has proved especially valuable in analysing intercultural 
misunderstandings, as described in ­example 14.
Example 14
Six Chinese business people organised a ten-​day visit to meet with 
representatives from the British firm with whom their organisation had 
negotiated a contract. Both the British hosts and the Chinese delegates 
were unhappy at the end of the visit. The Chinese delegates felt that their 
face needs were inadequately attended to. They considered, for example, 
that the seating arrangements for the meetings conveyed a message which 
indicated lack of respect for their social identities and status. Similarly, the 
amount of time allocated to the welcome event and to different speakers, 
in particular, was considered inadequate, and thus disrespectful. The British 
hosts, on the other hand, (mistakenly) felt that the Chinese would prefer to 
be treated informally, since there had been many previous delegations, and 
they felt that rapport had been well established. They were irritated that the 
Chinese seemed so dissatisfied with their arrangements.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
514
A rapport management analysis highlighted the fact that the different groups 
had different expectations concerning how their sociality rights should be 
recognised, and about what constituted an adequate demonstration of respect 
for their social identities in a formal context.
Similarly, African American customers in Los Angeles complained at the lack 
of interpersonal engagement by Korean shopkeepers, while the Korean retailers 
crticised the customers’ relative lack of restraint. In another business context, 
British managers interacting with their German counterparts complained at the 
distancing effect of their use of titles and surnames in interaction. The Germans 
were being respectful in a formal context, while the British managers preferred 
to reduce the formality of the interaction.
These examples of failure to establish rapport involve unintended impol-
iteness based on intercultural miscommunication. However, research in the 
area of politeness and rapport management has also focused on distinguishing 
“unmarked” conventionally appropriate linguistic behaviour from “marked” 
behaviour, including deliberately impolite utterances which may be intended to 
challenge social harmony but may also have some other interactional goal, such 
as political gain or entertainment. So, for example, the utterances produced in 
the Prime Minister’s Question Time in the English House of Commons are gener-
ally not regarded by the participants as inappropriate. Even though they appear 
to be very impolite to outsiders, the insults are treated as perfectly appropriate 
by the participants in this confrontational context. Insulting comments about 
people’s intelligence, appearance and rhetorical skills, which would cause great 
offence in other contexts, are regarded as normal and appropriate, as illustrated 
in ­example 15 which elicited laughter rather than outrage.
Example 15
MP:	
... having just heard the predictable routine from the Leader of the 
Opposition –​ the man of all gags and no policy –​ and before we
Other MPs laugh
MP:	
hear the predictable routine from ...
There are a range of contexts, then, in which people deliberately adopt linguis-
tically aggressive behaviour. Ritual insults are part of the interactional resources 
of many adolescent gangs, and game shows such as the (now defunct) British 
programme, The Weakest Link, provide further examples of contexts where 
intentional insults are regarded as acceptable and appropriate. Anne Robinson, 
the caustic host, confronted participants with utterances such as you’re a coward 
aren’t you; pathetic; stupid; did you bribe the production team to get onto this 
show?; and who has the intellect of a flea?
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
515
To sum up, a pragmatic approach to the analysis of language emphasises that the 
interpretation of meaning requires careful attention to context. Judgements about 
what counts as polite, friendly or impolite behaviour are very much a matter of 
dynamic negotiation between participants in particular social and cultural contexts. 
Different participants may interpret the “same” interaction quite differently.
As this part of the chapter has indicated, a good deal of pragmatics research 
has tended to concentrate on the analysis of speech acts, and even on features 
of single utterances or very short exchanges. By contrast, the ethnography of 
speaking framework, which is described in the next part, focuses rather on 
speech events as a whole, and embraces the total social and cultural setting as 
components in the analysis.
Exercise 4
Identify examples from TV or your own observations where sarcastic, insulting and face-​
threatening comments are treated as appropriate.
What pragmatic principles are involved in generating the “rude” inferences?
What are the distinguishing features of the context (e.g. consider the relationship 
between the participants, setting, purpose of the interaction, etc.)?
Exercise 5
A good deal of the data collected by those interested in cross-​cultural pragmatics consists 
of material elicited through questionnaires which ask people to respond to imaginary 
scenarios. Here is an example:
A classmate who regularly misses class asks you to borrow your notes. You would really 
prefer not to lend your notes to them. What would you say?
Identify three advantages and three disadvantages of this method of data collection.
Answer at end of chapter
Ethnography of speaking
Example 16
Harriet was a very decorous and proper linguist who hated to draw attention 
to herself or to “break the rules” when attending events hosted by people 
from a culture other than her own. On one occasion, at a kava-​drinking 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
516
event in Vanuatu, she whispered to her more culturally experienced com-
panion “is it OK to leave the circle temporarily?” When he reassured her 
this was fine, she hastily left and could then be heard quietly vomiting 
behind a nearby bush!
Sociolinguists who have worked with people from different cultural backgrounds 
are very aware of the amount of cultural baggage that we all carry around with 
us. We make assumptions about what is normal and usual and appropriate and 
correct, and we respond with surprise, or sometimes disapproval, when some-
body breaks our rules or behaves in a way that challenges our expectations. The 
ethnography of speaking (also known as the ethnography of communication 
since it embraces features of non-​verbal communication too) is an approach to 
analysing language which has been designed to heighten awareness of culture-​
bound assumptions. Dell Hymes, the sociolinguist who first developed this the-
oretical approach, worked with the Indigenous peoples of the USA, and this 
made him very aware of the limitations of traditional approaches to describing 
communication systems.
The framework that Hymes developed for the analysis of communicative 
events involved the following components:
•	Genre or type of event: e.g. phone call, conversation, business meeting, lesson, 
interview or blog.
•	Topic or what people are talking about: e.g. holidays, sport, sociolinguistics 
or politics.
•	Purpose or function: the reason(s) for the talk: e.g. to plan an event, to catch 
up socially, to teach something or to persuade someone to help you.
•	Setting: where the talk takes place: e.g. at home, in a classroom or in an office.
•	Key or emotional tone: e.g. serious, jocular or sarcastic.
•	Participants: characteristics of those present and their relationship; gender, 
age, social status, role and role relationship: e.g. mother–​daughter, teacher–​
pupil, TV interviewer or interviewee and audience.
•	Message form, code and/​or channel: e.g. by telephone, letter or email, language 
and language variety, or non-​verbal communication.
•	Message content: specific details of what the communication is about: e.g. 
organising a time for a football match, describing how a tap works or describing 
how to make rotis.
•	Act sequence or ordering of speech acts: e.g. greetings, meeting turn-​taking 
rules or ending a telephone conversation.
•	Rules for interaction or prescribed orders of speaking: e.g. who must speak 
first, who must respond to the celebrant at a wedding or who closes a business 
meeting.
•	Norms for interpretation of what is going on: the common knowledge and 
shared understandings of the relevant cultural presuppositions; what we need 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
517
to know to interpret what is going on: e.g. that how are you does not require a 
detailed response in most Western English-​speaking societies or that it is polite 
to refuse the first offer of more food in some cultures.
Some of these components were introduced in ­chapter 1 (setting, topic, 
participants, function), and some have been referred to in other chapters 
(message form includes register and variety, for example), but some have not yet 
been discussed.
Explicitly identifying the components of a communicative event in this way has 
proved particularly useful in describing interaction in unfamiliar cultures. The 
framework highlights features that contrast between cultures, e.g. the different 
ways that legal proceedings or celebrations are conducted, or contrasts in how 
meetings are run. It also provides a way of analysing events that are unique to 
a particular culture: e.g. ritual insults in African American vernacular culture, 
formal rituals of welcome in Māori communities, or kava-​drinking events in 
Pacific communities.
Example 17 uses the ethnography of communication framework to describe a 
kava-​drinking ceremony in Aulua, a community of south-​east Malakula Island in 
Vanuatu. Kava is a mild narcotic drunk in many parts of Polynesia and Melanesia. 
Public social kava drinking is restricted to adult males in Aulua; women may 
drink kava but not in the company of men. (Other parts of the country are far 
stricter, and forbid women from consuming kava or even witnessing its produc-
tion.) Before the ceremony begins, the hosting male, or senior male of the clan, 
prepares the kava and the women prepare food. The hosting men stand around 
near the kava while the women and children sit on mats spread in a wide semi-​
circle. Visiting families may sit on their mats among the hosting families. Visiting 
males stand behind the mats until the speech starts.
Example 17
Communicative event: a thanking feast
Genre:	
feast to repay workers who have donated labour to building a  
house
Topic:	
negotiable between participants
Purpose:	 to acknowledge or balance the work given by presenting food 
and kava to the appropriate workers
Setting:	
village green, late afternoon or evening
Key:	
relatively formal
Participants:
A:	
Senior male host
B:	
Other males from the hosting clan
C:	
Church elder
D:	
Serving/​preparing males
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
518
E:	
Hosting females
F:	
Children from hosting families
G:	
Senior visiting male
H:	
Other visiting males
I:	
Visiting females
J:	
Visiting children
Message form: when everyone has arrived, A makes a short speech thanking 
the visitors for their work
Act sequence:
A gives a thank you speech.
C says a prayer.
ALL clap.
A calls on G to take the first cup of kava which is presented to them by D.
G must drink the kava in full view of the audience and standing.
When G is finished, all clap.
Then A drinks.
ALL clap.
A calls on members from B and H to drink the kava in relative order of age. 
Members are entitled to decline, or defer for others to go ahead of them. 
Drinkers may specify how full the cup should be; the default is full. (It is 
bad form to leave kava in the cup when returned to D.) Drinkers other 
than A and G need not drink in front of the audience but slip back into 
the shadows and drink, and spit.
Drinkers must thank D, but need not directly thank A.
When the first round is finished, all drinkers are invited to drink again until 
all the kava runs out.
The analysis highlights the complexities of a communicative event in an 
unfamiliar culture, including the different roles that participants play and the 
different rules for speaking which operate. In many communities, high school 
children are expected to speak only when given permission. The audience in 
a TV studio during an interview has a very restricted role; they may laugh 
appreciatively and applaud at appropriate moments, but only the interviewer 
and interviewee are expected to speak. At a traditional English wedding cere-
mony, most of those involved are expected to remain as silent auditors during 
the core ceremony, although they may contribute to the singing of hymns or 
songs. Because the ethnography of speaking framework was devised to high-
light features of a communicative event that people tend to take for granted, it 
is particularly useful for comparing speech events between different social and 
cultural groups.

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
519
Example 18
A wedding I attended recently took place in a garden, with a female 
lay celebrant who welcomed the guests, and then formally introduced 
the bride and groom and their families, and the officially designated 
speakers. The celebrant invited each of the parents to give their child into 
the care of the person they were marrying, and then led the bride and 
groom through their formal vows. She then declared them married. Next, 
she invited previously designated speakers to make their contributions 
(a poem, a story, a song and two sets of reflections about the couple). 
Guests were then invited to contribute spontaneously if they wished (and 
two did so). At the end of the ceremony the celebrant formally wished 
the married couple well for their future. There was modern recorded 
music at the beginning and the end, and a song from a friend of the bride 
as a contribution in the middle.
Using the ethnography of communication framework to compare this event 
with a more traditional European wedding generates some obvious questions 
about the ways that weddings are organised in different communities, such as:
•	Are there restrictions on the setting or the place where the core wedding cere-
mony may take place?
•	Who acts as “organiser” or MC (master of ceremonies)?
•	Who are the core participants?
•	Who gets to speak and for how long?
•	What role, if any, do the parents of the bride and groom play?
•	How much flexibility is there in the words uttered at different points?
•	Is music an essential or an optional component? Are there restrictions on the 
kinds of music?
•	What are the unspoken assumptions about what is not permitted: e.g. 
responses to requests regarding impediments to the marriage, or contributions 
from other than designated speakers?
Exercise 6
Compare the modern wedding described in ­example 18 with a traditional wedding in your 
culture, or with a wedding ceremony in Greek culture, or Hindu culture. (Films such as 
Monsoon Wedding, Four Weddings and a Funeral, My Big Fat Greek Wedding, or The Wedding 
Ringer could be used as a basis for discussion.) The components of a communicative event 
can be used to guide your analysis.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
520
An ethnography of speaking approach is particularly valuable in highlighting 
the unnoticed “rules” that operate in any interaction. The framework draws 
attention to features that participants take for granted, and which tend to go unob-
served unless something goes wrong. Example 19, for instance, highlights how 
email challenges some of the established rules of polite written communication.
Example 19
Subject line: Help
hi there Derek
I desperately need help with an essay I have to do about new words in 
New Zealand English
can you send me something you have written that I can use –​ soon as pos-
sible –​ it is due this week
I will be very grateful......promise!!
Louise
The participants (writer and addressee) in this example are strangers; and 
there is a large age and status gap. Derek is an older, respected and inter-
nationally acclaimed expert scholar in the field of New Zealand vocabulary, 
while Louise is a teenage high school student. There are many ways in which 
this example transgresses the rules of formal written communication between 
strangers: the casual greeting hi there, the use of first name, Derek, and the very 
directly encoded demands for assistance, I need help, can you send me some-
thing, with the intensifiers and up-​graders, desperately, soon as possible; and 
the coy final promise!! All these features suggest a close friendly relationship 
between the writer and addressee.
An ethnography of speaking or communication approach highlights the 
mismatch between various components of this communicative event. This is a 
written communication on a serious topic, from a young student to an older 
professor, with the goal of eliciting assistance. All these factors suggest that 
formal rules of interaction should prevail. But the genre is email, and this 
clearly has a strong influence on what is considered permissible. Nevertheless, 
it is possible that the writer and addressee do not share similar rules of inter-
action, and that what each considers acceptable differs. In this case, Derek was 
not amused and Louise received not a contribution to her essay but a list of 
references!
Exercise 7
Using table 14.1, make some brief notes comparing the email message in ­example 19 with 
the telephone conversation in ­example 1.
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
521
Insiders and outsiders
Another distinction which is highlighted by an ethnography of speaking or com-
munication approach is the role of the researcher as an insider or an outsider in a 
community. There has been a great deal of discussion in sociolinguistics about the 
relative advantages of researching a culture from the inside, as a member of a com-
munity, as opposed to coming into a community as a researcher from outside. Early 
sociolinguists and anthropological linguists were typically outsiders in the cultures 
they researched and described. This had some advantages since it was often easier 
to identify ways of speaking and rules of interaction that contrasted with those 
they were familiar with. Researchers noticed when there was a silence where they 
expected to hear talk, for example, and vice versa; they noticed restrictions on 
speaking rights which differed from those in their own societies, and so on.
However, an outsider’s evaluation of what certain utterances or exchanges 
“mean” may be rather different from the evaluation of those who are insiders in 
the culture. It is easy to misinterpret the significance of a gesture or an utterance, 
or even of silence, if you assume you know what it means, and thus never question 
its significance. So, for example, the reasons for silence between two Cuna Indians 
who have just met for the first time cannot be interpreted by someone from out-
side the culture. Without a sound knowledge of the culture, an outsider would find 
it very puzzling indeed, since reassuring formulaic talk to dispel any tension is the 
normal means of greeting a stranger in many Western communities. For the Cuna 
Indians of Panama, however, a formulaic silence is an appropriate response to an 
ambiguous or unpredictable situation where the status of the participants is unclear.
A researcher who is an insider has an accepted role and position in the com-
munity, and so they are less likely to influence or alter the “normal” order of 
events, or to cause people to be self-​conscious about their behaviours. On the 
other hand, an insider may overlook distinctive patterns or rules of speaking 
Table 14.1  Analysing a communicative event
Components of event
Email communication
Telephone conversation
Genre
Topic
Purpose
Setting
Participants
Key
Message form
Message content
Act sequence
Rules for interaction
Norms for interpretation
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
522
and rules of interpretation which seem “natural” to an insider, but which are 
quite distinctive to their community. So, for instance, the long silences which are 
perfectly normal between visiting neighbours in working-​class Belfast attract no 
attention from insiders, but seem very distinctive rules of (not) speaking to an 
outside researcher.
Finally, it is worth pointing out that the ethnography of speaking approach 
also provides another way of defining the concept of the speech community: i.e. 
a group of people who share the same rules of speaking. People who belong to 
the same speech community interpret events similarly, and know the norms for 
behaving appropriately in the regular communicative events of the community.
Exercise 8
Use the ethnography of speaking framework to describe the components of one of the 
following speech events:
•	 a classroom lesson/​university seminar or webinar
•	 a school meeting between teachers and parents
•	 a children’s party
•	 a sports event
•	 an auction
•	 a TV advertisement
•	 a cookery demonstration.
Exercise 9
Here are five different definitions of the speech community. What distinguishes each from 
the others?
1	 John Lyons (1970: 326): all the people who use a given language (or dialect).
2	 Dell Hymes (1962): a group who share rules of speaking and rules for the interpretation 
of speech performance.
3	 Joshua Fishman (1971: 28): a community all of whose members share at least a single 
speech variety and the norms for its appropriate use.
4	 John Gumperz (1965): a social group which may be either monolingual or multilin-
gual, held together by frequency of social interaction patterns and set off from the 
surrounding areas by weaknesses in the lines of communication.
5	 William Labov (1972a: 120): the speech community is not defined by any marked 
agreement in the use of language elements, so much as by participation in a set of 
shared norms; these norms may be observed in overt types of evaluative behaviour, and 
by the uniformity of the abstract patterns of variation which are invariant in respect of 
particular levels of usage.
Answer at end of chapter
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
523
Exercise 10
How does a speech community differ from a community of practice (a term discussed in 
­chapter 8)?
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 11
Erving Goffman was a Canadian sociologist who introduced the idea of interaction as a per-
formance, and he found the concepts of backstage and frontstage useful in exploring this 
idea. More recently, discourse analysts have used the notions of backstage and frontstage 
(or back region and front region) to analyse the ways in which people interact in particular 
social contexts. In the backstage performance discourse of an organisation, for example, 
people may prepare using a small group office conversation, for their frontstage perform-
ance at the company’s Board meetings. (See ­example 20 below.) Rugby coaches hold 
backstage discussions preparing their joint approach to training and the process of motiv-
ating their team. Teachers in the staffroom may have backstage discussions preparing to 
deal with problematic issues in their classroom.
(a)	
Can you provide two other similar examples of backstage/​frontstage contexts?
(b)	
Backstage discourse often has features which distinguish it from frontstage discourse 
in such contexts. Suggest two such features.
Answers at end of chapter
Source: DILBERT ©2010 Scott Adams. Used by permission of Andrews McMeel Syndication. All 
rights reserved.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
524
Interactional sociolinguistics
Interactional sociolinguistics is an approach to analysing discourse which is 
associated with John Gumperz, another person who made a large contribution to 
the development of the field of sociolinguists. This approach shares a great deal 
with the ethnography of communication framework from which it developed; 
but an interactional sociolinguistics approach pays particular attention to the 
clues people use to interpret conversational interaction within its ethnographic 
context.
Interactional sociolinguists typically make use of the detailed tools of 
Conversation Analysis (see later in this chapter), paying careful attention to 
turn-​taking behaviour, hesitations, pauses and paralinguistic behaviour (e.g. 
sighs, laughter, in-​breaths, etc.) to interpret what the speaker intended. But, 
unlike core conversation analysts, interactional sociolinguists also take account 
of the wider sociocultural context in which interactions take place. So they 
bring to bear their knowledge of the community and its norms in interpreting 
what is going on in an interaction. Consider ­example 20, an excerpt from a 
workplace interaction between a group of men in an information technology 
team at a company known as Trang. What sense can you make of it without 
some background information? (Note: the sections between slant lines /​ \ 
occur simultaneously. This method of marking overlaps is used throughout 
this chapter.)
Example 20
1	
Jacob:	
do you want me to come as well?
2	
Call:	
um hmm /​[laughs]\
3	
	
Dudley:	  /​don’t wear a\ don’t wear an Asher tie
4	
Barry:	
[laughs] yeah you can go incognito
5	
[general laughter]
6	
Jacob:	
hide in the back row
7	
	
[general laughter]
8	
Barry:	
just don’t say anything ...
It is clear from the laughter that the men are exchanging humorous 
comments, but it is almost impossible to work out exactly what is going on 
without a good deal more information. The team members are discussing a 
meeting which they plan to attend where people from other teams will be 
present. It is crucial to know that Jacob has been seconded to Trang from 
an American company, Asher Products. Dudley and Barry make humorous 
suggestions about the conditions under which Jacob may accompany them 
to a large meeting where they will interact with people from other teams. 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
525
Each contribution elaborates the underlying proposition, “you can come to 
the meeting only if you clearly identify as one of us”. In other words, Jacob 
is being asked to blend in and not advertise that he is a “foreigner” from an 
outside organisation. And he clearly gets the point since he adds his own 
suggestion, hide in the back row (line 6).
From an interactional sociolinguistics perspective, familiarity with the pre-
vious discourse, as well as the wider social context, is clearly important to 
understanding what is going on here. It is also interesting from a sociolinguistic 
point of view that this short exchange focuses explicitly on Jacob’s status as an 
“outsider”, and abruptly foregrounds the boundaries between Trang and Asher 
Products which have appeared irrelevant in the extensive technical discussion in 
which the participants have previously been engaged.
Contextualisation cues
In analysing any interaction from an interactional sociolinguistics perspective, 
the researcher looks for contextualisation cues, i.e. features “by which speakers 
signal and listeners interpret what the activity is, how the semantic content is to 
be understood and how each sentence relates to what precedes or follows”, to 
quote Gumperz. Contextualisation cues signal contextual presuppositions, i.e. 
knowledge that the speaker assumes the listener has already or information that 
they can work out for themselves by paying attention to features of the context. 
Contextualisation cues thus allow participants to infer the most likely inter-
pretation of an utterance. They may take a range of forms. In ­example 20, the 
laughter and the teasing tone used by Dudley and Barry serve as important cues 
that their comments are intended to be interpreted as humorous teases, rather 
than serious suggestions.
In some parts of Canada, the choice between French and English for an inter-
action is politically loaded. At the very least, this choice may convey information 
about cultural identity. In ­example 21, the waiter tries to do his customers a 
favour by offering them a choice of languages.
Example 21
Three people in a Montreal café. Two are fluent bilinguals, one has only a 
working knowledge of French.
1	 Waiter:                         Anglais ou francais, English or French?
2	 Bilingual Customers:  Bien, les deux
  	                    [well both]
3	 Waiter:                         Non, mais, anglais ou francais?
  	                    [No, but, English or French?]
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
526
4	 Bilingual Customers:    It doesn’t matter, c’est comme vous voulez
  	                    [Whatever you want]
5	 Waiter:                         (sigh) OK, OK, I’ll be back in a minute.
The customers refuse to choose and so force the waiter to make the choice. 
Here the contextualisation cues –​ in the form of the waiter’s persistence and 
repetition of his question (line 3), his sigh and his temporary abandonment of 
the customers –​ all suggest that he is very unhappy at being forced to make this 
choice.
In ­example 22, the use of strong stress and high volume serves as a con-
textualisation cue indicating that the speaker found the performance surpris-
ingly good.
Example 22
Woman commenting on a gymnastics performance she has seen at her son’s 
school.
[CAPITALS indicate higher volume and underline indicates strong stress.]
I went to the gymnastics display last night. It was GOOD.
Falling intonation may indicate that the speaker is providing definitive infor-
mation in answer to a question, as illustrated in ­example 23.
Example 23
[\ indicates falling intonation.]
Jill:       Will you pick me up?
Tony:  I wìll. No problèm.
Contextualisation cues can also take the form of discourse moves. In the tele-
phone call in ­example 1, the form of the conversational opening served as a con-
textualisation cue which generated inferences about the relationship between the 
participants and the routineness of the call. A Japanese researcher showed how 
the women leaders she studied used supportive moves to obtain cooperation for 
their directives. The supportive moves emphasised shared knowledge and served 
as contextualisation cues to signal to their listeners that they saw themselves as 
members of the same team.
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
527
Example 24
Woman director to older male subordinate.
Miya:	
you know the ventilation fan? I’m thinking that we should leave 
it on during the daytime. The switch is inside the building. Then 
sorry to bother, but when you leave
Tomi:	
yes I [got it]
Miya:	
um [turn off] the switch
Miya succeeds so well in setting up the shared context and aligning herself 
with Tomi, her addressee, that he anticipates her directive and overlaps her 
articulation of it. Her supportive moves thus cue the up-​coming directive and 
ensure he interprets her intent accurately.
Non-​verbal behaviours such as facial expressions, head nods, gestures and 
silences also provide very important contextualisation cues which are valuable 
when analysing video data. A raised eyebrow can give a very clear indication of 
how an utterance has been interpreted –​ though its precise meaning may differ 
between cultures. In Polynesian culture, for instance, a raised eyebrow serves as 
a greeting whereas in British culture, a raised eyebrow generally conveys surprise 
or even disbelief. In New Zealand the Leader of the Opposition in 2020, Judith 
Collins, generated a good deal of discussion by informing journalists that when 
she raised an eyebrow, she was telling a joke indicating that what she said should 
not be treated as serious.
Exercise 12
In multilingual contexts, code-​switching may serve as a strategy or contextualisation cue 
for conveying meaning at a covert, taken-​for-​granted level. What do you think are the 
social meanings cued by the bigman’s language switches between Tok Pisin and Buang 
described in ­chapter 2, ­exercise 18?
Answer at end of chapter
Miscommunication
Miscommunication is possible between any two people, but the potential 
is greater when different sociolinguistic norms are involved. Interactional 
sociolinguists have made a valuable contribution to identifying potential sources 
of miscommunication between different sociocultural groups.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
528
Example 25
In a British cafeteria, an Indian woman, Roopa, serving behind the counter 
spread doom and gloom, and aroused customer resentment, simply because 
of the way she served the gravy. The customers heard her as peremptorily 
stating that they should have gravy, whether they wanted it or not. When the 
customers’ complaints were reported to the woman, she expressed surprise. 
She claimed she had been offering them gravy –​ not pushing it on them!
When people from different language or even different dialect backgrounds 
interact, clashes between discourse norms are possible, with a risk of miscommu-
nication. Using an interactional sociolinguistics approach, we can look for clues 
to help interpret what speakers intended to communicate in the specific context 
of their talk. The problem in ­example 25 involved a misinterpretation of context-
ualisation cues. Influenced by her first language, Roopa’s variety of English led 
her to use strong stress and falling intonation on the word gravy when offering 
it to customers. These prosodic features were interpreted by speakers of other 
dialects of English as indicators of an assertion rather than an offer. The context-
ualisation cues were misread because of a clash between dialect features.
The interactional sociolinguist also tries to make explicit the presuppositions 
and background knowledge that people use to interpret utterances in context. In 
doing so, the concept of a schema or frame is often useful. A schema is the set of 
expectations that we bring to an interaction, based on our previous experiences 
and our cultural norms. When we walk into a British shop, for example, we have 
certain expectations about how the interaction with the shopkeeper or check-​
out operator will proceed. So, unless we know them well, we don’t expect a long 
personal conversation as we pay for our shopping. When we go to the doctor’s, 
we expect the doctor to ask questions and to provide advice. In a job interview 
in Western cultures, we expect to be asked about relevant skills and to “sell” our-
selves as a suitable appointee.
The examination of cross-​cultural encounters makes it clear that such schemas 
or frames are as culture-​bound as other aspects of our interactional expertise. 
In ­example 26, for instance, the British interviewer takes it for granted that 
someone applying for a job will present themselves as positively as possible. He 
assumes the interviewee will play down his weaknesses and talk up his strengths. 
But it appears this is not what the interviewee considers appropriate.
Example 26
Ben is being interviewed by Neil for the job of driver/​conductor with the 
London regional transport service. Ben is a bilingual Asian with near-​native 
competence in English. Ben has just told the interviewer that he applied for 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
529
a job as a guard at an earlier stage and failed the test. Rideway is the com-
pany where Ben currently works.
Neil:	
You failed the test at that stage, OK.
  	
And since then you’ve worked as a process operator.
  	
What do you think London Buses is going to offer you that 
Rideway don’t offer you?
Ben:	
Well, quite a lot of things, for example like um ... 
Christmas bonus.
Neil:	
Uh huh.
Ben:	
So many things, holidays and all that. Well we get holidays in 
Rideway but you er ... get here more holidays that you get in 
Rideway.
Neil:	
All right.
The hidden message or “real” intention of Neil’s question What do you think 
London Buses is going to offer you that Rideway don’t offer you? is some-
thing like What does the job mean to you and what will London Buses gain 
by employing you?. In other words, the interviewer is inviting the candidate to 
“sell” himself, and persuade him why he should be appointed to the job. Ben is 
expected to describe how his experience and abilities are relevant to the job or 
how the job will offer a challenge which he welcomes. But instead, Ben responds 
to the surface meaning of the question and talks about the material advantages 
of the job to him in terms of bonuses and holidays. The interviewer’s response 
All right, with a low falling tone, indicates that this was not an expected or 
preferred answer from the candidate. The candidate’s honesty, combined with 
rather different assumptions about how personal to be or how to present one’s 
commitment and worth, set this interview off on the wrong footing.
In New Zealand society, the Māori ethic which values humility and frowns on 
self-​promotion sometimes disadvantages Māori operating in Pākehā contexts. If 
they have no-​one else to speak on their behalf, or testify to their strengths, people 
from cultures which discourage boasting may find themselves systematically 
overlooked when jobs and promotions are involved. A Pākehā managing dir-
ector, Helen, asked Hemi, a Māori manager, about how people had reacted to his 
recent presentation on the company’s revised objectives. Hemi responded well 
I was very nervous and made some mistakes. Fortunately, Helen was experienced 
in cross-​cultural discourse norms; she asked someone else about Hemi’s presen-
tation and discovered it had been very effective. It is easy to see, however, that 
someone less experienced might make inferences about Hemi’s abilities or per-
formance based on such a self-​deprecating response.
An interactional sociolinguistic approach focuses, then, on the consequences 
of different background assumptions for interaction between groups. When 
expectations are not fulfilled, listeners make inferences about the speaker: e.g. she 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
530
misheard; he is trying to offend; he’s incompetent; or she is stupid. Very rarely do 
we assume that the speaker has a different set of interactional rules of speaking 
which account for their (from the listener’s point of view) unexpected or damaging 
response. And, of course, since the majority group’s definition of events generally 
takes precedence, it is typically minority group members who suffer. This point is 
discussed further later in this chapter (in the section on Critical Discourse Analysis).
Example 27
Claire, a policy analyst, has sought an interview with a manager, Tom, 
because Jared was appointed to a more senior position as acting manager 
which she had hoped to obtain.
1 Claire:	 well I just want to talk to you about it
2 	
and and I suppose [swallows]
3 	
[tut] I just want to get some ideas on what I could do
4 	
to actually be considered favourably next time
5 Tom:	
yeah I don’t think it’s a it’s a question of er favourability
6 	
I mean it was a question more practicalities more than anything else
7 	
um I was in urgent need of someone to fill in and
8 	
Jared had done that in the past already
Exercise 13
Consider the schemas or frames that could account for what is going on in ­example 27, 
and identify contextualisation cues which favour different interpretations.
Answer at end of chapter
Conversation Analysis (CA)
Conversation Analysis (CA) has its roots in sociology, and sociologists argue its 
value in demonstrating that talk is action. CA researchers approach communica-
tion as jointly organised activity like dancing, or a cooperative musical.
CA is now used by researchers in many other disciplines, including sociolinguists 
who are interested in analysing the structure of talk, and explaining how we 
manage the rules of ordinary everyday conversation at the most micro-​level. At 
the simplest level, for instance, it is noticeable that many interactions involve 
adjacency pairs; related utterances produced by two successive speakers in such 
a way that the second utterance is identified as a follow up to the first.
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
531
Example 28
(a)	 A:	 Hi there
	
B:	
Hi
(b)	 A:	 See you later
	
B:	
Ciao
(c)	 A:	 What page are you on?
	
B:	
Thirty-​three
(d)	 A:	 Wanna come up for dinner tonight?
	
B:	
Mm yeah thanks that’d be nice
Greetings, farewells, questions and answers, invitations, and acceptances/​
refusals are all examples of adjacency pairs.
Exercise 14
Identify possible adjacency pairs in the following list of utterances and comment on any 
difficulties you encounter. The first step is to sort them into first pair parts and second pair 
parts. Then try to match them up.
Can I help you?
I’d like some juice
Sorry I didn’t mean to be rude
I haven’t actually, most of them are in the dishwasher
No I am fine thanks
Just be careful when you open that cupboard
Don’t talk to me like that
Could you open the door?
OK thanks
Yes, the bus station is the end of this street
Like what?
Well don’t you boss me around
I can’t understand what you’re saying
Sorry but I just have to go or I’ll be late
My hands are full
Too bad
OK, let me try again
When you say go to the end, do you mean as far as the bus station?
You’ve left me all the dirty dishes again
Answer at end of chapter
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
532
Preferred and dispreferred second pair parts
The examples in ­exercise 14 indicate that identifying adjacency pairs is not 
always straightforward. As mentioned in the answer, CA looks for internal 
linguistic clues and paralinguistic clues to assist. So OK often functions as an 
acknowledgement of a point made, while well may signal that a qualification is 
coming next, as in ­example 29.
Example 29
Monica:	
wasn’t that a great concert
Don:	
well, I was a bit tired
Though Don does not say so explicitly, the use of well to introduce the 
second part of this adjacency pair, responding to Monica’s solicitation of his 
opinion, suggests he does not agree with her. His comment I was a bit tired can 
be interpreted as an excuse, implying that lack of attention explains his lack of 
appreciation.
Exercise 14 also illustrates that some first part utterances may be followed 
by one of two possible types of responses: e.g. invitation–​acceptance or invita-
tion–​refusal, complaint–​apology or complaint–​denial, and so on. In such cases, 
it is often possible to identify one as a preferred response, and the other as 
a dispreferred response. The dispreferred second pair part is often structurally 
marked in some way, e.g. by an initial pause, or a delaying discourse marker such 
as well in ­example 29, or a fall–​rise intonation contour, or some other signal that 
the speaker anticipates the utterance will be unwelcome from the addressee’s 
point of view. Example 30 illustrates some of these features.
Example 30
[↓ indicates a marked falling intonation on the following word (here 
expressing unwillingness).]
Sara:	
Barbara I have to go to a lecture in a few minutes and Joan 
isn’t back from lunch (2) could you take over the desk for me
Barbara:	
erm (0.5) (tut) well I I ↓ could but it would be better if you 
could find someone else cos I have to leave at two
The verbal hesitation erm, the dental click (tut), the discourse marker well, the 
repeated I, and the stressed could (with marked falling intonation) are all classic 
signals that a dispreferred response is coming next.
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
533
By drawing attention to the patterned nature of adjacency pairs, CA also 
provides a basis for accounting for instances where people deviate from these 
patterns. So, for example, people may insert a side sequence into an adja-
cency pair.
Example 31
A:	
Wanna come to a movie tonight?
	
B:  Depends what time
	
A:  ’Bout eight
B:	
Mm yeah thanks that’d be great
Side sequences appear to challenge the claim that an invitation is followed 
by an acceptance (preferred response) or a refusal (dispreferred response), but 
on closer examination they prove to be simply another regular pattern within 
what CA researchers call the “systematics” of the organisation of turn-​taking in 
everyday conversation. The pattern is still evident; it is just more complex. The 
second part of the initial adjacency pair follows the side sequence.
Example 32
1	
Ann:	 Then guess what (1) she dished up Phad Moo Sub
2	
Liz:	
Phad Moo Sub?
3	
Ann:	 It’s a Thai dish with meat
4	
Liz:	
Oh so she didn’t know about Sally
Exercise 15
Identify the side sequence in the exchange in ­example 32, and explain its purpose. Paying 
attention just to internal conversational clues, suggest what is conveyed by oh in the last 
line of this example.
Answer at end of chapter
Unlike the two previous approaches, CA emphasises that the analyst should 
only make use of information available from the text being analysed and should 
not refer to extra-​textual, ethnographic information. Hence, attention to the dis-
course feature oh in ­exercise 15 enables the CA researcher to deduce that Liz 
has made an inference about Sally simply on the basis of the discourse itself. No 
extra-​contextual information is needed.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
534
Exercise 16
An Australian study examined responses to requests made by texting. When the response 
to the request was delayed by more than one minute, the answer was much more likely 
to be a refusal or “no” response, rather than an acceptance or “yes” response. In other 
words, preferred responses (acceptances) were sent quickly, while dispreferred responses 
(refusals) were delayed. And no responses typically included an address term, an apology 
(sorry), and a reason for the refusal.
You can see whether these patterns are typical for people in your social network by 
examining responses to requests you send by text. You can also consider other reasons 
that might explain a delayed response, though, as mentioned above, a strict CA analysis 
would not consider this relevant for interpreting the responses unless these reasons were 
referred to in the text (e.g. I was just at the gym; or my phone was switched off).
Conversational feedback
Adjacency pairs are one aspect of the systematics of turn-​taking which is a focus 
of CA. Attention to conversational feedback is another. At times in a conversa-
tion, one person may hold the floor for a period while recounting a narrative, 
for instance, or describing an experience, or explaining how something works. 
Meanwhile the other participant typically provides evidence that they are 
attending to the speaker, i.e. some kind of feedback which may be verbal (mm, 
uh-​huh, right) or non-​verbal (head nodding, attentive gaze).
The need for verbal feedback is especially apparent in telephone conversations, 
as ­example 33 illustrates.
Example 33
Dominic, seven years old, is phoning his parents to say he is about to be 
driven home by his host.
[↑ indicates a marked rising intonation.]
1	
[Phone:	ring ring]
2	
Dad:	
hello Oxford 9128392
3	
Dom:	 ↑Dad
4	
Dad:	
oh Dom
5	
Dom:	 I’m comin’ ’ome in ten minutes
6	
Dad:	
you’re comin’ ’ome in ten minutes
7	
Dom:	 yea
8	
Dad:	
oh good boy y-​ –​ have you enjoyed yourself?
9	
Dom:	 yea
10	
Dad:	
good (2)
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
535
11	
	
very nice (2)
12	
	
are you still there Dom?
13	
Dom:	 mm
14	
Dad:	
alright then pet (2)
15	
	
we’ll be waitin’ on you alright?
16	
Dom:	 yea bye
17	
Dad:	
bye
Dominic is not used to using the phone, and this is evident in a number of 
ways. His opening is minimal and contains no explicit greeting, and his closing 
yea bye (line 16) is also brief and not negotiated with his dad. So the expected 
pattern would be that Dominic would introduce the pre-​closing alright? and his 
dad would respond alright and then Dominic would say goodbye and then his 
dad would say goodbye. Instead, Dominic’s dad finally initiates the pre-​closing at 
line 14 alright then pet. This follows two attempts to hand the floor to Dominic 
which he does not take (at lines 10 and 11), and nor does Dominic respond ver-
bally to his dad to indicate that he is still attending, leading his dad to ask are 
you still there Dom? (line 12). Even when his dad makes the first pre-​closing 
move alright then pet (line 14), Dominic does not provide the expected second 
part, leading his dad to try again we’ll be waitin’ on you alright? (line 15).
Attention signals in the form of verbal feedback on the phone are especially 
important since the speaker cannot see the listener. As CA researchers argue, 
careful attention to the data, including pauses and absences, as well as instances 
of feedback, provides a basis for inferring that Dominic has not yet fully mastered 
the conversational rules of telephone interaction in his social group. There is no 
need to appeal to extra-​linguistic evidence.
As illustrated by this brief discussion, CA studies what an utterance does in 
relation to preceding utterances and what its implications are for what follows. 
Dominic’s lack of skill highlights how participants typically work together 
to jointly achieve conversational openings and closings, as well as decisions, 
interviews and even story tellings. CA focuses on how an interaction unfolds 
as a sequence of actions by different participants, with the significance of an 
utterance highly dependent on its position in a sequence, as well as being jointly 
negotiated.
Interestingly, the frequency with which feedback is provided, and even the 
exact positioning of the feedback, differs between social and cultural groups. 
Mayumi, a Japanese student, recorded one of our meetings and she subsequently 
told me that she now understood why people commented on the high frequency 
with which Japanese people provide verbal feedback. She said she could scarcely 
hear what I was saying on the recording, firstly because of the high frequency of 
her own feedback, and secondly because her hai (yes) often overlapped with my 
speech and so obscured it. By contrast, she noted that in conversations between 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
536
New Zealanders, the listener’s feedback is typically positioned at the end of the 
speaker’s clauses and minimally overlaps the speech.
Example 34
Two workers have just met at the start of the day.
[Length of pauses or silences in seconds is indicated by the numbers in 
brackets: e.g. (2) =​ two second pause.]
1	
Dan:	
looks like it’s gonna be a nice day eh
2	
Tom:	
[no response]
3	
Dan:	
so you haven’t done anything all week (2) eh (1)
4	
	 	
you haven’t done anything exciting (3) talk to any girls?
5	
Tom:	
no
6	
Dan:	
oh that’s all right then (2)
7	
	 	
gonna be a great day though eh (1) don’t you think
8	
Tom:	
[no response]
Exercise 17
Using a CA approach, identify evidence that Tom could be described as not playing a full 
conversational part in the conversation in ­example 34.
Answer at end of chapter
Exercise 18
Record a telephone conversation between two adults and another between two children.
(a)	
Identify the conversational feedback and compare the amount in the two conversations. 
Have the children developed adult-​like proficiency in providing feedback?
(b)	
Paying attention to pauses, hesitations, hedges, silences and in-​breaths, identify any 
evidence of conversational “trouble” provided within either conversation.
(c)	
Identify any instances of overlapping speech. Does the overlap cause problems?
Interruptions and overlaps
CA researchers argue that talk “constitutes” particular institutional realities. In 
other words, discourse is the very stuff of many interactions, especially in areas 
 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
537
such as the law, in teaching and in business meetings. As its label implies, CA 
treats the pattern of ordinary conversation as primary: systematic alternation 
between reasonably equal turns at talking, negotiated implicitly, is regarded as 
the basic conversational model. Variations from this pattern often indicate a 
different kind of context. So, for example, when someone takes very long turns 
compared to others, or when one person explicitly allocates turns to others, 
or when someone disrupts the turns of others; all this behaviour is marked by 
comparison with ordinary conversation. It suggests, for example, talk in a more 
formal or institutional context.
Example 35
Leila, the Chair, opens a meeting of her team of six in a government depart-
ment. Before she speaks there is a buzz of small talk between various people 
around the table.
[(voc) indicates a non-​specific vocalisation; (tut) signals a dental click.]
1	
Leila:	 right we’re all here let’s get started (2) [buzz of talk stops]
2	
	
OK we’re starting with plans for a meeting with the WIT   
/​group\
3	
Eliz:	
/​worldwide information\ technology
4	
Leila:	 um yes (0.5) Carol [voc] has um [tut] organised another 
meeting
5	
	
an introductory meeting for next Wednesday (0.5)
6	
	
Carol do you want to brief people?
7	
Carol:	 thanks yes um well the meeting is scheduled for ...
Leila uses a typical meeting-​opening discourse marker right, together with 
her declaration we’re all here let’s get started followed by a two second pause to 
open the meeting. This pause, unlike those in casual conversation, is not a pos-
ition in the interaction where someone else is expected to speak. As Chair, Leila 
has the right to the next turn after she declares the meeting open. Thereafter, 
despite the brief overlap between Elizabeth and Leila in lines 2 and 3 where 
Elizabeth expands on the acronym, the basic pattern here is that one person 
speaks at a time. This is the typical turn-​taking pattern for orderly spoken inter-
action in many Western contexts, and especially in formal meetings. People are 
very proficient at positioning their next conversational turns precisely at a point 
(known as a transition-​relevance place or TRP) where the previous speaker 
has completed their turn. In many conversations, there are few or minimal 
overlaps; people read the syntactic, prosodic and non-​verbal signals that a TRP 
is approaching and “latch” their utterances to the previous speakers with great 
skill while, by contrast, in formal meetings, there are even short pauses between 
speaker turns.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
538
Deviations from this one-​at-​a-​time pattern typically generate inferences of 
various kinds, as ­example 36 illustrates. The excerpt is from a meeting of a sub-​
committee of the New Zealand National Museum Planning Committee. Cliff 
Whiting is the Māori Chief Executive Officer of the museum. Ron Trotter is 
the Chair of the Planning Committee. The excerpt relates to a central issue for 
the Board, namely, how the museum will represent and reflect the relationship 
between the two major cultural groups in New Zealand, the Indigenous Māori 
people and the Pākehā settlers. The museum is to include within it a marae, a 
traditional Māori meeting house and surrounding area for speech-​making, for 
which Cliff Whiting is responsible. Most traditional New Zealand marae are 
built by and for Māori, and located in particular tribal areas, though there are 
also some urban marae which are non-​tribal. The planned museum marae is 
unusual in that it will be clearly visible and public. Cliff Whiting is responding 
to a statement from Ron Trotter about how he sees the museum marae as being 
a place where Pākehā as well as Māori will feel comfortable.
Example 36
Meeting of a small sub-​committee of the New Zealand National Museum 
Planning Committee. Cliff Whiting is the Māori Chief Executive Officer of 
the museum. Ron Trotter is the Chair of the Planning Committee.
1	
Cliff:	
there are two main (0.2) fields that have to be explored (0.2)
2	
	
and er (0.1) the one that is most important is its 
customary role
3	
	
in the first place? because (0.2) marae comes on and it 
comes from
4	
	
(0.4) the tangata whenua who are Māori
5	
	
/​(0.7) to change it\
6	
Ron:	
/​but it’s not just\ for Māori=​
7	
Cliff:	
=​no=​
8	
Ron:	
=​it it you must get that if it is a Māori institution and 
nothing more
9	
	
this (bangs table) marae has failed (0.2)
10	
	
and they must (bangs table) get that idea
(Gaylene Preston Productions)
Note: =​ indicates that utterances are neatly “latched” to each other, i.e. 
there is not even the smallest pause between them: ? signals a rising inton-
ation but not necessarily a question; i.e. the high rising terminal (HRT); 
tangata whenua refers to the Indigenous Māori people; and underlining 
indicates strong stress.
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
539
Cliff Whiting states that there are two fields to be explored (line 1), from 
which a listener might infer that he has two points to make. He speaks slowly 
and deliberately, with regular pauses, as is customary in formal Māori oratory. 
At line 6, Ron Trotter overlaps Cliff Whiting with a statement that challenges 
Cliff’s focus on Māori. The overlap is positioned at a TRP, a point where it 
would be reasonable for Ron Trotter to assume Cliff Whiting had completed his 
turn if it were not for the fact that, firstly, Cliff has given notice that he had two 
points to make, and, secondly, that he is speaking slowly and deliberately with 
regular pauses between clauses. In these circumstances, Ron Trotter’s overlap 
can be interpreted as a disruptive interruption, especially since he proceeds to 
take over the floor and to state his position with great emphasis accompanied 
by banging on the table. After one brief response no (line 7) (which could be a 
protest or could be agreeing with Ron Trotter’s statement), Cliff Whiting is silent 
thereafter, and on the video of this excerpt he can be seen to physically withdraw 
and look down, while Ron Trotter’s table banging invades his physical space.
In analysing this interaction, a CA researcher typically begins by comparing 
it with mundane conversation in which the order, length and type of turns are 
relatively free. A CA analysis of this episode identifies the ways in which the 
participants display an orientation to different rules, namely the rules of a 
meeting where speakers typically expect to complete even relatively long turns 
without interruption. In this excerpt, then, the overlap disrupts the turn of the 
person who holds the floor, and in the context of the talk, this deviation from 
one-​at-​a-​time talk can be interpreted as indicating disagreement.
Overlapping talk is not always disruptive, however, as ­example 37 illustrates. 
Here, three colleagues construct a humorous fantasy sequence, an imaginary 
scenario describing an all-​purpose suit which could be used by anyone unexpect-
edly summoned to see the Minister.
Example 37
Three colleagues are discussing the problems which arise when someone is 
unexpectedly summoned to see the Minister.
1  Eve:	
I think we need a ministry suit just hanging up in the cupboard
2      	 /​[laughs]\
3  Lei:	
/​you can just\ imagine the problems with the length /​[laughs]\
4  Eve:	 /​it would have\ it would have to have an elastic waist
5        	so /​that we [laughs]\ could just be yeah
6  Lei:	
/​[laughs] yes that’s right [laughs]\
7  Eve:	
bunched in for some and [laughs] let it out
8  Lei:	
/​laughs\
9  Eve:	 /​out for others\
	10  Les:	
and the jacket would have to be /​long to cover all the bulges\
	11  Lei:	
/​no I’m quite taken with this\
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
540
There is a great deal of overlap between the talk and the laughter throughout 
this excerpt. At line 6, Leila overlaps Evelyn’s utterance, and at line 11 she 
overlaps Lesley’s utterance. Both Leila’s contributions are positive yes that’s 
right and no I’m quite taken with this and they simply support the points 
being made by those she is overlapping, rather than introducing new content. 
There is no evidence from the prosodic or paralinguistic features that this is 
experienced as disruptive talk; rather the laughter and high energy of the inter-
change suggest this is collaborative “all-​together-​now” talk, as Jennifer Coates 
labels it.
Overlapping talk is thus a particularly rewarding area for CA researchers 
since it always generates inferences of some sort based on the CA assumption 
that in conversation one person talks at a time. As we have seen, this is often 
not the case, but it has proved a fruitful starting point to account for variations 
from this pattern.
Example 38
A meeting in a large commercial organisation chaired by Clara, the section 
manager, since the usual chairperson is absent. Seth has gone to collect the 
minutes from the previous meeting.
1	
Clara:	 okay well we might just start without Seth
2	
	
we can can review the minutes from last week
3	
	
when /​he finally comes back\
4	
Renee:	 /​are YOU\ taking the minutes this week
5	
Clara:	 [eyebrows raised] no I’m just trying to chair the meeting
Exercise 19
Identify three internal clues in ­example 38 that a conversation analyst might use to support 
the inference that Clara is managing potential interactional trouble.
Answer at end of chapter
Keeping just to the text
It is worth emphasising an important methodological point that has been 
briefly mentioned several times in the discussion so far: a basic characteristic 
of a CA approach is that you should not begin the analysis with any precon-
ceived ideas about what will be worth examining. Unlike the ethnography of 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
541
communication and the interactional sociolinguistics approaches, the analysis 
should not include any information from your field notes, or interviews, or the 
participants’ reflections on the talk. The data is primary, and all relevant infor-
mation should be deducible from the data, and relevant categories for analysis 
should arise out of the data. So, for example, you should not assume that gender 
or power are relevant aspects of an interaction, unless it is clear from the data 
that the participants perceive these as relevant dimensions in understanding 
what is being conveyed.
For CA, it is important to find evidence in the interaction of which of a range 
of possible interpretations is intended and interpreted by or oriented to the 
participants. So, in ­example 27, in order to infer whether Claire’s utterance in 
lines 1–​4 is intended as an indirect complaint or whether she is genuinely seeking 
advice, a CA researcher would examine what comes before and what follows her 
utterance, together with attention to pauses, hesitations, false starts, intakes of 
breath, intonation and similar clues, to help interpret what is going on.
Because CA researchers analyse talk in such detail, they rarely analyse 
very large amounts of text; rather they focus on significant excerpts in which 
conversationalists manage to convey often very subtle meanings. It will be evi-
dent from earlier discussion that other approaches draw extensively on the meth-
odology of CA for insights in analysing discourse. CA researchers pay attention 
to the interactional significance of even the smallest aspect of spoken interaction, 
such as the words oh, OK and well, and to the amount and frequency of feedback 
or minimal response signals such as mm, mmhmm, uh huh, yeah and right; they 
attend to pauses and hesitations, vocalisations, sighs, in-​drawn breaths, giggles 
and laughter. Whether an utterance is said “breathily”, or with laughter running 
through it, or in a surprised tone of voice may be very important to interpreting 
the meaning of what is going on. Overlaps are precisely transcribed and pauses 
carefully measured. The most minute aspect of interaction that allows the listener 
to infer social meaning is relevant to the analysis. The goal is to identify what is 
significant to the participants as evidenced by their interactional behaviour. CA 
provides a useful set of descriptive tools for discourse analysts, no matter what 
kind of theoretical approach they adopt.
The approach described here could be described as traditional CA. More 
recently, an approach called interactional linguistics has developed from CA, 
which has greater consideration of context and nonlinguistic communication 
such as gesture and gaze. This approach uses larger datasets aiming to make 
generalisations about interactional features across these. For example, a team of 
interactional linguists looked at the duration of gaps between turns in interactions 
across ten different languages. They found not only that the times were very 
similar across languages, but that, on average, the time between the end of one 
person’s turn and that of the next person is less than the time it takes to retrieve a 
word from memory: i.e. very short indeed. This research also demonstrated that 
stereotypes about how some cultures use turn-​taking (e.g. long silences between 
turns) were not supported by interactional data.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
542
Exercise 20
Identify one distinctive point that might be made using an interactional sociolinguistics 
approach to ­example 36.
Answer at end of chapter
While an interactional sociolinguistics approach tends to spotlight different 
sociocultural norms, an ethnography of communication approach might estab-
lish that Ron Trotter’s behaviour is considered quite appropriate in many of the 
majority group, male-​dominated board rooms which are his usual milieu. From 
the perspective of the approach discussed in the next section of this chapter, 
Critical Discourse Analysis, Ron Trotter’s behaviour could be analysed as an 
instance of explicitly “doing power”. Indeed, some of those who saw the film 
from which the excerpt is taken interpreted his behaviour as an instance of 
verbal bullying. CDA is an approach which focuses precisely on the ways in 
which power and ideology are evident in interaction.
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA)
Example 39
The police officer behind the desk in a police station greets a woman who 
approaches the desk.
PO:	
Good morning love, what can I do for you
Woman:	
Good morning constable. I want to see your sergeant.
  	
And its not “love”, it’s Detective Inspector.
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) differs from all the previous methods of 
describing discourse in this chapter mainly in the stance of the analyst, which is, 
predictably, overtly “critical”. It is one component of Critical Discourse Studies 
which includes theory and applications, as well as interdisciplinary methods of 
analysis. Although we have often described the political and social, and espe-
cially cross-​cultural, implications of each of the approaches outlined so far, they 
are all essentially descriptive in their starting points. By contrast, CDA is expli-
citly concerned with investigating how language is used to construct and main-
tain power relationships in society; the aim is to identify connections between 
language and power, and between language and ideology. In ­example 39, the 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
543
police officer’s choice of the friendly, and perhaps patronising, term love turns 
out to be an inappropriate form of address for the senior policewoman he is 
addressing. Her response makes it clear that she does not approve of this way 
of greeting her.
The critical discourse analyst deliberately dons a pair of critical spectacles 
and looks for evidence of the covert exercise of power in supposedly “equal” 
interactions, or for indications of hidden ideological assumptions about 
“normal” ways of doing things that disadvantage minority groups. Sexist and 
racist language are obvious targets for the critical discourse analyst, but CDA 
research has a very wide agenda, and includes the analysis of political speeches, 
medical textbooks, advertising and marketing strategies, and many other forms 
of rhetoric.
Critical discourse analysts often make use of aspects of other approaches: e.g. 
many use a CA approach to describe the ways in which participants manipu-
late the rules of conversation in order to gain a political advantage; or they may 
use interactional sociolinguistics to highlight the relevance of the social context 
in which people are operating, and the underlying connections between lan-
guage, power and ideology. It is ultimately the overarching critical stance which 
distinguishes CDA, rather than the precise methods used to analyse the discourse. 
This section illustrates this stance firstly by examining how CDA highlights the 
ways in which discourse enacts and reinforces power relationships; and sec-
ondly by illustrating the role of the critical discourse analyst in making explicit 
the ideological beliefs or covert assumptions which underlie some instances of 
discourse in society.
Power and CDA
The exchange between Ron Trotter and Cliff Whiting in ­example 36 transgressed 
the norms of polite, semi-​formal meetings in many workplaces. The turn-​taking 
norms in such meetings typically permit each participant to speak uninterrupted 
until they have made their points. But Ron Trotter verbally intruded into Cliff 
Whiting’s space, cutting across his speaking turn and preventing him from 
making his points about different cultural ways of doing things. From a CDA 
perspective, it could be argued that Ron Trotter exercised unwarranted power, 
based on the covert assumption that his views warranted greater weight than 
Cliff Whiting’s, perhaps because he was the Chair of the Committee to which 
the two participants belonged, or perhaps because he was a (male) member of 
the dominant cultural group whose rights he was explicitly asserting in this 
interchange.
Example 40 illustrates a situation where the turn-​taking rules are not those of 
committee members supposedly treating each other as equals, but rather those 
of participants in an explicitly unequal encounter.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
544
Example 40
A police officer is questioning a suspect about growing cannabis. The inter-
view is aimed at establishing whether he was growing it for his own use or 
for sale.
1	
PO:	
okay you also told me that you haven’t got enough money to 
live on
2	
	
is that right so that’s why you grow the cannabis
3	
	
cos you haven’t got enough money
4	
	
isn’t that what you said Sam
5	
Sam:	 I’ve got enough money just to buy food and pay my way
6	
PO:	
okay
7	
Sam:	 but I ain’t got enough money to buy my extras that I need
8	
PO:	
okay (0.5) so where are you growing that cannabis
9	
Sam:	 near in my own backyard
10	
PO:	
I thought you said that place didn’t belong to you
11	
	
it belongs to the X organisation
12	
Sam:	 yeah well I was growing it in in the backyard in there
In this unequal encounter, the police officer has the right to ask questions and 
to expect the suspect to answer them. In lines 1–​4, the police officer first asks 
Sam to confirm something he has said earlier, is that right (line 2) and then isn’t 
that what you said Sam (line 4). Sam is not given a chance to respond to the first 
request for confirmation (there is no pause after is that right), before the second 
proposition and request for confirmation are put to him. If you compare this 
interaction with a conversation with a friend, it is immediately apparent that this 
technique could be interpreted as badgering and even verbally bullying Sam into 
a response. The police officer is here challenging Sam to confirm a proposition 
that will form the foundation for an argument that he needs to sell the cannabis 
he grows in order to survive. It appears that Sam does not see the trap, since he 
voluntarily reveals that he is in need of money for extras above bare sustenance 
(line 7).
The police officer then asks another question where are you growing 
that cannabis (line 8), and when Sam responds, the police officer challenges 
the accuracy of his response by referring to earlier information that he has 
supplied which contradicts the implications of this response that the place 
he is growing cannabis belongs to him. In any normal conversation, Sam’s 
use of the phrase my own backyard is understandable, given that it is the 
backyard of the place in which he is living. The police officer’s challenge thus 
reminds us that this is a formal interview where precision about such details 
is a legal issue.
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
545
In later sections of this interview, the police officer overtly challenges Sam 
with questions such as: what do you have to say Sam?; come on Sam I’m asking 
you some straight questions; is that what you are saying?; and is that right, isn’t 
that what you said?. These features of the discourse clearly indicate that this is 
an unequal encounter. A CDA approach focuses on such features to demonstrate 
how the police officer uses verbal means to intimidate the suspect and make him 
feel powerless. In ­chapter 15, some real-​world applications of this approach to 
analysis are illustrated in the section on forensic linguistics.
Power may also be enacted in more subtle ways in interactions which are 
apparently very urbane and democratic. Setting the agenda of a discussion, for 
instance, is one way of exercising influence in even a very democratic interaction. 
The person who decides what will be discussed and what will be excluded is 
subtly exercising control over the topics of talk which will be considered rele-
vant. In a formal meeting, this may take the form of a written agenda whose 
contents are determined by the meeting chair in advance. When there is no 
written agenda, the meeting chair usually exercises power by determining what 
topics will be discussed and who may contribute, as in ­example 41.
Example 41
Meeting in a large commercial organisation chaired by section manager.
1	
Clara:	
Seth has gone to collect the minutes from the previous 
meeting
2	
	 	
okay shall we kick off and just go round the room um doing
3	
	 	
an update and then when Seth comes in with the the minutes
4	
	 	
we need to check on any action items from our planning
5	
	 	
over to you Marlene
Here Clara’s power or authority is apparent from the discourse: she determines 
the order of items for discussion and she allocates the first turn of talking to 
Marlene. Even in less formal interactions, particular participants may influence 
what is to be discussed: e.g. it’s time we sorted out where we are going; well 
I just thought we needed to talk this through a bit further; or they may declare 
certain contributions irrelevant (that’s a red herring; you’re way off track there). 
One criterion for deciding on their relative power or influence in the context is 
to note whether others pay attention to their declarations.
The end of a conversation is another point where it is useful to look for evi-
dence of power being exercised in an interaction. Example 42 is an excerpt from 
the end of an informal discussion between two women in a very egalitarian 
workplace. They have had a long exploration of a problematic issue and each 
has contributed equally to finding a solution. In many sections of the discussion, 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
546
it would be impossible to identify one woman as more influential or powerful 
than the other from the discourse alone. However, as the interaction draws to 
a close, there are some interesting linguistic clues as to who is calling the shots. 
Can you identify them?
Example 42
Katie and Kelly are policy analysts in a government department. They have 
been discussing possible titles for an official publication.
[(2) signals a two-​second pause.]
1	
Katie:	
well (2) if I think of anything further shall I say
2	
Kelly:	
oh yeah let me know (thank) you yeah
3	
Katie:	
are you just doing a memo now are you
4	
Kelly:	
but I’ll –​ yeah ’cause I’ve got to um (1) have it to Ruth 
at ten so
5	
Katie:	
yeah well I think we’ve taken it a bit further than where it 
was before
6	
Kelly:	
okay yes that was very helpful thank you Katie that’s   
GREAT
This excerpt demonstrates that Katie is the person who decides it is time 
that the discussion should draw to a close. She signals this first with the dis-
course marker well followed by a pause, and then a statement indicating she has 
nothing further to say at this point. She follows this up by establishing that Kelly 
will take the required follow-​up action are you just doing a memo now are you 
(line 3). Finally, she summarises what they have achieved I think we’ve taken it 
a bit further than where it was before (line 5). Summary is a powerful tool for 
those wishing to assert their influence and authority. At the end of any meeting, 
the person who sums up thereby stamps their interpretation of what has been 
achieved on the proceedings. It is a subtle but effective way of enacting power, 
as CDA emphasises.
Example 43
Chris is involved in an interview with the headmaster.
Headmaster:	
Why didn’t you go straight down Queen Street?
Chris:	
I’m not walkin’ down there with a load of coons from St 
Hilda’s comin’ out of school.
Headmaster:	
Why’s that?
Chris:	
Well that’s obvious, i’n it? I don’ wanna get belted.
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
547
Headmaster:	
Well there isn’t usually any bother in Queen Street, 
is there?
Chris:	
No. None of us white kids usually go down 
there, do we?
  	
What about that bust-​up in the Odeon carpark at 
Christmas?
Headmaster:	
That was nearly a year ago, and I’m not convinced you 
lot were as innocent as you made out.
  	
So when you got to the square, why did you wait 
around for quarter of an hour instead of going 
straight home?
Chris:	
I thought my mate might come down that way 
after work.
  	
Anyway, we always go down the square after school.
Exercise 21
(a)	
Can you identify three features in Chris’ use of language in ­example 43 which 
suggest Chris is refusing to conform to the community’s expectations about appro-
priate ways of speaking in an interview with the headmaster?
(b)	
Did you assume Chris was a boy? Why (not)?
Answers at end of chapter
Ideology and CDA
CDA researchers aim to expose the hidden messages and especially the taken-​
for-​granted assumptions that underlie much of our everyday discourse. Because 
advertisers make use of discourse to influence our behaviour –​ typically to per-
suade us to buy their product –​ adverts are one of the most obvious targets of 
CDA. Adverts appeal to their audience’s emotions, their desires and fears, and to 
their often unexamined attitudes and beliefs.
An advert appeared on British billboards in the 1990s, advertising Fiat cars. 
The advert relied on sexist attitudes, as well as racist stereotypes. The car was 
compared to a “lady” who, it implied, would attract sexual attention (she would 
get her bottom pinched): i.e. the audience was encouraged to infer that she (and 
by analogy the car) was a sexy object. This was an Italian car and that informa-
tion was conveyed indirectly through the stereotype of Italian men as bottom-​
pinchers. Interestingly, the graffiti on the billboard indicated that feminists had 
responded to the sexist advert with their own critical discourse, saying “If this 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
548
lady was a car she’d run you down”, indicating their displeasure at the sexist 
assumptions underlying the advert’s discourse.
Another focus of CDA has been discourse which is apparently neutral and 
informative, but which on closer examination turns out to be manipulative 
and even distorting. For example, in the health section of a women’s magazine, 
and under the heading Healthy Hint, there was not some expert nutritional or 
medical advice as the heading might lead the reader to expect, but an advert for 
an anti-​inflammatory with a “100 per cent natural, herbal formula”. A CDA 
approach is clearly valuable in identifying the “advertorial” and the “infomer-
cial”, a genre in which a particular product is promoted in what at first appears 
to be an editorial or a feature article.
Even more interesting, because less obvious, are the subtle ways in which our 
responses are manipulated in contexts which are supposedly sources of “infor-
mation”, such as newspaper reports, or even textbooks –​ contexts where we are 
perhaps less aware of the underlying orientations and goals of the writers or 
speakers. When we don our CDA spectacles we can often identify subtle sources 
of bias in the way language is used in these contexts. Consider the different 
messages conveyed by the choice of lexical items and syntactic patterns in the 
following sentences reporting the “same” incident.
Example 44
(a)	
Police shoot eleven people dead in pro-​democracy demonstration.
(b)	 Rioting blacks shot dead as political leaders meet.
The use of an active construction in (a) and the identification of the agent as 
the police conveys a very different impression from the passive construction in 
(b) where the agents have disappeared. The use of the word rioting in (b) could 
be read as implying that the shooting was justified, while the choice of blacks 
(vs. people) objectifies those shot. Finally, the inclusion of the information in 
(a) that the incident involved a pro-​democracy demonstration communicates a 
very different message from the message conveyed in (b), where it is implied that 
the reason for the rioting is related to the meeting of political leaders.
A CDA approach focuses on the ways in which lexical choices such as riot vs. 
protest vs. demonstration, or hooligans vs. protestors vs. demonstrators subtly 
convey different ideological positions and different political sympathies. CDA 
researchers warn that as readers we are often unaware of the effect of such 
choices as we read apparently “objective” news reports.
Even less obvious at first glance are the assumptions underlying the appar-
ently descriptive and informative discourse of some medical textbooks. For 
example, the woman patient is framed rather differently in the excerpts in (a) vs. 
(b) in ­example 45. (See also ­chapter 13, ­example 2 which discusses this text from 
another perspective.)
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
549
Example 45
(a)	
Surgery is also indicated when ... hormone treatment has failed to 
control the symptoms... . Since many women erroneously believe that 
following hysterectomy ... obesity is usual, the physician must explain 
that removal of the uterus has no side-​effects.
(b)	 Alternative treatments include radiation and birth control pills, 
but these are considered controversial and can cause serious 
complications... . If your doctor suggests any of these treatments, be 
sure to get a second opinion.
Both sentences use educated, technical vocabulary, but they address different 
readerships. The main clue to this is the stance expressed through the choice 
of grammatical structures. In (a), the use of the passive voice (is also indicated) 
removes any reference to the actor or agent, i.e. the doctor or physician, thus 
enabling the writer to avoid allocating explicit responsibility to the physician 
for the decision to undertake surgery, as well as conveying an impression of 
clinical objectivity. And though this is a book written for medical students, they 
are not addressed as you, but rather the physician is referred to in the third 
person and presented as an expert who must correct the erroneous assumptions 
of many women.
By contrast (b) treats the women target readers as intelligent agents rather 
than passive, ignorant objects of surgery. They are addressed in the second person 
(your doctor), giving the impression of friendliness or solidarity. Moreover, the 
information provided is empowering rather than didactic: the reader is presented 
with alternatives, and evaluative comments, and recommended to seek a second 
opinion. This is a very different approach from (a).
A CDA approach seeks to identify ways in which readers or listeners are 
manipulated through choices of particular words and constructions to take a 
particular position in relation to the topic of discussion. Pronoun choices, for 
example, can quickly and effectively position a reader as one of “us”, observing 
the behaviour of “them”, thus including the reader or listener in one group while 
objectifying another group and distancing the reader or listener from them. In 
one government organisation where we did research, the employees commented 
that the usage of their Chief Executive Officer (CEO) changed over a period 
of time, subtly indicating a change of orientation. Initially, when the CEO 
talked about we and us, he was referring to himself and the other employees of 
the organisation. Five years later, the terms we and us in the CEO’s discourse 
typically referred to him and his fellow chief executives in other government 
organisations. His pronoun usage betrayed the re-​alignment of his loyalties, and 
his employees were aware that this reflected new priorities which impacted nega-
tively on their working conditions.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
550
In meetings between management and employees, it is often illuminating to 
examine the use of pronouns, and especially shifts between the referents of we, 
you and they in the course of a meeting. In ­example 46, three utterances are 
listed in the order they occurred in the speech of the manager of an industrial 
plant. It is interesting to ask who is included in we in each instance.
Example 46
Plant Manager addressing large meeting between managers and employees 
in a context of re-​structuring and down-​sizing.
(a)	
it’s been a bit over a month since we got together
(b)	 we have a cost reduction programme
(c)	
we’ll try to handle any questions that you might have
In (a) we is inclusive and refers to the management and the employees, but 
the referent of we in (b) is less clear-​cut. Though the company as a whole has 
a cost reduction programme, it is the managers who have been developing it. 
And by (c), it is clear that we refers only to the managers while you refers to the 
employees.
One might expect that the pronoun we would consistently convey inclusive-
ness and solidarity. But context is crucial as has been consistently demonstrated 
in this book. So when we clearly does not include the speaker, and refers only 
to the addressee(s), it may function as a distancing device, conveying a rather 
patronising tone, as in ­example 47.
Example 47
An email from a manager to her supervisors in a white-​collar organisation.
Hi,
When we are looking at grading positions, could we please ensure that 
we abide by the rules of the XB structure rather than creating grades for 
positions because of salary constraints... . If we do not grade appropriately 
then the responsibility for the grading system will go back to Finance and 
we will have to ask for a grade for each role change. This is not a position 
that I would like to see happen.
Thanks
Barbara
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
551
Although the manager uses we, she is not herself directly involved in grading 
positions, but only in managing those who are. Her usage thus sets up a false 
impression of shared responsibility and solidarity. It is similar to the usage of a 
nurse who asks a patient how are we today? or the mother who asks her child 
did we have a good sleep then? In other words, we means you, and the effect is 
patronising rather than inclusive.
Exercise 22
The following is a set of dimensions for analysis, somewhat simplified from those provided 
by Teun van Dijk, a well-​known CDA researcher.
Access: who has access to the place of interaction and under what conditions?
Setting: (location, place and time of interaction): who decides? who is favoured by the 
location and the time?
Participant positions and roles: what are the relevant social role relationships and 
identities?
Genre: is everyone equally familiar with the appropriate genre?
Speech acts: what kinds of speech acts occur in the interaction?
Topics: who selects topics? who controls topics?
Local meaning and coherence:
•	 Levels of specificity and degree of completeness: e.g. what kind of information is given 
in most detail?
•	 Perspective: whose perspectives are presented in the discourse?
•	 Implicitness (implications, presuppositions, vagueness): what implicit assumptions 
underlie the discourse?
•	 Coherence: are there any gaps in the argument as presented?
Style (variations of syntax, lexicon and sound):
•	 Lexical style: do word choices betray assumptions?
•	 Syntactic style: do structures conceal/​stress agency?
•	 Anaphora and deictics: do choices indicate relationships?
Rhetoric: what are the effects of metaphor, repetition, imagery, rhetorical questions, allit-
eration and parallelism in the discourse?
Summary: who sums up?
Consider what these questions reveal about the power dimensions underlying a university 
undergraduate seminar or tutorial. A recording of a seminar you have attended would be 
an ideal focus of analysis.
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
552
Exercise 23
Compare van Dijk’s set of components of analysis with those used in the ethnography of 
speaking approach. What do the differences suggest about the different emphases of these 
two approaches to analysing language in context?
Possible answer in the conclusion to this chapter
Multimodal analysis
In recent years, discourse analysts have begun to pay attention to more than just 
the linguistic features of interaction. Multimodal analysis includes other modes 
of communication, such as gestures, gaze, head movements, posture, and facial 
expressions, which also convey meaning, including social meaning. Objects in 
the environment, such as speech notes or diagrams on a whiteboard, may also be 
relevant in contributing to a fuller understanding of the meanings conveyed in a 
particular interaction. As video recording has become more sophisticated, it has 
become possible to analyse these different modes or actions that convey meaning 
and to identify their structures and functions in detail.
One way to understand what multimodal analysis offers the discourse analyst 
is to consider the differences between what can be said about an interaction with 
and without considering non-​verbal aspects of the communication. Consider 
­example 36, the exchange between Ron Trotter and Cliff Whiting. The video 
of this interaction provides a wealth of additional multimodal information to 
enrich the analysis. Note, for instance, the body postures of Ron Trotter and 
Cliff Whiting throughout the excerpt. Ron Trotter physically (as well as ver-
bally) intrudes into Cliff Whiting’s space, banging forcefully with his fist on the 
table, while Cliff Whiting leans back, folds his arms and looks down, indicating 
his discomfort and suggesting that he no longer wishes to engage in the discus-
sion. Note also the absence of verbal participation and the distancing gestures of 
the other participant at the meeting, Cheryll Sotheran.
Multimodal analysis can provide valuable insights in interpreting interaction 
and a richer and deeper understanding of what is going on. It is worth noting 
that this kind of analysis has other labels too, as it has been developed within a 
range of approaches to discourse analysis, due to the increased availability and 
accessibility of video recording technology. You might encounter it described 
as “non-verbal communication”, but this focus on nonlinguistic aspects of 
interactions such as gesture and gaze also form a crucial part of interactional 
linguistics, which was mentioned earlier in this chapter.
Memes are another fascinating area involving visual communication where 
multimodal analysis is crucial. Memes are multimodal elements of culture which 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
553
are passed online from one person to another. They combine images and text in 
picture or video form and, as they are copied and spread, they are modified in 
interesting and clever ways. Memes often use non-​standard and ironic language 
with the aim of being entertaining –​ perhaps funny or silly. They are perfect 
examples of language play.
Source: Adapted from original illustration by Martin Kozlowski.
The illustration by Martin Kozlowski, as shown above, originally appeared in 
The New York Times in 2015, and became the source of a series of memes. The 
illustration depicts a Trojan horse, which legend says Odysseus used to secretly 
enter the city of Troy and win the Trojan War. Metaphorically, a Trojan horse 
has come to mean any tactic that allows someone to trick an opponent into 
inviting them into a protected place. While the original illustration commented 
on social media companies infiltrating the mainstream media, meme creators 
created alternative meanings by adding text to label its different parts.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
554
 
Source: Adapted from original illustration by Martin Kozlowski.
In the illustration shown above, the castle is represented as people I meet at a 
party, the person leading the horse into the city walls as me, the horse as small 
talk and the hidden enemy as Critical Discourse Analysis. These elements work 
together to create a humorous scenario in the mind of the viewer, who imagines 
an over-​enthusiastic discourse analyst chatting to unsuspecting partygoers, all the 
while preparing to derail the conversation to CDA. Other creators have adopted 
the same basic approach to refer to a whole range of themes, for example a child 
being called to dinner by their mother only to be “tricked” into setting the table, 
or a person realising with disappointment that what appears to be a chocolate 
chip cookie is actually filled with raisins.
Discourse analysts find memes interesting for a number of reasons. They dem-
onstrate ways in which people are clever and creative, yet within the constraints 
of taken-​for-​granted structures. Creating a meme involves imitating and recre-
ating an existing combination of image and text, so that it transforms into some-
thing similar and familiar but new.
Another reason that memes are interesting is the fact that they are intertextual. 
Each new meme adds layers of meaning so memes are not fully understandable 
(or sometimes not understandable at all) unless the viewer has seen several of 
their previous forms. So being able to interpret a meme involves the satisfying 
shared cultural experience of being in on a joke. For sociolinguists, then, the 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
555
analysis of memes offers insights into what particular social and cultural groups 
find interesting, diverting and witty, as well as how people work together to 
spread new language forms.
Exercise 24
How important do you think emoji are in text communication?
What is the range of meanings they can convey?
Can they ever substitute for written text?
Answer at end of chapter
Conclusion
This chapter has provided a brief taste of just a small selection from a range of 
different ways of carrying out discourse analysis. It will be clear that discourse 
analysis provides useful tools for sociolinguists who are interested in describing 
in detail the ways of speaking and writing associated with particular social and 
cultural groups in social context and, as illustrated in this chapter, it is especially 
valuable in highlighting sources of contrast between groups and potential areas 
of cross-​cultural misunderstanding.
Each approach emphasises different aspects of the way discourse is used in 
communication. Pragmatics is concerned with the analysis of meaning in inter-
action and, from the sociolinguist’s perspective, the development of theories of 
politeness have offered a good deal of insight into the differing ways in which 
people use discourse in context, and especially in accounting for why discourse 
is not consistently brief, truthful, relevant and clear.
The ethnography of speaking approach is particularly valuable when 
describing communicative events for a group whose cultural or social norms 
are not those of the majority group. The framework it provides ensures that 
researchers do not overlook important features of the event, and also that 
they do not over-​emphasise aspects which are “business as usual” for the 
participants. An interactional sociolinguistics approach similarly highlights the 
wider sociocultural context within which events take place, but this approach 
pays particular attention to the linguistic and nonlinguistic clues which account 
for how people interpret conversational interaction within its ethnographic 
context.
The fourth approach exemplified in this chapter, Conversation Analysis, is a 
method of analysing much more than conversation, but conversation is regarded 
as basic. Meetings and transactional interactions are described in relation to the 
view of conversation as a jointly organised activity, with the significance of any 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
556
utterance highly dependent on its position in a sequence. Versions of CA are typ-
ically used by researchers with a range of theoretical frameworks; they treat CA 
as a set of discourse analysis techniques and apply it in as much detail as they 
consider useful for their purposes. Researchers who adopt a Critical Discourse 
Analysis framework, for example, can use CA to highlight particular features of 
an interaction which exemplify how discourse constructs and maintains power 
relationships, and props up a particular view of “reality”. The same is true of 
multimodal analysis. Attention to modes beyond speech enhances the sophisti-
cation of the analysis within any theoretical framework, and provides valuable 
additional insights about how social meaning is conveyed in interaction. Memes 
are a very good illustration as it is the combination of textual and visual elem-
ents that is crucial to “getting the joke”.
Norman Fairclough has argued that the widespread societal promotion of 
standard varieties of a language, and the related derogation of vernacular var-
ieties, is a specific example of hegemony or domination which the critical dis-
course analyst should expose and challenge. This issue is discussed in the next 
chapter on attitudes to language. Abstract concepts like “the standard language” 
and “good grammar” are typically associated in the minds of many people 
with authority, hierarchy, tradition and elitism, and the “correct” way of doing 
things. A Critical Discourse Studies approach to this issue emphasises that these 
concepts are based on arbitrary, superficial rules of the formal standard language 
of a community, that they have no intrinsic status, and that they derive their sig-
nificance from their association with the rich, educated and powerful members 
of a society. Chapter 15 picks up some of these themes and examines the contri-
bution of attitudes to sociolinguistic realities.
Methods
This chapter has illustrated six different methods for carrying out discourse analysis:
1	
Pragmatics and politeness theory
2	
Ethnography of speaking
3	
Interactional sociolinguistics
4	
Conversation Analysis
5	
Critical Discourse Analysis
6	
Multimodal analysis.
Every exercise has provided some ideas for methods of discourse analysis, as well as 
suggesting sources of suitable data for analysis: e.g. (social) media, recorded speech, 
written texts, corpora, advertising material, memes, etc. Also consider how crucial it is 
to get video-​recorded interaction in order to conduct multimodal analysis, but be aware 
it can be difficult to find people who are willing to be recorded on video (though the 
increase in Zoom interactions as a result of coronavirus COVID-​19 may have reduced this 
problem for some).
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
557
We do not have space to cover more, but there are other methods for carrying out 
discourse analysis which you can read about if you are interested: e.g. genre analysis, dis-
cursive psychology and speech act theory.
Chapters in Holmes and Hazen (2014) and Vine (2018) also illustrate specific ana-
lytical approaches in detail. Stubbe et al. (2003) and Vine (2020) helpfully provide 
examples of different approaches to the same discourse extract. There are also many 
handbooks with material on different approaches to discourse analysis, such as Gee and 
Handford (2013).
See Heller, Pietikäinen and Pujolar (2017) for detailed guidance on research methods in 
the area of critical sociolinguistics.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 14
Answer to ­exercise 1
By stating that he is getting enough pain relief and that he is using it any time he 
needs it, Lionel implies that he is making use of the pain relief; but he does not 
actually say so explicitly. A more direct response would be No I don’t need it. 
Because Lionel responds indirectly, Kirsty infers that he is not using it (line 6). 
People typically expect responses to be truthful and relevant, unless they have 
reason to suspect otherwise. Because Kirsty suspects Lionel is being “brave” and 
avoiding taking pain relief, she examines his responses carefully, and correctly 
infers that he is not taking pain relief. In the next section of this chapter, some of 
the bases for such pragmatic inferences are examined.
Answer to ­exercise 2
This exchange illustrates Lakoff’s politeness rule 3: Be friendly. This is friendly 
social talk; the content is not important; the talk is primarily social or affective in 
function, designed to establish rapport and maintain good collegial relationships. 
Being friendly and engaging in social talk or “small talk” is considered one way 
of being positively polite by many but not all sociocultural groups.
Answer to ­exercise 3
This is an exchange between two people who know each other well in a Greek 
community. It is interesting to note that the responder acknowledges that the 
apologiser is indeed disturbing them, but then makes a positively polite comment. 
While this kind of response might occur jokingly between very close friends 
in my community, a more likely response would be No problem, you are not 
disturbing us at all.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
558
Answer to ­exercise 5
In terms of the advantages, this data collection method enables the researcher to:
•	Collect information about a much wider range of situations and from a larger 
group of people than could be collected using observation or recording.
•	Manipulate the social variables: e.g. to systematically vary aspects of the 
relationship between the participants (e.g. social distance or status),  and the 
ranking of the imposition.
•	Access sociolinguistic and pragmatic norms –​ to identify what people believe is 
appropriate and correct verbal behaviour in different contexts.
Disadvantages include the following:
•	People are often inaccurate in what they report. They tend to report what 
they think they would say rather than what they would actually say in the 
situation.
•	Because it is written, the data is edited, so important information about pauses, 
hesitations, etc. which typically occur in speech are omitted.
•	Because they are writing rather than speaking, people tend to give short 
responses.
•	There is no information (generally) about the dynamics of an interaction, 
e.g. how an invitation or request is “negotiated” between the different 
participants.
Answer to ­exercise 9
1	
Delimiting speech communities is a task for the linguist if one adopts Lyons’ 
definition, since it involves delimiting dialects and languages. There is an 
implicit assumption of a monolingual community.
2	
Hymes’ definition takes account of shared cultural norms, as described 
earlier in this chapter.
3	
Fishman’s definition takes account of multilingual individuals and requires 
only one shared variety to define the community; it also takes into account 
shared social rules for using that variety.
4	
Gumperz’ definition includes the possibility of multilingual speech commu-
nities and, distinctively, uses density of social interaction as a criterion for 
delimiting the community.
5	
Labov’s definition is unusual in using shared evaluative norms about speech 
as the distinguishing feature of a speech community; norms which he suggests 
will be reflected in speech usage patterns.
Answer to ­exercise 10
The various definitions of a speech community focus on a shared language or 
shared norms of speech or speaking. By contrast, a community of practice is 
defined by shared activities or practices. The defining characteristics are generally 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
559
agreed to be regular interaction, a jointly negotiated enterprise or agreed goals, 
and a shared repertoire of ways of speaking established over time. Whereas a 
speech community might be as large as a country or a city or a suburb, a com-
munity of practice has more typically been identified with smaller units, such as 
a hiking group, a street gang, a choir or a sports team.
Answer to ­exercise 11
(a)	 There are many possible examples which you could use to answer this 
question: e.g. doctor–​patient interactions where the doctor discusses the 
patient’s problems backstage with a colleague or a nurse before meeting the 
patient frontstage; shop managers may discuss customers’ orders backstage 
with an assistant before the assistant interacts frontstage with the customer; 
and hairdresser apprentices may discuss possible treatments for a customer 
backstage with a more experienced colleague before interacting with the 
customer frontstage.
(b)	 There are many potential features. In very general terms, backstage 
interactions tend to be characterised by more informal and colloquial styl-
istic features, while frontstage interactions tend to include more standard 
and formal features. Features which have been identified in recent research 
include:
•	terms of address: nicknames and endearments or insults characterise back-
stage talk in some contexts, while they generally do not occur in frontstage 
interactions
•	the kind of humour which occurs backstage is often cruder or more 
contestive than the humour in frontstage talk
•	small talk and social talk contribute significantly to many backstage 
interactions whereas they typically contribute in a more limited and rou-
tine way to frontstage interactions
•	frontstage interactions often include a certain amount of formulaic talk 
and routines whereas backstage talk may not.
Of course, these are all generalisations and you may be able to think of many 
exceptions. Your own observations will assist you in identifying distinctive dis-
course features of backstage and frontstage contexts in which you participate.
Answer to ­exercise 12
In very broad terms, the switches between Buang and Tok Pisin cue social 
meanings related to solidarity vs. power.
Answer to ­exercise 13
This is a relatively formal interview between a manager and a policy analyst in 
her department, so we approach it with a transactional schema for workplace 
interviews.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
560
There are two possible sub-​schemas which might be relevant. Firstly, Claire 
could be genuinely seeking advice from Tom to help her succeed in being 
promoted in the future. Alternatively, or perhaps additionally, she could be 
making a complaint about having been passed over for someone else. The para-
linguistic information that she swallows and tuts (lines 2–​3) suggests she is ner-
vous, indicating that perhaps she intends to do more than just seek advice, which 
is not a very face-​threatening act. Her choice of the words actually and favour-
ably (line 4) support this suggestion, since they focus on the complaint aspect of 
her topic.
In his response, Tom focuses on the word favourably to indicate that he dis-
agrees with Claire’s perception of what happened (line 5). Tom reframes the 
decision being discussed as a neutral one dictated by factors beyond his con-
trol. An interactional sociolinguistic approach would also note that he uses 
the speaker-​oriented pragmatic hedges I don’t think to attenuate his disagree-
ment (line 5) and I mean to introduce his alternative interpretation of what had 
happened (line 6).
Answer to ­exercise 14
One set of possible pairings (i.e. others are possible too):
1A	 Just be careful when you open that 
cupboard
Warning
1B	
OK thanks
Acknowledgement
2A	 Can I help you?
Offer/​request
2Ba	 I’d like some juice
Response to offer/​request
2Bb	 No I am fine thanks
Refuse offer
3A	 Don’t talk to me like that
Complaint
3Ba	 Sorry I didn’t mean to be rude
Apology/​response to complaint
3Bb	 Like what?
Denial/​challenge
3Bc	 Well don’t you boss me around
Counter-​complaint
4A	 I can’t understand what you’re saying
Complaint
4Ba	 Too bad
Response to complaint
4Bb	 OK, let me try again
Response to complaint/​offer
5A	 When you say go to the end, do you 
mean as far as the bus station?
Seek clarification
5B	
Yes, the bus station is the end of this 
street
Clarification
6A	 You’ve left me all the dirty dishes again
Accusation/​complaint
6Ba	 I haven’t actually, most of them are in 
the dishwasher
Denial
6Bb	 Sorry but I just have to go or I’ll be late
Admission, apology, excuse
7A	 Could you open the door?
Request
7B	
My hands are full
Indirect refusal
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
561
The list of possible B responses in ­examples 2, 3, 4 and 6 makes it clear that 
there are often alternative second parts in adjacency pairs. It is generally possible 
to establish which are potential second parts by attending to linguistic clues. The 
most obvious are references to shared lexical items (bus station) or items from 
the same lexical set (dishes, dishwasher), but there are more subtle clues which 
a CA approach highlights, such as the particles OK (1B, 4Bb), well (3Bc) and 
yes (5B).
Answer to ­exercise 15
The initial utterance includes the phrase guess what followed by a one-​second 
pause, which can be interpreted as a signal that Ann expects Liz to make an 
inference, and perhaps to be shocked or surprised by what follows. Liz does 
not produce the expected second part indicating surprise until line 4. Thus lines 
2 and 3 constitute a side sequence which serves to identify crucial information 
needed by Liz (namely that Phad Moo Sub is a meat dish) in order to interpret 
the basis on which Ann expects her to be surprised. The particle oh in line 4 
indicates that Liz has now got the point and has made an inference (that the 
host did not know that Sally did not eat meat) on the basis of Ann’s previous 
utterance.
Answer to ­exercise 17
Dan supplies many opportunities for Tom to contribute to the conversation, 
including:
•	providing the first parts of potential adjacency pairs
•	pausing at places where feedback could occur
•	using the invitational facilitative tag eh.
However, Tom makes only one contribution to the conversation, a negative 
minimal response, no, in response to a direct question, talk to any girls?
Tom also fails to respond to remarks directly addressed to him (lines 1, 3 
and 7), absences which CA suggests are “notable” in this context. Without con-
textual information we cannot know the reason for Tom’s lack of conversational 
cooperation, but CA provides useful tools to identify the fact that there seems to 
be some conversational trouble here.
Answer to ­exercise 19
At least three clues suggesting interactional trouble:
1	
Disruptive interruption –​ Renee overlaps Clara’s speech by several words 
(lines 3–​4).
2	
High volume and stress on YOU (line 4) suggests a rather aggressive stance.
3	
Raised eyebrow and stress on trying (line 5) conveys the implication that 
Renee’s interruption is interpreted as unhelpful.
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
562
Answer to ­exercise 20
There is abundant evidence within the interaction, both verbal and non-​verbal, 
that Cliff Whiting experiences the discursive behaviour of Ron Trotter as disrup-
tive and problematic. How you interpret what is going on depends, however, on 
the theoretical perspective you adopt.
An interactional sociolinguistics approach might highlight the clash of 
different cultural norms involved. Māori discourse norms and rules for speaking 
in formal contexts strictly adhere to a rule that one person holds the floor at 
a time, and a speaker is allowed to complete their turn uninterrupted. From a 
Pākehā perspective, interruption can be interpreted as conveying enthusiasm or 
passion, and this is another possible interpretation of what is going on here.
Answer to ­exercise 21
(a)	 Features that suggest that Chris is not conforming to the community’s 
expectations when speaking to the headmaster:
•	Chris’ use of vernacular rather than standard forms (e.g. -​in’ rather than -​ing 
forms) in the relatively formal context of an interview with the headmaster.
•	Chris’ use of challenging tags to a superior: i’n it? do we?.
•	Chris’ explicit challenge to the headmaster’s implication that hanging 
about the square is not acceptable behaviour anyway, we always go down 
the square after school.
•	Chris asks a question (What about that bust-​up in the Odeon carpark at 
Christmas?) and the headmaster answers it, whereas one would expect 
neither Chris to ask questions nor the headmaster to respond in such an 
interview.
(b)	 On each of these points, Chris’ behaviour fits the stereotype of male rather 
than female speech, as discussed in earlier chapters.
Answer to ­exercise 22
A detailed analysis of a transcript would take too much space, so the answer 
below provides just a starting point for the analysis, illustrating some points that 
might emerge from a consideration of the first few components of van Dijk’s 
framework. It is based on a typical university undergraduate seminar scenario:
Access: Only the teacher can book the teaching room and access the relevant 
teaching resources.
Setting: The location and timing of a seminar is typically in a place more con-
venient to the teacher than the students (though an overarching timetable 
and room bookings system operated by the institution often imposes an 
even higher level of constraint).
Participant positions and roles: Relevant identities are teacher, students; stu-
dent presenting a paper. The teacher has the right to determine what will 
count as a valid contribution, declare what is relevant, etc.
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
563
Genre: The teacher is generally much more familiar than the students with the 
structure and discourse appropriate to a seminar.
Speech acts:
Teachers tend to use:
longer, more sustained informative speech acts
evaluative speech acts
test questions (to which they know the answers)
directives.
Students tend to use:
short informative speech acts
information seeking questions.
Topics: The teacher typically determines the agenda and main topics for 
discussion.
If you can record such a session, you could expand the analysis to examine how 
the discourse further constructs the power relations evident in the non-​verbal 
dimensions. You might consider, for instance, evidence of presupposed positions, 
beliefs, attitudes, and so on. Note, for instance, the use of particles such as you 
know, of course, obviously and clearly which imply shared presuppositions, 
knowledge and experience. Check for pronoun usage: who is we, you, they? 
Consider who sums up and what their summary reveals about their position in 
relation to the topic.
Answer to ­exercise 24
Emoji provide very restricted ways of conveying meaning which can substitute 
for only a narrow range of messages such as I agree, great, I feel sad/​angry/​
happy, etc. Context is crucial to their interpretation, as always in sociolinguistic 
analysis. However, when combined with text, emoji can fulfil a similar role to 
that of gesture in spoken communication.
Do you have data which would challenge this answer? See Seargeant (2019) 
for a detailed sociolinguistic response to the issue.
Note too that recent American research suggests that the meaning of lol has 
evolved and is now being used as an empathetic marker rather than an abbrevi-
ation for “laugh out loud”.
Concepts introduced
•	Pragmatics
•	Conversational maxims
•	Politeness theory
•	Rapport management framework
•	Ethnography of speaking
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
564
•	Backstage and frontstage performance
•	Interactional sociolinguistics
•	Contextualisation cues
•	Conversation Analysis (CA)
•	Adjacency pairs
•	Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA)
•	Multimodal analysis
•	Memes
References
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Drew and Heritage (1992) for the concept of “notable absences”
Goffman (1959) on backstage and frontstage
Holmes and Meyerhoff (1999) on differences between community of practice 
and speech community
Keenan (1976) on Malagasy communicative norms
Lee-​Wong (2000); Usami (2002) on politeness strategies in Asian cultures
Milroy (1987: ­chapter 2) on silence during visits in working-​class Belfast homes
New Idea, December 2006, p.42 was the source of the advert for an anti-​   
inflammatory
Nwoye (1989) on Igbo proverbs
Rendle-​Short (2015) on responses to text message requests
Richards (2006) on back region and front region
Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1978) on CA
Saville-​Troike (2003) for examples of the components of the ethnography of 
communication
Sherzer (1977) on the Cuna Indians
Spencer-​Oatey (2008) on rapport management
Spencer-​Oatey and Franklin (2009) on intercultural miscommunication
Stivers et al. (2009) on turn-​taking and time between turns
Stubbe (1998) on minimal feedback by Māori vs. Pākehā conversationalists
Thomas (1995: 76) on the suspension of implicatures in cultures where the norm 
is not to refer to the dead
Vine and Marsden (2016) on eh in New Zealand English
Wenger (1998) on communities of practice
White (1989) on back-​channeling by Anglo-​Americans vs. Japanese 
conversationalists
Wilson (2011) on backstage and frontstage
www.youtube.com/​watch?v=​4fW7h3NvmBs on Judith Collins’ eyebrows as 
contextualisation cues
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
565
Quotations, definitions and sources:
Example 1 is from Drew and Chilton (2000: 145): it has been slightly edited for 
ease of reading
Example 4 is transcribed from an episode of the popular New Zealand soap 
Shortland Street ©South Pacific Pictures Serials Limited 1995
Example 9 is from Holmes and Fillary (2000)
Example 11 is from Lee-​Wong (2000: 143): it has been edited for ease of reading
Example 12 is from Kouletaki (2005: 260–​2): the examples are translated from 
questionnaire responses provided in Greek
Example 13 is from Sifianou (2001: 395): the example is translated from Greek
Example 14 is based on Spencer-​Oatey and Xing (2003)
Example 15 is from Harris (2001: 467)
Example 16 is based on a genuine incident described by the late Terry Crowley
Example 17 was provided by Martin Paviour-​Smith based on his field-​working 
experience
Example 20 is from Holmes and Marra (2002)
Example 21 is adapted from Heller (1982: 116–​17)
Example 24 is adapted from an example in Takano (2005: 648)
Example 25 is elaborated from an account in Gumperz (1982: 173)
Example 26 is from Roberts, Davies and Jupp (1992): it has been slightly edited 
for ease of reading
Example 27 is from Stubbe et al. (2003). The discussion draws in particular 
on observations by Maria Stubbe and Elaine Vine in the interactional 
sociolinguistics section.
Example 33 is from research on children’s telephone conversations described in 
Holmes (1981)
Examples 34, 35, 37, 38, 41 and 42 are edited excerpts from the Wellington 
Language in the Workplace corpus
Example 36 is an excerpt from the New Zealand film Getting to Our Place, 
transcribed by Julia de Bres. A video clip of this excerpt is available through 
the online version of the Elsevier Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics.
Example 39 is from the TV series Prime Suspect
Example 43 is adapted from Fairclough (1989: 68–​9)
Example 44 is adapted from Lee (1992: 98ff)
Example 45 is adapted from Harres (1993). The first excerpt is from a med-
ical textbook (Llewellyn-​Jones 1982: 209); the second is from a handbook 
produced by the Boston Women’s Health Book Collective (1984: 510).
Example 46 is from Tulin (1997:108)
Example 47 is based on data from Waldvogel (2005)
Exercise 5 is taken from Liao and Bresnahan (1996)
Exercise 21 is based on Van Dijk’s (1998) CDA approach to text
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
566
Definition of “contextualisation cues” is from Gumperz (1982: 131)
Igbo proverb in ­example 10 is taken from Nwoye (1989)
Definition of CA as jointly organised activity is from Sacks (1984)
Definition of adjacency pairs is from Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1978)
The examples cited from The Weakest Link can be found on the following web-
site: www.bbc.co.uk/​programmes/​b006mgvw
Julia de Bres provided the material on memes, including the second Trojan 
horse image
Keely Kidner provided input for the section on multimodal analysis
Useful additional reading
Blommaert (2005)
Bucholtz and Hall (2016) on multimodal analysis
Cameron (2001)
Copland and Creese (2015) provide a detailed description of ethnographic meth-
odology to collect and analyse data
Couper-​Kuhlen and Selting (2017) on interactional linguistics
Culpeper (2011)
Deumart (2014) on a sociolinguistic approach to digital communication 
including SMS, email, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, blogging, etc
Freytag (2019) on politeness in business emails in Spanish and English
Gee (2014)
Gee and Handford (2013)
Goffman (1981)
Gumperz and Cook-​Gumperz (2012)
Heller, Pietikäinen and Pujolar (2017) on critical sociolinguistic methods
Holmes (2018b) on the boundary between sociolinguistics and pragmatics
Holmes and Hazen (2014): ­chapter 12 by Janet Holmes provides a description of 
how to carry out discourse analysis and ­chapter 14 by Paul Drew describes 
how to undertake CA analysis
Hyland (2013): an introductory reader which covers basic concepts intelligibly
Jewitt (2009) on multimodal analysis
Johnstone (2017)
Jones, R.H. (2019)
Kaplan-​Wenger and Ullman (2015)
Ledin and Machin (2020) on multimodal analysis
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 10
Norris (2019) on methods of multimodal analyis
Paltridge (2012)
Seargeant (2019)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ANALYSING DISCOURSE
567
Shifman (2013) on memes
Sidnell (2010)
Spencer-​Oatey and Kádár (2020) on intercultural politeness
Strauss and Feiz (2014)
Stubbe et al. (2003)
Thomas (1995)
Thornbury (2005)
Vine (2018, 2020)
 
 
 
 

568
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-19
Attitudes to language
Example 1
Sir,
What are teachers doing today? They don’t seem to know the first thing 
about teaching pronunciation. One mispronunciation which really galls me 
is when people say LORE instead of law. On radio and TV LORE and 
order is replacing law and order in the speech of all the announcers. Can’t 
people see that lore and law, saw and soar are different words? Introducing 
these superfluous r s all over the place is a sign of ignorance. Yesterday my 
son SOAR a frog in the pond he tells me. Though his teacher isn’t a bore, 
she appears to be a boor as far as teaching him which words have an r in 
them and which don’t!
People who hold strong views about the way words should be pronounced 
illustrate nicely the themes of this chapter. The issue of whether r should be 
pronounced or not pronounced in English is an especially good example of the 
arbitrariness of the linguistic features which attract such attention, as we saw in 
­chapters 9 and 10. There is nothing intrinsically good or bad about [r]‌-​pronoun-
cing. Yet in some communities it is regarded as an example of “good speech”, 
while in others [r]-​pronouncing is regarded as humorous, rustic and as evidence 
of lack of education. Ultimately attitudes to language reflect attitudes to the users 
and the uses of language, as we shall see in this chapter. There is nothing intrin-
sically beautiful or correct about any particular sound. Swallow, for example, 
has positive connotations when people associate the word with the bird, but if 
you define it as the action which follows chewing, the associations alter, and so 
do assessments of the word’s “beauty”. Context is all!
Attitudes and applications
15
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
569
A concept that is closely related to language attitudes is language ideology. 
The distinction between the two is not always clear, and some sociolinguists 
use the terms interchangeably. The main distinction is that language ideologies 
are deeply seated beliefs that people hold about language and are reflected in 
societal values (and the prestige) of languages and language varieties. Language 
attitudes are more personal and are more influenced by the beliefs of the indi-
vidual speaker and hearer. Importantly, language ideology also tends to include 
how a person views their own language(s), such as which language they consider 
to be more emotional, or which language they see as more practical.
Some critics of [r]‌-​less accents argue that they will disadvantage their users in 
the area of reading in particular. They argue that people who don’t distinguish 
the pronunciation of lore and law or sword and sawed are storing up literacy 
problems for the future. It is easy to demonstrate that such fears are ill-​founded. 
While pronunciation differences can be a help in distinguishing different 
meanings, they are not essential. People manage to distinguish the meanings of 
son and sun, break and brake, and write, rite and right, despite the fact that they 
sound the same in most accents of English. But this kind of argument, linking 
linguistic attitudes which are based in social prejudice to often spurious edu-
cational consequences, is surprisingly widespread. The second section of this 
chapter discusses these issues as one example of applied sociolinguistics, dem-
onstrating the impact of sociolinguistic research in the “real world”. In the final 
section of the chapter, the research of sociolinguists in the area of forensic lin-
guistics provides another illustration of how sociolinguistics can make a useful 
contribution in the wider society.
Example 2
“Danish is not a language, but a throat disease,” wrote one Norwegian 
respondent in reply to a 1950s postal questionnaire asking for Scandinavian 
people’s opinions of the relative aesthetic qualities of Swedish, Danish and 
Norwegian.
The results of the questionnaire referred to in ­example 2 placed Swedish 
first and Danish at the bottom of the pile. These results reflected not so much 
the relative aesthetic qualities of the three languages as the political fortunes 
of the three countries associated with each language. Sweden was at that time 
the undoubted political leader, while Denmark –​ the former ruling power –​ was 
in a less influential political position. People’s attitudes to Swedish and Danish 
reflected Scandinavian politics rather than any intrinsic linguistic features of 
the language. With the rise of Danish influence through its membership of the 
European Economic Community, the results from a similar questionnaire in the 
twenty-​first century would likely be very different. Of course, these results are 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
570
also influenced by the identity of the respondents, since many studies show that 
people generally (though not always) value their own language variety above 
others, at least in terms of pleasantness.
It has been suggested that intelligibility is also affected by attitudes. People 
generally find it easier to understand languages and dialects spoken by people 
they like or admire. A closely related point, at least for majority group members, 
is that people are more highly motivated, and consequently often more successful, 
in acquiring a second language when they feel positive towards those who use 
it. Clearly attitudes to language have interesting implications both for politicians 
and language teachers.
People generally do not hold opinions about languages in a vacuum. They 
develop attitudes towards languages which indicate their views about those 
who speak the languages, and the contexts and functions with which they are 
associated. Consider the discussion about indexicality in the Interlude: the 
attitudes that people hold about other social groups based on stereotypes are 
mapped onto the language variety, which becomes an attitude they hold to that 
language variety, and thus whenever they hear it, the stereotype is indexed. 
Language attitude research is one way to uncover the indexicalities that char-
acterise a particular code, or language feature. On the other hand, when people 
listen to accents or languages they have never heard before, their assessments are 
totally random. There is no pattern to them. In other words, there is no evidence 
for universal consensus about which languages sound most beautiful and which 
most ugly, despite people’s beliefs that some languages are just inherently more 
beautiful than others.
Example 3
These are all real complaints from viewers/​listeners about the pronunci-
ation of the on the Australian Broadcasting Corporation (ABC).
1	
One of your announcers (young woman –​ don’t know name) doing 
a station promo refers to “thu” ABC instead of “thee” ABC –​ which 
should be the pronunciation of “the” before a vowel. It sounds unedu-
cated and is annoying.
2	
She says tha instead of the. Her voice sounds like she should be on 
a commercial station. She sounds rough and not the usual abc voice. 
I know I sound like mrs Bucket however I feel better now I?ve had 
my say.
3	
I was taught at school & at home that the correct pronunciation 
of the word “the” is “thuh” unless the following word starts with 
a vowel when it is pronounced “thee”. This has been the case for at 
least the last 60 odd years. I am surprised at the number of ABC staff 
that I hear on the radio that aren’t aware of this convention/​rule & 
pronounce it as “thuh” even if the following word starts with a vowel 
& this also includes when they mention their employer......“thuh” 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
571
ABC. These staff are mostly young women, but I have heard at least 
one male as well pronouncing incorrectly. Is this not being taught 
in schools any more or is this just another instance of new “trendy 
speak”. I look forward to hearing your thoughts on this situation.
Note: All punctuation and spelling has been preserved from the originals.
Example 3 provides examples of complaints about a particular linguistic fea-
ture of English; the pronunciation of the before vowels (or the pre-​vocalic def-
inite article). Most people seem unaware of this feature, although there does 
appear to be a change in progress. What these complaints show is that some 
people have taken issue with the ABC broadcasters’ pronunciation. Notice that, 
for the most part, the targets of the criticism are (young) women. What might 
this say about the identity of the complainants? In studies of language stigma, 
we often find that women’s speech is more heavily criticised than men’s speech. 
Indeed, men and women can use the same feature, but when this is criticised in 
public, it is usually women who bear the brunt of the criticism, as discussed in 
­chapter 12.
Attitudes to language are strongly influenced, then, by social and political 
factors, as was evident in the discussion in many earlier chapters. Language var-
ieties have indexing properties which all members of the community are aware 
of. Language planners must take account of attitudes when they select a suit-
able language for development as an official or national language. Attitudes to 
pidgins and creoles, for instance, present major impediments to their promotion 
and acceptance as official languages, or for use in schools.
In some countries, the official status given to unpopular languages has caused 
problems. There have been riots in Belgium and India over language issues, and 
bombings and the removal or defacement of English road signs have illustrated 
the strength of people’s feelings about the place of English in Wales and Gaelic-​
speaking parts of Scotland. In Quebec, it was found in the 1960s that French 
Canadians tended to rate recorded English Canadian voices very positively, as 
more intelligent, competent and likeable, for instance, than French Canadian 
voices. By the 1970s, however, ratings of French Canadians were higher, reflecting 
increased political awareness, and the increased self-​esteem that went with this. 
In the twenty-​first century, English retains high status and is regarded as essential 
in the workplace, but there has also been more cultural and linguistic mixing, 
and some softening of the antagonism between members of the Anglophone and 
Francophone communities. Language attitudes are very sensitive to social and 
political changes. The growing body of research comparing Quebec French and 
Parisian French indicates that interest in the distinctiveness of Quebec French 
has risen considerably –​ further evidence that attitudes to language provide 
insights about social, economic and political relationships.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
572
Language attitudes can have a great influence in areas such as education. 
Arguments in Somalia about which script should be used to write down Somali, 
a Cushitic language, delayed progress in increasing literacy rates for decades. 
The most influential factors in this debate were not the intrinsic merits of the 
alternative scripts, but rather people’s attitudes to speakers and writers of Arabic 
and English and the functions for which those languages were used. Supporters 
of Arabic script pointed to the prestige, the religious significance and the cul-
tural importance of Arabic for the people of Somalia. It was claimed that some 
of the religious poetry written by Somalis in Arabic surpassed in its ardour and 
zeal similar compositions by the Arabs. Those who advocated the Latin alphabet 
pointed to its usefulness and the access it would give to scientific and techno-
logical information. An attempt at a hybrid script, known as Osmanian script 
after its inventor Osman Yusuf, was tried, but failed to catch on. Finally, in 1973 
a Latin script was adopted and given official status. Some saw this as a triumph 
for efficiency over sentiment. Others regarded it as a bureaucratic decision in 
favour of a culturally sterile script. Attitudes to language certainly contributed 
to the years of stalemate and lack of progress in selecting a script in Somalia.
Exercise 1
How could you test whether people’s opinions about a language are based on the intrinsic 
linguistic features of the language (such as its sounds and its grammatical patterns), or 
derive from nonlinguistic factors such as the social and political status of the speakers, or 
the contexts with which the language is associated?
Answer at end of chapter
Overt and covert prestige
Example 4
An elocution class in Belfast. The pupil has just recited a poem using the 
local Belfast pronunciation of words like Jane. The elocution teacher 
responds as follows.
Teacher:	
How do you pronounce her name?
Pupil:	
Jane (with an RP-​like pronunciation)
Teacher:	
How do you remember that?
Pupil:	
The rain in Spain falls mainly on the plain (with an RP-​like 
pronunciation)
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
573
Prestige is a slippery concept. The meaning of overt prestige is reasonably self-​
evident. The standard variety in a community has overt prestige. Speakers who 
use the standard variety are rated highly on scales of educational and occupa-
tional status: their speech indexes their high social status and their social identity. 
These positive ratings indicate the associations of their speech variety, which is 
generally held up as the “best” way of speaking in the community. The standard 
is the variety typically taught in elocution classes, regardless of the pupils’ native 
accents, as ­example 4 illustrates. It is overtly admired and generally identified 
as a model of “good” speech by all sections of the community, regardless of the 
way they themselves speak. In fact, it has been suggested that this agreement 
about the standard variety or “best” accent is what identifies a group of people 
as belonging to a speech community. Regardless of variation in their own speech, 
they all recognise one variety as the standard or norm for the community.
Covert prestige, by contrast, is an odd term which could even be regarded as 
involving two contradictory ideas. How can something have prestige if its value 
is not publicly recognised? The term covert prestige has been widely used, how-
ever, to refer to positive attitudes towards vernacular or non-​standard speech 
varieties. Clearly such varieties are valued or they would not continue to be used. 
Yet when people are asked to comment on them, they rarely admit to valuing 
them (at least to strangers). New Yorkers, for instance, vehemently denounce 
New York speech. One New Yorker described it as “incontrovertibly dumb”. 
After talking to many New Yorkers, Labov described the city as a “sink of nega-
tive prestige”! Similarly, in Norwich, Trudgill was told “I speak ’orrible” by men 
who used the local vernacular. Yet people continue to use the forms they avow-
edly despise. The term covert prestige was introduced to explain the fact that, 
despite their “official” protestations, people clearly do in fact value vernacular 
varieties. They clearly index identities which they value.
In some schools in Britain, and in New Zealand too, children are taught to 
speak RP in elocution classes, but they would never be caught using this accent 
outside the classroom. The local accent is the only possible way of speaking to 
friends, workmates and family. It expresses group identity and solidarity. Not 
surprisingly, many people do not want to sound like Prince Harry, the Duchess 
of Kent, or even the TV newsreaders.
There is also a large group of people who are not aware that they do not 
speak with the accent they admire and regard as the standard. Most people are 
surprised when they hear their own recorded voices. Some of this surprise usu-
ally relates to the pronunciations they hear themselves using. There is a story 
about a public speaker at a conference on speech who inveighed for some time 
against slipshod and sloppy pronunciations such as the use of gonna for going 
to. He ended:
And I tell you I believe that this deplorable pronunciation should be opposed 
by all teachers and eliminated entirely, and I’m gonna make damn sure that 
no child in my class uses it.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
574
Condemned out of his own mouth with a pronunciation which is a wide-
spread and perfectly acceptable one, he collapsed red-​faced and defeated in the 
face of gales of laughter from his audience. Similarly, in ­example 5 Labov tells 
the sad story of how he unintentionally disillusioned a New York woman and 
her daughter about the way they spoke, not realising how damaging this slice of 
reality would be.
Example 5
The case of Debbie S. and Mrs S. ends on an unhappy note. In the discus-
sion of r, both mother and daughter insisted that they always pronounced 
all their r ’s ... They had ridiculed Speaker 2 [one of the speakers on the 
recordings played to them] for dropping a single r, and they could not 
believe that they would make such a mistake themselves. Unwisely I played 
back the section of tape in which Mollie S. recited “Strawberry shortcake, 
cream on top, tell me the name of my sweetheart”. She could hear the con-
sistent [lack of r] in her speech but after a moment’s thought she explained 
the situation as a psychological transference –​ she had imagined herself in 
her childhood setting, and had used a childish speech form. I then played 
a section of careful speech, the discussion of common sense, and also 
Debbie’s reading of the standard text. When Mrs S. and her daughter at 
last accepted the fact that they regularly [omitted r] in their own speech, 
they were disheartened in a way that was painful to see. An interview 
which would otherwise have been an exhilarating experience for this lady 
and her daughter was thus terminated in a bitter disappointment for them 
both: and once the damage had been done, there was no way to restore 
their pride in their own speech.
The realisation that we do not always speak as we had imagined can serve as 
a warning not to be too hasty in judging the speech of others.
Exercise 2
This exercise is intended to give you some idea of how language attitude data is collected 
and of the kind of results which emerge. In order to make the exercise manageable, we 
suggest you use just two recorded voices and ask for responses from a small number of 
people. To obtain results you could generalise from, it would be necessary to use more 
voices and many more respondents.
Record a person from your community with a local accent telling you a story from their 
personal experience. Then record someone with a standard accent (such as RP in England) 
from the TV or radio, talking on a similar personal topic if possible. Then play excerpts from 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
575
the two speakers to two or three of your friends or family and ask them to rate the speakers 
on the following scale.
After listening to the recording, indicate with a tick where you would place the speakers:
Speaker 1
1
2
3
4
5
pleasant
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unpleasant
attractive
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unattractive
self-​confident
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
un-​self-​confident
likeable
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unlikeable
fluent
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
not fluent
reliable
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unreliable
sincere
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
insincere
ambitious
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unambitious
friendly
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unfriendly
intelligent
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
unintelligent
good sense of humour
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
no sense of humour
leadership skills
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
no leadership skills
highly educated
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
uneducated
high status job
—​
—​
—​
—​
—​
low status job
What differences are there in the ratings? How would you explain them?
Answer at end of chapter
Example 6
Ray is a British African Caribbean teenager whose linguistic repertoire 
includes features of Jamaican Creole as well as standard British English 
with a local Manchester accent. He has no illusions about his teacher’s 
views about the language variety that he speaks with his friends:
She’d rather we said nothing at all if we don’t use “proper English”. And 
as for Patois she hits the roof if she hears us using it at school. She calls it 
sloppy, ugly speech.
British Jamaican Creole, or Patois, which was discussed in ­chapters 2 and 
8, seems to be gradually disappearing. But many of its linguistic features have 
been incorporated into local varieties of English. These new varieties are highly 
valued as markers of ethnic identity by their users. Moreover, it seems that 
Patois retains covert prestige since few of those who use it admit to outsiders 
that proficiency in this variety is greatly admired, especially among young Black 
British people. As ­example 6 indicates, official attitudes to the linguistic varieties 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
576
used by young Black people often treat their speech as a deplorably deficient 
form of English which hinders their educational progress. Some teachers have 
described the language of their British African Caribbean pupils as “babyish”, 
“careless and slovenly”, “lacking proper grammar” and “very relaxed like the 
way they walk”! In fact, Patois is a language variety with a complex grammar, 
distinctive pronunciations and some characteristic vocabulary items, as we saw 
in ­chapter 8. It has its own literary material. There are poets and novelists who 
write in Patois. But the new vernacular varieties of English which are gradually 
replacing Patois in the speech of young people are equally condemned by the 
wider society.
Overtly negative attitudes towards their speech reflect the depressed social 
position of British African Caribbean people rather than any features of the lan-
guage varieties they use. African Caribbean migrants arrived in Britain during 
the 1950s and 1960s with a generally positive attitude looking for work. But 
Britain needed mainly unskilled workers, and as a result literate well-​educated 
Caribbean people had to take low-​paid low-​status jobs. Despite this, they were 
confident that their children would do better as a result of a good British educa-
tion. Unfortunately, the reality turned out differently. By the late 1980s, African 
Caribbean people were still working mainly in unskilled and semi-​skilled jobs, 
earning less on average than other groups (though recent figures suggest the 
situation is improving). Moreover, their children were not doing well at school. 
Not only were they not doing as well as children of Indigenous British people, 
they were not even doing as well as the children of other immigrant groups 
in Britain, such as Greeks, Chinese and Indians. Schools tended to blame the 
children and their language for their educational failure (a point mentioned 
in ­chapter 13 which is discussed further below). But there is nothing linguis-
tically inadequate about the way these children speak. Comments about the 
vernacular varieties of English they use are largely based on ignorance and 
prejudice. Most people are not aware of the full complexity of these vernacular 
varieties since they hear very little of them. It is the fact that they are used by 
African Caribbean immigrants –​ a low status group in Britain –​ that shapes 
attitudes towards these varieties.
Similar negative attitudes have been noted by linguists studying recently 
emerging non-​standard varieties of London English, in particular. Since the 
1950s, London has become steadily more multicultural. In any one borough of 
inner London in the twenty-​first century, there at least 100 different languages 
spoken by schoolchildren, with a total of around 300 across the city as a 
whole. The result has been the emergence of the new variety described in 
­chapter 8, Multicultural London English (MLE), sometimes called Jafaican. 
This variety is used by young people of diverse ethnicities, including African 
Caribbean, Black African, Bangladeshi, Moroccan, Columbian, Portuguese 
and white Anglo backgrounds. It is a systematic variety with a core of innova-
tive phonetic, grammatical and discourse features, and it is learned from 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
577
other young people in multicultural friendship groups. This variety too has 
been condemned by the wider public and by some teachers as “slang” and 
“broken English”. Indeed, young people themselves often (mistakenly) refer 
to it as slang.
Society’s overt evaluation of these vernacular varieties clearly reflects 
attitudes to the low social status of economically depressed (and especially 
Black) immigrants and the children of immigrants in Britain. This was clearly 
demonstrated in a study which asked student teachers to rate recordings of five 
children they had never met all talking fluently on the topic of a visit to the den-
tist. The listeners heard a British middle-​class boy, two working-​class children 
and two African Caribbean children. They rated the middle-​class boy most intel-
ligent, most interesting, best behaved and friendliest. Next came the working-​
class children who were both rated alike. Last came the two African Caribbean 
children. Yet one of the African Caribbean children actually spoke twice on 
the recording –​ though the listeners did not realise this. (This is known as the 
matched guise technique.) She spoke once in the Barbadian (African Caribbean) 
accent which she used at home with her friends and family, and once in the 
working-​class accent she used at school. So the same girl was viewed as more 
intelligent, for instance, when she spoke in her working-​class accent than when 
she was identifiable as an African Caribbean child. Clearly, it is the assumed 
ethnic identity and associated social status of the speakers which forms the basis 
of people’s evaluations.
In what follows, we discuss in more detail people’s attitudes to overtly valued 
varieties, such as standard British English and the RP accent, and Standard 
American English or Mainstream White American English, and contrast this 
with attitudes to covertly valued vernacular varieties, such as MLE and African 
American Language.
Exercise 3
Discuss with five different people their views about the language of any immigrant group 
with which you are familiar. The method used to collect information on attitudes to lan-
guage in ­exercise 2 (playing recorded voices) tends to elicit overt norms and attitudes. 
With people you know well, you may be able to get beyond the overt attitudes to find out 
how they really feel about their own speech, the speech of other local people, the speech 
of immigrants and the way the TV newsreaders speak. Do people’s comments on language 
reflect the social status of the groups concerned, as suggested in the previous section of 
this chapter?
Note any evidence in the comments you collect of a difference between covert and overt 
attitudes to language. In other words, do people criticise a variety which they never-
theless use regularly, while saying they admire a variety which they would never or very 
rarely use?
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
578
Attitudes to standard British English and RP
Example 7
(a)	
Next to our people our language is our greatest national asset; it is the 
essential ingredient of the Englishness of England.
(b)	 English ought to be the queen of the curriculum for any British child. 
It is one of the things that define his or her nationality.
Standard British English has an enormous legacy of overt prestige. It has been 
regarded as a symbol of British nationhood, as the quotations in ­example 7 indi-
cate. For well over a century, it has been promoted as the only acceptable variety 
for use in all official domains, including education. By comparison, vernacular 
dialects of English are downgraded. The political and social basis of these attitudes 
is clearly evident, however, when we remember that the elite consensus until at 
least the eighteenth century was that English was a decidedly inferior language, 
less eloquent than Latin or Greek, or even than French and Italian. Prestige codes 
emerge by social consensus and owe nothing to their intrinsic linguistic features.
While there is general agreement on the inferior status of vernacular dialects 
(whatever their covert value as solidarity markers), many people are surprised to 
find that standard accents of English are highly regarded by those who don’t use 
them. This is clearly illustrated by reactions to RP in England. When people are 
asked to assess recordings of RP speakers, they typically rate them as more intelli-
gent, industrious, self-​confident and determined than regional-​accented speakers –​ 
even when the raters themselves speak with a regional accent. RP is rated ahead 
of all other accents on such criteria as communicative effectiveness, social status 
and general pleasantness. People who use RP accents are often taken more ser-
iously, and RP speakers are more likely to persuade people to cooperate. And for 
RP-​speaking women there are even further benefits. They are rated as more com-
petent, less weak, more independent, adventurous and more feminine than non-​
RP speakers. This, incidentally, provides another good reason for the fact, noted 
in ­chapter 7, that women tend to use more prestige forms than men. Women are 
more positively evaluated by others when they use such forms. In New Zealand, 
recordings of women with “broad” New Zealand accents were evaluated very 
negatively; they were even assessed as likely to be “sluts”.
Example 8
But in England, people of education and good social position all speak pure 
English. In New Zealand, this harsh and horrid brogue of ours is perme-
ating every class of society; you get it in the speech of shop-​girls and on the 
lips of university graduates.
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
579
Even outside Britain, RP is still an overtly admired model in many countries 
where English is used, such as Singapore and New Zealand. While attitudes to local 
varieties vary, RP often has a guaranteed place among acceptable prestige forms.
The robustness of such attitudes is remarkable. School inspectors visiting New 
Zealand from Britain in the 1880s described New Zealand speech as “pure and 
undefiled”, preserving all that was good about English pronunciation. By the turn 
of the century, however, a New Zealand accent which was different from RP and 
British regional accents began to develop. The school inspectors’ reports became 
correspondingly less admiring and more critical. Agreeing with the letter writer in 
­example 8, they called New Zealand English an “objectionable colonial dialect”. 
Subsequently, the New Zealand accent was described as “indefensible”, “corrupt”, 
“degraded”, and even “hideous” and “evil-​sounding”. Given the inspectors’ 
British origins, these views were predictable. What is rather more surprising is 
that many New Zealand teenagers in the 1980s and 1990s rated RP more highly 
than any New Zealand accent (though interestingly, by 1998, not as highly as a 
North American accent). One student responded to a recording of a distinctly 
New Zealand accent with the comment “God help us if we all sound like this”.
Once again, the social basis of these attitudes is very clear. Though there 
are many notable exceptions, including Prime Ministers David Lange, Helen 
Clark, John Key, and Jacinda Ardern, it seems to be still the case for most New 
Zealanders (as for people in the UK) that a high level of education and a high-​
status job is associated with an accent closer to RP than to broad New Zealand 
English (or regional UK accents for those in Britain). Hence the persistent rela-
tively high ratings of RP –​ at least on overt measures.
It should be said that there have always been New Zealanders who took a 
different view, objecting, for example, to the adoption of imported so-​called 
“refined” upper-​class vowels. But in the past they were a minority. On the other 
hand, while RP tends to be rated highly on the status dimension, as in Britain, 
local accents generally score more highly on characteristics such as friendliness 
and sense of humour, and other dimensions which measure solidarity or social 
attractiveness. This evidence of the covert prestige of regional accents and ver-
nacular varieties is discussed further in the next section of this chapter.
Attitudes to vernacular forms of English
In the early part of this chapter, we discussed attitudes to British Patois, a var-
iety used by members of the African Caribbean community in Britain (and one 
which seems to be gradually disappearing in the twenty-​first century, with some 
of its linguistic features being absorbed into local vernacular varieties). While 
attitudes are always changing, and new varieties of Black British English, such as 
MLE, are rapidly developing, these varieties can still be described as vernacular 
varieties which are generally condemned or ridiculed by those who consider 
themselves guardians of the language. They are often regarded ambivalently 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
580
even by their users. Another example of a widely known variety of this kind 
is African American Language (AAL). Astonishingly, a recent study found that 
negative evaluations of AAL could be found even among university students in 
Japan, suggesting that Japan has absorbed American racial stereotypes along-
side many other American values. In the USA, AAL has been at the centre of 
a debate about the role of vernacular varieties in education for at least four 
decades.
African American Language
Example 9
... what makes me feel that blacks tend to be ignorant is that they fail to 
see that the word is spelled a-​s-​k not a-​x. And when they say aksed, it 
gives the sentence an entirely different meaning. And that is what I feel 
holds blacks back.
(female call-​in viewer, Oprah Winfrey Show, 1987)
Some examples of structural differences between AAL and Standard American 
English (SAE) and Mainstream White American English (MWAE) were discussed 
in ­chapter 8. Most nonlinguists, however, are unaware of the evidence for AAL 
as a distinct and systematic variety. Consequently, criticism of AAL has been well 
documented by sociolinguists for decades. As ­example 9 indicates, critics typic-
ally assume that AAL use indicates ignorance rather than choice. Given the min-
uscule sound difference between [ask] and [aks], and the lack of logic in arguing 
for a particular pronunciation on the basis of a written form, it is ironic that ask 
has been a particularly frequent focus of comment. (And in fact [aks] for [ask] 
has a long history as a vernacular form since it can be found in the speech of the 
yokels in Shakespearean plays and in Chaucer’s tales too.) Yet this is quite typ-
ical of the kinds of comments made about AAL use, no matter which particular 
feature is selected for condemnation.
Much media use tends to support negative attitudes to AAL. African American 
newsreaders and movie stars typically use SAE/​MWAE, while those entertainers 
and sports celebrities who do use AAL features tend to restrict them to more 
intelligible, stereotypical features in less formal contexts. The prejudices of the 
wider community tend to be reinforced by such behaviour, as well as by the 
subtle reinforcement of negative attitudes provided by the depiction of AAL 
users in TV shows and movies as less well-​educated, down-​at-​heel and often 
unsavoury characters. One interesting analysis showed that the characters who 
used AAL in successful Disney films such as The Jungle Book and The Lion King 
represented animals rather than humans. This is how stereotypes are constructed 
and reinforced.
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
581
Example 10
Negro Dialect
Substandard Negro Dialect
Non-​standard Negro English
Black English
Ebonics
Vernacular Black English
African American Vernacular English
African American English
African American Language
AAL is a prime example of a language variety which is so politically “hot” 
that it has been constantly labelled and re-​labelled, as ­example 10 illustrates. (See 
­chapter 13 for a discussion of political correctness and euphemism.) The term 
Ebonics was originally coined in the 1970s, but it was revived and popularised in 
the 1990s when the Oakland Unified School District Board of Education passed 
a resolution affirming the legitimacy of Ebonics (as they labelled AAL) as a lan-
guage system, and supporting its use as a bridge to learning SAE or MWAE in 
school. The decision created a furore and even resulted in a Senate sub-​committee 
hearing on the status of AAL and its role in education.
Many African American parents were unconvinced of the benefits of using 
AAL and concerned that the time would be better devoted to acquiring SAE/​
MWAE. Their letters to the newspapers and contributions on talk-​back and 
call-​in shows expressed fears that the use of AAL in schools was just another 
strategy for preventing their children from achieving educational success. On 
the other hand, many successful African Americans asserted the importance of 
maintaining and giving status to AAL, and of resisting attempts by the majority 
group to impose SAE/​MWAE on everyone.
Example 11
Language is political. That’s why you and me, my Brother and Sister, that’s 
why we sposed to choke our natural self into the weird, lying, barbarous, 
unreal, white speech and writing habits that the schools lay down like holy 
law. Because in other words the powerful don’t play; they mean to keep 
that power, and those who are the powerless (you and me) better shape 
up mimic/​ape/​suck-​in the very image of the powerful, or the powerful will 
destroy you –​ you and our children.
(June Jordan: poet, writer, political activist)
Adopting SAE/​MWAE, even for part of the time, seems a betrayal of their 
home dialect to many African Americans. The issue has become too politicised 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
582
for the notion of a broader verbal repertoire, or the construction of different 
social identities, to provide a simple resolution. For many minority ethnic group 
members, ethnic identity is fundamental and colours or infuses everything they 
say and do, think and believe. From this perspective, advocating bidialectalism 
is perhaps like asking a woman to pretend to be a man for the duration of each 
working day, or vice-​versa.
The Ebonics debate of the 1990s thus re-​ran the familiar arguments about the 
social disadvantages of using AAL. Reduced to its basic element the argument 
is: “If you use AAL you won’t get a good job”. But those who put forward this 
argument generally imply that African American children who use SAE/​MWAE 
will get good jobs. This is the fallacy. It is clear from the evidence provided 
by US employment statistics that it is ethnicity rather than language which is 
the primary basis of discrimination. Moreover, those African Americans who do 
succeed, achieving occupations such as airline pilots and army officers, are often 
mistaken for service personnel in public places. The problem is racist attitudes, 
not linguistic deficit or even dialect difference, though dialect difference can 
make a contribution, as ­example 12 indicates.
Example 12
The murder of George Floyd by a police officer in 2020 triggered a 
renewed outcry against institutionalised racist attitudes. In an earlier case, 
when George Zimmerman was tried for the shooting of Trayvon Martin, 
sociolinguists argued that Zimmerman was found not guilty of second-​
degree murder because the prosecution’s key witness Rachel Jeantel used 
African American English. She was ridiculed as inarticulate, not credible 
and incomprehensible, and, due to unfamiliarity with the dialect, court 
transcripts of her testimony were highly inaccurate. Later sociolinguistic 
research on juror appraisals found an increase in negative evaluations and 
guilty verdicts when witnesses spoke African American Language. A similar 
case can be made in relation to George Floyd’s language variety.
So negative attitudes to language varieties can serve to reinforce social, racial 
and ethnic prejudice. These issues are developed further in the next two sections 
of this chapter.
Vernacular forms of English: users and contexts
Example 13
Attention to the rules of grammar and care in the choice of words encourages 
punctiliousness in other matters ... The overthrow of grammar coincided 
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
583
with the acceptance of the equivalent of creative writing in social behav-
iour. As nice points of grammar were mockingly dismissed as pedantic and 
irrelevant, so was punctiliousness in such matters as honesty, responsibility, 
property, gratitude, apology and so on.
Support for so-​called grammar teaching often derives from the misleading asso-
ciation of grammar with authority, hierarchy, tradition and elitism, and order 
and rules, as illustrated by ­example 13. What is meant here is not grammar, but 
a number of arbitrary, superficial rules of formal standard British English. Such 
advocates do their cause more harm than good. It is difficult for a sociolinguist 
to take seriously the suggestion that using standard grammar encourages hon-
esty, or that the use of vernacular forms has any connection with ingratitude.
In ­chapter 6 we saw that the standard dialect is primarily a socially defined 
entity, not a linguistically defined one. Standard English (in every country) is 
the English used by educated people with relatively high social status (generally 
referred to as the middle class). So, middle-​class children speak standard English, 
and children from other social groups do not.
It is also worth emphasising a point that was illustrated in ­chapter 10: no-​
one uses 100% vernacular or non-​standard forms. When people talk of non-​
standard English, they are referring to the fact that particular linguistic forms 
occur more often in the speech of one group than another. Omission of the 
verb be in utterances such as she not here, the use of multiple negation, and the 
substitution of [d]‌ for [ð] in words such as the and then, for instance, are all 
features of vernacular dialects, but people who use these forms generally know 
and use the standard forms too. They simply use fewer standard forms than 
those who come from different socioeconomic or ethnic groups. Our speech also 
expresses and constructs our identity. The reason that vernacular forms survive 
is attitudinal. As mentioned above, working-​class children do not want to sound  
like David Cameron or Hillary Clinton. They do not even want to sound like 
their teachers, however well they get on with them. If they were to speak like their 
middle-​class friends, their families would laugh at them for sounding “posh” or 
“stuck-​up” or “prissy”.
It is also true that many people increase their use of standard forms as the 
context becomes more formal (provided they are not deliberately diverging or 
distinguishing their speech from the speech of their interlocuters). This means 
that middle-​class children are unlikely to use any vernacular forms at all when 
they are asked to read aloud, for instance, whereas children from lower socio-
economic groups may use some vernacular forms. The use of vernacular forms 
is clearly patterned and systematic, not random and haphazard. The number 
of standard forms in everyone’s speech increases in formal contexts like school 
and a law court, while the number of vernacular forms increases in relaxed 
casual contexts such as the playground and the home. Vernacular forms express 
the friendliness and relaxed attitudes appropriate in casual contexts.

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
584
Thus the reasons that people condemn vernacular forms are attitudinal, not 
linguistic. Children who use vernacular forms are not disadvantaged by inad-
equate language. They are disadvantaged by negative attitudes towards their 
speech –​ attitudes which derive from their lower social status and its associations 
in people’s minds. Unfortunately, these attitudes often have unhappy educational 
consequences, as we shall see later in this chapter. First, however, a brief look at 
methods of collecting attitude data.
Exercise 4
Think of three ways that a sociolinguist could find out about a community’s attitudes to a 
particular language variety. Identify one advantage or strength and one disadvantage or 
weakness of each method.
Answer in the next section
A note on methodology
Collecting information about attitudes to language is a tricky business. While we 
can use direct observation and questions to elicit overt attitudes, it is much more 
difficult to discover how people evaluate vernacular varieties, especially those 
which are overtly condemned or ridiculed in the media. There are three main 
ways that people have used to collect information on attitudes to language –​ 
observation of use in the public domain, direct questions, and indirect methods –​ 
and they have all been referred to or illustrated at various places in this book.
Societal treatment
Sociolinguists can infer attitudes by observing the way language is used in the 
public domain. This is a very unobtrusive method of collecting data, and a wide 
variety of materials can be used for this purpose. For instance, government 
documents can provide information on the status of different languages; educa-
tional documents can give clues about teachers’ views about students’ language; 
and employment advertisements can indicate which languages or varieties of a 
language are favoured by employers. The representation of dialect in novels is 
another source of attitudinal information: less well-​educated people are often 
represented as using vernacular grammar and strong regional accents.
Cartoons often parody dispreferred language features and they can provide 
useful insights on societal stereotypes. The cartoons in ­chapter 12, for instance, 
provide information on how society views aspects of male–​female interaction. 
Research on the linguistic landscape (discussed in ­chapter 3) provides further 
insights into attitudes to language. The language of advertisements (written and 
spoken) can indicate preferred speech styles and accents, for instance, while 
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
585
multilingual advertisements often indicate the associations of different languages 
in a particular country or community: e.g. Italian with romance and passion, 
French with good food, German with reliability and English with technology 
and success. Even T-​shirts can convey attitudes to language with socio political 
messages such as Kōrerotia te reo Māori! (Speak Māori!).
People regularly express views about language issues on the radio, on TV, 
on the net and in the press. Sociolinguists record people’s views and collect 
letters from the public in newspaper and magazines or on websites as evidence 
of people’s attitudes to language. Many of the examples in this book, such as 
­example 10 in ­chapter 5, ­example 2 in ­chapter 9 and ­example 1 in this chapter, 
are instances of this type of contribution. They provide one kind of evidence 
about attitudes to language. These sources of attitude data are relatively easy to 
access. They can provide useful clues to language changes in progress, and suggest 
areas for further study. Though data collected in this way is rarely adequate for a 
sociolinguist to come to definitive conclusions about how widely such attitudes 
are shared, it can provide interesting indications of the range of attitudes held in 
a community. A study of attitudes to the Māori language expressed in 51 Letters 
to the Editor in the early 1990s, for instance, identified a range of arguments that 
people drew on to support their pro-​Māori or anti-​Māori claims.
So observation can be a good starting point for research and a useful source 
of information about some aspect of attitudes to language, but it rarely provides 
a representative picture of how widely held such views are.
Direct measures
Sociolinguists can ask direct questions about people’s attitudes to particular 
languages or language varieties or even linguistic features: e.g. do you like the 
Welsh language? do you think Welsh sounds beautiful? do you like the sound 
at the beginning of the Welsh word Llandudno? These closed yes/​no questions 
are easy to code so you can collect answers from large numbers of people using 
a written questionnaire or an interview schedule, and then count the responses 
easily. Written questionnaires can be anonymous and they can even be sent out to 
large numbers of people by post, thus accessing a large sample of the community.
Less easy to analyse are responses to open questions: e.g. what do you think 
of the way the Queen of England speaks? what are your views about African 
American Language? what do you think about the pronunciation [aks] for [ask]? 
Answers to these questions require careful analysis; they need to be categorised 
at least into those which are for and against and, as a result, it is less easy to 
draw neat conclusions about people’s views. But they also offer the possibility of 
eliciting richer and more interesting data since the researcher hasn’t decided in 
advance on what the relevant dimensions of analysis will be. Using more open-​
ended questions, it is possible to be surprised and learn something new.
One major disadvantage of such direct approaches to collecting information 
about attitudes is that people may not reveal their true attitudes, especially if 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
586
they feel that their views are unacceptable in the wider community. So if they 
secretly admire or dislike te reo Māori or Welsh or Singlish or AAL, they may 
not admit this to an interviewer who appears to represent a group unsympa-
thetic to their views. Clearly, the age, ethnicity, gender and social background of 
the interviewer may also influence people’s responses in this way. Closely related 
is a pattern known as acquiescence bias where respondents give the answers 
they think their interviewer is looking for. Psychologists have demonstrated that 
this is culturally influenced, so people from some cultures are more likely to 
provide agreeing responses to questions than people from others. Anonymous 
questionnaires can help in resolving such dilemmas, but the response rates to 
written questionnaires tend to be very low, and the people who respond are often 
those with a particular barrow to push, i.e. a special interest in the topic.
So the results may not be representative of the views of the community 
as a whole. Students in lecture theatres are often asked to respond to such 
questionnaires because they provide a captive and usually cooperative audience. 
But their results present the same problem; they are hardly representative of the 
wider community. Indeed, this is part of a wider problem with basing research 
upon participants sourced from the population of students within universities in 
WEIRD (Western Educated Industrialised Rich & Democratic) cultures, which 
is why many sociolinguists avoid this approach.
Indirect measures
A third way of collecting data on language attitudes is to use an indirect measure 
which elicits the respondents’ attitudes without making them feel self-​conscious 
or embarrassed. The most sophisticated form of this method is the matched guise 
technique described above. Typically, listeners hear recordings of two people 
saying the same thing but speaking in two different languages or two different 
varieties. The listeners are unaware that the four samples they hear are produced 
by just two speakers. Moreover, they are asked to evaluate the personality of 
the speakers rather than the language variety itself. Since the personality of the 
speakers is constant for the pairs of voices, this cannot in principle be an influ-
ence on the responses. So since attitudes to language and its users and uses are 
inextricably intertwined, as this chapter has described, people’s responses inevit-
ably tell us something about their attitudes to the language.
Many variations of this basic strategy have been developed involving a 
number of bilinguals and a range of varieties of languages and accents. The most 
radical variation involves simply playing recorded stimuli of different languages 
and accents to listeners and asking them to respond to the voices on a range of 
dimensions such as those provided in the rating scale in ­exercise 2. Obviously, 
this approach does not keep the personality of the speakers constant, but the 
problems that have been identified relate not so much to variation in the per-
sonality of speakers, but rather to the problem of getting speakers who sound 
equally fluent and confident. Stutters and hesitations have a huge influence 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
587
on people’s judgements. So getting data which is truly comparable is a major 
challenge for this methodology.
As a footnote to this brief discussion on methods of collecting data on lan-
guage attitudes, it is perhaps worth mentioning that observing what people do 
can also provide a measure of their attitudes to language. Enrolment in language 
classes is a good indication of a positive attitude to a language, for example. 
Attending events such as plays and concerts which use the language is another. 
One clever study sent an invitation to an evening of Puerto Rican singing and 
dancing to people who had indicated in a questionnaire that they held positive 
attitudes to Puerto Rican people and to the use of Spanish. They were being asked 
to demonstrate their commitment. Another study asked people to respond to a 
questionnaire in a different language each evening at the theatre and deduced 
people’s attitudes by the numbers who responded to each request. You can prob-
ably think of some weaknesses in each of these methods, but they are attempts to 
circumvent the problem that what people tell a researcher and what they really 
believe are not necessarily the same.
Exercise 5
It has been suggested that attitudes have three components: a cognitive component (e.g. 
what we know or believe about a language), an affective component (e.g. how we feel 
about the language) and a conative component (e.g. what we are likely to do in relation 
to a language).
So, if we were measuring attitudes to Welsh, we could investigate what a person 
believes about the Welsh language, how they feel about the language and what they seem 
likely to do that would indicate their attitude to Welsh.
A very positive overall attitude would be indicated if they (1) believe that Welsh will 
help them to get a good government job in Wales, (2) consider that poetry written in 
Welsh and songs sung in Welsh are beautiful and (3) are currently enrolled in a Welsh lan-
guage class.
How might these components differ for languages such as American English and 
endangered Hawaiian in Hawai’i?
Answer at end of chapter
Attitudes to language are important to sociolinguists for a variety of reasons. 
In ­chapter 4 we saw that they were significant in the description of pidgin and 
creole languages. Social dialectologists have claimed that shared attitudes to 
speech or shared speech norms are the crucial criteria in defining members of 
the same speech community. Attitudes to vernacular varieties or the languages 
of disfavoured groups affect many teachers’ academic expectations of those 
who use these varieties, with implications for their academic progress. Not sur-
prisingly, it has also been found that attitudes to the way people speak affect 
employers’ decisions about who to hire. Clearly, attitudes to language have 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
588
practical implications in many social spheres, and illustrate well the ways in 
which sociolinguistic research often has an applied dimension. In the next section 
of the chapter, we provide examples of ways in which sociolinguistic research 
has proved useful in the educational sphere in particular.
Source: Nick Wilson; modified from original.
Exercise 6
In ­chapter 10, it was demonstrated that the number of standard vs. vernacular forms used 
by people varied according to the social context. What are the educational implications 
of this fact?
Answer at end of chapter
Sociolinguistics and education
Vernacular dialects and educational disadvantage
Many sociolinguists have been drawn into public debates about the educational 
implications of their research. The best-​known example is probably the part 
sociolinguists have played in debates over the place of vernacular dialects in 
schools, and the (erroneous) claims that children who use vernacular forms are 
linguistically deprived or deficient.
It has been evident for some time that in many speech communities, the middle-​
class children do better at school than working-​class children. They achieve 
better exam results, for instance. Similarly, though there are some exceptions, 
children from the mainstream culture generally have greater success in school 
than minority group children. In English-​speaking communities, these facts 
have often been misleadingly linked to the fact that children from the successful 
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
589
groups tend to use more standard dialect forms –​ they use standard English –​ 
while the speech of children from the less successful groups often includes a 
greater frequency of vernacular forms.
This is an area where some sociolinguists have made great efforts to be 
helpful. Some have undertaken research to investigate the extent to which the 
use of vernacular forms or a distinct variety like Patois in Britain or AAL in the 
USA may act as a barrier to communication between teachers and pupils. Some 
have developed programmes to change teachers’ negative attitudes and develop 
their appreciation of linguistic diversity. Others have interpreted the results of 
sociolinguistic research for teachers and provided advice and recommendations 
for classroom practice. A widely quoted example involved the legal case in the 
USA which is described in ­example 14.
Example 14
In 1977, Moira Lewis was 8 years old. She lived in the city of Ann Arbor in 
the USA in Green Road, an area where there were both rich and poor people. 
She went to the local school, Martin Luther King Elementary School. It 
was a school with mainly white children, but there were also some African 
American children like Moira, and a few Asian and Latino children. By 
the time Moira was 8 years old, her mother was getting concerned that 
she was not doing well at school. She talked to some of the other African 
American mothers and found they were worried too. The school took the 
view that Moira and her African American friends were problems –​ they 
labelled them as “learning disabled”. But Moira’s mother and her friends 
knew better. Their kids were perfectly healthy, bright children. It was the 
school which was failing, not the children. The mothers decided to take the 
school to court, claiming that the teachers were not adequately providing 
for their children’s education. The mothers won their case, and the school 
was required to provide a programme for Moira and her friends which 
gave them a better chance of educational success.
In this example, the African American mothers argued that the local school 
was not taking proper account of their children’s linguistic proficiency and edu-
cational needs. A number of sociolinguists were called as “expert witnesses” to 
testify that the variety of English used by the children was a dialect distinct from 
SAE/​MWAE, with a different history and origins in a creole which developed on 
American slave plantations. The judge accepted their testimony and ordered the 
school to take account of features of the children’s dialect. He pointed out that 
the teachers and children could understand each other, and expressed the view 
that the main barriers to the children’s progress took the form of unconscious 
negative attitudes held by the teachers to children who spoke AAL. The steps 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
590
that were taken to remedy the situation consisted mainly of in-​service training 
for the teachers. This involved, for example, helping them distinguish between 
features of the children’s dialect and reading errors, and suggesting ways they 
could help the children develop the ability to switch between AAL and SAE/​
MWAE.
Dialect differences can certainly lead to miscommunication, especially if ver-
nacular dialect users do not hear a great deal of the standard dialect. In most 
English-​speaking communities, however, as in Ann Arbor, there is little evidence 
that children who use vernacular forms have trouble understanding the standard 
English they hear on TV, on radio and from their teachers. In fact, sociolinguists 
have demonstrated that in some communities, at least, children clearly do under-
stand the standard dialect, since when they are asked to repeat sentences in the 
standard, they often translate them accurately into the vernacular equivalents, 
as the pairs of sentences in ­example 15 demonstrate. The (b) sentences are the 
child’s repetition of the (a) sentences.
Example 15
(1a)	 Nobody ever sat at any of those desks.
(1b)	 Nobody never sat at no desses.
(2a)	 I asked Alvin if he knows how to play basketball.
(2b)	 I aks Alvin do he know how to play basketball.
Translation presupposes understanding. If, as these examples suggest, 
understanding is not usually a major hurdle, the next question is whether any-
thing should be done to change the speech of children who use vernacular forms.
Sociolinguists have pointed out that attempts to alter people’s speech without 
their full cooperation are fruitless. People can change their own speech if they 
really want to, but teachers and parents simply waste their time correcting 
children’s usage if the children do not want to sound different. It has been 
noted that when children imitate their teachers for fun, or when they role-​play 
a middle-​class person in a game or a school activity, they often produce con-
sistently standard forms for as long as required. Motivation and free choice are 
crucial factors, and any attempts to teach standard dialect forms will not succeed 
without them.
If, however, children can see some point in being able to use standard forms 
consistently in certain contexts, such as job interviews, then, with the informa-
tion provided by sociolinguists, teachers can provide students with guidance on 
which vernacular forms are most salient to listeners. Many sociolinguists believe, 
however, that their primary obligation is to educate the community to accept 
variation and vernacular forms, without condemning or stereotyping their users 
as uneducated and low status, rather than to train vernacular users to adopt 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
591
standard speech forms. This is an area of ongoing debate among those concerned 
with educational linguistics, as well as more widely among those challenging 
institutionalised “linguistic profiling” based on racist attitudes, a point discussed 
further later in this chapter.
Exercise 7
Can you think of any reason why a language teacher might think it was not their job to 
teach those who use vernacular forms to use standard dialect forms?
Answer at end of chapter
Linguistic deficit
A related area where sociolinguistic research has proved useful is in the area of 
educational testing. Sociolinguists have successfully demonstrated that (incor-
rect) claims that minority group children and working-​class children were 
linguistically deprived were generally based on inadequate tests. The major con-
tribution that sociolinguists have made in this area is to provide evidence about 
the effect of contextual factors on speech.
An example will serve to illustrate this point. In order to determine the 
extent of their vocabulary and grammar, it is usual to ask children to complete 
a number of language tests. At one time, these tests were often administered 
by an adult stranger from a different social background from the child, and 
sometimes from a different ethnic group from the child too. As a rule, each 
child was interviewed individually in a quiet room in the school. Children 
from minority and working-​class backgrounds who were tested under these 
conditions generally did not do well. They responded monosyllabically, saying 
as little as possible, and escaping with relief after it was all over. Middle-​class 
children, on the other hand, tended to do much better. They were much more 
willing to answer questions at length.
Although those administering the tests thought that they were administering 
these tests under “standard” and “controlled” conditions, there were in fact some 
important differences in the experiences of middle-​class children compared to 
others being tested. An adult stranger using the standard dialect would be more 
likely to resemble the friend of your mother or father if you were a middle-​class 
child. If you were not a middle-​class child, your experience of adults who used 
the standard variety would be teachers, social welfare workers and government 
officials –​ not the sort of people a child would be likely to want to talk to for 
long if it could be avoided.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
592
Example 16
Michelle came home from school after her history exam.
“How did you get on?” asked her mother. “What did they ask you?”
“I had to write about Captain Cook,” Michelle replied.
“What did you say?” asked her mother.
So Michelle told her all the interesting stories about Captain Cook’s 
adventures that she had recounted in her exam answer. Finally, her 
mother interrupted, “But didn’t you mention that he was one of the first 
Europeans to discover New Zealand?”
“Oh no,” she replied, “I think they know that!”
The kind of questions the interviewer asked would also be more familiar to 
middle-​class children. Middle-​class parents are much more likely to ask children 
to “display what they know”. When grandma visits, for instance, little Pauline is 
instructed Tell grandma what you did on Sunday. This kind of question is used 
in language tests too, e.g. Tell me everything you can about this picture. To a 
child who is used to being asked questions like these –​ questions to which the 
questioner obviously knows the answer –​ such instructions are not a problem. 
Other children may find them puzzling and wonder if there is a catch or a trick 
involved. In other words, the testing conditions are not the same for all the 
children.
Sociolinguists were able to provide evidence that children who responded 
monosyllabically in a test-​interview were voluble and communicative in different 
contexts –​ with their friends, for instance. One researcher showed that the evalu-
ative constructions used in story telling by the African American teenagers that 
he recorded were more developmentally advanced or mature than those used 
by the white teeangers. In other words, claims that these children were linguis-
tically deficient or “had no language” or were limited to a “restricted code” 
could be firmly refuted. The formality and unfamiliarity of the testing context 
for these children accounted for the misleading inference that they were linguis-
tically deprived.
It was also pointed out that the language of the tests was more similar to that 
of the middle-​class children than to that of children from other social groups. 
When responses to the test questions were analysed, it was found that some-
times answers which were factually correct but which used vernacular forms 
were marked wrong, because they didn’t exactly match the form of the answers 
on the marking schedule. Once again, evidence from sociolinguists was valuable 
in demonstrating that the children’s language was linguistically systematic and 
well-​structured and not inadequate or deficient.
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
593
Exercise 8
The following dialogue took place between an adult and an African American child in a 
New York school. The Black boy enters a room where there is a large, friendly white inter-
viewer, who puts an object on the table in front of the boy and says, Tell me everything you 
can about this.
[The interviewer’s further remarks are in (round brackets).]
[12 seconds of silence]
(What would you say it looks like?)
[8 seconds of silence]
A space ship.
(Hmmmm.)
[13 seconds of silence]
Like a je-​et.
[12 seconds of silence]
Like a plane.
[20 seconds of silence]
(What colour is it?)
Orange. [2 seconds] An’ wh-​ite. [2 seconds] An’ green.
[6 seconds of silence]
(An’ what could you use it for?)
[8 seconds of silence]
A je-​et.
[6 seconds of silence]
(If you had two of them, what would you do with them?)
[6 seconds of silence]
Give one to some-​body.
(Hmmm. Who do you think would like to have it?)
[10 seconds of silence]
Cla-​rence.
(Mm. Where do you think we could get another one of these?)
At the store.
(Oh ka-​ay!)
Can you suggest any reasons for the child’s monosyllabic responses?
Answer at end of chapter
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
594
Example 17
Fifteen-​year-​old Alan was totally disgusted with his English teacher. “She’s 
not interested in our ideas,” he said, “or whether we are original or cre-
ative. All she cares about is big words! The guy who gets top marks uses a 
thesaurus. He just looks up the longest words he can find and sticks them 
in. He doesn’t even know what they mean half the time!”
At secondary level (students of 11 years old and above), sociolinguists 
have explored more specifically the ways in which the vocabulary range of 
middle-​class children differs from that of working-​class children. Through 
wide reading of the kinds of books that teachers approve of, and exposure 
to the vocabulary of well-​educated adults, some children are more familiar 
than others with words of Graeco-​Latin origin (though they may not always 
be willing to use them in interaction). These words –​ words like education, 
exponent, relation and expression –​ make up between 65% and 100% of the 
specialist vocabularies of subjects taught in secondary schools and tertiary 
institutions. Obviously, children who are familiar with such words will be at 
an advantage. One study showed that between 12 and 15 years old, massive 
differences developed in the oral use of such words by children from different 
social backgrounds.
Children who use words of Graeco-​Latin origin with familiarity and con-
fidence are clearly more likely to succeed in exams which require knowledge 
of such vocabulary in particular subject areas. Children from homes where 
adults don’t read for entertainment, and where reading is not a normal everyday 
activity, tend to develop a different range of vocabulary –​ one which is of great 
value in many spheres of their daily lives, but of little relevance in understanding 
the materials they meet in secondary school textbooks.
One reason why working-​class children fail in school, then, is that the odds 
are stacked against them. The criteria for success are middle-​class criteria –​ 
including middle-​class language and ways of interacting. Familiarity with the 
vocabulary essential to school success gives middle-​class children an advan-
tage. A second reason identified by sociolinguists is that many of the children, 
recognising that schools are essentially middle-​class institutions, deliberately 
and understandably rebel against all that they represent. One very dramatic 
piece of evidence of this was provided by a study of male adolescent gangs in 
New York. The gang members were failing in school, yet many were bright, ver-
bally skilled young men. To maintain a position as a gang leader in the Harlem 
district of New York, for instance, requires a quick wit and considerable verbal 
facility. They could trade insults with ease and respond quickly and wittily to 
verbal challenges. There was little doubt about their oral language abilities. Yet 
most of these teenage boys were three or more years behind in their reading 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
595
levels, and none had a reading score above the norm for an 11-​year-​old. What 
was more, the higher their status in the gang, the lower was their reading score. 
The reasons are complicated, but the most basic and important one was that 
they did not share the school’s ideas of what was worth knowing. They did not 
identify with the school’s values, and they knew that the school did not recog-
nise their skills and values. They felt they had been defined as outsiders from 
the beginning, and saw no point in conforming since there was no chance of 
success.
A more recent New Zealand study demonstrated that the context in which 
students’ vocabulary knowledge is evaluated and the methods used can 
strongly influence the results. So individual testing with a supportive adult 
elicited much better results than group testing. As always, context and attitude 
are important.
Exercise 9
One sociolinguistic study of an African American working-​class community showed that 
the verbal skills expected of boys and girls differ considerably. Both learn how to deal 
with “analogy” questions asked by their elders. These encourage them to see parallels 
and connections among disparate events and to talk about them cleverly without 
spelling out explicitly what the links are. Allusiveness is valued, rather than explicitness, 
and the resulting style has been described as “topic-​associating”. Boys, however, are also 
encouraged to practise story telling in competitive public arenas where adults as well as 
children watch and judge.
How might these different cultural experiences affect the success of the children in 
school?
Answer at end of chapter
Structural differences between standard and vernacular varieties may lead to 
inaccurate assessments of children’s educational potential. Differences between 
groups in their perceptions of the appropriate ways of talking in a variety of 
contexts may also lead to inaccurate evaluations of children’s ability. This 
section has illustrated how sociolinguists have used the information described in 
this book about the relationships between language and its users, and language 
and its uses, in order to identify a range of misconceptions which can disadvan-
tage some social and ethnic groups in school. Forensic linguistics is another area 
where sociolinguists make a contribution to redressing social injustices based on 
misconceptions about language use and language variation. The final section of 
this chapter illustrates some of the social benefits of the work of sociolinguists 
who focus on language use in legal settings.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
596
Sociolinguistics and forensic linguistics
Example 18
Raj, a man with a strong British African Caribbean accent, was accused 
of murder in Britain. During his trial, the prosecution alleged that Raj had 
stated that he had got on a train and shot a man to kill. A socio-​phonetician 
was able to demonstrate that what Raj had actually said was that he got on 
the train and showed a man ticket.
The person transcribing the British African Caribbean man’s statement in this 
case was unfamiliar with the variety of English that he spoke and so, although 
she honestly transcribed what she thought he said, she was wrong. Fortunately, 
a qualified linguist who was familiar with the range of variation in different 
dialects of English was able to provide an alternative and much more reliable 
account of what the man had said.
Forensic linguists work in a very wide range of social contexts. In addition 
to research about how language is used in written and spoken legal settings, 
they also provide expert evidence to courts about language issues. Sometimes 
this involves analysis of language and communication in legal contexts such as 
police interviews, courtroom interaction or legal documents. Or it may entail 
examining language used in academic writing (for example in plagiarism cases), 
in trademarks, in phone conversations, in blogs, in text messaging and in email 
interactions. In providing expert evidence to courts, forensic sociolinguists aim 
to identify sociolinguistic clues and understandings which will assist in resolving 
legal questions and contribute to justice being done.
Forensic linguists have contributed as expert witnesses to court cases involving 
murder, sexual assault, kidnapping, fraud, drug dealing and many more such ser-
ious crimes or legal injustices. The case of Robyn Kina, discussed in ­chapter 13 
(­example 15), illustrated how the evidence of a sociolinguist about the patterns 
of interaction in the English used by many Aboriginal people, including Kina, 
helped overturn a false conviction for murder. Sociolinguists have also questioned 
the expertise of people who have used language tests to make judgements about 
the nationality of people seeking refugee status. Often there is simply insufficient 
information about sociolinguistic and dialectal variation to reliably make such 
judgements.
Forensic linguists examine every level of linguistic analysis. Phonetic ana-
lysis provides information on regional and social accents which has often 
assisted in eliminating crime suspects. So, for example, a British dialectologist 
was able to accurately identify the Sunderland accent on a hoax recording 
sent to the police by someone who claimed to be the infamous serial killer 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
597
known as the Yorkshire Ripper. The linguist’s phonetic analysis was proved 
right 26 years later when DNA from the envelope seal confirmed the identity 
of the hoaxer.
Lexical evidence has been used to demonstrate the likelihood of plagiarism. 
Linguists helped in addressing some of the controversies surrounding the source 
of materials in The Da Vinci Code, for example. Sociolinguists have assisted 
in identifying characteristics of the likely author of less public texts, such as 
anonymous threatening letters. It is often possible to identify features which 
suggest that the author is not a speaker of English as a first language, for instance, 
or that they are not highly educated, or that they come from a particular social 
or ethnic background.
Grammatical evidence has supported claims that a text written to explain 
procedures was incomprehensible, thus accounting for an error which had ser-
ious consequences. Linguists have also identified grammatical strategies which 
can disadvantage witnesses in court cases. Agentless passive and intransitive 
structures, for example, are often used by defence lawyers to avoid attributing 
agency to a person accused of a crime, as in ­example 19.
Example 19
you think you were cheated
your shirt came off
your arms were held over your head
so were your legs bruised?
In all these examples, the agent has disappeared and the focus has shifted to 
the victim. The syntactic form of a question also limits the range of permissible 
answers, and thus the range of information the addressee feels free to offer. If 
in court, for example, you are asked the question Did you drink more than two 
glasses of beer?, then, inhibited by the formal context, you may feel you are 
restricted to answering only yes. A more informative response might be I had 
three small glasses over four hours and accompanied by a large meal. Moreover, 
the latter answer might well provide a more useful basis for evaluating your 
ability to drive at the end of the evening.
Example 20
Prosecution lawyer:	
So you were wandering around the area for over 
two hours that night
Accused:	
I was walking around the district looking for a 
shop
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
598
The semantic features of words can convey very different associations with 
important consequences. Walking around sounds purposeful, for example, while 
wandering around suggests aimless activity, a subtle difference which may be sig-
nificant to the impression that the jury forms about someone’s character. In some 
dialects, going partying implies drugs and sexual activity, i.e. it means more than 
just going to a party, and such distinctions may be significant under cross-​exam-
ination. The semantic scope of words can also be relevant. For example, when a 
Torres Strait Creole speaker uses the word kill, it sounds like the English word 
meaning cause to die. But in Torres Strait Creole kill means hurt or maim. The 
potential for cross-​cultural misunderstanding and the serious implication in an 
assault or murder case are obvious.
Police interviews have received a good deal of attention from forensic linguists, 
and especially the police caution, called in the USA “the Miranda warning”. 
This refers to the advice about their rights that the police are required to give 
to people who are suspects before they begin an interview. Sociolinguistic ana-
lysis of the discourse suggests that conversations between the police and the 
suspects, supposedly simply explaining the suspect’s rights, involve persuasion 
and suggestions in some cases, as well as reassurance and expressions of empathy 
in others.
Example 21
1	
Police officer:	 OK now do you agree that just a short time ago
2	
		
in the company of Wally Peters you were
3	
		
Sergeant Allen read you your rights as a person in 
custody?
4	
Suspect:	
(quietly) Yeah.
5     Police officer:	
And that was this form here this Caution and Summary
6	
		
of Part 10A on the 4-​Crimes Act?
7	
Suspect:	
(quietly) Yeah.
8	
Police officer:	 OK and you signed that?
9	
Suspect:	
(quietly) Yes –​ I did –​ yeah.
10	
Police officer:	 OK. Now did you understand that –​
11	
Suspect:	
Yes.
12	
Police officer:	 What do you understand by by your rights?
13	
Suspect:	
Oh (pause) my rights?
14	
Police officer:	 Do you understand that this while you’re in police 
custody
15	
		
that police have certain they have a duty of care
16	
		
to do certain things for you?
17	
Suspect:	
Yeah.
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
599
The forensic sociolinguist, Diana Eades, points out that although the police 
officer invites the suspect to explain his rights in his own words (line 12), he 
actually provides no opportunity for him to do that. When the suspect expresses 
uncertainty oh my rights? (line 13), the police officer responds with a long 
utterance (lines 14–​16) full of legal terminology e.g. a duty of care to do cer-
tain things for you. Sociolinguistic analysis of a large number of police–​suspect 
interviews indicates that suspects often consider a question such as what do you 
understand by your rights? as challenging and face-​threatening. There is much 
to consider and critique in even a short extract such as this, and some forensic 
linguists have made an effort to communicate the results of such analyses so that 
they can be used in police training.
For similar reasons, forensic linguists have used discourse analysis to examine 
courtroom interaction for evidence of potential injustice. In cross-​examination, 
the lawyer’s choice of words can be very significant in conveying a particular per-
spective. Sexual assault trials are prime targets for such analysis, and sociolinguists 
such as Susan Ehrlich have identified a number of pragmatic strategies which 
lawyers use to suggest that the victim was willing rather than resistant.
Example 22
Q is the prosecuting lawyer; Connie is the rape victim.
1	
Q:	
And I take it part of your involvement then
2	
		
on the evening of January 27th
3	
		
and having Mr A. come back to your residence
4	
		
that you felt that you were in this comfort zone
5	
		
because you were going to a place that you were very 
familiar
6	
		
correct?
7	
Connie:	
It was my home, yes.
8	
Q:	
And you knew you had a way out if there was any 
difficulty?
9	
Connie:	
I didn’t really take into account any difficulty.
10	
		
I never expected there to be any.
11	
Q:	
I appreciate that. Nonetheless, you knew that there were
12	
		
other people around who knew you
13	
		
and obviously would come to your assistance
14	
		
I take it if you had some problems
15	
		
or do you know? Maybe you can’t answer that.
16	
Connie:	
No, I can’t answer that. I can’t answer that.
17	
		
I was inviting him to my home
18	
		
not my home that I share with other people
19	
		
not you know a communal area.
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
600
20	 	
I was taking him to my home
21	 	
and I really didn’t take into account anybody else around
22	 	
anybody that I lived near.
23	 	
It was like inviting somebody to your home.
24	 Q:	
Fair enough. And I take it from what you told us
25	 	
in your evidence this morning
26	 	
that it never ever crossed your mind
27	 	
when this whole situation reached the point
28	 	
where you couldn’t handle it or were no longer in control
29	 	
to merely go outside your door to summons someone?
30	 Connie:	 No.
The underlined speech controls the direction and scope of the discourse by 
asserting a proposition with the implication that it is a reasonable one, and 
that the addressee will confirm it. The lawyer uses the word knew (lines 8, 
11) reinforced by the word obviously (line 13) which implies that what is being 
asserted is a fact, and which presupposes it is true. The accumulated assertions 
undermine Connie’s position by suggesting there was help available and she 
didn’t seek it. In addition, the word merely (line 29) suggests that it would have 
been easy to seek such help, indirectly indicting her for not doing so and thus 
avoiding the assault.
The result of the consistent use of such strategies is the disempowerment of 
the female complainant. Through the ways in which the lawyer’s questions are 
formulated, she is subtly constructed as having failed to take steps to protect 
herself. In other words, skillful use of linguistic strategies can result in the blame 
for the assault being shifted from the perpetrator to the victim.
Exercise 10
In the extract below taken from a rape trial, identify the different ways in which the lawyer 
and complainant describe the “same” social context, and consider the implications of their 
different choices.
Lawyer:	
And you went to a bar in Boston is that correct?
Complainant:	
It’s a club
Lawyer:	
It’s where girls and fellas meet, isn’t it?
Complainant:	
People go there.
Lawyer:	
And during that evening didn’t mister Jones come over to sit with you?
Complainant:	
Sat at our table.
Answer at end of chapter
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
601
Microaggression
Example 23
•	USA researchers who analysed more than 100 hours of body camera 
footage from Oakland Police discovered that officers consistently used 
less respectful language with Black community members than white 
during routine traffic stops.
•	American sociolinguist John Baugh studied hundreds of test phone calls 
to find that when a voice sounds African American or Mexican American, 
many people made racist, snap judgments about callers with the conse-
quence that they failed to be considered for accommodation or to secure 
a job interview.
•	In the late twentieth century Dale Spender found that audience members 
consistently reported that women spoke more than men in meetings, 
though analysis showed this was false. Deborah Cameron documents 
that the pattern of male conversational dominance in a range of contexts 
continues to be well attested in twenty-​first century research (as discussed 
in Chapter 12).
•	French politician, Jean-​Luc Mélenchon, derided a journalist’s south-
western pronunciation before irately asking the crowd if anybody had a 
“comprehensible” question. In the wake of this insult, French Member 
of Parliament Laetitia Avia proposed legislation against such accent 
discrimination.
The relationship between language and attitudes can be illustrated by subtle 
and not so subtle discrimination based on accent, as illustrated in ­example 23 
and discussed earlier in this chapter. Example 23 provides instances of what 
have been called microaggressions –​ brief and commonplace daily indignities, 
often (though not only) verbal, whether intentional or unintentional, that com-
municate hostile, derogatory or negative attitudes to the target person or com-
munity. Any social group can be the target of such behaviour, which often goes 
unnoticed by those who are not the target. Even when unintended, such negative 
verbal and discursive behaviour can cause discomfort or anger.
Protesting can be an effective strategy to counter microaggression when 
the perpetrator is unaware of the effect of their comments. For example, an 
older woman challenged a waiter who said to her and her companion “And 
how was your shopping ladies?”. He apologised. But it is rarely successful 
when the behaviour is motivated and deliberate, as, for example, when people 
phoning about potential accommodation are rejected solely on the basis of 
their accent. Proving that prejudice and attitudinal bias is the cause is gener-
ally too difficult.
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
602
Exercise 11
Consider linguistic means by which elderly people may be treated in ways that could be 
labelled as patronising or microaggressive.
Answer at end of chapter
Conclusion
This chapter has described a range of attitudes to languages and varieties of lan-
guage, as well as some of the social, educational and legal implications of such 
attitudes. The linguistic varieties of different groups and their sociolinguistic 
norms, or appropriate ways of speaking in different contexts, may be quite 
distinctive. Sociolinguistic information on the social basis of attitudes to these 
varieties and their uses helps explain why children from lower socioeconomic 
groups and children from minority cultural backgrounds often do not succeed in 
middle-​class classrooms. Sociolinguistic research can assist in identifying points 
of potential conflict, and suggesting alternative styles of interaction which may 
be more successful.
There has been space in this chapter to explore only a very small range of 
examples, specifically in the fields of educational linguistics and forensic linguistics, 
where the implications and applications of sociolinguistic study may be beneficial 
in the wider community. Reflecting on the sociolinguistic variation described in pre-
vious chapters, you will be able to think of many more implications and applications 
of sociolinguistic research. Language planning, for example, discussed in ­chapter 5, 
is an obvious area of applied sociolinguistics, both at the macro-​level of advising 
on national languages, for example, and the micro-​level of devising orthographies, 
or recommending specific instances of non-​sexist terminology. Second language 
learning is another area where sociolinguistic information on patterns of language 
use and attitudes to language has proved valuable. Sociolinguistic information can 
usefully illuminate many everyday interactions in a speech community, including in 
the workplace. The concluding chapter draws together some of the many interesting 
linguistic patterns which characterise the users and uses of language which have 
emerged in the discussion in previous chapters.
Methods
Methods for collecting data to examine attitudes to language:
•	 Exercise 2 provides a description of a widely used method of collecting data regarding 
attitudes to language.
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
603
•	 A detailed discussion of alternative methods is on pages 584–587:
(a)	 Societal treatment, using publicly available sources: e.g. media, internet or 
TV shows.
(b)	Direct measures: questionnaires and interviews.
(c)	 Indirect measures: e.g. the matched guise technique
•	 Forensic linguistic methods examine language in contexts where sociolinguistic clues 
and understanding may help resolve legal issues: e.g. creative or academic writing in 
plagiarism cases, or verbal abuse in text messages or blogs, etc.
Answers to exercises in ­chapter 15
Answer to ­exercise 1
One method which has been used to investigate this issue is to play a range of 
recorded speakers of different languages to a group of listeners. The listeners’ 
reactions to languages and dialects that are familiar to them are then compared 
with their reactions to languages which are unfamiliar.
Using this method, it has been found that responses to a familiar language 
form a pattern. The pattern indicates the prestige of the speakers of the lan-
guage in the community whose views are being sought. Responses to unfamiliar 
dialects and languages, however, form no pattern and are randomly distributed. 
The same is true for accents. For example, Cockney was rated tenth in a list 
of ten accents played to British listeners, while it was rated third by American 
listeners to whom it was much less familiar. These results provide support for 
the claim that listeners’ responses are strongly influenced by nonlinguistic factors 
rather than any intrinsic aesthetic qualities of the variety being evaluated.
Answer to ­exercise 2
The local accent is likely to be less highly rated than the standard accent, espe-
cially by older listeners, and especially on the “status” related features such as 
confidence, ambition, intelligence, leadership skills, high education and high 
status job. Local accents generally gain higher ratings on solidarity related 
features such as sincerity, friendliness, reliability and sense of humour, and from 
young people.
Whatever reactions you collect, you should be able to explain them by 
considering social influences on people’s attitudes to accents, and by taking 
account of the concepts of overt and covert prestige.
Answer to ­exercise 5
As with all sociolinguistic issues, the answer depends on which community is 
being considered. Hawaiians are likely to have different attitudes from Anglos in 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
604
Hawai’i. Let’s consider just the Hawaiians’ attitudes, as an example of how you 
might have answered this question.
Hawaiians might know a good deal about the history of the language and its 
family relationships, as well as its significance as a conveyer of Hawaiian culture. As 
a result, they might believe that knowing something about Hawaiian is important 
for every Hawaiian person (cognitive component). Since it is the Indigenous lan-
guage, they are likely to feel very positive about it, even if they do not speak 
Hawaiian. They might enjoy Hawaiian songs, for example (affective component). 
Some may have enrolled for Hawaiian language classes, incorporate Hawaiian 
phrases into daily language and attend events where Hawaiian is used (conative 
component). The affective component of their attitudes to English are likely to be 
less positive, though they may know a good deal about the language and believe 
that knowledge of English is essential for Hawaiian citizens. They are likely to use 
English for most of their everyday interactions. The material discussed in ­chapter 3 
on endangered languages and ­chapter 5 on language policy also includes relevant 
ideas about these components of attitudes to language.
Answer to ­exercise 6
As pointed out in the preceding section of the chapter, even the most well-​
educated speaker uses some vernacular forms on some occasions in some 
contexts, so there can be no argument for the inherent superiority of standard 
forms for educational purposes. Conversely, if a speaker can produce a 
standard form –​ even if they do not do so consistently –​ the argument for 
educational deficit based on ignorance of that form cannot hold water. Claims 
about the educational disadvantages of some varieties indicate attitudes to 
the users and functions of those varieties in context, rather than any intrinsic 
features of the varieties. This issue is discussed in more detail in the second 
half of the chapter.
Answer to ­exercise 7
It has been suggested by some sociolinguists that schools should not identify 
their task in the language section of the curriculum as teaching standard forms 
to children who do not use them. Rather, they suggest, the teacher’s task is to 
provide children with the means to challenge the attitudes which discriminate 
against their speech forms. Since there is no linguistic basis for these negative 
attitudes, it is argued that schools should empower children and give them the 
confidence to assert the validity of their language and the skills needed to expose 
the insubstantial nature of the criticisms made of vernacular forms.
On the other hand, others argue that the standard dialect is necessary for 
social advancement and for communicating effectively with a wider audience, 
at least in writing. Moreover, they claim, it is essential to use standard forms in 
order to be taken seriously in many social contexts, spoken and written.
Where do you stand in this debate?
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
605
Answer to ­exercise 8
There are many possible reasons for the child’s responses. He may be unwilling 
to talk freely to an adult from a different ethnic group and social class. He 
may be frightened in a situation which he experiences as a testing situation. He 
may feel resentful and uncooperative in testing situations where his previous 
experience has been that he does not do well. He may find it difficult to work 
out what answers are required. He may consider the questions so obvious that 
he suspects they are trick questions, and therefore feels uncomfortable and sus-
picious. Some of these possibilities are elaborated in the next section of this 
chapter.
Note Labov’s comment on this interview:
The child is in an asymmetrical situation where anything he says can literally 
be held against him. He has learned a number of devices to avoid saying any-
thing in this situation, and he works very hard to achieve this end.
Answer to ­exercise 9
The boys’ experience of story telling stands them in good stead in white middle-​
class schools. They respond to requests to tell the teacher about an experience 
with a topic-​focused narrative which is accepted as a story. The teacher accepts 
their stories and helps develop them.
The girls have not had this kind of experience, however, and their stories tend 
to resemble children’s responses to analogy questions in their community. They 
draw parallels between events which have no obvious connection and expect the 
listener to draw out the links. But schools value explicitness, and the girls’ allusive 
accounts of their experiences often make no sense to white middle-​class teachers. 
The teachers think the girls are incapable of sticking to the point and constructing 
a coherent story. By identifying these differences in the background experiences of 
the children, the sociolinguist was able to account for the differences in their per-
formance in school, and recommend ways of helping the working-​class African 
American girls develop the narrative skills valued by the school.
Answer to ­exercise 10
The lawyer’s description of the way the defendant met the complainant suggests 
a pick-​up or dating situation, while the complainant’s responses refute the 
implications of the lawyer’s choice of words, and suggest she had no reason to 
suspect the defendant’s intentions.
More specifically, the complainant uses the word club to replace the lawyer’s 
word bar, thus suggesting a more sociable place. Similarly, she substitutes people 
go there for the lawyer’s choice of where girls and fellas meet, de-​sexualising the 
context. Finally, she uses the phrase our table, interpreting the lawyer’s you as 
plural, and indicating she was not alone but one of a group. Each of these moves 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
606
indirectly challenges the implication of the lawyer’s construction of the meeting 
as a pick-​up.
The different lexical choices clearly do a good deal of work here in presenting 
a particular perspective on what was going on.
Answer to ­exercise 11
Here are some examples of microaggression experienced by older people, though 
you may have thought of many more. While some may be perceived as intended 
to be helpful, they may also be experienced as unwelcome covert or subtle insults.
•	Asking if they need help down the stairs/​across the road.
•	Talking louder and more slowly than to others.
•	Communicating boredom when they tell an anecdote.
•	Addressing them as dear.
•	Assuming it is acceptable to strike up conversation with them.
•	Ignoring them in a group and addressing only younger participants.
•	Assuming specific interests and political views.
Concepts introduced
•	Language attitudes
•	Overt and covert prestige
•	Matched guise technique
•	Ebonics
•	Attitude methodology
•	Forensic linguistics
•	Microaggression
References
The following sources provided material or ideas for this chapter:
Agheyisi and Fishman (1970) on methods of collecting attitude data, and espe-
cially commitment measures
Andrzejewski (1963) on Somali
Baker (1992) on all aspects of attitudes to language, including the three 
components identified in ­exercise 5
Baugh (2018) on linguistic profiling and discrimination described in ­example 23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
607
Bayard (1990); Bayard and Weatherall (1999) on attitudes to New Zealand 
English
Bayard (1991) on attitudes to New Zealand women’s speech
Bourhis (1983) on Quebec
Burton (1976) on classroom discourse
Cameron (2020) on male dominance in interaction
Cargile, Takai and Rodriguez (2006) on attitudes to AAL in Japan
Cheshire et al. (2011, personal communication) on MLE
Corson (1985) on social class and vocabulary
Coulthard and Johnson (2007) on forensic linguistics
Coupland and Bishop (2007) on attitudes to British accents
Coxhead et al. (2018) on the influence of context and attitude on vocabulary 
testing
Crystal (2010) on Somali
Dray and Sebba (2011) on Jamaican Creole features in Manchester vernacular
Eades (2010) on forensic linguistics
Eberhardt (2020) on police microaggression described in ­example 23
Edwards (1982) on ratings of RP
Edwards (1978, 1985) on attitudes to Patois
Gardner (1985) on matched guise technique
Garrett, Coupland and Williams (2003) on data collection methods
Giles, Bourhis and Davies (2011) on aesthetics and language attitudes
Gordon (1997) on attitudes to New Zealand women’s speech
Gordon and Abell (1990) on attitudes to New Zealand English
Haugen (1966c) on attitudes to Scandinavian languages
Hirst (1974) on Graeco-​Latin vocabulary
Kerswill (20014) on MLE
Kircher (2009) on attitudes to French and English in Quebec
Labov (1966) on attitudes to New York speech
Labov (1972c, 1972d) on New York adolescents’ speech
Ladegaard (2000) on methods of collecting attitude data
Lane (2003) on Letters to the Editor about the Māori language
Lippi-​Green (1997) on attitudes to AAVE
Michaels (1981) on African American children’s narrative styles
Millar (1989) on elocution lessons in Ireland
Milroy (1984) on inter-​dialectal comprehension
Nielsen and Hay (2005) on attitudes and dialect perception in New Zealand
Piller (2001) on attitudes and multilingual advertisements
Seals and Dawson (2021) on French accent discrimination described in 
­example 23
Spender (1980) on erroneous perceptions of female dominance in interaction
Stubbs (1983) on classroom interaction and educational linguistics
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

LANGUAGE VARIATION: FOCUS ON USES
608
Sue (2010) on microaggressions
Torgersen, Kerswill and Fox (2006) on inner London speech
Trudgill (1972, 1975) on attitudes to vernacular varieties of English
Trudgill and Giles (1977) on language attitudes and evaluation
Warner (1999) on Hawaiian
Warren and Oakes (2011) on attitudes to French and English in Quebec
White (2013) on attitudes to languages and aesthetics
Wiese et al. (2015) on training programmes to change teachers’ negative attitudes 
and develop their appreciation of linguistic diversity
Wolfram and Schilling-​Estes (2006) on Ebonics
Quotations and further sources:
Example 2 is based on Haugen (1966c: 292)
Example 3 is based on personal communications with Tiger Webb, language 
consultant at the ABC
Example 4 is based on Millar (1989)
Example 5 is from Labov (1966: 329)
Example 7(a) is from an article by the Secretary of State for Education in The 
Times, 7 November 1986
Example 7(b) is from an Editorial in The Times, 30 April 1988
Example 8 is from The Triad 1912 quoted in Gordon and Deverson (1989: 30)
Example 9 is from Lippi-​Green (1997:180)
In ­example 10, the list is from Wolfram and Schilling-​Estes (1998: 14)
Example 11 is from Lippi-​Green (1997:186). See also Jordan (1995: 62–​63).
Example 12 is based on work by Rickford and King (2016)
Example 13 is from an article by John Rae in The Observer (a British news-
paper) cited in Cameron and Bourne (1989: 11)
Example 14 is based on material in Labov (1982)
Example 15 uses sentences from Labov (1972b)
Example 16 is adapted from Burton (1976: 30–​31)
Example 18 is based on Coulthard (2005)
Example 21 is from Eades (2010: 140) and has been slightly edited
Example 22 is from Ehrlich (2003: 655) and has been slightly edited
Exercise 1 is based on Trudgill and Giles (1977)
Exercise 8: the excerpt is from Labov (1972c: 184–​5)
Exercise 9 is based on Michaels (1981)
Exercise 10 is based on Drew (1985: 138) with discussion from Eades (2010)
Exercise 11 was inspired by Helen Garner’s short story (2016) The insults of age
New York speech as “incontrovertibly dumb” is from the New Zealand news-
paper Dominion, 6 November 1989, p. 8
The term “linguistic profiling” was coined by John Baugh. See Baugh (2018)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ATTITUDES AND APPLICATIONS
609
Useful additional reading
Bauer and Trudgill (1998)
Baugh (2018)
Coupland and Jaworski (2009): Part IV
Garrett (2010)
Labov (1972c, 1982)
Lippi-​Green (1997)
Mesthrie et al. (2009): ­chapter 11
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 4
Meyerhoff, Schleef and Mackenzie (2015): ­chapter 9
Philips (2008)
Rickford and King (2016)
Romaine (2000): ­chapter 7
Saville-​Troike (2003): ­chapters 5 and 6
Stubbs (1983)
 
 
 
 
 

610
DOI: 10.4324/9780367821852-20
Example 1
Neil:	
you’ve got an enormous bottom
 	
[lots of laughter]
Mother:	
that’s not very polite Neil
Three-​year-​old Neil has discovered the delight of words. Enormous is a won-
derful word, satisfyingly longer than huge, his previous favourite. But he hasn’t 
yet learned that this particular utterance is generally regarded as insulting. He 
considers he has made a descriptive observation, but big bottoms are not highly 
valued in all societies, including the Western society that Neil is growing up in. 
And while family members regard his remark as amusing, others may not. Neil 
is still learning how to use language appropriately. He is developing his sociolin-
guistic competence, the subject matter of this book and the first section of this 
chapter.
This final chapter draws together some of the themes that have run throughout 
the book, using the concept of sociolinguistic competence to do so. What is 
involved in knowing how to use language appropriately? Almost every chapter 
has illustrated some aspect of sociolinguistic competence, so this concept provides 
a useful means of reviewing the material covered.
We then use the social scales or dimensions of analysis introduced in ­chapter 1, 
and referred to throughout the book, in order to highlight their importance in 
accounting for patterns of language use in different communities. Status and 
solidarity have repeatedly proved fundamental social dimensions in sociolin-
guistic analysis, though the emphasis differs in different communities according 
to factors such as the fluidity of group boundaries. Formality and function are 
equally useful concepts for illuminating linguistic variation in different speech 
communities. The demonstrable value of these dimensions in sociolinguistic ana-
lysis suggests they may prove universally relevant sociolinguistic tools of analysis.
The data reviewed in this book has demonstrated the rich diversity of language 
behaviour in different contexts and communities. The same basic components 
have produced myriads of linguistic mosaics throughout the world. As well as 
Conclusion
16
 
 

CONCLUSION
611
describing this variation, sociolinguists, like others who seek to understand 
human behaviour, also search for generalisations that reveal common human 
responses to particular social influences. The final section of this chapter provides 
examples of possible sociolinguistic universals or generalisations.
Sociolinguistic competence
When the term “linguistic competence” was first proposed by Noam Chomsky, 
it provoked a strong reaction from one of the leading sociolinguists of the time, 
Dell Hymes. Chomsky defined linguistic competence as the knowledge of lan-
guage of “the ideal speaker–​hearer in a completely homogeneous speech com-
munity”. Hymes argued that this idealisation was so far from the reality of most 
of the world’s experience as to be unhelpful. From a sociolinguist’s perspective, 
the challenge was to account for the knowledge that enabled people to use lan-
guage appropriately in a range of diverse social contexts. Using language appro-
priately involves knowing the sociolinguistic rules for speaking in a community. 
It means understanding the influence of social factors on speech behaviour and 
vice-​versa –​ which is what this book has been about. Each chapter has illustrated 
a different aspect of the many and varied types of knowledge which people in 
different communities acquire when they learn to use language appropriately in 
their own community. The knowledge which underlies people’s ability to use lan-
guage appropriately is known as their sociolinguistic competence.
The first section of the book focused on multilingual communities. Choosing 
the appropriate variety or code to use in such communities involves choosing 
from distinctly different languages, as well as dialects and styles within a lan-
guage. In multilingual communities, children generally learn their ethnic 
language(s) first, and later add other languages for purposes such as educa-
tion, and for communication with a wider range of people in a wider range 
of contexts. Children gradually develop a linguistic repertoire of the linguistic 
codes or varieties which are appropriate in different domains in their speech 
communities. In the Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire), for example, as 
described in ­chapter 2, Kalala acquired standard Zairean Swahili in school and 
Kingwana for communication in the marketplace. The ways in which individ-
uals exploit their linguistic repertoires by switching between different varieties 
can usually be observed more clearly in multilingual communities, because the 
varieties being drawn on are often distinct languages. Some of the many social 
meanings that can be conveyed by code-​switching in multilingual communities 
were illustrated in the first section of the book.
The linguistic repertoire of different generations may differ. This is particu-
larly apparent in communities where language shift is in progress. The sociolin-
guistic competence of an immigrant’s granddaughter, for example, will usually 
differ markedly from that of her grandfather, as we saw in ­chapter 3. She may 
have lost the ethnic language, while developing a wider range of styles in the 
 

CONCLUSION
612
language of the new community. Alternatively, she may have retained the ethnic 
language, but only for use in one or two domains. So, for example, young British 
Portuguese may use Portuguese only in the home and at church. English will be 
appropriate in all other domains. There are many different social factors which 
contribute to the relative speed of language shift, and different factors are rele-
vant in different communities. Nonetheless, the pattern of shift over three or 
four generations from monolingualism in the ethnic language to bilingualism 
and then to monolingualism in the language of the new community seems pretty 
robust, though generally regrettable.
The relative status and functions of different languages in multilingual com-
munities were examined in ­chapters 4 and 5. Vernacular languages are the first 
languages people learn and, in many multilingual communities, the number of 
people who speak a particular vernacular is relatively small. A language of wider 
communication or lingua franca is often an essential addition to a person’s rep-
ertoire. Kalala would not have got far in Bukavu with only his vernacular, Shi. 
He needed the local variety of Swahili, Kingwana, as a lingua franca. Vernacular 
languages contrast with lingua francas in many ways in line with their different 
functions for speakers. For the same reasons, they also differ from standard 
languages. The factors which result in the promotion of a particular var-
iety to the status of standard are social rather than linguistic. But as a result, 
members of a speech community generally need to acquire some familiarity with 
a standard language as part of their sociolinguistic competence. A vernacular 
may be unwritten, for instance, whereas a standard will generally have a writing 
system. Standard languages also have more status and are used more widely than 
vernaculars, so there are obvious advantages to learning them. As a result of 
colonial expansion, and subsequent political and economic expansion, English 
has become a particularly widespread and influential lingua franca –​ an inter-
national or global language. It now serves many varied functions in different 
countries and takes diverse forms.
Pidgin and creole languages, which are also discussed in ­chapter 4, develop ini-
tially as lingua francas. Pidgins are never the only language in an individual’s lin-
guistic repertoire. They serve as a means of communication between people who 
don’t share any variety with each other. Creoles, by contrast, are first languages 
for some individuals. Haitian Creole is not only the first language, it is also the 
only language of most Haitians. Learning how to use a creole appropriately is as 
complex a task as acquiring sociolinguistic competence in any other language.
The final chapter of the first section of this book looks at the status of 
languages from a macro level, rather than from the individual’s point of view. 
National and official languages are defined in relation to states rather than 
social groups or individuals. They develop or are developed to serve the needs 
of governments and nations. Swahili in Tanzania, Hebrew in Israel, Mandarin 
Chinese in China and standard Norwegian in Norway are all examples of var-
ieties which have been consciously developed to serve the many functions of 
the official language of their countries. The process of developing languages for 

CONCLUSION
613
such high-​level functions is one of the activities of language planners, as also 
illustrated in ­chapter 5.
In the second section of the book, the focus was on variation in monolingual 
communities. Just as the particular configuration of a person’s linguistic reper-
toire in a multilingual community indicates their social and regional affiliations, 
so the range of dialects and styles used by monolinguals tells the same story. 
Sociolinguistic competence in a monolingual community includes learning to 
use the community language in a way which signals one’s membership of various 
overlapping social groups, and enacts a range of social identities. You belong 
to a particular social group –​ whether you define it in terms of class or caste or 
simply group. You also live in a particular region. It is possible that both these 
factors are evident in your speech, but the first will almost certainly be indicated 
linguistically. If you live in a monolingual community, the social group to which 
you belong may be indicated by your pronunciation, by your grammar or by 
your vocabulary –​ or by all of these.
You will almost certainly also indicate your gender in some aspects of the 
way you speak, as well as whether you are a child or an adult. We unconsciously 
acquire as part of our sociolinguistic competence the linguistic features and inter-
actional patterns which convey these social messages in our own speech com-
munity. We learn how to speak appropriately for our gender and age group, and 
to actively construct our social identities in ways consistent with the dominant 
ideology. Swearing and slang can be crucial indicators of group membership, 
for example. Ethnicity can also be signalled by the way essentially monolin-
gual people of different ethnic backgrounds use their language. So, for instance, 
there are a range of linguistic features which serve as ethnic signals in English-​
speaking communities. A young Black British woman from the Midlands speaks 
differently from her white middle-​class teachers. Her speech signals her ethnic 
identity as well as indicating her gender, age and social background. Ethnic lin-
guistic tags are obvious signals, but ethnicity is also often signalled by the fre-
quency of occurrence of particular vernacular forms. We tend to notice only the 
ethnic markers of those who belong to minorities. The majority ethnic group is 
treated as the norm against which others are described. Obviously, however, the 
absence of specific markers of minority group ethnicity also conveys information 
about a speaker’s majority group ethnic affiliation.
We all belong to overlapping social groups. We are concurrently members 
of a social, an ethnic and a regional group, as well as members of a particular 
gender and age group. Clearly these groups do not coincide. Your particular 
way of speaking is constructed, mainly unconsciously, from choices among all 
these different possibilities. And another important factor is who you talk to. 
The people you interact with most often may also influence your speech –​ your 
social network of regular contacts will therefore indicate the potential range of 
linguistic influences on your speech. Which of these contacts actually has most 
effect on your speech is often best explained by referring to the social dimensions 
of solidarity and status, which are discussed further later in this chapter.

CONCLUSION
614
Like ­chapter 5 in Part I, ­chapter 9 at the end of Part II moves away from 
the speech behaviour of small groups and individuals to take a broader view 
by focusing on language change. This chapter draws on the patterns described 
in the preceding chapters in order to explore the contribution of social factors 
to language change in a community. Linguistic change is always embedded in 
variation. But which variation will lead to change and which will remain stable 
over time? Where do changes begin? Who leads linguistic change? How do 
changes proceed through a community? The processes by which a particular 
change spreads reflect patterns of social contact. You learn the current slang 
from a friend who learnt it from another friend outside your group. You adopt 
new pronunciations, often unconsciously, in order to sound more like those you 
have heard using them. In established speech communities, the reasons for the 
successful spread of one change compared to others are predominantly social 
and attitudinal.
Between the second and third sections of the book we paused to consider 
how identity seems to be crucial to so many of the sociolinguistic concepts 
we discuss, and looked at how identity can be seen as deeply intertwined with 
language variation. This helped us transition to the third section of the book, 
which focused on the uses of language rather than its users. While the second 
section explored the influence of social features of speakers on the language 
varieties they used, in the third section, the influence of other aspects of the situ-
ation or social context on the form of language was discussed. Features of the 
different speech styles that people use in socially distinct situations are explored 
in ­chapter 10, for instance. Using language appropriately involves learning to 
take account of who you are talking to. Knowing how to speak or write to a 
child, for instance, as opposed to an elderly relative, or to a stranger compared 
to a friend –​ these all involve this aspect of sociolinguistic competence. The 
setting itself and the purpose of an interaction are further factors which influ-
ence speech style –​ how formal is it, for instance, or how relaxed? Uncontracted 
forms such as was not, has not and is not are typical of more formal speech 
styles while wasn’t and hasn’t tend to occur in less formal speech, and innit and 
eh characterise casual styles.
Is the interaction aimed at a specialised audience or not? Sociolinguistic com-
petence includes knowing when to speak and when to be silent, for example. So 
children (eventually!) learn to be silent during the sermon in church, but to join 
in chorused responses to prayers. For some speakers, sociolinguistic competence 
includes knowing how to speak appropriately in a formal context such as a law 
court, or how to describe a cricket match for the benefit of radio listeners. The 
way the specialised features of such registers are moulded by their function is 
exemplified in ­chapter 10.
Sociolinguistic competence also involves knowing how to use language for 
different functions, such as getting things done in different contexts. The ability 
to use language effectively and politely to different people is important. Ways in 
which people demonstrate such knowledge are illustrated in ­chapter 11. When 

CONCLUSION
615
people from different social groups or cultures meet, their sociolinguistic norms 
may conflict. The result may be embarrassment or misunderstanding. Learning a 
foreign language in a Western classroom, for example, often seems at first to be 
a matter of learning the vocabulary and grammar from a book, and struggling 
to imitate the pronunciation of the teacher in class. But the concept of sociolin-
guistic competence makes it clear that much more is involved than control of the 
linguistic structures. Even at the early stages of learning French, it is evident that 
social factors are relevant too. When do you use tu and when vous for instance? 
Who is addressed as Madame and who Mademoiselle? Learning to speak appro-
priately in a range of contexts is important if one wants to avoid causing offence, 
reducing everyone to hysterical laughter, or embarrassing others by a sociolin-
guistic faux pas.
Acquiring sociolinguistic competence in another language may be a slow 
and difficult process, since it involves understanding the social values that 
underlie the community’s ways of using language. Many rules of polite inter-
action depend on understanding the social distance norms of the community. It 
is generally considered rude to say only allô when answering the telephone in a 
French-​speaking culture. You also need to state who you are, so the caller can 
“place” you appropriately. Greeks hardly ever apologise for ringing a friend, 
assuming their call is a welcome token of friendship, while British English people 
often begin with I hope I’m not disturbing you, reflecting a view of phone calls 
as intrusions which require a negative politeness strategy in mitigation since 
they impinge on the sociality rights of the person called. Being polite in another 
language is a complex matter. It involves knowing the relative weight that the 
community puts on different kinds of social relationships, and how these are 
appropriately expressed.
Gender is another relevant factor in accounting for patterns of language 
use. In the middle section of the book, we saw that in many communities 
men used more vernacular forms than women. Vernacular forms consequently 
index masculinity in many communities. In ­chapter 12, differently gendered 
patterns of interaction are explored. Acquiring sociolinguistic competence 
involves recognising the appropriate ways that the gender order dictates that 
women and men should interact in a community (even if one might wish to 
challenge them). The widely held stereotype of women as unconfident speakers 
is challenged by a view that focuses on the politeness function of many features 
of women’s usage. Are the distinctive features of women’s talk a consequence 
of their subordinate social position? Or do women and men unconsciously 
collude in the social construction of a less powerful and assertive gender iden-
tity for women than for men? A social constructionist approach provides 
a dynamic way of analysing social interaction, and also draws attention to 
opportunities to challenge and change dominant interaction patterns which 
disadvantage particular groups.
From this perspective, acquiring sociolinguistic competence is not simply a 
matter of absorbing appropriate rules of interaction by socialising with one’s 

CONCLUSION
616
peers. The social construction of femininity and masculinity is a society-​wide 
activity, beginning with the important gender label assigned at birth, and con-
tinuing with messages about appropriately gendered ways of presenting oneself 
throughout one’s life. Constructing one’s sexual identity is also a linguistic enter-
prise. Constructing gender identity and sexual identity are largely unconscious 
processes acquired in peer group interaction as one grows. But the wider social 
context in which these developments take place provides clues about the gender 
order, the way society expects females and males to behave. In many communi-
ties, girls develop ways of speaking which are appropriate to second-​class citi-
zens. And in some societies, heterosexuality is not regarded as the only possible 
norm; a wider spectrum of sexual identities is accepted, a development which is 
increasingly apparent more widely.
There is little doubt that many English-​speaking societies treat both women 
and non-​heterosexuals negatively. This is apparent as soon as you examine the 
terms used to describe these groups. Sexist language constructs and reinforces 
negative stereotypes of women, as illustrated in the last section of ­chapter 12 
and the beginning of ­chapter 13. A community’s attitudes to different groups 
are often indicated by the linguistic categories which have developed over time 
to label those groups. As children learn the language, they absorb the value 
judgements and affective messages as well as the referential meanings of words. 
Those who wish to challenge the messages must recognise their relationships 
to the wider societal evaluation of these groups. Changing the language is a 
consciousness-​raising exercise which may assist in the more important and fun-
damental task of changing the status of oppressed groups. Your membership 
of some these groups, and the stereotypes that exist about them, might mean 
that the way you speak is scrutinised and stigmatised more than the speech of 
others. If you speak English and believe that you have never encountered any 
form of linguistic discrimination, then it is very likely that you are a white 
middle-​class heterosexual male who uses a standard variety of English as your 
first language.
Language constructs social reality. If medical textbooks represent patients as 
helpless, ignorant and problematic, then the doctors who use them are likely to 
absorb these attitudes and behave in ways which reinforce them. They will be 
patronising towards their patients. Chapter 13 explores the relationship between 
language, thought and culture, and the issue of the extent to which learning 
a language also involves acquiring a particular worldview. Can we escape the 
linguistic lenses provided by our language? Labels such as queer and coconut 
encode social prejudices which children absorb with the language. And while 
resistance is possible, it takes considerable effort to challenge and alter well-​
established attitudes and habitual linguistic behaviours.
If language influences cognition, children who acquire languages which make 
particular semantic distinctions may learn to count more quickly, or to distin-
guish colours or shapes more speedily than those learning different languages. 

CONCLUSION
617
If we can be influenced by sexist and racist terminology, then perhaps the struc-
tural categories provided by our language also influence our perceptions of space 
and time. These issues are discussed in ­chapter 13, as well as the influence of 
the environment on the language of those who occupy it. The precise balance 
between the influence of language on perceptions of “reality”, as opposed to 
the influence of reality on the categories developed by language, will doubtless 
continue to generate debate for many more centuries. The issues involved are 
seen most starkly when radically different cultures come into contact. The 
worldviews of Native American and Aboriginal Australian peoples, for example, 
are often difficult for Westerners to comprehend. It is not surprising, then, that 
culturally different patterns of interaction, expressing different views of social 
relationships, rights and obligations, often result in cultural clashes and mis-
communication. Inevitably, it is members of the minority culture who suffer 
when this happens. Where cultural and social values differ, the perspective of 
the majority tends to define social reality, as ­chapter 13 illustrates. We labelled 
this the culture order –​ the taken-​for-​granted presuppositions about appropriate 
cultural behaviour which impact interaction, especially in intercultural contexts. 
It is also the majority perspective which wins out when languages disappear. 
The costs are hard to evaluate with precision, but they involve the loss of cog-
nitive distinctions, and the disappearance of environmental and sociocultural 
information.
Chapter 14 focuses on a specific aspect of sociolinguistic competence, our 
ability to manage discourse in a range of social contexts. How do we know when 
to respond to an insult (such as Neil’s in ­example 1) with laughter as opposed 
to outrage? How do we identify the complex meanings conveyed by an indirect 
response such as I am a bit tired to a direct question such as do you want to 
come to a movie tonight? How do we know when and how much small talk to 
use at work, and what topics are acceptable? How do we know when come and 
see me tomorrow is an invitation as opposed to a summons? Interpreting the 
social meaning conveyed by talk-​in-​interaction, and encoding social meaning 
appropriately in different social contexts, are aspects of sociopragmatic compe-
tence. Discourse analysis provides a way of studying this aspect of competence.
There are many different approaches to the analysis of discourse. Chapter 14 
illustrates six, each of which analyses discourse from a slightly different angle. 
From a sociolinguistic perspective, pragmatics provides useful insights into the 
different ways that politeness is encoded in discourse in different sociocultural 
contexts. So, pragmatic principles account for how it is possible to infer that 
someone is politely asking for a lift when they say Damn I just missed my bus. 
In some cultures, people are expected to explicitly express their concern and 
interest in other people, while in other cultures such behaviour is considered 
intrusive. Knowing whether to invite someone into your home for a meal, how 
often to telephone, when to apologise and for what, how to refuse a request –​ 
these are all aspects of sociopragmatic competence.

CONCLUSION
618
The ethnography of speaking framework provides a means of describing 
communicative events in any culture. For formal events, the rules are some-
times made explicit, e.g. who may talk, in what order, about what topics 
and for how long. But we acquire knowledge of the rules for less formal 
interactions as we grow up in a community: e.g. when to talk in school and 
when to keep quiet, how much talk to contribute as a dinner guest, how 
quickly to respond to an email from your lecturer or a text from a friend, and 
whether it is OK not to use your camera if the other person has their camera 
on during a call.
The ability to accurately interpret the social significance of what is going on 
is another aspect of our sociopragmatic competence. We learn to “read” the 
underlying social meaning of utterances and to make inferences about what 
someone “really” means. New pupils in school, especially those from minority 
ethnic backgrounds, sometimes miss the point of teachers’ utterances. They take 
literally questions which are intended as reprimands, such as are you talking? 
is that Mary I see sitting on the windowsill? And they fail to recognise door as 
an instruction to open the door for the teacher. Interactional sociolinguistics 
provides a way of identifying the contextualisation cues that we use to interpret 
the social meanings conveyed by talk-​in-​interaction.
Example 2
Example of a text message interaction:
Tim:	
hi sweetie what does idk gtgn syl mean
Jill:	
I don’t know got to go now see you later
Tim:	
Ok I will ask your sister
New ways of interacting highlight the established communicative rules we 
use without reflection. Concepts such as adjacency pairs emphasise the fact 
that greetings and farewells, and questions and answers, are typically paired 
sets of utterances in many contexts. But how do these patterns work out 
when texting or engaged in a real-​time online chat? Do the rules of written 
communication take over? People typically dispense with greetings and sign 
offs when sending text messages. Text messages are typically minimal in con-
tent, and often use abbreviations and acronyms as illustrated in ­example 2. 
Feedback in simultaneous online messaging or chatroom interaction is often 
delayed in time, and thus does not always occur in the “correct” sequence on 
screen. Conversation Analysis provides tools for describing what is going on 
as new rules or norms of interaction emerge with the development of these 
new genres.
 

CONCLUSION
619
Example 3
Emails between Elaine and Marion. Elaine is the Division Manager; Marion 
is a colleague.
Elaine:	
could you come and see me tomorrow about 10.30?
Marion:	
yes sure
[2 hours later]
Marion:	
In my last three jobs if the boss asked to see you then you 
were in trouble, I’m not in trouble am I?
Marion was certainly not in trouble. Elaine just needed to discuss a complicated 
problem that she thought Marion could help with. But this email exchange 
highlights the potential for miscommunication on the basis of assumptions 
and inferences we all make in interaction. Elaine had not thought of herself as 
Marion’s boss, although she was manager of the unit in which Marion worked. 
Having worked in much more hierarchical organisations, Marion “read” the 
email as a threatening summons. The ways in which power is encoded in dis-
course are often subtle. In this case, reflecting on the encounter, Elaine realised 
that by not telling Marion the reason for the meeting, she was putting her at 
a disadvantage. Note too that Marion was required to come to Elaine’s room 
rather than the other way round. The different approaches to discourse ana-
lysis in ­chapter 14 provide ways to unpack the sociopragmatic and sociocultural 
assumptions which underlie different interpretations of messages.
Chapter 15 extends the discussion of the relevance of concepts such as power 
and status in sociolinguistics in relation to language attitudes in particular. 
Children absorb attitudes from their peers and families as they grow up. The 
attitudes people hold towards different languages or accents are components of 
their sociolinguistic competence. These attitudes are not related to any intrinsic 
linguistic merits or deficiencies of the linguistic varieties concerned. Rather they 
reflect the social status of those who use the varieties, or the contexts in which 
the varieties are customarily used. The language of the highest status group in a 
community is generally overtly admired and recognised as a model by the whole 
community. Being able to recognise the prestige variety is part of a person’s 
sociolinguistic competence, even though they may choose not to use that variety 
themselves.
All members of a community need to be able to understand the standard 
dialect. Sociolinguists argue that all should have the option of producing it 
too, if they choose to do so. Most people acquire control of the standard var-
iety in school, at least for written purposes. Those who do not may suffer 
 

CONCLUSION
620
the educational implications of negative attitudes to vernacular speech var-
ieties. Chapter 15 discusses the mistaken bases for the widespread negative 
judgements which label as educational failures many children who speak ver-
nacular varieties, or who use language in ways which differ from the approved 
norms of the middle-​class school. This chapter also describes forensic linguistic 
research, another area where sociolinguists make a contribution to redressing 
social injustices based on misconceptions about language use and language 
variation.
Using the concept of sociolinguistic competence, we have reviewed the 
material covered in the book in a linear progression which has emphasised the 
links between different chapters. The next section of this chapter now briefly 
shows how the social scales or dimensions, introduced in ­chapter 1, provide 
another thread throughout the book.
Dimensions of sociolinguistic analysis
Sociolinguists are interested in identifying ways of describing and explaining the 
relationship between language and the social contexts in which it is used. In this 
book, a number of concepts have repeatedly proved useful in accounting for the 
patterns found in a wide range of societies. In particular, we have made use of 
the following scales or dimensions introduced in ­chapter 1:
1	
solidarity/​social distance
2	
status/​power
3	
formality
4	
function –​ affective and referential.
Example 4
Two little Māori girls are playing “school” in the classroom during the 
lunch-​break. Mere is the teacher and Hine the pupil. Mere has written on 
the board: It is ten o’clock. Time for work. A little boy, Tama, puts his head 
in the door.
Tama:	
Where’s Mrs McLean?
Mere:	
Dunno. She not here.
Tama:	
You sure?
Hine:	
Mrs McLean not here dummy!
Mere:	
Mrs McLean isn’t around today.
[Tama leaves at this point and Mere continues with her lesson.]
Mere:	
Now Hine. You copy this carefully.
Hine:	
Yes Miss. I am.
 
 

CONCLUSION
621
This example shows Mere and Hine code-​switching between standard 
and vernacular forms of English for a variety of reasons. Sometimes they use 
standard utterances with forms of the verb be, and sometimes they don’t. As 
teacher, Mere uses is, a form of the verb be, in her writing on the board. As pupil, 
Hine uses am, another form of be, in her final reply. Both switch to utterances 
without be in addressing Tama. However, when Tama questions her response, 
Mere switches to standard English to emphasise what she is saying, while Hine 
resorts to friendly abuse!
Mere and Hine know both the standard and the vernacular forms, and they 
choose which to use. They choose according to the influence of the sociolin-
guistic dimensions of solidarity, status, formality and function. In the formal 
classroom situation acting as teacher and pupil, standard forms are appropriate 
(indexing the formality and status/​power dimensions). To a fellow Māori pupil, 
vernacular forms are appropriate (signalling solidarity). For emphasis, a switch 
to the standard is effective (exploiting the affective function or dimension of 
meaning). In the 1920s, the same social messages may have been conveyed by 
switching between Māori and English in these circumstances. Māori would have 
expressed solidarity, while English would have expressed formality and superior 
status.
Solidarity/​social distance
The solidarity dimension has proved relevant in accounting for patterns of lin-
guistic interaction throughout the book. How well you know someone is one 
of the most important factors affecting the way you talk to them. The choice 
between regional dialect and standard Norwegian in Norway, or between 
German and Italian in Sauris, or Meg vs. Mrs Billington in Cardiff, may simply 
indicate the degree of solidarity between the speaker and addressee.
Vernacular languages are often used between people who share attitudes 
and values, and who may belong to the same ethnic group. In-​group lan-
guage is the language of solidarity. Two Paraguayans who meet in Paris will 
use Guaraní to signal their shared identity. Strangers with little in common 
are more likely to use a lingua franca or official language for communication. 
Vernacular forms within a language also occur more frequently in interactions 
where people know each other well. Standard forms often express social dis-
tance between participants. Certain speech styles are also used most often 
between intimates. In most cultures, positive politeness strategies are appro-
priate between those who know each other well, for example, or who wish to 
know each other better. But gossip would be inappropriate between strangers. 
Negative politeness strategies tend to characterise interactions between 
strangers –​ those who are socially distant and whose sociality rights should 
be observed.
 

CONCLUSION
622
Status/​power
The status or power dimension also accounts for a variety of linguistic differences 
in the way people speak. You speak in a way which signals your social status and 
constructs your social identity in a community. Those at the top in multilingual 
communities often have the widest linguistic repertoire, and they certainly speak 
the official language. In a monolingual community, the higher your social group, 
the more standard forms you are likely to use. The language of the most presti-
gious group is, by definition, the standard dialect.
The way you talk to others also signals your relationship on this dimension. 
Where people use non-​reciprocal address forms, for instance, the reason is gen-
erally due to a status or power difference. If you call someone Sir and he calls 
you Chris, then he is your superior in some context. The subordinate status of 
women is often signalled and reinforced by the non-​reciprocal use of address 
forms. The butcher may use dear to his women customers, for instance, but they 
do not call him dear and he is unlikely to use dear to the men working on the 
road outside. Power or status differences also explain the greater use of nega-
tive politeness forms by some speakers. You will probably use a less direct form 
when asking your boss for a lift, for example, than when asking your sister.
Formality
The formality dimension accounts for speech variation in different settings 
or contexts. The H variety in a diglossia situation is the variety used in more 
formal situations. Classical Arabic is not used in everyday talk. In Haiti, the L 
language, Haitian Creole, is the language of relaxed informal situations. Official 
languages are the appropriate varieties for formal government interactions 
and state occasions. Vernaculars are the languages of informal interaction. In 
monolingual communities, vernacular forms predominate in casual talk, while 
standard forms are more frequent in situations such as a formal interview with 
the school principal or the bank manager. Formal settings such as law courts, 
the House of Assembly or Parliament, a graduation ceremony or a retire-
ment dinner will require appropriate language. Formal styles of speech with 
distinctive pronunciation, syntax and vocabulary are the linguistic equivalent 
of formal dress on such occasions. Though status and solidarity are usually 
very important influences on appropriate language choice, the formality of the 
setting or speech event can sometimes override them. In court, even sisters will 
call each other by their formal titles, and at a wedding ceremony the language 
of the bride and groom is prescribed by the ritual occasion, not by the closeness 
of their relationship.
Different communities put different degrees of weight on solidarity vs. status, 
and formality vs. casualness. In a conservative, status-​based community, where 
differences are emphasised, interactions with acquaintances may be relatively 
 
 

CONCLUSION
623
formal. In groups where friendship or how well you know someone tends to 
override status differences, similarities are stressed, and interactions tend towards 
the informal in many contexts. A group of elderly Indian upper-​caste men might 
represent one extreme, while a group of lower-​class North American teenagers 
might represent the other.
Function
The function of an interaction can also be an important influence on linguistic 
form, as we have seen throughout the book. Some interactions, such as news 
bulletins, sports commentaries and legal documents, are high in information 
content, or referential meaning. Their linguistic features are strongly influenced 
by the kind of information they need to convey, and the constraints of time and 
setting they are responding to. In other interactions, such as friendly gossip, the 
social or affective message may be the most important reason for the interaction. 
This too influneces the form of the language.
Pidgin languages develop for primarily referential functions. As a result, 
the linguistic forms found in pidgin languages are generally not elaborated 
in ways which could serve to convey social information. They are simple and 
minimal. The speakers have other varieties which they use with their friends 
for social and affective functions and to construct their social identities. 
People do not generally use pidgins to convey their social status, nor how 
much they like the addressee. Where variation develops, however, these are 
precisely the kinds of functions it serves. For example, it is possible to convey 
warmth and affection in the H variety or using standard dialect forms, but it 
is more often the case that people use L varieties and vernacular forms for this 
purpose. Similarly, while referential information can certainly be conveyed in 
any language or dialect, in practice, the H variety or standard dialect tends to 
be regarded as the most appropriate way of expressing primarily informative 
material, particularly for a wide audience, and especially when the informa-
tion is in written form.
Language serves many functions, but in all communities the basic functions 
of referential and affective (or social) meaning have proved useful dimensions 
of analysis. Every language provides means of expressing social as well as ref-
erential meaning, and the choice between alternative ways of saying the “same” 
thing frequently involves a consideration of these dimensions. Though referen-
tially equivalent, Oh it’s you! conveys a very different affective message from 
How lovely to see you, do come in! when you open the door to someone. It has 
been suggested that, at least in casual interaction, some social groups tend to 
stress the affective rather than the referential function of talk. If this is so, the 
possibilities for miscommunication with those who have different norms are 
obvious. Similarly, different cultural groups may emphasise affective functions 
 

CONCLUSION
624
in contexts where others consider referential information is the primary focus. 
A short welcoming greeting to parents at a school meeting, for instance, may 
strike some groups as too perfunctory, and as indicating that the school does not 
value their presence. For others, a short greeting may be considered as sensible. 
It dispenses with formalities and enables the meeting to get down to business 
with minimal delay.
These four dimensions thus prove valuable in analysing the range of socio-
linguistic variation in many different types of speech communities and different 
contexts. As suggested above, they seem to be universally useful sociolinguistic 
tools of analysis. The final section of this chapter briefly exemplifies the notion 
of sociolinguistic universals.
Sociolinguistic universals
Sociolinguists look for general patterns in the relationship between language 
and society. They are interested in identifying and explaining common trends 
in the ways social factors account for linguistic variation in different speech 
communities. The generalisations they seek could be described as sociolinguistic 
universals. At this stage, some will be obvious from the previous discussion. 
You may like to try formulating some sociolinguistic universals yourself before 
reading the following generalisations:
•	All speech communities have linguistic means of distinguishing different social 
relationships; here solidarity and status are relevant dimensions of analysis.
•	All speech communities have linguistic means of distinguishing different con-
textual styles; formality is here the relevant dimension of analysis.
•	All speech communities have linguistic means of expressing basic speech 
functions: potential universals here are referential and affective functions, or 
at a greater level of specificity, those listed on page 388.
•	In all speech communities, language change implies language variation, with 
social variation an important contributing component.
These potential sociolinguistic universals are at a high level of generality, and 
have been illustrated throughout the book. Before finishing, however, we provide 
examples of three more specific universals that sociolinguists have developed. 
They are testable hypotheses derived from fundamental sociolinguistic principles. 
The first is one which links the solidarity and status/​power dimensions. The 
second links the status/​power dimension to the formality dimension. The third 
universal involves considerations of the functions of language in relation to the 
solidarity and status/​power dimensions.
Sociolinguistic universal 1: If a particular linguistic form, such as tu in 
French or first name in English, is used reciprocally to express solidarity 
between people who know each other well, the same form will be used 
 

CONCLUSION
625
non-​reciprocally by more powerful people to their subordinates to express 
superior status or power.
Sociolinguistic universal 2: If a particular pronunciation or grammatical fea-
ture, such as [h]‌-​dropping or be omission, is used to express a shift in style, 
from formal to informal for instance, the same feature will be used to signal 
differences in social group membership.
Sociolinguistic universal 3: Linguistic forms expressing negative politeness 
will be used more frequently as social distance and status/​power differences 
between people increase.
Making such generalisations explicit means they can more easily be 
tested against a range of data. Do they hold for your speech community, for 
example?
It is easy to illustrate the first generalisation. People in many English-​speaking 
speech communities call those that they know well by their first names in all but 
the most formal contexts. They use title and last name, e.g. Mrs Davidson or 
Dr Boyce, to those they know less well (socially distant addressees). This pattern 
is generally reciprocal. But in situations where one person is more powerful or 
has more social status, we often find a non-​reciprocal pattern. The Director calls 
the office junior Jim, but she is called Mrs Johnson in reply.
This is an example of a generalisation which once applied widely but which 
appears to be involved in a process of change. As discussed in ­chapter 11, for some 
communities, including some in North America, Australia and New Zealand, 
the fact that people know each other well may override their status or power 
differences –​ especially if the difference is not a great one. Reciprocal usage 
may therefore be usual even between superior and subordinate when they have 
known each other for some time. So while these sociolinguistic generalisations 
involve fundamental social dimensions such as status and solidarity, the ways in 
which they interact, and especially the precise ways in which they are expressed 
or realised will change over time. The reasons for linguistic changes are often 
changes in the social values of the societies concerned. In this case, the old 
pattern indicated the importance of status differences. The new pattern signals 
the increasing relevance of solidarity as a factor in relationships in many Western 
societies.
Example 4 illustrates the second generalisation. The switch from using 
standard to vernacular forms of be is one feature of a switch from formal to 
informal style. Mere uses standard forms when she is acting in her role as 
teacher in a formal classroom setting, and vernacular forms when she is talking 
to a fellow Māori student. This vernacular grammatical feature is also a feature 
which distinguishes different social groups. Those from higher socioeconomic 
groups tend not to omit be, while those from lower status social groups omit 
it some of the time. This is a common pattern, as we saw in ­chapter 10. The 
linguistic features which signal higher status are those used in more formal or 
careful speech styles.

CONCLUSION
626
But again, the generalisation must be treated with caution. There are some 
linguistic features which characterise different styles, but which do not neces-
sarily distinguish different social groups. It seems unlikely that greater use of 
the passive, for instance, a feature which tends to characterise more formal 
styles of speech, will systematically distinguish between the speech of different 
social classes. The generalisation seems more likely to hold with respect to 
features of pronunciation and morphology than features of syntax and vocabu-
lary. It is also less relevant where social distinctions are relatively rigid. So in 
Javanese, as we saw in ­chapters 6 and 10, the linguistic features which char-
acterise distinct Javanese social dialects and signal social caste membership 
are distinguishable from the features which mark different styles within each 
dialect.
The third generalisation relates negative politeness to social distance and 
status/​power differences between people. Negative politeness is respectful and 
avoids imposing on the addressee; it attends to their sociality rights. People who 
do not know each other well tend to use negative politeness forms to reduce the 
strength of directive speech acts, for instance. Subordinates similarly soften the 
impact of speech acts such as requests and disagreements with appropriate nega-
tive politeness devices. In some cultures, even speech acts such as invitations and 
informatives will be expressed with attenuated force to a stranger or a superior, 
attending to their sociality rights. We use forms such as would you like to sit 
down? and I wonder if you could possibly pass me that glass? when speaking to 
a new acquaintance or a new boss. To a friend, the direct sit down or pass me 
that glass would be much more likely.
Similar patterns hold in other languages and cultures. Negative politeness 
devices mitigate the force of speech acts such as directives to those who are 
socially distant or superior, while direct unadorned imperative forms charac-
terise the language of equals with solidarity links. In Tzeltal, for instance, men 
use direct forms to each other. In Javanese, the most basic form of the language, 
ngoko, is used between close friends of equal rank. Differences in status and soli-
darity lead to the use of more elaborated forms to express the same message in 
a socially more appropriate way. Negative politeness devices are also extensively 
used in Japanese to those who are socially distant or superior in status. Attention 
to the addressee’s sociality rights takes high priority.
These three sociolinguistic universals are presented as examples of the kinds 
of generalisation which sociolinguists are interested in formulating. They iden-
tify universal tendencies or trends, and so make it easier to link such language 
trends to social trends and processes. They encapsulate an important step in the 
process of explaining the relationship between language and society. And that is 
of course the primary goal of sociolinguistics.

CONCLUSION
627
Tailpiece
Example 5
Robbie:	
What is social linguistics anyway?
Mum:	
It’s sociolinguistics not social linguistics. Why don’t you read 
the book and find out?
Robbie:	
It’s too long!
In concluding this book, we note regretfully that many topics have received 
only the briefest discussion, and many more have not been covered at all –​ des-
pite a tolerant publisher who allowed us to stretch this book well beyond the 
limit initially envisaged (again). For example, though we have discussed the role 
of English as a lingua franca, and described features of a range of varieties of 
English, we have had relatively little to say about the globalisation of English, 
a large, and rapidly expanding topic. There are many applied sociolinguistic 
topics, too, that have been necessarily curtailed. Bilingual education has had 
no more than passing mention. The implications of sociolinguistic research for 
second language learning is another rich topic which has not been done justice. 
We can only hope that our choices have served the purpose of whetting your 
appetite for further reading in this area, and that having read this book you will 
be better equipped to understand other books about sociolinguistics. A final 
example will serve to underline the fundamental message of this book, while 
also, hopefully, provoking further thought:
Example 6
Student:	
Whenever I ask a question about how people talk, you 
always answer “it all depends”.
Janet:	
Context is all!
Concepts introduced
•	Linguistic competence
•	Sociolinguistic competence
•	Sociopragmatic competence
•	Sociolinguistic universals
 
 
 
 

CONCLUSION
628
References and sources
The following sources provided material for this chapter:
Chomsky (1965: 3) for definition of linguistic competence
Holmes (2018a) on the culture order
Hymes (1972: 269ff) on sociolinguistic competence
Universal 1 is based on Brown and Ford (1961)
Universal 2 is based on Bell (1984: 151)
Universal 3 is based on Brown and Levinson (1987)
Example 2 derives from www.collinsdictionary.com/​word-​lists/​text-abbre  
viations-​and-​symbols
Useful additional reading
Filppula, Klemola and Paulasto (2009)
Hudson (1996)
Meyerhoff (2011): ­chapter 12
Saville-​Troike (2003)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

629
References
Abe, Hideko (2011) Lesbian bar talk in Shinjuku, Tokyo. In Jennifer Coates and Pia 
Pichler (eds) Language and Gender: A Reader, 2nd edn. Oxford/​Malden, MA: Wiley 
Blackwell. 375–​83.
Agheyisi, Rebecca and Joshua A. Fishman (1970) Language attitude studies. 
Anthropological Linguistics 12, 5: 137–​57.
Aipolo, Anahina and Janet Holmes (1990) The use of Tongan in New Zealand: prospects 
for language maintenance. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 11, 
6: 501–​21.
Aitchison, Jean (2001, 2012) Language Change: Progress or Decay? 4th edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Albirini, A. (2016) Modern Arabic Sociolinguistics: Diglossia, Variation, Codeswitching, 
Attitudes and Identity. London/​New York: Routledge.
Allan, Keith and Kate Burridge (2006) Forbidden Words: Taboo and the Censoring of 
Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allan, Scott (1990) The rise of New Zealand intonation. In Allan Bell and Janet Holmes 
(eds) New Zealand Ways of Speaking English. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 
115–​28.
Androutsopoulos, Jannis (2010) Ideologising ethnolectal German. In Tommaso M. Milani 
and Sally Johnson (eds) Language Ideologies and Media Discourse: Texts, Practices, 
Politics. London: Bloomsbury. 182–​202.
Andrzejewski, Bogumil W. (1963) Poetry in Somali society. New Society, 23 March, 
25: 22–​4.
Appel, René and Pieter Müysken (1987) Language Contact and Bilingualism. 
London: Edward Arnold.
Armstrong, Nigel (1996) Variable deletion of French /​l/​: linguistic, social and stylistic 
factors. Journal of French Language Studies 6, 1: 1–​21.
Auer, Peter (1999) From code-​switching via language mixing to fused lects. International 
Journal of Bilingualism 3: 309–​32.
Austin, Peter K. and Julia Sallabank (eds) (2011) The Cambridge Handbook of 
Endangered Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bailey, Charles-​James N. (1973a) The patterning of language variation. In Richard W. 
Bailey and Jay L. Robinson (eds) Varieties of Present-​Day English. London: Collier-​
Macmillan. 156–​86.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
630
Bailey, Charles-​James N. (1973b) Variation and Linguistic Theory. Washington, 
DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Baker, Colin (1992) Attitudes and Language. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Baker, Colin and Wayne E. Wright (2021) Foundations of Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Baker, Paul (2005) Public Discourses of Gay Men. London: Routledge.
Baker, Paul (2010) Will Ms ever be as frequent as Mr? A corpus-​based comparison of gen-
dered terms across four diachronic corpora of British English. Gender and Language 
4, 1: 125–​49.
Baron, Dennis (2020) What’s Your Pronoun? Beyond He and She. New York: Liveright.
Barrett, Rusty (1999) Indexing polyphonous identity in the speech of African American 
drag queens. In Mary Bucholtz, A.C. Liang and Laurel J. Sutton (eds) Reinventing 
Identities. The Gendered Self in Discourse. New York/​Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 313–​31.
Bassett, Judith, Keith Sinclair and Marcia Stenson (1985) The Story of New Zealand. 
Auckland: Reed Methuen.
Bauer, Laurie, Janet Holmes and Paul Warren (2005) Language Matters. London: Palgrave.
Bauer, Laurie and Peter Trudgill (eds) (1998) Language Myths. London: Penguin.
Baugh, John (2018) Linguistics in Pursuit of Justice. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bayard, Donn (1987) Class and change in New Zealand English: a summary report. Te 
Reo 30: 3–​36.
Bayard, Donn (1990) ‘God help us if we all sound like this’: attitudes to New Zealand 
and other English accents. In Allan Bell and Janet Holmes (eds) New Zealand Ways of 
Speaking English. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 67–​96.
Bayard, Donn (1991) A taste of Kiwi: perceived attitudes to accent, speaker gender, and 
perceived ethnicity across the Tasman. Australian Journal of Linguistics 11: 1–​38.
Bayard, Donn and Ann Weatherall (1999) Identifying and evaluating accents of English: a 
replication study. In Proceedings of the Wellington Language and Gender Symposium, 
Victoria University of Wellington, 21–​22 October 1999. Wellington: Victoria 
University.
Bayard, Donn, Cynthia Gallois, Jeffery Pittam et al. (2001) Pax Americana? Accent atti-
tudinal evaluations in New Zealand, Australia and America. Journal of Sociolinguistics 
5, 1: 22–​49.
Becker, Kara (2009) /​r/​ and the construction of place identity on New York City’s Lower 
East Side. Journal of Sociolinguistics 15, 5: 634–​58.
Becker, Kara (2017) The sociolinguistic interview. In Christine Mallinson, Becky Childs 
and Gerard Van Herk (2017) Data Collection Methods in Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. 
London: Routledge. Chapter 6.
Bell, Allan (1984) Language style as audience design. Language in Society 13, 2: 145–​204.
Bell, Allan (1991) The Language of the News Media. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bell, Allan (2000) Maori and Pakeha English: a case study. In Allan Bell and Koenraad 
Kuiper (eds) New Zealand English. Wellington: Victoria University Press. 221–​48.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
631
Bell, Allan (2001) Back in style: reworking audience design. In Penelope Eckert and 
John R. Rickford (eds) Style and Sociolinguistic Variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 139–​69.
Bell, Allan (2014) The Guidebook to Sociolinguistcs. Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Bell, Allan and Janet Holmes (1992) On shear markets and sharing sheep: the merger of 
EAR and AIR in New Zealand English. Language Variation and Change 4, 3: 251–​73.
Bell, Allan, Karen David and Donna Starks (2000) Languages of the Manukau Region. 
Auckland: Report to the Woolf Fisher Research Centre, University of Auckland.
Bengoechea, Mercedes (2011) Non-​sexist Spanish policies: an attempt bound to fail. 
Current Issues in Language Planning 12, 1: 35–​53.
Bennett, Joe (2012) “And what comes out may be a kind of screeching”: the stylisation of 
chavspeak in contemporary Britain. Journal of Sociolinguistics 16, 1: 5–​27.
Benton, Richard A. (1991) The Maori language: dying or reviving. East-​West Centre 
Association Working Paper No. 28. Honolulu, HI: East-​West Centre Association.
Benton, Richard A. (2001) Whose language? Ownership and control of te reo Maori in 
the third millennium. New Zealand Sociology 16, 1: 35–​54.
Bernstein, Basil (1973) Class, Codes and Control. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Bialystok, Ellen (2007) Bilingualism as a protection against the onset of symptoms of 
dementia. Neuropsychologia 45, 2: 9–​464.
Bickerton, Derek (1975) Dynamics of a Creole System. London/​New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Bigelow, Martha and Melissa Engman (eds) (2020) Doing Indigenous language reclam-
ation. Modern Language Journal 104, 2: 480–​525.
Blackledge, Adrian and Angela Creese (2017) Translanguaging and the body. International 
Journal of Multilingualism 14, 3: 250–​68.
Blackledge, Adrian and Angela Creese (2019) Voices of a City Market: An Ethnography. 
Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Blackwood, Roger, Elizabeth Lanza and Hirut Woldemariam (2017) Negotiating and 
Contesting Identities in Linguistic Landscapes. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Blake, Renée and Meredith Josey (2003) The /​ay/​ diphthong in a Martha’s Vineyard com-
munity: what can we say 40 years after Labov? Language in Society 32, 4: 451–​85.
Blanc, Haim (1968) The Israeli koine as an emergent national standard. In Joshua A. 
Fishman, Charles A. Ferguson and Jyotirindra Das Gupta (eds) Language Problems of 
Developing Nations. New York: John Wiley. 237–​51.
Blocker, Dianne (1976) And how shall I address you? A study of address systems at 
Indiana University. Working Papers in Linguistics, No. 33. Austin, TX: Southwest 
Educational Development Laboratory.
Blom, Jan-​P. and John J. Gumperz (1972) Social meaning in linguistic structure. In John J. 
Gumperz and Dell Hymes (eds) Directions in Sociolinguistics. London: Holt, Reinhart 
& Winston. 407–​34.
Blommaert, Jan (2005) Discourse: A Critical Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
632
Blommaert, Jan and Jie Dong (2020) Ethnographic Fieldwork: A Beginner’s Guide, 2nd 
edn. Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Blum-​Kulka, Shoshana, Brenda Danet and Rimona Gherson (1985) The language of 
requesting in Israeli society. In Joseph P. Forgas (ed.) Language and Social Situations. 
New York: Springer-​Verlag. 113–​39.
Boberg, Charles (2017) The use of written questionnaires in sociolinguistics. In Christine 
Mallinson, Becky Childs and Gerard Van Herk (2017) Data Collection Methods in 
Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. London: Routledge. Chapter 8.
Bodine, Anne (1975) Androcentrism in prescriptive grammar. Language in Society 4, 
2: 129–​56.
Bodo, Csanád (2005) Hungarian in Austria. In Anna Fenyvesi (ed.) Hungarian 
Language Contact Outside Hungary: Studies on Hungarian as a Minority Language. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing. 241–​64.
Bolinger, Dwight (1980) Language: The Loaded Weapon. London: Longman.
Bortoni-​Ricardo, S.M. (1985) The Urbanisation of Rural Dialect Speakers: A 
Sociolinguistic Study in Brazil. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boston Women’s Health Book Collective (1984) The New Our Bodies, Ourselves: A 
Book by and for Women. Boston, MA: Simon and Schuster.
Bourhis, Richard Y. (ed.) (1983) Conflict and Language Planning in Quebec. Clevedon, 
Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Bradley, John (1988) Yanyuwa: ‘men speak one way, women speak another’ Aboriginal 
Linguistics 1, 126–​34.
Bradley, John (2011) Men speak one way, women speak another. In Jennifer Coates 
and Pia Pichler (eds) Language and Gender: A Reader, 2nd edn. Oxford/​Malden, 
MA: Wiley Blackwell. 13–​19.
Bright, William (1966) Language, social stratification and cognitive orientation. 
Sociological Inquiry 36, 2: 313–​18.
Bright, William and A.K. Ramanujan (1964) Sociolinguistic variation and language 
change. In H.G. Lund (ed.) Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress of 
Linguists. The Hague: Mouton. 1107–​13.
Broesch, Tanya L. and Gregory A. Bryant (2015) Prosody in infant-​directed speech is 
similar across Western and traditional cultures. Journal of Cognition and Development 
16, 1: 31–​43.
Brown, David J. (1995) Language maintenance among the Mapuche people of Chile after 
500 years of Castellanisation. Journal of Intercultural Studies 16, 1–​2: 55–​65.
Brown, Penelope and Stephen Levinson (1987) Politeness: Some Universals in Language 
Usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, Roger and Albert Gilman (1960) The pronouns of power and solidarity. In T.A. 
Sebeok (ed.) Style in Language. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 253–​76.
Brown, Roger and Marguerite Ford (1961) Address in American English. Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology 62: 375–​85.
Brown, Tim (2000) The implementation of non-​sexist language reform in the NZ public 
sector. Unpublished Honours terms paper. Wellington: Victoria University.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
633
Browning, Robert (1982) Greek diglossia yesterday and today. International Journal of 
the Sociology of Language 35: 49–​68.
Bryen, Diane N., Cheryl Hartman and Pearl E. Tait (1978) Variant English. Colombus, 
OH: Bell and Howell.
Bucholtz, Mary (2009) From stance to style: gender, interaction and indexicality in 
Mexican immigrant youth slang. In Alexandre Jaffa (ed.) Stance: Sociolinguistic 
Perspectives. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bucholtz, Mary and Kira Hall (2005) Identity and interaction: a sociocultural linguistic 
approach. Discourse Studies 7, 4–​5: 585–​614.
Bucholtz, Mary and Kira Hall (2016) Embodied sociolinguistics. In Nikolas Coupland 
(ed.) Sociolinguistics: Theoretical Debates. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
173–​98.
Burling, Robbins (1970) Man’s Many Voices. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Burton, Deirdre (1976) ‘I think they know that’: aspects of English language work in pri-
mary classrooms. Nottingham Linguistic Circular 5, 1: 22–​34.
Caldas-​Coulthard, Carmen Rosa (ed.) (2020) Innovations and Challenges: Women, 
Language and Sexism. London: Routledge.
Cameron, Deborah (1995) Verbal Hygiene. London: Routledge.
Cameron, Deborah (1997) Performing gender identity: young men’s talk and the con-
struction of heterosexual masculinity. In Sally Johnson and Ulrike Hanna Meinhof 
(eds) Language and Masculinity. Oxford: Blackwell. 47–​65.
Cameron, Deborah (2001) Working with Spoken Discourse. London: Sage.
Cameron, Deborah (2006) On Language and Sexual Politics. New York: Routledge.
Cameron, Deborah (2007) The Myth of Mars and Venus: Do Men and Women Really 
Speak Different Languages? Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cameron, Deborah (2020) The gender respect gap. In Carmen Rosa Caldas-​Coulthard 
(ed.) Innovations and Challenges: Women, Language and Sexism. London: 
Routledge. 19–​33.
Cameron, Deborah and Don Kulick (2003) Language and Sexuality. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, Deborah, Fiona McAlinden and Kathy O’Leary (1988) Lakoff in context. In 
Jennifer Coates and Deborah Cameron (eds) Women in their Speech Communities. 
London: Longman. 74–​93.
Cameron, Deborah and Jill Bourne (1989) Grammar, Nation and Citizenship: Kingman 
in Linguistic and Historical Perspective. University of London, Institute of Education: 
Department of English and Media Studies Occasional Paper No. 1.
Cargile, Aaaron Castelan, Jiro Takai and José I. Rodriguez (2006) Attitudes towards 
African American Vernacular English: a US export to Japan? Journal of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Development 27, 6: 443–​56.
Carnevale, Carla, Rudolf de Cillia, Hans-​Jürgen Krumm et al. (2008) Language and 
Language Education Policies in Austria. Vienna: Bundesministerium für Unterricht, 
Kunst und Kultur, Bundesministerium für Wissenschaft und Forschung and 
Österreichisches Sprachen-​Kompetenz-​Zentrum.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
634
Carroll, John B. (ed.) (1956) Language, Thought and Reality: Selected Writings of 
Benjamin Lee Whorf. New York: Wiley.
Carroll, John B. (1965) Language and Thought. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cazden, Courtney B. (1972) Child, Language and Education. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston.
Cenoz, Jasone (2003) The additive effect of bilingualism on third language acquisition: A 
review. International Journal of Bilingualism 7: 71–​87.
Chambers, Jack C. (2003) Sociolinguistic Theory, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Chambers, Jack C. and Peter Trudgill (2004) Dialectology, 2nd edn. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.
Chambers, Jack C., Peter Trudgill and Natalie Schilling-​Estes (eds) (2004) The Handbook 
of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cheshire, Jenny (1982a) Linguistic variation and social function. In Suzanne Romaine (ed.) 
Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech Communities. London: Edward Arnold. 153–​66.
Cheshire, Jenny (1982b) Variation in an English Dialect: A Sociolinguistic Study. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheshire, Jenny (1989) Addressee-​oriented features in spoken discourse. York Papers in 
Linguistics 13: 49–​64.
Cheshire, Jenny, Paul Kerswill and Ann Williams (2005) Phonology, grammar, and 
discourse in dialect convergence. In Peter Auer, Frans Hinskens and Paul Kerswill 
(eds) Dialect Change: Convergence and Divergence in European Languages. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 135–​67.
Cheshire, Jenny, Paul Kerswill, Sue Fox et al. (2011) Contact, the feature pool and 
the speech community: the emergence of Multicultural London English. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics 15, 2: 151–​96.
Chew, Phyllis (2007) Remaking Singapore: language, culture, and identity in a globalized 
world. In Amy B.M. Tsui and James W. Tollefson (eds) Language Policy, Culture and 
Identity in Asian Contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 73–​93.
Child Language Research and Revitalization Working Group. (2017) Language 
Documentation, Revitalization, and Reclamation: Supporting Young Learners and 
Their Communities. Washington, DC: Education Development Centre.
Chiles, Tina (2003) Titles and surnames in the linguistic construction of women’s iden-
tities. New Zealand Studies in Applied Linguistics 9, 1: 87–​97.
Choi, Jinny K. (2005) Bilingualism in Paraguay: forty years after Rubin’s study. Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 26, 3: 233–​48.
Chomsky, Noam (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chua, Siew Kheng Catherine (2011) Singapore’s E(Si)nglish-​knowing bilingualism. 
Current Issues in Language Planning 12, 2: 125–​45.
Clyne, Michael (ed.) (1982) Multilingual Australia. Melbourne, VIC: River Seine.
Clyne, Michael (1984) Language and Society in the German-​speaking Countries. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Clyne, Michael (1985) Language maintenance and shift –​ some data from Australia. In 
Nessa Wolfson and Joan Manes (eds) Language and Inequality. The Hague: Mouton. 
195–​206.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
635
Clyne, Michael (2000) Lingua franca and ethnolects in Europe and beyond. Sociolinguistica 
14: 83–​9.
Clyne, Michael, Catrin Norrby and Jane Warren (2010) Language and Human Relations. 
Styles of Address in Contemporary Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coates, Jennifer (1988) Gossip revisited: language in all-​female groups. In Jennifer Coates 
and Deborah Cameron (eds) Women in their Speech Communities. London: Longman. 
94–​122.
Coates, Jennifer (1996) Women Talk: Conversation between Women Friends. Oxford:  
Blackwell.
Coates, Jennifer (2003) Men Talk: Stories in the Making of Masculinities. Oxford:  
Blackwell.
Coates, Jennifer (2004) Women, Men and Language, 3rd edn. London: Longman.
Coates, Jennifer (2013) Women, Men and Everyday Talk. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Coates, Jennifer and Deborah Cameron (eds) (1988) Women in their Speech Communities. 
London: Longman.
Coates, Jennifer and Pia Pichler (eds) (2011) Language and Gender: A Reader, 2nd edn. 
Oxford/​Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Collins Dictionary of the English Language (1991) London: Collins.
Cooper, Robert L. (ed.) (1982) Language Spread: Studies on Diffusion and Social Change. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press in cooperation with the Center for Applied 
Linguistics, Washington, DC.
Cooper, Robert L. (1989, reprinted 1996) Language Planning and Social Change. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Copland, Fiona and Angela Creese with Frances Rock and Sara Shaw (2015) Linguistic 
Ethnography: Collecting Analysing and and Presenting Data. London: Sage.
Corson, David (1985) The Lexical Bar. Oxford: Pergamon.
Coughlan, Eileen (2021) Accommodation or rejection? Teenagers’ experiences of tensions 
between traditional and new speakers of Irish. Journal of Sociolinguistics 25: 1–​18.
Coulmas, Florian (2018) An Introduction to Multilingualism: Language in a Changing 
World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Coulthard, Malcolm (2005) Some forensic applications of descriptive linguistics. www1. 
aston.ac.uk/​lss/​staff/​coulthardm/​.
Coulthard, Malcolm and Alison Johnson (2007) An Introduction to Forensic 
Linguistics: Language in Evidence. London: Routledge.
Couper-​Kuhlen, Elizabeth and Margret Selting (2017) Interactional Linguistics: Studying 
Language in Social Interaction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coupland, Justine (1996) Dating advertisements: discourses of the commodified self. 
Discourse and Society 7, 2: 189–​207.
Coupland, Nikolas (1981) The social differentiation of functional language use. A socio-
linguistic investigation of travel agency talk. PhD dissertation. Cardiff: University of 
Wales Institute of Science and Technology.
Coupland, Nikolas (2007) Style: Language Variation and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
636
Coupland, Nikolas (2010) Welsh linguistic landscapes ‘from above’ and ‘from below’. 
In Adam Jaworksi and Crispin Thurlow (eds) Semiotic Landscapes: Language, Image, 
Space. London/​New York: Continuum. 77–​101.
Coupland, Nikolas and Adam Jaworski (eds) (2009) The New Sociolinguistics Reader. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave.
Coupland, Nikolas and Hywel Bishop (2007) Ideologised values for British accents. 
Journal of Sociolinguistics 11, 1: 74–​93.
Coupland, Nikolas, Justine Coupland, Howard Giles et al. (1988) Accommodating the 
elderly: invoking and extending a theory. Language in Society 17, 1: 1–​41.
Coxhead, Averil, I.S.P Nation, Lisa Woods et al. (2018) Group vs. individual: how admin-
istration procedure can affect vocabulary test scores. New Zealand Studies in Applied 
Linguistics 24, 2: 24–​41.
Creese, Angela and Adrian Blackledge (2019) Translanguaging and public service 
encounters: language learning in the library. Modern Language Journal 103: 1–​15.
Crosby, Fay and Linda Nyquist (1977) The female register: an empirical study of Lakoff’s 
hypotheses. Language in Society 6: 313–​22.
Crowley, Terry (1990) From Beach-​la-​Mar to Bislama. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crystal, David (2002a) Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, David (2002b) The English Language Today, 2nd edn. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Crystal, David (2003) English as a Global Language, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Crystal, David (2006) Language and the Internet. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crystal, David (2008) Txting: The Gr8 Db8. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Crystal, David (2010) The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language, 3rd edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Culpeper, Jonathan (2011) Impoliteness: Using Language to Cause Offence. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.
Cunningham, Una and Jeannette King (2021) Information, education, and language 
policy in the linguistic landscape of an international airport in New Zealand. In Greg 
Niedt and Corinne Seals (eds) Linguistic Landscapes Beyond the Language Classroom. 
London/​New York: Bloomsbury Academic. 97–​113.
Cutler, Cecelia (2010) Hip-​hop, white immigrant youth, and African American ver-
nacular English: accommodation as an identity choice. Journal of English Linguistics 
38, 3: 248–​69.
Dahmen, Josua (in press) Bilingual speech in Jaru–​Kriol conversations: codeswitching, 
codemixing, and grammatical fusion. International Journal of Bilingualism.
Daly, Nicola, Janet Holmes, Jonathan Newton et al. (2004) Expletives as solidarity 
signals in FTAs on the factory floor. Journal of Pragmatics 36, 5: 945–​64.
De Bres, Julia (2015) The hierarchy of minority languages in New Zealand. Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development 36, 7: 1–​17.
De Camp, David (1977) The development of pidgin and creole studies. In Albert Valdman 
(ed.) Pidgin and Creole Linguistics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press. 3–​20.
Denison, Norman (1972) Some observations on language variety and plurilingualism. In 
John B. Pride and Janet Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 65–​77.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
637
Deterding, David (2005) Emergent patterns in the vowels of Singapore English. English 
World-​Wide 26, 2: 179–​97.
Deumart, Ana (2014) Sociolinguistics and Mobile Communication. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Dharurkar, Chinmay (2019) Borrowed words make it informal! The pragmatics and aes-
thetics of code-​mixing of English in Indian languages. In Arnapurna Rath, Chabdrani 
Chatterjee and Saroja Ganapathy (eds) Critical Essays on Literature, Language, and 
Aesthetics. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars. 249–​61.
Dickson, Victoria and Lauren Hall-​Lew (2017) Class, gender, and rhoticity: the social 
stratification of non-​prevocalic /​r/​ in Edinburgh speech. Journal of English Linguistics 
45, 3: 229–​59.
Dimitropoulos, C.J. (1983) Demotic is on the march. Language Monthly 2.
Dixon, Robert (2002) Australian Languages. Their Nature and Development. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dorian, Nancy C. (1982) Defining the speech community to include its working 
margins. In Suzanne Romaine (ed.) Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech Communities. 
London: Edward Arnold. 25–​34.
Douglas-​Cowie, Ellen (1978) Linguistic code-​switching in a Northern Irish village: social 
interaction and social ambition. In Peter Trudgill (ed.) Sociolinguistic Patterns in 
British English. London: Edward Arnold. 37–​51.
Dovchin, Sender, Alastair Pennycook and Shaila Sultana (2018) Popular culture, 
transglossic practices and pedagogy. In Popular Culture, Voice and Linguistic 
Diversity: Young Adults On-​ and Offline. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Downes, William (1998) Language and Society, 2nd edn. London: Fontana.
Dray, Susan and Mark Sebba (2011) Practices, ethnicity and authenticity: ‘creole’ and 
youth language in a British inner-​city community. In Lars Hinrichs and Joseph T. 
Farquharson (eds) Variation in the Caribbean: From Creole Continua to Individual 
Agency. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 231–​50.
Drew, Paul (1985) Analyzing the use of language in courtroom interaction. In Teun 
van Dijk (ed.) Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Volume 3. Discourse and Dialogue. 
London: Academic Press. 136–​47.
Drew, Paul and John Heritage (1992) Analyzing talk at work: an introduction. In Paul 
Drew and John Heritage (eds) Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional Settings. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 3–​65.
Drew, Paul and Kathy Chilton (2000) Calling just to keep in touch: regular and 
habitualised telephone calls as an environment for small talk. In Justine Coupland 
(ed.) Small Talk. New York: Longman. 137–​62.
Drummond, Rob and Erik Schleef (2016) Identity in variationist sociolinguistics. 
In Sian Preece (ed.) The Routledge Handbook of Language and Identity. 
London: Routledge. 76–​91.
Dubois, Betty Lou and Isobel Crouch (1975) The question of tag questions in women’s 
speech: they don’t really use more of them, do they? Language in Society 4: 289–​94.
Dunmore, Stuart (2019) Language Revitalisation in Gaelic Scotland: Linguistic Practice 
and Ideology. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
638
Eades, Diana (1994) A case of communicative clash: Aboriginal English and the legal 
system. In John Gibbons (ed.) Language and the Law. London: Longman. 234–​64.
Eades, Diana (1996) Legal recognition of cultural differences in communication: the case 
of Robyn Kina. Language and Communication 16, 3: 215–​27.
Eades, Diana (2010) Sociolinguistics and the Legal Process. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual 
Matters.
Eakins, Barbara W. and R. Gene Eakins (1979) Verbal turn-​taking and exchanges in 
faculty dialogue. In Betty-​Lou Dubois and Isobel Crouch (eds) The Sociology of the 
Languages of American Women. San Antonio, TX: Trinity University. 53–​62.
Eastman, Carol M. (1983) Language Planning: An Introduction. San Francisco, 
CA: Chandler and Sharp.
Eberhardt, Jennifer L. (2020) Biased. London: Penguin Books.
Eckert, Penelope (1989) Jocks and Burnouts: Social Categories and Identity in the High 
School. New York: Teachers College Press.
Eckert, Penelope (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Eckert, Penelope (2008) Variation and the indexical field. Journal of Sociolinguistics 
12: 453–​76.
Eckert, Penelope (2012) Three waves of variation study: the emergence of meaning in the 
study of sociolinguistic variation. Annual Review of Anthropology 41: 87–​100.
Eckert, Penelope (2018) Meaning and Linguistic Variation: The Third Wave in 
Sociolinguistics. Cambridge, UK/​New York: Cambridge University Press.
Eckert, Penelope and John R. Rickford (2001) (eds) Style and Sociolinguistic Variation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-​Ginet (1992) Think practically and look 
locally: language and gender as community-​based practice. Annual Review of 
Anthropology 21: 461–​90.
Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-​Ginet (1995) Constructing meaning, constructing 
selves: snapshots of language, gender, and class from Belten High. In Kira Hall and 
Mary Bucholtz (eds) Gender Articulated: Language and the Socially Constructed Self. 
New York: Routledge. 469–​507.
Eckert, Penelope and Sally McConnell-​Ginet (2013) Language and Gender, 2nd edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Edelsky, Carole (1977) Acquisition of an aspect of communicative competence: learning 
what it means to talk like a lady. In Susan Ervin-​Tripp and Claudia Mitchell-​Kernan 
(eds) Child Discourse. London: Academic Press. 225–​43.
Edwards, Anne and Drusilla Beyfus (1969) Lady Behave: A Guide to Modern Manners 
for the 1970s. London: Cassell.
Edwards, John (1982) Language attitudes and their implications among English speakers. 
In Ellen Bouchard Ryan and Howard Giles (eds) Attitudes towards Language Variation. 
London: Edward Arnold. 20–​33.
Edwards, Viv (1978) Language attitudes and underperformance in West Indian children. 
Educational Review 30, 1: 51–​8.
Edwards, Viv (1985) Expressing alienation: creole in the classroom. In Nessa Wolfson 
and Joan Manes (eds) Language and Inequality. The Hague: Mouton. 325–​34.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
639
Edwards, Viv (1986) Language in a Black Community. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual 
Matters.
Ehrlich, Susan (2003) Coercing gender: language in sexual assault adjudication processes. 
In Janet Holmes and Miriam Meyerhoff (eds) The Handbook of Language and Gender. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 645–​70.
Ehrlich, Susan, Miriam Meyerhoff and Janet Holmes (eds) (2014) Handbook of 
Language, Gender and Sexuality. New York: Wiley-​Blackwell.
Eisikovits, Edina (1989a) Variation in the perfective in inner-​Sydney English. Australian 
Journal of Linguistics 9: 3–​20.
Eisikovits, Edina (1989b) Girl-​talk/​boy-​talk: sex differences in adolescent speech. In 
Peter Collins and David Blair (eds) Australian English. St Lucia, QLD: University of 
Queensland Press. 35–​54.
Ennaji, Moha (2005) Multilingualism, Cultural Identity, and Education in Morocco. 
Hedelberg/​New York: Springer Publishing.
Errington, J. Joseph (1988) Structure and Style in Javanese: A Semiotic View of Linguistic 
Etiquette. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Ervin-​Tripp, Susan M. (1968) An analysis of the interaction of language, topic and 
listener. In Joshua A. Fishman (ed.) Readings in the Sociology of Language. The 
Hague: Mouton. 192–​211.
Ervin-​Tripp, Susan M. (1972) Sociolinguistic rules of address. In John B. Pride and Janet 
Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 225–​40.
Evans, Nicholas (1998) Aborigines speak a primitive language. In Laurie Bauer and Peter 
Trudgill (eds) Language Myths. London: Penguin. 159–​68.
Evans, Nicholas (2010) Dying Words: Endangered Languages and What They Have to 
Tell Us. Oxford/​Malden, MA: Wiley-​Blackwell.
Fairbairn-​Dunlop, Peggie (1984) Factors associated with language mainten-
ance: the  Samoans in New Zealand. New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies 
19: 99–​113.
Fairclough, Norman (1989) Language and Power. London: Longman.
Fasold, Ralph (1984) The Sociolinguistics of Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Fasold, Ralph (1990) The Sociolinguistics of Language. Oxford: Blackwell.
Feagin, Crawford (1979) Variation and Change in Alabama English. Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press.
Fengyuan, Ji (1998) Language and politics during the Chinese Cultural Revolution: a 
study in linguistic engineering. PhD thesis. Christchurch: University of Canterbury.
Ferguson, Charles A. (1959) Diglossia. Word 15: 325–​40.
Ferguson, Charles A. (1983) Sports announcer talk: syntactic aspects of register vari-
ation. Language in Society 12, 2: 153–​72.
File, Kieran A. (2012) Post-​match interviews in New Zealand rugby: a conciliatory media 
interview genre. New Zealand English Journal 26, 1: 1–​22.
File, Kieran A. (2013) The post-​match interview as a discourse genre: a genre and register 
analysis. PhD thesis. Wellington: Victoria University of Wellington.
Filppula, Markku, Juhani Klemola and Heli Paulasto (eds) (2009) Vernacular Universals 
and Language Contacts. New York/​London: Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
640
Finegan, Edward and Niko Besnier (1989) Language: Its Structure and Use. 
New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Fischer, John L. (1958) Social influences on the choice of a linguistic variant. Word 
14: 1, 47–​56.
Fishman, Joshua, A. (1971) Sociolinguistics. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Fishman, Joshua A. (1972) The relationship between micro-​ and macro-​sociolinguistics 
in the study of who speaks what language to whom and when. In John B. Pride and 
Janet Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 15–​32.
Fishman, Joshua A. (1978) Positive bilingualism: some overlooked rationales and 
forefathers. In J. Alatis (ed.) International Dimensions of Bilingual Education. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 42–​52.
Fishman, Joshua A. (2001) Can Threatened Languages Be Saved? Reversing Language 
Shift, Revisited: A 21st Century Perspective. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual  
Matters.
Fishman, Joshua A. (2003) Bilingualism with and without diglossia: diglossia with 
and without bilingualism. In Christina Bratt Paulston and G. Richard Tucker (eds) 
Sociolinguistics: The Essential Readings. Maldon, MA: Blackwell.
Fraser, Graham (2006) Sorry I Don’t Speak French: Confronting the Canadian Crisis 
that Won’t Go Away. Toronto, ON: McLelland and Stewart.
Freed, Alice (2020) Women, language and public discourse: five decades of sexism and 
scrutiny. In Carmen Rosa Caldas-​Coulthard (ed.) Innovations and Challenges: Women, 
Language and Sexism. London: Routledge. 3–​18.
Freytag, Vera (2019) Exploring Politeness in Business Emails: A Mixed-​methods Analysis. 
Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Freywald, Ulrike, Katharina Mayr, Tiner Özçelik et al. (2011) Kiezdeutsch as a 
multiethnolect. In Friederike Kern and Margret Selting (eds), Ethnic Styles of Speaking 
in European Metropolitan Areas. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gal, Susan (1978) Peasant men can’t get wives: language change and sex roles in a bilin-
gual community. Language in Society 7, 1: 1–​16.
Gal, Susan (1979) Language Shift: Social Determinants of Linguistic Change in Bilingual 
Austria. New York: Academic Press.
Garcia, Ofelia and Li Wei (2014) Translanguaging: Language, Bilingualism and 
Education. London: Palgrave.
Garcia, Ofelia and Li Wei (2015) Bilingual Education in the 21st Century: A Global 
Perspective. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gardner, R.C. (1985) Social Psychology and Second Language Learning: The Role of 
Attitudes and Motivation. London: Edward Arnold.
Gardner-​Chloros, Penelope (1997) Code-​switching: language selection in three Strasbourg 
department stores. In Nikolas Coupland and Adam Jaworski (eds) Sociolinguistics: A 
Reader and Coursebook. Basingstoke: Palgrave. 361–​75.
Garner, Helen (2016) Everywhere I Look. Melbourne: Text Publishing Company. 
211–​17.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
641
Garrett, Peter (2010) Attitudes to Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Garret, Peter, Nikolas Coupland and Angie Williams (2003) Investigating Language 
Attitudes: Social Meaning of Dialect, Ethnicity and Performance. Cardiff: University 
of Wales Press.
Garvin, Paul and Madeleine Mathiot (1956) The urbanisation of the Guaraní language. 
In A.F.C. Wallace (ed.) Men and Cultures: Selected Papers from the Fifth International 
Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological Sciences. Philadelphia, PA: University 
of Pennsylvania Press. 365–​74.
Gee, James Paul (2014) An Introduction to Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method, 4th 
edn. London and New York: Routledge.
Gee, James Paul and Michael Handford (eds) (2013) The Routledge Handbook of 
Discourse Analysis. London: Routledge.
Geertz, Clifford (1960) The Religion of Java. Glencoe, IL: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Gesslbauer, Carmen (2003) Creole: language and Black identity in Britain. Stichproben. 
Wiener Zeitschrift für kritische Afrikastudien 5, 3: 5–​20.
Giles, Howard (ed.) (1977) Language, Ethnicity and Intergroup Relations. London/​
New York: Academic Press.
Giles, Howard and Patricia Johnson (1987) Ethnolinguistic identity theory: a social psy-
chological approach to language maintenance. International Journal of Sociology of 
Language 68: 69–​99.
Giles, Howard and Philip Smith (1979) Accommodation theory: optimal levels of con-
vergence. In Howard Giles and Robert St Clair (eds) Language and Social Psychology. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 45–​65.
Giles, Howard, Richard Bourhis and Ann Davies (2011) Prestige speech styles: the 
imposed norm and inherent value hypotheses. In William C. McCormack and Stephen 
A. Wurm (eds), Language and Society: Anthropological Issues. The Hague: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 589–​96.
Goffman, Erving (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. Harmondsworth:  
Penguin.
Goffman, Erving (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Gold, David L. (1989) A sketch of the linguistic situation in Israel today. Language in 
Society 18, 3: 361–​88.
Gonzalez, Andrew (1998) The language planning situation in the Philippines. Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development 19, 5–​6: 487–​8.
Goodwin, Marjorie H. (1980) Directive-​response speech sequences in girls’ and boys’ 
task activities. In Sally McConnell-​Ginet, Ruth Borker and Nellie Furman (eds) Women 
and Language in Literature and Society. New York: Praeger. 157–​73.
Gordon, Elizabeth (1997) Sex, speech and stereotypes: why women use prestige forms 
more than men. Language in Society 26, 1: 47–​64.
Gordon, Elizabeth and Marcia Abell (1990) ‘This objectionable colonial dialect’: his-
torical and contemporary attitudes to New Zealand speech. In Allan Bell and Janet 
Holmes (eds) New Zealand Ways of Speaking English. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual 
Matters. 21–​48.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
642
Gordon, Elizabeth and Margaret Maclagan (2001) Capturing a sound change: a real 
time study over 15 years of the NEAR/​SQUARE diphthong merger in New Zealand 
English. Australian Journal of Linguistics 21, 2: 215–​38.
Gordon, Elizabeth and Tony Deverson (1985) New Zealand English. Auckland: Heinemann.
Gordon, Elizabeth and Tony Deverson (1989) Finding a New Zealand Voice. 
Auckland: New House.
Gorter, Durk (ed.) (2006) Linguistic Landscape: A New Approach to Multilingualism. 
Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Goyvaerts, Didier L. (1988) Indoubil: a Swahili hybrid in Bukavu. Language in Society 
17, 2: 231–​42.
Goyvaerts, Didier L. (1996) Kibalele: form and function of a secret language in Bukavu 
(Zaire). Journal of Pragmatics 25: 123–​43.
Goyvaerts, Didier, D. Naeyaert and M. Semikenke (1983) Language and education 
policy in the multilingual city of Bukavu. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development 4, 1: 47–​62.
Graddol, David and Joan Swann (1989) Gender Voices. Oxford: Blackwell.
Green, James A. (1999) Handwriting on the stall: a study of graffiti and gender. BA 
Honours research essay. Dunedin: Otago University.
Grosjean, François (1982) Life with Two Languages. London/​Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Gumperz, John J. (1964) Linguistic and social interaction in two communities. American 
Anthropologist 66, 63: 137–​53.
Gumperz, John J. (1965) The speech community. Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences 9, 
3: 382–​6. (Reprinted in Pier Paolo Giglioli (ed.) (1972) Language and Social Context. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin.)
Gumperz, John J. (1971) Language in Social Groups. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Gumperz, John J. (1977) The sociolinguistic significance of conversational code-​
switching. RELC Journal 8, 2: 1–​34.
Gumperz, John J. (ed.) (1982) Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gumperz, 
John 
J. 
and 
Jenny 
Cook-​Gumperz 
(2012) 
Interactional 
socio-  
linguistics: perspectives on intercultural communication. In Christina Bratt Paulston, 
Scott F. Kiesling and Elizabeth S. Rangel (eds) Handbook of Intercultural Discourse 
and Communication. Oxford: Blackwell. 63–​76.
Gumperz, John J. and Robert Wilson (1971) Convergence and creolisation: a case from 
the Indo-​Aryan/​Dravidian border in India. In Dell Hymes (ed.) Pidginization and 
Creolization of Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 151–​67.
Gutmann Fuentes, Andrea (2019) Language of the land: the politics of Mapudungun 
language death and revitalization in Chile. Research thesis. Ohio: Ohio State 
University.
Guy, Gregory (1988) Language and social class. In Frederick J. Newmeyer (ed.) 
Linguistics: The Cambridge Survey. IV: Language: The Socio-​Cultural Context. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 37–​63.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
643
Guy, Gregory, Barabara Horvath, Julia Vonwiller et al. (1986) The meaning of an inton-
ation in Australian English. Australian Journal of Linguistics 4, 1: 1–​17.
Hall, Kira (1995) Lip service on the fantasy lines. In Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz (eds) 
Gender Articulated: Language and the Socially Constructed Self. London: Routledge. 
183–​216.
Hall, Kira (2011) Boys’ talk: Hindi, moustaches and masculinity in New Delhi. In Jennifer 
Coates and Pia Pichler (eds) Language and Gender: A Reader, 2nd edn. Oxford/​
Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 384–​400.
Halliday, Michael A.K. (1973) Explorations in the Functions of Language. London: Edward 
Arnold.
Halliday, Michael A.K. (1975) Learning How to Mean. London: Edward Arnold.
Hancock, Ian (1977) Appendix: repertory of pidgin and creole languages. In Albert 
Valdman (ed.) Pidgin and Creole Linguistics. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University 
Press. 277–​94.
Harres, Annette (1993) The representation of women in three medical texts. Australian 
Review of Applied Linguistics Series S, No. 10: 35–​53.
Harrington, J., S. Palethorpe and C. Watson (2000) Monophthongal vowel changes in 
Received Pronunciation: an acoustic analysis of the Queen’s Christmas Broadcasts. 
Journal of the International Phonetic Association 30, 1: 63–​78.
Harrington, Kate, Lia Litosseliti, Helen Sauntson et al. (eds) (2008) Gender and Language 
Research Methodologies. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Harris, David K. (2007) When Languages Die: The Extinction of the World’s Languages 
and the Erosion of Human Knowledge. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Harris, Sandra (2001) Being politically impolite: extending politeness theory to adver-
sarial political discourse. Discourse and Society 12, 4: 451–​72.
Harris, Sandra (2004) Subverting conversational repair in computer-​mediated conversa-
tion. In Mike Baynham, Alice Deignan and Goodith White (eds) Applied Linguistics at 
the Interface. London: Equinox. 65–​77.
Hatch, Evelyn (1983) Psycholinguistics: A Second Language Perspective. Rowley, 
MA: Newbury House.
Haugen, Einar (1959) Planning for a standard language in modern Norway. 
Anthropological Linguistics 1, 3: 8–​21.
Haugen, Einar (1965) Construction and reconstruction in language planning. Word 
21: 188–​207.
Haugen, Einar (1966a) Dialect language and nation. American Anthropologist 
68: 922–​35.
Haugen, Einar (1966b) Language Conflict and Language Planning. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Haugen, Einar (1966c) Semicommunication: the language gap in Scandinavia. Socio-​
logical Inquiry 36, 2: 280–​97.
Haupt, Enid (1970) New Seventeen Book of Etiquette and Young Living. 
New York: David McKay.
Hawkins, Peter R. (1967–​68) Some linguistic consequences of a working-​class environ-
ment. Te Reo 10–​11: 40–​51.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
644
Hazenberg, Evan (2017) The practice of identity: gender and performativity in New 
Zealand English. PhD thesis. Wellington: Victoria University.
Hecht, Ana Carolina (2011) Un análisis antropológico sobre la migración y el 
desplazamiento lingüístico entre hablantes de la lengua toba en Argentina. Gazeta de 
Antropologia 27, 1: 1–​15.
Heller, Monica S. (1982) Negotiations of language choice in Montreal. In John J. 
Gumperz (ed.) Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 108–​18.
Heller, Monica, Sari Pietikäinen and Joan Pujolar (2017) Critical Sociolinguistic Research 
Methods. London: Routledge.
Hilmarsson-​Dunn, Amanda and Ari Páll Kristinsson (2010) The language situation in 
Iceland. Current Issues in Language Planning 11, 3: 207–​76.
Hirsh, Walter (ed.) (1987) Living Languages: Bilingualism and Community Languages in 
New Zealand. Auckland: Heinemann.
Hirst, P.H. (1974) Knowledge and the Curriculum: A Collection of Philosophical Papers. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Hoffmann, Michol (2014) Sociolinguistic interviews. In Janet Holmes and Kirk Hazen 
(eds) Research Methods in Sociolinguistics: A Practical Guide. Oxford/​Malden, 
MA: Wiley Blackwell. 25–​41.
Hofstadter, Douglas R. (1982) Metamagical themas: ‘default assumptions’ and their 
effects on writing and thinking. Scientific American: 247, 5: 14–​21.
Holliday, Nicole R. (2019) Multiracial identity and racial complexity in sociolinguistic 
variation. Language and Linguistics Compass 13, 8: e12345.
Holm, John (2000) An Introduction to Pidgins and Creoles. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Holmes, Janet (1981) Hello-​goodbye: an analysis of children’s telephone conversations. 
Semiotica 37, 1/​2: 91–​107.
Holmes, Janet (1983) The structure of teacher’s directives. In Jack C. Richards and 
Richard W. Schmidt (eds) Language and Communication. London: Longman. 
89–​115.
Holmes, Janet (1984a) Hedging your bets and sitting on the fence: some evidence for 
hedges as support structures. Te Reo 27: 47–​62.
Holmes, Janet (1984b) ‘Women’s language’: a functional approach. General Linguistics 
24, 3: 149–​78.
Holmes, Janet (1985) Sex differences and miscommunication: some data from 
New Zealand. In J.B. Pride (ed.) Cross-​cultural Encounters: Communication and 
Miscommunication. Melbourne: River Seine. 24–​43.
Holmes, Janet (1990) Hedges and booster in women’s and men’s speech. Language and 
Communication 10, 3: 185–​205.
Holmes, Janet (1995) Women, Men and Politeness. London: Longman.
Holmes, Janet (1997a) Maori and Pakeha English: some New Zealand social dialect 
data. Language in Society 26, 1: 65–​101.
Holmes, Janet (1997b) Story-​telling in New Zealand women’s and men’s talk. In Ruth 
Wodak (ed.) Gender and Discourse. London: Sage. 263–​93.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
645
Holmes, Janet (2012) Politeness in intercultural discourse and communication. In 
Christina Bratt Paulston, Scott F. Kiesling and Elizabeth S. Rangel (eds) Handbook of 
Intercultural Discourse and Communication. Oxford: Blackwell. 205–​28.
Holmes, Janet (2017) Leadership and change management: examining gender, cultural 
and ‘hero leader’ stereotypes. In Stephanie Schnurr and Cornelia Ilie (eds) Challenging 
Leadership Stereotypes: Discourse and Power Management. New York: Springer. 15–​43.
Holmes, Janet (2018a) Negotiating the culture order in New Zealand workplaces. 
Language in Society 47, 1: 33–​56.
Holmes, Janet (2018b) Sociolinguistics vs. pragmatics: where does the boundary lie? In 
Cornelia Ilie and Neal R. Norrick (eds) Pragmatics and its Interfaces. Amsterdam/​
Philadelphia, PA:  John Benjamins. 11–​32.
Holmes, Janet, Allan Bell and Mary Boyce (1991) Variation and Change in New 
Zealand English: A Social Dialect Investigation. Project Report to the Social Sciences 
Committee of the Foundation for Research, Science and Technology. Wellington, 
Victoria University.
Holmes, Janet and Kirk Hazen (eds) (2014) Research Methods in Sociolinguistics: A 
Practical Guide. Oxford/​Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell.
Holmes, Janet and Meredith Marra (2002) Humour as a discursive boundary marker 
in social interaction. In Anna Duszak (ed.) Us and Others: Social Identities Across 
Languages, Discourses and Cultures. Amsterdam/​Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 
377–​400.
Holmes, Janet and Meredith Marra (2006) Humor and leadership style. Humor 19, 
2: 119–​38.
Holmes, Janet and Miriam Meyerhoff (1999) The community of practice: theories 
and methodologies in language and gender research Language in Society: Special 
Issue: Communities of Practice in Language and Gender Research. 28, 2: 173–​83.
Holmes, Janet and Rose Fillary (2000) Handling small talk at work: challenges for 
workers with intellectual disabilities. International Journal of Disability, Development 
and Education 47, 3: 273–​91.
Holmquist, Jonathan C. (1985) Social correlates of a linguistic variable: a study in a 
Spanish village. Language in Society 14, 2: 191–​203.
Honey, John (1989) Does Accent Matter? London: Faber and Faber.
Hornberger, Nancy H. and Serafin M. Coronel-​Molina (2004) Quechua language 
shift, maintenance, and revitalization in the Andes: the case for language planning. 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 167: 9–​67.
Horvath, Barbara (1985) Variation in Australian English. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Horvath, Barbara (2017) Ways of observing: studying the interplay of social and lin-
guistic variation. In Christine Mallinson, Becky Childs and Gerard Van Herk Data 
Collection Methods in Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Hosokawa, Komei (1987) Malay talk on boat: An account of Broome Pearling Lugger 
Pidgin. In Donald C. Laycock and Werner Winter (eds) A World of Language: Papers 
Presented to Professor Wurm, Stephen A. on his 65th Birthday. Canberra: Research 
School of Pacific and Asian Studies, Australian National University. 287–​96.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
646
Hudson, Richard A. (1996) Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Hughes, Arthur and Peter Trudgill (2005) English Accents and Dialects. An Introduction 
to Social and Regional Varieties of English in the British Isles, 4th edn. London: Edward 
Arnold.
Hui, Saiying (1989) Pronunciation of intervocalic and final stops in New Zealand 
English: a pilot project. Unpublished term project. Wellington: Victoria University.
Hyland, Kenneth (ed.) (2013) Discourse Studies. Reader. London: Bloomsbury.
Hymes, Dell (1962) The ethnography of speaking. In Thomas Gladwin and William 
C. Sturtevant (eds) Anthropology and Human Behaviour. Washington, DC: The 
Anthropology Society of Washington. 13–​53.
Hymes, Dell (1972) On communicative competence. In John Pride and Janet Holmes 
(eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 269–​93.
Hymes, Dell (1974) Foundations in Sociolinguistics. Philadelphia, PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Hyndman, Christine (1985) Gender and language differences: a small study. Unpublished 
terms paper. Wellington: Victoria University.
Ilbury, Christian (2020) “Sassy Queens”: stylistic orthographic variation in Twitter and 
the enregisterment of AAVE. Journal of Sociolinguistics 24, 2: 245–​64.
Inoue, Kyoko (1979) Japanese: a story of language and people. In Timothy Shopen (ed.) 
Languages and their Speakers. Cambridge, MA: Winthrop. 241–​300.
Irwin, Patricia and Naomi Nagy (2007) Bostonians /​r/​ speaking: a quantitative look at 
(R) in Boston. University of Pennsylvania Working Papers in Linguistics 13, 2: 1–​7.
Jackson, Jane (2014) Introducing Language and Intercultural Communication. 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Jacob, Jenny (1990) A Grammatical Comparison of the Spoken English of Maori and 
Pakeha Women in Levin. Wellington: Victoria University.
Jahangiri, N. and Richard A. Hudson (1982) Patterns of variation in Tehrani Persian. 
In Suzanne Romaine (ed.) Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech Communities. 
London: Edward Arnold. 49–​63.
Jahr, Ernst Håkon (1989) Limits of language planning? Norwegian language planning 
revisited. International Journal of the Sociology of Language 80: 33–​9.
James, Deborah and Sandra Clarke (1993) Interruptions, gender and power: a crit-
ical review of the literature. In Deborah Tannen (ed.) Gender and Conversational 
Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 231–​80.
Jamieson, Pennie (1980) The pattern of urban language loss. Australian and New Zealand 
Journal of Sociology 16, 2: 102–​09.
Jaspers, Jūrgens (2011) Strange bedfellows: appropriations of a tainted urban dialect. 
Journal of Sociolinguistics 15, 4: 493–​524.
Jaworksi, Adam and Crispin Thurlow (2010) (eds) Semiotic Landscapes: Language, 
Image, Space. London/​New York: Continuum.
Jewitt, Carey (ed.) (2009) The Routledge Handbook of Multimodal Analysis. London/​
New York: Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
647
Johnston, Lorraine and Shelley Robertson (1993) ‘Hey yous!’ the Maori–​NZE interface 
in sociolinguistic rules of address. Te Reo 36: 115–​27.
Johnstone, Barbara (2017) Discourse Analysis, 3rd edn. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Jones, Mari C. (2019) Endangered Languages and New Technologies. Cambridge:  
Cambridge University Press.
Jones, Rodney H. (2019) Discourse Analysis: A Resource Book for Students, 2nd edn. 
Abingdon: Routledge.
Jordan, June (1995) Civil Wars: Observations from the Front Lines of America, 2nd edn. 
New York: Touchstone.
Jule, Allyson 
(2018) 
Speaking 
Up: 
Understanding 
Language 
and 
Gender. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Kachru, Braj (1985) Standards, codification and sociolinguistic realism: the English lan-
guage in the outer circle. In Randolph Quirk and Henry G. Widdowson (eds) English 
in the World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kachru, Braj (1992) The Other Tongue: English Across Cultures. Urbana, IL: University 
of Illinois Press.
Kachru, Braj (1997) World Englishes, and English-​using communities. Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics 17: 66–​87.
Kaplan, Robert B. and Richard B. Baldauf Jr. (2013) Language and Language-​in-​
Education Planning in the Pacific Basin. Volume 2. New York: Springer Science & 
Business Media.
Kaplan-​Wenger, Judith and Char Ullman (2015) Methods for the Ethnography of 
Communication. New York: Routledge.
Karimzad, Farzad (2019) Investigating multilingual identities and ideologies among 
Iranian communities in context of mobility. In Seyed Hadi Mirvahedi (ed.) The 
Sociolinguistics of Iran’s Languages at Home and Abroad. London: Palgrave. 251–​77.
Kasstan, Jonathan R. (2018) Exploring contested authenticity among speakers of 
a contested language: the case of ‘Francoprovençal.’ Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development 39, 5: 382–​93.
Keenan, Elinor (1976) The universality of conversational postulates. Language in Society 
5: 67–​80.
Kenny, Lorcan, Caroline Hattersley, Bonnie Molins et al. (2016) Which terms should 
be used to describe autism? Perspectives from the UK autism community. Autism 20, 
4: 442–​62.
Kerswill, Paul (2001) Mobility, meritocracy and dialect levelling: the fading (and phasing) 
out of Received Pronunciation. In Pilvi Rajamäe and Krista Vogelberg (eds) British 
Studies in the New Millennium: The Challenge of the Grassroots. Tartu: University of 
Tartu. 45–​58.
Kerswill, Paul (2004) Koineization and accommodation. In Jack Chambers, Peter Trudgill 
and Natalie Schilling-​Estes (eds) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 669–​702.
Kerswill, Paul (2014) Identity, ethnicity and place: the construction of youth language in 
London. In Peter Auer, Martin Hilpert, Anja Stukenbrock et al. (eds) Space in Language 
and Linguistics. Berlin: De Guyter. 128–​64.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
648
Kerswill, Paul and Ann Williams (2000) Creating a new town koine: children and lan-
guage change in Milton Keynes. Language in Society 29: 65–​115.
Kerswill, Paul, Eivind Torgersen and Sue Fox (2007) Linguistic Innovators: The English 
of Adolescents in London. Full Research Report ESRC End of Award Report, RES-​
000-​23-​0680. Swindon: ESRC.
Keshavarz, Mohammad Hossein (1988) Forms of address in post-​revolutionary Iranian 
Persian: a sociolinguistic analysis. Language in Society 17, 4: 565–​75.
Khan, Farhat (1991) Final consonant cluster simplification in a variety of Indian English. 
In Jenny Cheshire (ed.) English Around the World: Sociolinguistic Perspectives. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 288–​98.
Kiesling, Scott F. (2006) Hegemonic identity-​making in narrative. In Anna De Fina, Deborah 
Schiffrin and Michael Bamberg (eds) Discourse and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 261–​87.
Kiesling, Scott F. (2011) Stance in Context: Affect, Alignment and Investment in 
the Analysis of Stancetaking. Presented at the iMean conference 15 April 2011. 
Bristol: University of West of England.
Kiesling, Scott F. and Christina Bratt Paulston (eds) (2005) Intercultural Discourse and 
Communication. Oxford: Blackwell.
Kircher, Ruth (2009) Language attitudes in Quebec: A contemporary perspective. PhD 
thesis. London: University of London, Queen Mary.
Kirkpatrick, Andy (ed.) (2010) Routledge Handbook of World Englishes. London/​
New York: Routledge.
Kirkwood, Michael (1989) Language Planning in the Soviet Union. London: Macmillan.
Knowles, Gerry (1987) Patterns of Spoken English. London: Longman.
Kochman, Thomas (1972) Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Kouletaki, Ekaterini (2005) Women, men and polite requests: English and Greek. In 
Robin T. Lakoff and Sachiko Ide (eds) Broadening the Horizon of Linguistic Politeness. 
Amsterdam/​Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins. 245–​74.
Kuiper, Koenraad and Douglas Haggo (1984) Livestock auctions, oral poetry and 
ordinary language. Language in Society 13, 2: 205–​34.
Kuiper, Koenraad and Paddy Austin (1990) They’re off and racing now: the speech of the 
New Zealand race caller. In Allan Bell and Janet Holmes (eds) New Zealand Ways of 
Speaking English. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters. 195–​220.
Kvietok Dueñas, Frances Julia (2019) Youth bilingualism, identity and Quechua lan-
guage planning and policy in the urban Peruvian Andes. PhD dissertation. Philadelphia, 
PA: University of Pennsylvania.
Labov, William (1963) The social motivation of a sound change. Word 19: 273–​309.
Labov, William (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New York City. Washington, 
DC: Centre for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, William (1972a) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia, PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, William (1972b) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the Black English 
Vernacular. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
649
Labov, William (1972c) The logic of non-​standard English. In Pier Paolo Giglioli (ed.) 
Language and Social Context. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 179–​215.
Labov, William (1972d) The relation of reading failure to peer-​group status. In Language 
in the Inner City. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. 241–​54.
Labov, William (1981) What can be learned about change in progress from synchronic 
description? In David Sankoff and Henrietta Cedergren (eds) Variation Omnibus. 
Edmonton: Linguistic Research Inc.
Labov, William (1982) Objectivity and commitment in linguistic science: the case of the 
Black English trial in Ann Arbor. Language in Society 11, 2: 165–​201.
Labov, William (1990) The intersection of sex and social class in the course of linguistic 
change. Language Variation and Change 2, 3: 205–​54.
Labov, William (2006) The Social Stratification of English in New York City, 2nd edn. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Ladegaard, Hans J. (2000) Language attitudes and sociolinguistic behaviour: exploring 
attitude–​behaviour relations in language. Journal of Sociolinguistics 4, 2: 214–​33.
Ladegaard, Hans J. and Dorthe Bleses (2003) Gender differences in young children’s 
speech: acquisition of sociolinguistic competence. International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics 13, 2: 222–​33.
Lakoff, George (1987) Women, Fire and Dangerous Things: What Categories Reveal 
About the Mind. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, Robin (1975) Language and Woman’s Place. New York: Harper Colophon.
Lakoff, Robin T. and Sachiko Ide (2005) Broadening the Horizon of Linguistic Politeness. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Landry, Rodrigue and Richard Y. Bourhis (1997) Linguistic landscape and ethnolinguistic 
vitality: an empirical study. Journal of Language and Social Psychology 16, 1: 23–​49.
Lane, Chris (2003) Writing a language off. Anti Maori argumentation in letters to New 
Zealand editors. In Phyllis M. Ryan and Roland Terborg (eds) Language: Issues of 
Inequality. México: Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Centro de Enseñanza 
de Lenguas Extranjeras.
Lass, Roger (1987) The Shape of English. London: Dent.
Laver, John (1981) Linguistic routines and politeness in greeting and parting. In Florian 
Coulmas (ed.) Conversational Routine. The Hague: Mouton. 289–​304.
Lawson, Robert (2014) “Don’t even [θ/​f/​h]ink aboot it”: an ethnographic investigation 
of social meaning, social identity and (θ) variation in Glasgow. English World-​Wide 
35, 1: 68–​93.
Ledin, Per and David Machin (2020) Introduction to Multimodal Analysis, 2nd edn. 
London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Lee, David (1989) Sociolinguistic variation in the speech of Brisbane adolescents. 
Australian Journal of Linguistics 9: 51–​72.
Lee, David (1992) Competing Discourses: Language and Ideology. New York: Longman.
Leech, Geoffrey N. (1983) Principles of Pragmatics. London: Longman.
Lee-​Wong, Song Mei (2000) Cross Cultural Communication: Politeness and Face in 
Chinese Culture. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
650
Leith, Dick (1983) A Social History of English. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Leonard, Stephen Pax (2011) Relative linguistic homogeneity in a new society: the case 
of Iceland. Language in Society 40, 2: 169–​86.
Leonard, Wesley Y. (2017) Producing language reclamation by decolonising ‘language’. 
In Wesley Y. Leonard and Haley De Korne (eds) Language Documentation and 
Description. Volume 14. London: EL Publishing. 15–​36.
Levon, Erez (2017) Ethnographic fieldwork. In Christine Mallinson, Becky Childs and 
Gerard Van Herk (2017) Data Collection Methods in Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. 
London: Routledge. Chapter 5.
Levon, Erez and Yang Ye (2020) Language, indexicality and gender ideologies: contextual 
effects on the perceived credibility of women. Gender and Language 14 2: 123–​51.
Lewis, E. Glyn (1978) Bilingualism in education in Wales. In Bernard Spolsky and Robert 
L. Cooper (eds) Case Studies in Bilingual Education. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
249–​90.
Li Wei (2005) Code-​switching, preference marking and politeness in bilingual cross-​gen-
erational talk. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 16, 3: 197–​214.
Li Wei (2018) https://​blog.oup.com/​2018/​05/​tran​slan​guag​ing-​code-​switch​ing-​dif​fere​nce/​.
Liao, Chao Chih and Mary I. Bresnahan (1996) A contrastive pragmatic study on 
American English and Mandarin refusals strategies. Language Science 18, 3–​4: 703–​27.
Linguistic Minorities Project (1985) The Other Languages of England. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Lippi-​Green, Rosina (1997) English with an Accent. London: Routledge.
Litosseliti, Lia (2006) Gender and Language: Theory and Practice. London: Hodder 
Arnold.
Llewellyn-​Jones, D. (1982) Fundamentals of Obstetrics and Gynaecology. Volume II. 
London: Faber & Faber.
Louhio, Emilia (2015) Generic personal pronouns in New Zealand newspaper English. 
PhD thesis. Tampere, Finland: University of Tampere.
Lyons, John (1970) (ed.) New Horizons in Linguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Macafee, Caroline (1989) Qualitative insights into working-​class language attitudes. 
York Papers in Linguistics 13: 191–​202.
Macafee, Caroline (1997) Ongoing change in modern Scots: the social dimension. In 
Charles Jones (ed.) The Edinburgh History of the Scots Language. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press. 514–​48.
Macalister, John (2012) Language policies, language planning and linguistic landscapes 
in Timor-​Leste. Language Problems and Language Planning 36, 1: 25–​45.
Macauley, R.K.S. (1977) Language, Social Class and Education. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Mahootian, Shahrzad (2006) Code-​switching and mixing. In Keith Brown (ed.) 
Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics. Volume 2. Oxford: Elsevier. 511–​27.
Mao Zedong (1976) Quotations from Chairman Mao Zedong. Beijing: Foreign 
Languages Press.
Marsden, Sharon (2013) Phonological variation and the construction of regional identity 
in New Zealand English. PhD thesis. Wellington: Victoria University.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
651
Mather, Patrick-​André (2012) The social stratification of /​r/​ in New York City: Labov’s 
department store study revisited. Journal of English Linguistics 40, 4: 338–​56.
May, Stephen (2001) Language and Minority Rights: Ethnicity, Nationalism and the 
Politics of Language. London: Longman.
Mæhlum, Brit (1996) Codeswitching in Hemnesberget: myth or reality? Journal of 
Pragmatics 25: 749–​61.
McCallum, Janet (1978) In search of a dialect. New Zealand Journal of Educational 
Studies 13, 2: 133–​43.
McColl Millar, Robert (2005) Language, Nation and Power. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
McConnell-​Ginet, Sally (2011) Gender, Sexuality and Meaning. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
McConnell-​Ginet, Sally (2020) Words Matter: Meaning and Power. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
McDonald, Maryon (1994) Women and linguistic innovation in Brittany. In Pauline  
Burton, Ketaki Kushari Dyson and Shirley Ardener (eds) Bilingual Women:  
Anthropological Approaches to Second-​Language Use. Oxford: Berg. 85–​110.
McElhinny, Bonnie S. (1995) Challenging hegemonic masculinities: female and male 
police officers handling domestic violence. In Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz (eds) 
Gender Articulated: Language and the Socially Constructed Self. London: Routledge. 
217–​43.
McMillan, Julie R., A. Kay Clifton, Diane McGrath et al. (1977) Women’s language: uncer-
tainty or interpersonal sensitivity and emotionality. Sex Roles 3, 6: 545–​59.
McWhorter, John (2009) The Cosmopolitan Tongue: The Universality of English. www. 
worldaffairsjournal.org/​article/​cosmopolitan-​tongue-​universality-​english.
McWhorter, John (2014) The Language Hoax: Why the World Looks the Same in Any 
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McWhorter, John (2015) How immigration changes language. The Atlantic 14 
December 2015.
Mesthrie, Rajend (2014) Analyzing sociolinguistic variation in multilingual contexts. In 
Janet Holmes and Kirk Hazen (eds) Research Methods in Sociolinguistics: A Practical 
Guide. Oxford/​Malden, MA: Wiley Blackwell. 276–​289.
Mesthrie, Rajend, Joan Swann, Andrea Deumert et al. (2009) Introducing Sociolinguistics, 
2nd edn. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Metge, Joan (1995) New Growth from Old: The Whaˉnau in the Modern World. 
Wellington: Victoria University Press.
Meyerhoff, Miriam (2011) Introducing Sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. London: Routledge.
Meyerhoff, Miriam, Erik Schleef and Laurel Mackenzie (2015) Doing Sociolinguistics: A 
Practical Guide to Data Collection and Analysis. London: Routledge.
Michael-​Luna, Sara and A. Suresh Canagarajah (2007) Multilingual academic liter-
acies: pedagogical foundations for code meshing in primary and higher education. 
Journal of Applied Linguistics 4, 1: 55–​77.
Michaels, Sarah (1981) Sharing time: children’s narrative styles and differential access to 
literacy. Language in Society 10, 3: 423–​42.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
652
Migge, Bettina (2007) Code-​switching and social identities in the Eastern Maroon com-
munity of Suriname and French Guiana. Journal of Sociolinguistics 11, 1: 53–​73.
Mihalic, F. (1971) The Jacaranda Dictionary and Grammar of Melanesian Pidgin. Milton, 
NSW: The Jacaranda Press.
Millar, Sharon (1989) Approaches to accent in the classroom. Pre-​Publications of the 
English Department of Odense University, No. 51. Odense: Odense University.
Miller, Casey and Kate Swift (1991) Words and Women: New Language in New Times. 
New York: HarperCollins.
Milroy, James and Lesley Milroy (1985) Linguistic change, social network and speaker 
innovation. Journal of Linguistics 21, 2: 339–​84.
Milroy, Lesley (1982) Social network and linguistic focusing. In Suzanne Romaine (ed.) 
Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech Communities. London: Longman. 141–​52.
Milroy, Lesley (1984) Comprehension and context: successful communication 
and communication breakdown. In Peter Trudgill (ed.) Applied Sociolinguistics. 
London: Academic Press. 7–​31.
Milroy, Lesley (1987) Language and Social Networks, 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Milroy, Lesley (1989) Gender as a speaker variable: the interesting case of the glottalised 
stops in Tyneside. York Papers in Linguistics 13: 227–​36.
Milroy, Lesley and Matthew Gordon (2003) Sociolinguistics: Methods and Interpretation. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Mirvahedi, Seyed Hadi (2016) Linguistic landscaping in Tabriz, Iran: a discursive trans-
formation of an Azerbaijani–​Farsi speaking space into a Farsi–​English speaking place. 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 242: 195–​216.
Mirvahedi, Seyed Hadi (2020) Iranians at home and abroad: current sociolinguistic 
issues, possible solutions, and future trajectories. In Seyed Hadi Mirvahedi (ed.) 
The Sociolinguistics of Iran’s Languages at Home and Abroad. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 279–​90.
Mirvahedi, Seyed Hadi and John Macalister (2017) Home as a confluence of discourses 
in multilingual linguistic ecologies. In Family Language Policy in a Multilingual World:  
Challenges, Opportunities, and Consequences. New York/​London: Routledge. 219–​35.
Mirvahedi, Seyed Hadi and Nima Nasjian (2010) Is Azeri going to live or leave? A crit-
ical study of institutional supports available to Azeri in Tabriz, Iran. Proceedings of 
FEL XIV. Bath: Foundation for Endangered Languages. 175–​80.
Mitford, Nancy (1949) The Pursuit of Love. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Mitford, Nancy and Alan S.C. Ross (1980) Noblesse Oblige. London: Futura.
Mooney, Maureen (1980) Directives as a speech function: an examination of the struc-
ture of directives in a New Zealand psychiatric clinic. Unpublished term project. 
Wellington: Victoria University.
Moore, Emilee, Jessica Bradley and James Simpson (2020) Translanguaging as 
Transformation. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Morrish, Liz and Helen Saunston (2007) New Perspectives on Language and Sexual 
Identity. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Mputubwele, Makim M. (2003) The Zairian language policy and its effect on the 
literatures in national languages. Journal of Black Studies 34, 2: 272–​92.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
653
Mulac, Anthony, Torborg Louisa Lundell and James Bradac (1986) Male/​female lan-
guage differences in a public speaking situation. Communication Monographs 53, 
2: 115–​29.
Myers-​Scotton, Carol (1993) Social Motivations for Code-​Switching: Evidence from 
Africa. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Myers-​Scotton, Carol (1997) Duelling Languages: Grammatical Structure in 
Codeswitching. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Myers-​Scotton, Carol (2006) Multiple Voices: An Introduction to Bilingualism. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Myers-​Scotton, Carol (2009) Code-​switching. In Nikolas Coupland and Adam Jaworski 
(eds) The New Sociolinguistics Reader. Hampshire: Palgrave. 473–​89.
Nation, I.S.P. (2001) Learning Vocabulary in Another Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
National Center on Cultural and Linguistic Responsiveness (2017) A report on tribal 
language revitalization in head start and early head start. Boston: U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services.
Nelson, Hank (1972) Papua New Guinea: Black Unity or Black Chaos. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.
Nettle, Daniel and Suzanne Romaine (2000) Vanishing Voices. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Neyland, Matilda (2019) The sexual other: discursive constructions of migrant sex 
workers in New Zealand media. Unpublished MA dissertation. Wellington: Victoria 
University of Wellington.
Nichols, Patricia C. (1983) Linguistic options and choices for black women in the rural 
South. In Barrie Thorne, Cheris Kramarae and Nancy Henley (eds) Language, Gender 
and Society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 54–​68.
Nichols, Patricia C. (1984) Networks and hierarchies: language and social stratification. 
In Cheris Kramarae, Muriel Shulz and William O’Barr (eds) Language and Power. 
London: Sage. 23–​42.
Nielsen, Daniel and Jennifer Hay (2005) Perceptions of regional dialects in New Zealand. 
Te Reo 48: 95–​110.
Nilsen, Alleen Pace (1972) Sexism in English: a feminist view. In Nancy Hofman, Cynthia 
Secor and Adrian Tinsley (eds) Female Studies VI. Old Westbury, NY: The Feminist 
Press. 102–​9.
Norris, Sigrid (2019) Systematically Working with Multimodal Data: Research Methods 
in Multimodal Discourse Analysis. London: Wiley-​Blackwell.
Nwoye, Onuigbo G. (1989) Linguistic politeness in Igbo. Multilingua 8, 2–​3: 259–​75.
O’Barr, William M. and Bowman K. Atkins (1980) ‘Women’s language’ or ‘powerless lan-
guage’? In Sally McConnell-​Ginet, Ruth Borker and Nelly Furman (eds) Women and 
Language in Literature and Society. New York: Praeger. 93–​110.
O’Hanlon, Renae (2006) Australian hip hop: a sociolinguistic investigation. Australian 
Journal of Linguistic 26, 2: 193–​209.
Ochs, Elinor (1987) The impact of stratification and socialization on men’s and women’s 
speech in Western Samoa. In Susan U. Philips, Susan Steele and Christine Tanz (eds) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
654
Language, Gender and Sex in Comparative Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 50–​70.
Ochs, Elinor (1992) Indexing gender. In Alesssandro Duranti and Charles Goodwin (eds) 
Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 335–​58.
Orton, Harold, Stewart Sanderson, John Davidson et al. (1998) The Linguistic Atlas of 
England. London: Routledge.
Otheguy, Ricardo, Ofelia García and Wallis Reid (2015) Clarifying translanguaging and 
deconstructing named languages: a perspective from linguistics. Applied Linguistics 
Review 6, 3: 281–​307.
Paltridge, Brian (2012) Discourse Analysis: An Introduction, 2nd edn. London: Continuum.
Pandit, P.B. (1979) Perspectives on sociolinguistics in India. In W.M. McCormack and 
Stephen A. Wurm (eds) Language and Society. The Hague: Mouton.
Paris, Django (2011) Language Across Difference: Ethnicity, Communication, and Youth 
Identities in Changing Urban Schools. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Paulston, Christina Bratt (1974) Linguistic and communicative competence. TESOL 
Quarterly 8, 4: 347–​62.
Paulston, Christina Bratt and G. Richard Tucker (eds) (2003) Sociolinguistics: The 
Essential Readings. Maldon, MA: Blackwell.
Pauwels, Anne (1998) Women Changing Language. London: Longman.
Pauwels, Anne and Joanne Winter (2004) Generic pronouns and gender-​inclusive lan-
guage reform in the English of Singapore and the Philippines. Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics 27, 2: 50–​62.
Pauwels, Anne, Joanne Winter and Joseph Lo Bianco (eds) (2007) Maintaining Minority 
Languages in Transnational Contexts. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Pawley, Andrew (1991) How to talk cricket. In Robert Blust (ed.) Currents in Pacific 
Linguistics: Papers in Austronesian Languages and Ethnolinguistics in Honour of 
George W. Grace. Honolulu, HI: Pacific Linguistics. 339–​68.
Pawley, Andrew, Frances Syder and He Fangming (1989) Tasmanian vernacular English. 
Working paper. Canberra: Australian National University.
Petyt, K.M. (1985) Dialect and Accent in Industrial West Yorkshire. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Philips, Susan U. (2008) Language and social inequality. In A. Duranti (ed.) A Companion 
to Linguistic Anthropology. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 474–​95.
Philips, Susan and Anne Reynolds (1987) The interaction of variable syntax and dis-
course structure in women’s and men’s speech. In Susan U. Philips, Susan Steele 
and Christine Tanz (eds) Language, Gender and Sex in Comparative Perspective. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 71–​94.
Pilkington, Jane (1989) ‘Don’t try and make out that I’m nice’: the different strategies that 
men and women use when gossiping. Unpublished term paper. Wellington: Victoria 
University.
Piller, Ingrid (2001) Identity constructions in multilingual advertising. Language in 
Society 30: 153–​86.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
655
Platt, John (1977) A model for polyglossia and multilingualism (with special reference to 
Singapore and Malaysia). Language in Society 6, 3: 361–​78.
Podesva, Robert J. (2006) Phonetic detail in sociolinguistic variation: its linguistic sig-
nificance and role in the construction of social meaning. PhD thesis. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University.
Podesva, Robert J. (2008) Three sources of stylistic meaning. In Proceedings of the 
Symposium About Language and Society –​ Austin 15, Texas Linguistic Forum, 
51: 134–​43.
Pope, Jennifer (2002) The social history of a sound change on the island of 
Martha’s Vineyard, Massachussetts: forty years after Labov. MA dissertation. 
Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh.
Poplack, Shana (1980) Sometimes I’ll start a sentence in Spanish y termino en 
Español: toward a typology of code-​switching. Linguistics 18: 581–​618.
Poplack, Shana, Suzann Robillard, Nathalie Dion et al. (2020) Revisiting phonetic inte-
gration in bilingual borrowing. Language 96, 1: 126–​59.
Pragji, Usha (1980) A measure of dropped [h]‌ in the speech of two New Zealand 
speakers: Marjorie Lee and George Davies. Unpublished term paper. Auckland: 
Auckland University.
Preisler, Bent (1986) Linguistic Sex Roles in Conversation. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Rampton, Ben (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity among Adolescents. 
London: Longman.
Reinecke, John (1964) Trade jargons and creole dialects. In Dell Hymes (ed.) Language 
in Culture and Society. New York: Holt, Reinhart and Winston. 534–​46.
Rendle-​Short, Johanna (2009) The address term mate in Australian English: is it still a 
masculine term? Australian Journal of Linguistics 29, 2: 245–​68.
Rendle-​Short, Johanna (2015) Dispreferred responses when texting: delaying that ‘no’ 
response. Discourse and Communication 9, 6: 643–​61.
Revis, Melanie Sandra (2015) Family language policies of refugees: Ethiopians and 
Colombians in New Zealand. PhD thesis. Wellington: Victoria University of Wellington.
Revis, Melanie Sandra (2017) Family language policy in refugee-​background communi-
ties: towards a model of language management practices. Journal of Home Language 
Research 2: 40–​62.
Ricento, Thomas (ed.) (2005) An Introduction to Language Policy. Oxford: Blackwell.
Richards, Jack C. and Richard W. Schmidt (1983) Conversational analysis. In 
Jack C. Richards and Richard W. Schmidt (eds) Language and Communication. 
London: Longman. 117–​54.
Richards, Keith (2006) Language and Professional Identity. London: Palgrave.
Rickford, John R. and Faye McNair-​Knox (1994) Addressee-​ and topic-​influenced style 
shift. In Douglas Biber and Edward Finnegan (eds) Sociolinguistic Perspectives on 
Register. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 235–​76.
Rickford, John R. and Sharese King (2016) Language and linguistics on trial: hearing 
Rachel Jeantel (and other vernacular speakers) in the courtroom and beyond. Language 
92, 4: 948–​88.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
656
Roberts, Celia, Evelyn Davies and Tom Jupp (1992) Language and Discrimination: A 
Study of Communication in Multi-​ethnic Workplaces. London: Longman.
Roberts, Mary (1991) The New Zealand Chinese community of Wellington: aspects of 
language maintenance and shift. In Janet Holmes and Ray Harlow (eds) Threads in the 
Tapestry of Language. Auckland: Linguistic Society of New Zealand. 31–​70.
Roberts, Mary L. (2001) The effects of immigration flow on patterns of language main-
tenance and shift in two immigrant communities in New Zealand. New Zealand 
Sociology 16, 1: 55–​78.
Rodgers, Bruce (1972) The Queen’s Vernacular: A Gay Lexicon. London: Blond and 
Briggs.
Romaine, Suzanne (1978) Post-​vocalic [r]‌ in Scottish English: sound change in progress. 
In Peter Trudgill (ed) Sociolinguistic Patterns in British English. London: Edward 
Arnold. 144–​58.
Romaine, Suzanne (1984) The Language of Children and Adolescents. Oxford: Blackwell.
Romaine, Suzanne (1988) Pidgin and Creole Languages. London: Longman.
Romaine, Suzanne (1989) Bilingualism. Oxford: Blackwell.
Romaine, Suzanne (2000) Language in Society, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Romaine, Suzanne (2007) Preserving Endangered Languages. New Jersey: Wiley.
Rubin, Joan (1968) National Bilingualism in Paraguay. Janua Linguarum Series Practica 
60. The Hague: Mouton.
Rubin, Joan (1985) The special relation of Guaraní and Spanish in Paraguay. In Nessa 
Wolfson and Joan Manes (eds) Language and Inequality. The Hague: Mouton. 111–​20.
Rubin, Joan and Björn H. Jernudd (eds) (1971) Can Languages Be Planned? Honolulu, 
HI: University of Hawaii Press.
Russell, Joan (1982) Networks and sociolinguistic variation in an African urban setting. 
In Suzanne Romaine (ed.) Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech Communities. London: 
Edward Arnold. 141–​52.
Russell, Joan (1989) The role of vernacularisation in Tanzania: Swahili as a political tool. 
York Papers in Linguistics 13: 295–​305.
Sacks, Harvey (1984) Notes on methodology. In J. Maxwell Atkinson and John Heritage 
(eds) Structures of Social Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 21–​7.
Sacks, Harvey, Emanuel A. Schegloff and Gail Jefferson (1978) A simplest systematics for 
the organization of turn taking for conversation. In Jim Schenkein (ed.) Studies in the 
Organization of Conversational Interaction. New York: Academic Press. 7–​55.
Salmond, Anne (1974) Rituals of encounter among the Maori. In Richard Bauman 
and Joel Sherzer (eds) Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 192–​212.
Sankoff, Gillian (1972) Language use in multilingual societies: some alternative 
approaches. In John B. Pride and Janet Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. 33–​51.
Sankoff, Gillian and Henrietta Cedergren (1971) Some results of a sociolinguistic study 
of Montreal French. In Regna Darnell (ed.) Linguistic Diversity in Canadian Society. 
Edmonton: Linguistic Research Inc. 61–​87.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
657
Santarita, Paula and Marilyn Martin-​Jones (1990) The Portuguese speech community. 
Unpublished paper: copy sent by author.
Sapir, Edward (1921) Language. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Saraceni, Mario (2015) World Englishes: A Critical Analysis. London: Bloomsbury.
Saville-​Troike, Muriel (2003) The Ethnography of Communication, 3rd edn. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Schilling-​Estes, Natalie (2004) Constructing ethnic identity in interaction. Journal of 
Sociolinguistics 8, 2: 163–​95.
Schleef, Erik (2014) Written surveys and questionnaires in sociolinguistics. In Janet 
Holmes and Kirk Hazen (eds), Research Methods in Sociolinguistics. Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley-​Blackwell. 42–​57.
Schmidt, Annette (1985) Young People’s Dyirbal: An Example of Language Death from 
Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Schmidt, Annette (1990) The Loss of Australia’s Aboriginal Language Heritage. 
Canberra: Aboriginal Studies Press.
Schneider, Edgar (2003) The dynamics of new Englishes from identity construction to 
dialect birth. Language 79, 2: 233–​81.
Scollon, Ron, Suzanne Wong Scollon and Rodney H. Jones (2012) Intercultural 
Communication: A Discourse Approach, 3rd edn. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Seals, Corinne A. (2019) Choosing a Mother Tongue: The Politics of Language and 
Identity in Ukraine. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Seals, Corinne A. and Shelley Dawson (forthcoming 2021) Sociolinguistics for Language 
Education. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Seargeant, Philip (2019) The Emoji Revolution: How Technology is Shaping the Future 
of Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Searle, John R. (1976) The classification of illocutionary acts. Language in Society 5, 1: 
1–​24.
Senghas, Ann (1995) The development of Nicaraguan Sign Language via the language 
acquisition process. In Dawn MacLaughlin and Susan McEwan (eds) Proceedings of 
the Boston University Conference on Language Development. Boston, MA: Cascadilla 
Press. 543–​52.
Shaklee, Margaret (1980) The rise of standard English. In Timothy Shopen and J.M. 
Williams (eds) Standards and Dialects in English. Cambridge, MA: Winthrop. 33–​62.
Sharpe, Margaret C. and John Sandefur (1976) The creole language of the Katherine 
and Roper River areas, Northern Territory. In Michael Clyne (ed.) Australia Talks: 
Essays on the Sociology of Australian Immigrant and Aboriginal Languages. Pacific 
Linguistics Series D-​No. 23. Canberra: Australian National University. 63–​73.
Sherzer, Joel (1977) The ethnography of speaking: a critical appraisal. In Muriel Saville-​
Troike (ed.) Linguistics and Anthropology. Washington, DC: Georgetown University 
Press. 43–​57.
Shibamoto, Janet S. (1987) The womanly woman: manipulation of stereotypical and 
nonstereotypical features of Japanese female speech. In Susan U. Philips, Susan Steele 
and Christine Tanz (eds) Language, Gender and Sex in Comparative Perspective. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 26–​49.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
658
Shifman, Limor (2013) Memes in a digital world: reconciling with a conceptual trouble-
maker. Journal of Computer-​mediated Communication 18, 3: 362–​77.
Shohamy, Elana (2006) Language Policy: Hidden Agendas and New Approaches. London 
and New York: Routledge.
Shohamy, Elana and Durk Gorter (eds) (2009) Linguistic Landscape: Expanding the 
Scenery. New York: Routledge.
Shuy, Roger (1969) Sex as a factor in sociolinguistic research. Paper presented at meeting 
of the Anthropological Society of Washington. Washington, DC. ERIC document; ED 
027522.
Shuy, Roger W., Walter A. Wolfram and William K. Riley (1967) Linguistic Correlates of 
Social Stratification in Detroit Speech. Cooperative Research Project No. 6–​1347. East 
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University.
Sidnell, Jack (2010) Conversation Analysis: An Introduction. Malden, MA: Wiley-​   
Blackwell.
Siebenhaar, Beat (2006) Code choice and code-​switching in Swiss–​German internet relay 
chat rooms. Journal of Sociolinguistics 10, 4: 481–​506.
Siegel, Jeff (1995) How to get a laugh in Fijian: code-​switching and humor. Language in 
Society 24, 1: 95–​110.
Siegel, Jeff (2008) The Emergence of Pidgin and Creole Languages. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Siegel, Jeff (2009) Linguistic and educational aspects of Tok Pisin. In Nikolas Coupland 
and Adam Jaworski (eds) The New Sociolinguistics Reader. Hampshire: Palgrave. 
512–​25.
Sifianou, Maria (2001) “Oh! How appropriate!” Compliments and politeness. In Arin 
Bayraktaroglu and Maria Sifianou (eds) Linguistic Politeness Across Boundaries: The 
Case of Greek and Turkish. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 391–​430.
Sifianou, Maria (2003) Language variation in Greece. In David Britain and Jenny Cheshire 
(eds) Social Dialectology: In Honour of Peter Trudgill. Amsterdam/​Philadelphia, PA: 
John Benjamins. 263–​73.
Smith, Lee (1971) Language usage and code-​switching among Maori bilinguals. 
Unpublished term project. Wellington: Victoria University.
Snell, Julia (2010) From sociolinguistic variation to socially strategic stylization. Journal 
of Sociolinguistics 14, 5: 630–​56.
Sorensen, Arthur P. (1972) Multilingualism in the Northwest Amazon. In John B. Pride 
and Janet Holmes (eds) Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: Penguin. 78–​93.
Spencer-​Oatey, Helen (2008) Face, (im)politeness and rapport. In Helen Spencer-​Oatey 
(ed.) Culturally Speaking. London: Continuum. 11–​47.
Spencer-​Oatey, Helen and Daniel Z. Kádár (2020) Intercultural Politeness: Managing 
Relations Across Cultures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Spencer-​Oatey, Helen and Jianyu Xing (2003) Managing rapport in intercultural 
business interactions: a comparison of two Chinese–​British welcome meetings. Journal 
of Intercultural Studies 24, 1: 33–​46.
Spencer-​Oatey, Helen and Peter Franklin (2009) Intercultural Interaction. London: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
659
Spender, Dale (1980) Man Made Language. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Spolsky, Bernard (1978) A model for the evaluation of bilingual education. International 
Review of Education 24, 3: 347–​60.
Spolsky, Bernard (2003) Reassessing Māori regeneration. Language in Society 32: 
553–​78.
Spolsky, Bernard (2009) Language Management. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Spolsky, Bernard (2012) Family language policy –​ the critical domain. Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development 33, 1: 3–​11.
Stewart, Malcolm W., Cynthia D. Verstraate and Janet L. Fanslow (1990) Sexist language 
and university academic staff: attitudes, awareness and recognition of sexist language. 
New Zealand Journal of Educational Studies 25, 2: 115–​25.
Stivers, Tanya, N.J. Enfield, Penelope Brown et al. (2009) Universals and cultural vari-
ation in turn-​taking in conversation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 
National Academy of Sciences. 106, 26: 10587–​92.
Stollznow, Karen (2020) On the Offensive: Prejudice in Language Past and Present. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stormbom, Charlotte (2020) Gendering in open access research articles: the role of epi-
cene pronouns. English for Specific Purposes 60: 193–​204.
Strauss, Susan and Parastou Feiz (2014) Discourse Analysis Putting Our Worlds into 
Words. New York: Routledge.
Stuart-​Smith, Jane (2007) The influence of the media. In Carmen Llamas, Peter Stockwell 
and Louise Mullany (eds) The Routledge Companion to Sociolinguistics. London: 
Routledge. 140–​48.
Stuart-​Smith, Jane and Claire Timmins (2010) The role of the individual in language vari-
ation and change. In C. Llamas and D. Watt (eds) Language and Identities. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. 39–​54.
Stuart-​Smith, Jane, Claire Timmins and Fiona Tweedie (2007) ‘Talkin Jockney’? Variation 
and change in Glaswegian accent. Journal of Sociolinguistics 11, 2: 221–​60.
Stuart-​Smith, Jane, Gwilym Pryce, Claire Timmins et al. (2013) Television can also 
be a factor in language change: evidence from an urban dialect. Language 89, 3: 
501–​36.
Stubbe, Maria (1998) Are you listening? Cultural influences on the use of supportive 
verbal feedback in conversation. Journal of Pragmatics 29: 257–​89.
Stubbe, Maria, Chris Lane, Jo Hilder et al. (2003) Multiple discourse analyses of a work-
place interaction. Discourse Studies 5, 3: 351–​88.
Stubbs, Michael (1983) Language Schools and Classrooms. London: Methuen.
Stubbs, Michael (1997) Language and the mediation of experience. In Florian Coulmas 
(ed.) The Handbook of Sociolinguistics. London: Blackwell. 358–​73.
SturtzSreetharan, Cindi (2017) Language and masculinity: the role of Osaka dialect in 
contemporary ideals of fatherhood. Gender and Language 11, 4: 552–​74.
Sue, Derald Wing (2010) Microaggressions in Everyday Life: Race, Gender, and Sexual 
Orientation. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Sunderland, Jane (ed.) (2006) Language and Gender. London: Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
660
Survey of the Health of the Maori Language (2001) Wellington: Ministry of Maori 
Development, Te Puni Kdkiri.
Tagliamonte, Sali (2005) So who? Like how? Just what? Discourse markers in the 
conversations of young Canadians. Journal of Pragmatics 7: 1896–​915.
Tagliamonte, Sali (2006) Analysing Sociolinguistic Variation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Tagliamonte, Sali (2012) Variationist Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Wiley-​Blackwell.
Tagliamonte, Sali and Alex D’Arcy (2004) He’s like she’s like. The quotative system in 
Canadian youth. Journal of Sociolinguistics 8: 493–​514.
Tagliamonte, Sali and Rebecca V. Roeder (2009) Variation in the English definite article: 
socio-​historical linguistics in t’ speech community. Journal of Sociolinguistics 13, 4: 
435–​71.
Takano, Shoji (2005) Re-​examining linguistic power: strategic uses of directives by 
professional Japanese women in positions of authority and leadership. Journal of 
Pragmatics 37, 5: 633–​66.
Talbot, Mary M. (2010 1st edn; 2019 3rd edn) Language and Gender: An Introduction. 
Oxford: Polity Press.
Tannen, Deborah (1990) You Just Don’t Understand: Women and Men in Conversation. 
New York: Morrow, Ballentine.
Terkourafi, Marina (ed.) (2012) The Languages of Global Hip Hop. New York: 
Bloomsbury.
The ManyBabies Consortium (2020) Quantifying sources of variability in infancy 
research using the infant-​directed-​speech preference. Advances in Methods and 
Practices in Psychological Science 3, 1: 24–​52.
Thomas, Beth (1988) Differences of sex and sects: linguistic variation and social networks 
in a Welsh mining village. In Jennifer Coates and Deborah Cameron (eds) Women in 
their Speech Communities. London: Longman. 51–​61.
Thomas, Erik R. (1997) A rural/​metropolitan split in the speech of Texas Anglos. 
Language Variation and Change 9, 3: 309–​32.
Thomas, Jenny (1989) Discourse control in confrontational interaction. In Leo Hickey 
(ed.) The Pragmatics of Style. London: Croom Helm. 133–​56.
Thomas, Jenny (1995) Meaning in Interaction. London: Longman.
Thomason, Sarah G. (2001) Language Contact: An Introduction. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Thomason, Sarah G. (2015) Endangered Languages: An Introduction. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Thornbury, Scott (2005) Beyond the Sentence: Introducing Discourse Analysis. Oxford: 
Macmillan.
Thorne, Barrie, Cheris Kramarae and Nancy Henley (eds) (1983) Language, Gender and 
Society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Ting-​Toomey, Stella (1999) Communicating Across Cultures. New York: Guildford.
Todd, Loreto (1990, reprinted 2003, 2016) Pidgins and Creoles, 2nd edn. London: 
Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
661
Torgersen, Eivind, Paul Kerswill and Susan Fox (2006) Ethnicity as a source of changes 
in the London vowel system. In Frans Hinskens (ed.) Language Variation –​ European 
Perspectives. Selected Papers from the Third International Conference on Language 
Variation in Europe (ICLaVE3), Amsterdam, June 2005. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
249–​63.
Trudgill, Peter (1972) Sex, covert prestige and linguistic change in the urban British 
English of Norwich. Language in Society 1, 2: 179–​96.
Trudgill, Peter (1974) The Social Differentiation of English in Norwich. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Trudgill, Peter (1975) Accent, Dialect and the School. London: Edward Arnold.
Trudgill, Peter (1983) Social identity and linguistic sex differentiation. In On Dialect. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 161–​8.
Trudgill, Peter (1988) Norwich revisited: recent linguistic changes in an English urban 
dialect. English World-​Wide 9, 1: 33–​49.
Trudgill, Peter (1992) Introducing Language and Society. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Trudgill, Peter (1994) Dialects. London: Routledge.
Trudgill, Peter (2009) Sociolinguistics: An Introduction to Language and Society, 4th 
edn. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Trudgill, Peter (2011) Sociolinguistic Typology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trudgill, Peter and Howard Giles (1977) Sociolinguistics and linguistic value judgments: 
correctness, adequacy and aesthetics. In Frank Coppieters and Didier L. Goyvaerts 
(eds) The Functions of Language and Literature Studies. Ghent: Story-​Scientia. 167–​90.
Tulin, Mary Fewel (1997) Talking organization: possibilities for conversation analysis in 
organizational behavior research. Journal of Management Inquiry 6, 2: 101–​19.
Tupas, Ruanni (2015) The politics of “p” and “f”: a linguistic history of nation-​building in 
the Philippines. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 36, 6: 587–​97.
Unesco (1953) The Use of Vernacular Languages in Education. Paris: Unesco.
Usami, Mayumi (2002) Discourse Politeness in Japanese Conversation. Tokyo: Hituzi 
Syobo.
Valdman, Albert (1988) Diglossia and language conflict in Haiti. International Journal of 
the Sociology of Language 71: 67–​80.
van Dijk, Teun A. (1998) Principles of critical discourse analysis. In Jenny Cheshire and 
Peter Trudgill (eds) The Sociolinguistics Reader. Volume 2. Gender and Discourse. 
London: Arnold. 367–​93.
Verivaki, Maria (1991) Greek language maintenance and shift in the Greek community 
of Wellington. In Janet Holmes and Ray Harlow (eds) Threads in the Tapestry of 
Language. Auckland: Linguistic Society of New Zealand. 71–​116.
Vikør, Lars S. (1995) The Nordic Languages: Their Status and Interrelations, 2nd edn. 
Oslo: Novus Press.
Vine, Bernadette (ed.) (2018) The Routledge Handbook of Language in the Workplace. 
London: Routledge.
Vine, Bernadette (2020) Introducing Language in the Workplace. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
662
Vine, Bernadette and Sharon Marsden (2016) Eh at work: the indexicality of a New 
Zealand English pragmatic marker. Intercultural Pragmatics 13, 3: 383–​405.
Vuzo, Mwajuma (2018) Towards achieving the sustainable development goals: revisiting 
language of instruction in Tanzanian secondary schools. International Review of 
Education. 64, 6: 803–​22.
Waldvogel, Joan (2005) Email in workplace communication. PhD thesis. Wellington: 
Victoria University.
Wales, Katie (1994) Royalese: the rise and fall of ‘The Queen’s English’. English Today 
10, 3: 3–​10.
Wardhaugh, Ronald (1987) Languages in Competition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Wardhaugh, Ronald and Janet M. Fuller (2015) An Introduction to Sociolinguistics, 7th 
edn. Oxford: Wiley Blackwell.
Warner, Sam L. No’eau (1999) Kuleana: the right, responsibility and authority of 
Indigenous peoples to speak and make decisions for themselves in language and cul-
tural revitalization. Anthropology and Education Quarterly 30: 68–​93.
Warren, Jane and Leigh Oakes (2011) Language policy and citizenship in Quebec: French 
as a force for unity in a diverse society? In Cattrin Norrby and John Hajek (eds) 
Uniformity and Diversity in Language Policy: Global Perspectives. Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters. 7–​21.
Warren, Paul (2016) Uptalk. The Phenomenon of Rising Intonation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Warren, Paul (2019) Non-​linear analysis of a diphthong merger. In Sasha Calhoun, Paola 
Escudero, Marija Tabain et al. (eds) Proceedings of the 19th International Congress of 
Phonetic Sciences. Canberra, Australia: Australasian Speech Science and Technology 
Association Inc. 1883–​87.
Weigel, Margaret M. and Ronald M. Weigel (1985) Directive use in a migrant agricul-
tural community: a test of Ervin-​Tripp’s hypothesis. Language in Society 14, 63–​80.
Wenger, Etienne (1998) Communities of Practice: Learning, Meaning and Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
West, Candace (1984) When the doctor is a lady: power, status and gender in physician–​
patient dialogues. Symbolic Interaction 7, 1: 87–​106.
West, Candace (1990) Not just ‘doctors’ orders’: directive-​response sequences in patients’ 
visits to women and men physicians. Discourse and Society 1, 1: 85–​112.
West, Candace and Don Zimmerman (1977) Women’s place in everyday talk: reflections 
on parent–​child interaction. Social Problems 24: 521–​9.
West, Candace and Don Zimmerman (1983) Small insults: a study of interruptions 
in cross-​sex conversations between unacquainted persons. In Barrie Thorne, Cheris 
Kramarae and Nancy Henley (eds) Language, Gender and Society. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House. 103–​18.
White, Daniel (2013) English, and international cross-​cultural attitudes in China, Japan 
and South Korea. Doctoral thesis. Newcastle, UK: Northumbria University.
White, Sheida (1989) Backchannels across cultures: a study of Americans and Japanese. 
Language in Society 18: 59–​76.
Whiteley, William, H. (1968) Some Problems of Transitivity in Swahili. London: SOAS.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

REFERENCES
663
Whiteley, William, H. (1969) Swahili: The Rise of a National Language. London: 
Methuen.
Whitney, Paul (1998) The Psychology of Language. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Wiese, Heike, Katharina Mayr, Philipp Krämer et al. (2015) Changing teachers’ attitudes 
towards linguistic diversity: effects of an antibias programme. International Journal of 
Applied Linguistics 27, 1: 129–​220.
Wiggen, Geirr (1997) Nynorsk-​Bokmål. In Hans Goebl, Peter Nelde, Zdenek Stary et 
al. (eds) Contact Linguistics: An International Handbook of Contemporary Research. 
Volume 2. Berlin/​New York: Walter de Gruyter. 948–​57.
Wilford, Judith (1982) Can I borrow your biscuit? Directive choice among children in a 
child care centre. Unpublished term paper. Wellington: Victoria University.
Williams, Michael (1990) A small study of post-​vocalic (r) on the Isle of Wight. 
Unpublished term paper. Wellington: Victoria University.
Wilson, Nick (2010) Bros, boys and guys: address term function and communities of 
practice in a New Zealand rugby team. New Zealand English Journal 24: 33–​54.
Wilson, Nick (2011) Leadership as communicative practice: the discursive construction 
of leadership and team identity in a New Zealand rugby team. PhD thesis. Wellington: 
Victoria University.
Wilson, Nick (2019) When “we” means “you”: the social meaning of English pseudo-​
inclusive personal pronouns. In Paul Bouissac (ed.) The Social Dynamics of Pronominal 
Systems: A Comparative Approach. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 35–​56.
Winford, Donald (2003) Introduction to Contact Linguistics. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Wolfram, Walt (1998) Dialect awareness programs in the school and community. In 
Rebecca S. Wheeler (ed.) Language Alive in the Classroom. Westport, CI: Greenwood 
Press. 47–​66.
Wolfram, Walt and Natalie Schilling-​Estes (1998, 2006, 2015) American English. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Wolfram, Walter and Ralph W. Fasold (1974) The Study of Social Dialects in American 
English. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Woods, Nicola (1988) Talking shop: sex and status as determinants of floor apportion-
ment in a work setting. In Jennifer Coates and Deborah Cameron (eds) Women in their 
Speech Communities. London: Longman. 141–​57.
Wurm, Stephen A. (1985) The status of New Guinea Pidgin (Neo-​Melanesian) and 
attitudes towards it. In Nessa Wolfson and Joan Manes (eds) Language and Inequality. 
The Hague: Mouton. 373–​86.
Ylänne, Virpi (2008) Communication accommodation theory. In Helen Spencer-​Oatey 
(ed.) Culturally Speaking, 2nd edn. London: Continuum. 164–​86.
Zimmerman, Don H. and Candace West (1975) Sex roles, interruptions and silences in 
conversation. In Barrie Thorne and Nancy Henley (eds) Language and Sex: Difference 
and Dominance. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 105–​29.
Zuckermann, Ghil’ad (2003) Language Contact and Lexical Enrichment in Israeli 
Hebrew. London/​New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

664
Following Knowles (1987) we have adopted the system used by Daniel Jones for 
the broad transcription of RP in The Principles of the IPA. Each sound is iden-
tified by its symbol and a key word. The key word is given in ordinary spelling 
and in broad transcription. The key words have been chosen for their relative 
stability from one variety of English to another.
Vowels
Consonants
1
i:
reed
/​ri:d/​
p
pop
/​pop/​
2
i
rid
/​rid/​
b
Bob
/​bob/​
3
e
red
/​red/​
t
tight
/​tait/​
4
a
bad
/​bad/​
d
dead
/​ded/​
5
a:
shah
/​ʃa:/​
k
cake
/​keik/​
6
o
cod
/​kod/​
g
gag
/​gag/​
7
o:
law
/​lo:/​
8
u
could
/​kud/​
tʃ
church
/​ʧə:ʧ/​
9
u:
mood
/​mu:d/​
ʤ
judge
/​ʤʌʤ/​
10
ʌ
bud
/​bʌd/​
11
ə:
bird
/​bə:d/​
f
fife
/​faif/​
12
ə
the
/​ðə/​
v
van
/​van/​
about
/​əbaut/​
θ
thirtieth
/​θə:tiəθ/​
sofa
/​soufə/​
ð
then
/​ðen/​
13
ei
raise
/​reiz/​
s
sauce
/​so:s/​
14
ou
rose
/​rouz/​
z
zoos
/​zu:z/​
15
ai
rise
/​raiz/​
ʃ
sheep
/​ ʃi:p/​
16
au
rouse
/​rauz/​
ʒ
leisure
/​leʒə/​
17
oi
toy
/​toi/​
h
hat
/​hat/​
18
iə
beer
/​biə/​
19
eə
there
/​ðeə/​
m
mime
/​maim/​
20
uə
lure
/​luə/​
n
noon
/​nu:n/​
ŋ
singing
/​siŋiŋ/​
l
lull
/​lʌl/​
r
rain
/​rein/​
j
yacht
/​jot/​
w
will
/​wil/​
Appendix: phonetic symbols
 
 

phonetic symbols
665
The numbering of the vowels is conventional, and follows the order originally 
used by Jones in 1918 in his Outline of English Phonetics (Cambridge: Heffer), 
and since adopted by a number of phonetics textbooks.
In addition, the following symbols have been used to represent sounds from 
languages other than English or to represent a greater degree of phonetic detail 
than the broad transcription system makes possible.
[ɲ]	 the palatal nasal sound heard in Spanish señor.
[ʔ]	 the glottal stop, a brief period of silence or absence of sound heard in 
place of medial and final [t]‌ in some dialects.
[ʈ]	 a retroflex sound produced by curling the tip of the tongue so that its 
underside touches the ridge behind the top teeth. This sound is heard in 
many Indian languages.

666
Sociolinguistics: key words and concepts
Accent
Definition: Regional or social variation in pronunciation.
Example: In British English:
Sam (north of England):	 ’ave you seen ’enry’s new ’ouse?
Jim (south of England):	 Henry has a new house?
Accommodation
See Communication Accommodation Theory
Acquiescence bias
Definition: The tendency for respondents to agree with statements, regardless of their content. 
This means people may contradict themselves in a long survey.
Example: Acquiescence bias might result in people agreeing with both these statements at 
different points in a survey:
New Zealanders speak with an attractive accent.
The New Zealand accent is not at all attractive.
Acrolect, mesolect and basilect
Definition: A continuum of varieties that may exist between the standard language and the 
creole (sometimes described as a post-​creole continuum). The variety closest to the standard 
is the acrolect (where acro means high), whereas the variety closest to the creole is labeled 
the basilect or “deep” creole. These two varieties are often mutually unintelligible. Varieties 
in between these two extremes are described as mesolects or intermediate varieties.
Example: Varieties in Jamaica and Guyana. In Guyanese Creole, the acrolectal form I told him, 
used by educated middle-​class people, has a mesolectal form I tell im, used by lower middle-​
class people, and a basilectal form mi tell am used by old and illiterate rural labourers.
Act sequence
Definition: The order in which turns are taken in a conversation.
Example: In an interview: the interviewer asks a question, and then the interviewee answers, 
and the interviewer then responds.
Adjacency pairs
Definition: Sequences of utterances from different speakers made up of a first part and a 
second part that typically occur together. A particular first part often requires a particular 
(or range of) second part(s).
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
667
Example:
A:	 hello
B:	
hello
A:	 how are you?
B:	
I’m fine thanks
Affective code-​switching
Definition: Changing language or formality level to express certain feelings or emotions.
Example: The Cantonese [in small capitals] here expresses impatience when a New Zealand 
Chinese mother is speaking to her young daughter:
Mother:	
Come on let’s go
Daughter:	
No I want to stay here and play
Mother:	
hurry up we’re going to be late
Affective function
Definition: Expresses feelings.
Example: I feel really great today!
Affricate
Definition: A sound produced by building up air behind a complete closure at some point in 
the mouth, followed by a slow release which sounds like a fricative.
Example: The initial sounds in English chin and chat, jar and jury, and the initial sound in 
German Zeit are affricates.
African American Language (AAL)
Also known as African American Vernacular English (AAVE) or African American English 
(AAE)
Definition: A distinct variety of American English spoken in many African American commu-
nities. Some characteristics are the absence of copula verb be, the use of habitual aspect be, 
and absence of possessive s. There are also distinctive phonological and lexical features.
Example:
He a teacher. =​ He’s a teacher.
She be at school on weekdays. =​ She’s always at school on weekdays.
Tom hat. =​ Tom’s hat.
Age-​grading
Definition: Refers to features of people’s speech which vary at different ages: e.g. pitch, 
vocabulary, pronunciation and grammar.
Example:
Teenage son:	
It’s munted!
Father:	
It’s what?
American standard English
Also known as Mainstream White American English 
Definition: The varieties of English associated with educated speech in the USA.
Example: Hilary Clinton’s variety; and English spoken by characters in the TV programme 
Friends.
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
668
Americanism
Definition: A word or usage distinctive to EngIish spoken in the USA.
Example: faucet (tap elsewhere), diaper (nappy elsewhere), car trunk (boot elsewhere), switch-
back (track or road with hairpin bends) and pacifier (dummy elsewhere).
Apparent-​time method
Definition: Used to compare the speech of older speakers to that of younger speakers in order 
to investigate language change in progress.
Example: In her study in Sydney, Barbara Horvath compared the percentage of the HRTs 
(high rising terminals or rising intonation at the end of statements) used by people in 
different age groups. She found that HRTs were used far more by teenagers than by adults, 
suggesting that HRTs might become an established feature of Sydney speech in the future.
Audience design
Definition: Speakers vary their style according to their (perceived) audience.
Example: Radio newsreaders vary their style according to the perceived audience of the radio 
station they are broadcasting on.
Australian English
Definition: The variety of English associated with Australia.
Example: Julia Gillard’s or Tony Abbot’s variety; variety spoken by characters in the TV pro-
gramme Neighbours.
Back vowel
Definition: A vowel produced with the tongue in the back of the mouth.
Example: The vowel in caught.
Basilect
See Acrolect, mesolect and basilect
BBC English
See RP
Bilingual education
Definition: Education where the goal is to produce bilingual pupils.
Example:
In Singapore, English is used for teaching alongside Malay or Mandarin (or both), and is 
available throughout the education system.
In Montreal, English-​speaking children may attend schools where only French is used for the 
first few years. English is introduced once French reading and writing have been established.
Bilingualism
Definition: Knowledge of two languages.
Example: Marie is bilingual. She grew up in Montreal with English as her first language, 
learned in the home. She went to a French immersion school so that at 15 years old, she 
also speaks French fluently.
Black British English
Definition: Distinctive varieties used by ethnic minorities in Britain such as those of West 
Indian or Caribbean descent. For example, many people of West Indian or Caribbean des-
cent speak a variety of Jamaican Creole (often called Patois) as well as English.
Example: dem kids lick him den walk away =​ those kids hit him then walked away.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
669
Booster
Definition: A word or phrase used to strengthen the force of an utterance.
Example: I am telling you she is really very polite.
British standard English
Definition: The varieties of English associated with educated speech in Britain.
Example: Tony Blair’s variety; and the variety spoken by characters in the TV programme 
Eastenders.
Broad diglossia
Definition: Where two separate languages are used for different functions in a community, 
especially where one is used for high (H) or more formal functions and the other for low 
(L) or informal functions.
Example: In Paraguay, Spanish and Guaraní are used in different situations. Where Spanish is 
appropriate (usually in more formal contexts), Guaraní is not and vice versa.
Canadian English
Definition: The variety of English associated with Canada.
Example: Variety used by Alex Trebek, host of Jeopardy; the character Robin Sherbatsky in 
the TV programme How I Met Your Mother; and Bob and Doug McKenzie in the TV pro-
gramme Great White North.
Case markers
Definition: Affixes on words signalling their grammatical status as subject, object, possessive, 
etc.
Example: In Latin the -​a on Maria in the sentence Mari-​a puell-​am amat (Mary loves the girl) 
marks Mary as the subject while the -​am on puellam signals it is the object. The -​a is thus 
a subject case marker and the -​am is an object case marker.
Change from above
Definition: Linguistic changes which take place above the level of conscious awareness, i.e. 
speakers have some awareness of the fact that these linguistic changes are occurring. This 
can also refer to changes which are entering the community’s speech from higher social 
groups and spreading to lower groups.
Example: Labov noted the spread of [r]‌ pronunciation in the speech of people in New York 
City in the 1960s. He reported that this was a feature which speakers were conscious of in 
their speech and that of others.
Change from below
Definition: Linguistic changes which take place below the level of conscious awareness, i.e. 
speakers are not aware that such linguistic changes are taking place. This can also refer 
to changes which are entering the community’s speech from lower social groups and 
spreading to higher groups.
Example: Labov provided evidence of considerable change in the vowel system of Philadelphian 
English in the 1990s. None of the changes, however, have risen to any prominent level of 
social awareness.
Class
Definition: Refers to a person’s social standing or socioeconomic position in society. This 
is often judged according to level of education and occupation, and in some societies by 
income and family background.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
670
Example: Members of the aristocracy in England would be classified as upper class; those 
engaged in manual or unskilled labour would generally be classified as working class.
Code (or Variety)
Definition: Any set of linguistic forms which patterns according to social factors, i.e. used 
under specific social circumstances. The term includes different accents, different linguistic 
styles, different dialects and even different languages which contrast with each other for 
social reasons.
Example: Maria is a teenager whose Portuguese parents came to London in the 1960s. She 
uses mainly Portuguese at home and to older people at the Portuguese Catholic church 
and community centre, but English is the appropriate code (or variety) for her to use at 
school.
Code-​mixing
Also known as Code-​switching
Definition: Rapid switching from one language to another within a conversation.
Example: [Samoan is in small capitals.]
Albert:	
My doctor told me to go on a diet. She said I was overweight. I tried. but it was so 
hard.
Kath:	
Yeah yeah, it’s all very well for the doctor to say but it is hard to cut down eh.
Code-​switching
Definition: Use of more than one language during a conversation. Rapid code-​switching is 
sometimes described as “code-​meshing” or a “fused lect”.
Example: Athena and her family moved from Crete to New Zealand ten years ago. Nowadays, 
when she talks to her younger brother, she tends to use both Greek and English –​ often in 
the same utterance.
Codification
Definition: A systematic description of language, usually as part of a process of standardisa-
tion. This is usually achieved through the production of grammars and dictionaries and 
sometimes also pronunciation manuals.
Example: In the 1470s, William Caxton used the speech of the London area as the basis for his 
translations of French works. Selecting forms was not always straightforward, however, as 
there were often several possible alternatives; he reported that he consulted the best writers 
of the upper class for judgments on usage issues.
Coining
Definition: The creation of new lexical items as a response to the changing world. Some of 
these become permanent language features and others die out.
Example: compact disc, website, opensource and blog.
Communication Accommodation Theory
Also known as Speech Accommodation Theory
Definition: A theory to account for how people change their style of speech towards or away 
from that of their interlocutor(s). Converging or modifying speech patterns towards the 
target’s speech style generally indicates familiarity or solidarity or a desire to please; diver-
ging or moving speech patterns away from a target’s speech style generally indicates a 
desire to emphasise social distance.
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
671
Example: Joe has heavily accented Irish English. Mandy, who speaks American accented 
English, starts to use some of the features of Irish English, indicating her wish to get closer 
to Joe.
Community of practice
Definition: A group engaged in a shared enterprise, who interact regularly, and who have 
common attitudes and values, and a shared repertoire.
Example: A book group, a hiking group, and a rugby team.
Consonant cluster simplification (or reduction)
Definition: When a group of two or more consonants, usually at the end of a word, is simpli-
fied by the elimination of one or more of them.
Example: fast becomes fas’; hold becomes hol’; and desk becomes des’.
Contextualisation cues
Definition: Features (including linguistic, paralinguistic and non-​verbal) which allow a speaker 
to signal and listeners to interpret the social meaning of an utterance.
Example: Laughter may indicate an utterance is intended as a joke or a tease rather than as a 
serious comment; facial expression or a sigh may indicate a speaker is unhappy with what 
has just been said; and strong stress might indicate surprise.
Conversational feedback (or back-​channelling)
Definition: Signals that one is attending to the speaker’s contribution; may be verbal or 
non-​verbal.
Example: mm, uh-​huh, right, head nodding and attentive gaze.
Covert prestige
Definition: Favourable connotations associated with the use of vernacular forms.
Example: Someone may use local forms to show that they belong to a particular work group. 
Working class men in Norwich told Peter Trudgill that they “speak ’orrible”, yet they 
continued to consistently use local vernacular forms, indicating that, despite their overt 
statements, they valued their local dialect.
Creole
Definition: A pidgin which has acquired native speakers and has consequently expanded 
in structure (grammar and vocabulary) in order to express the range of meanings and 
functions required of a first language.
Example: Tok Pisin in New Guinea, Bislama in Vanuatu and Haitian Creole in Haiti.
Creolisation
Definition: The process by which a pidgin becomes a creole. The process typically involves the 
regularisation of structural features so they are easier to acquire.
Example: Tok Pisin became creolised as it spread due to its usefulness as a lingua franca.
Decreolisation
Definition: A process where features of a creole language change to resemble more closely the 
standard variety. This process tends to occur when a creole is used side-​by-​side with the 
standard variety in a community where social barriers are not insuperable.
Example: Negerhollands in the Dutch West Indies is a language that has undergone complete 
decreolisation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
672
Determiner
Definition: A broad grammatical category of words which precede nouns in English.
Example: The definite article (the), the indefinite article (a, an), demonstrative items such as 
this, that, these and those, and possessives such as my and your. More formally, English 
determiners can occur in the following slot: _​_​_​ (Adjective) Noun.
Diachronic
Definition: A diachronic study of a language traces changes in the language over time; it is a 
historical study.
Example: Labov traced how the diphthongs in words like house and right changed over time 
in the speech of inhabitants of Martha’s Vineyard in the USA.
Dialect
Definition: Variety with distinctive regional or social features of vocabulary and/​or grammar, 
as well as differences in pronunciation.
Example:
Jill [Cockney]:  The ol’ bill nicked me mate on Saturday night.
Sue [RP]:           Oh no. Why did the police arrest your friend?
Dialect continuum/​chain
Definition: Moving from one village to another, there are only small changes in speech features 
from location to location. Inhabitants of adjacent villages can usually understand each 
other. Over large distances, however, speech differences are so great that inhabitants at 
either end of the chain may not be able to understand each other.
Example: Miriam learnt both French and Italian at university. While studying in Paris she 
decided to travel to Rome, staying in many of the provincial towns along the way. She 
found that the further she moved away from Paris, the more difficult it was to understand 
what was being said, although she had no problems being understood. In Chambery, near 
the French-​Italian border, she wasn’t sure whether she was hearing French Italian or Italian 
French. Gradually, as she approached Rome, she began to comprehend more and more of 
what she heard, and on reaching Rome found some kind of a match with the Italian she 
had learnt at university.
Diglossia (classic or narrow)
Definition: When two distinct varieties of the same language are used in the community for 
different and complementary functions. One is regarded as a high (H) form, the other as 
the low (L) form. No-​one uses the high variety in everyday conversation.
Example: In Eggenwil, a town in the Aargau canton of Switzerland, Silvia, a bank-​teller, 
knows two very different varieties of German. One is the local Swiss German dialect of 
her canton which she uses in her everyday interactions with other Swiss Germans. The 
other is standard German which she learnt at school, and though she understands it very 
well indeed, she rarely uses it in speech. Newspapers are written in standard German, 
and when she occasionally goes to hear a lecture at the university it may be in standard 
German.
Dispreferred second pair part
Definition: The second part of a sequence of utterances which is unexpected, less frequent, or 
more structurally complicated.
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
673
Example:
A:	 Would you like tea?
B:	
Coffee would be better thanks.
Domain
Definition: Involves typical interactions between typical participants in typical settings.
Example: Family, friendship, religion, workplace and education.
Double-​nested diglossia
Definition: Where two language varieties exist side by side as H and L varieties, with add-
itional high and low varieties within each variety.
Example: In Khalapur, India, Hindi and a local dialect, Khalapur, function as high (H) and 
low (L) varieties, and within each of these there are again high and low varieties: oratorical 
Hindi (H) and conversational Hindi (L); and Khalapur saf boli (H) (“clean speech”) and 
Khalapur moti boli (L) (“gross speech”).
Double-​overlapping diglossia
Definition: Where one language variety is used both as a high (H) and low (L) variety in 
different situations.
Example: A young girl in Tanzania may acquire her tribal language in the home as a L 
variety and then learn Swahili at school as a H variety. If she then goes to study at 
university with other students who speak different tribal languages, Swahili changes 
status in her repertoire. The language of instruction in lectures is now English (her new 
H variety) while the students use Swahili for everyday interaction, i.e. the L variety for 
this group.
Ebonics
See African American Language (AAL)
Emblematic code-​switching
Definition: Changing between languages to symbolise group membership, often involving just 
short routine phrases in one language.
Example: Membership of the Māori community indicated by use of kia ora or nē.
Equivalence constraint
Definition: Switches between languages can only occur at points where the surface structures 
of both languages match each other.
Example: English/​French: red boat/​bateau rouge =​ bateau red (breaks the constraint); big 
house/​grande maison =​ grande house (conforms to the constraint).
Ethnolinguistic vitality
Definition: Comprised of three components as predictors of language maintenance: (1) the 
status of the language as reflected in attitudes towards it;  (2) the size of the group who use 
it and their distribution; and (3) the extent to which the language has institutional support.
Example: Welsh language revival in Wales. Welsh has high prestige in Wales; its speakers are 
generally confined to Wales; and it has institutional support in the form of use in the media 
and in formal education.
Face
Definition: Our public self-​image that we try both to protect and to promote positively.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
674
Example: People do not like to appear incompetent in front of their boss: i.e. they try not to 
lose face; and when a person has made an error, they often try to minimise it: i.e. they try 
to save face.
Fine stratification
Also known as gradient stratification
Definition: Where a linguistic feature is used in very slightly different frequencies by social 
groups which differ from each other in ways that are very minor and difficult to distin-
guish socially.
Example: (r) pronunciation in New York City in the 1960s. Unstable variation is associated 
with fine stratification and is a clue to linguistic changes in progress in the community.
Free morpheme constraint
Definition: Code-​switching is prohibited after a bound morpheme.
Example: In Greek–​English code-​switching, when the plural morpheme -​s is used in the word 
dogs, the following word will be in English, i.e. the same language used for dogs:
[Greek is in small capitals.] look at what those dogs are eating!
Fricative
Definition: A sound made by narrowing the exit passage of air from the lungs at some point 
sufficiently to cause friction.
Example: [s]‌, [z], [f] and [v].
Gender-​exclusive speech forms
Definition: Features of language (pronunciation, grammar, vocabulary) used by one gender 
but not by other genders in a community.
Example:
Japanese men use: oyaji (father), hara (stomach) and umai (delicious).
Japanese women use: lotoosan (father), onaka (stomach) and oishii (delicious).
Gender order
Definition: Gendered assumptions or taken-​for-​granted presuppositions about gender-
appropriate behavior.
Example: In Western society: when business clients demand that they deal with a man rather 
than a woman; or when a woman’s contribution to a discussion is overlooked until 
espoused by a male.
Gender-​preferential features
Definition: In communities where the social roles of women and men are broadly similar or 
overlap, linguistic features are generally shared, though each gender may use features in 
different frequencies in particular social contexts.
Example: In English-​speaking communities, when using a more formal style, women tend 
to use more -​ing pronunciations and fewer -​in pronunciations than men in words like 
swimming and talking.
Generic forms
Definition: Forms which refer to all members of a group. (Many people object to the use of 
forms such as he or man to refer to both women and men. Such usages are increasingly 
regarded as sexist and old-​fashioned.)
Example: human being; humankind; and person.
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
675
Genre
Definition: Linguistic category referring to the style associated with a specific type of commu-
nicative event.
Example: Radio interview, sports commentary or lecture.
Glottal stop
Definition: A brief period of silence or absence of sound caused by cutting off the air stream 
from the lungs at the vocal cords. It functions as a consonant in some languages. It can be 
heard in place of medial and final [t]‌ in some English dialects.
Example: English speakers of the Cockney dialect replace standard [t]‌ with a glottal stop in 
words such as bitter and pint.
Gossip
Definition: Relaxed talk on familiar topics between friends in informal settings (stereotypic-
ally considered characteristic of women’s interactions) which functions to build and main-
tain social relationships.
Example:
Jo:	
Did you hear that May won Lotto last week?
Chris:	
Really?
Jo:	
Yeah she’s always so lucky.
Grammaticalisation
Definition: Something is said to be grammaticalised or grammaticised when it functions less 
and less like an independent lexical item, and more and more like an element in the gram-
matical system, such as an affix or an auxiliary verb.
Example:  In Tok Pisin, the adverb baimbai gradually shortened over time to bai and was 
suffixed to the verb to indicate future tense.
[h]‌-​dropping
Definition: Word-​initial [h]‌ is not pronounced in English.
Example: No [h]‌ pronunciation at the beginning of house, here and hard (i.e. ’ouse, ’ere and ’ard).
Hedge
Definition: A word or phrase used to weaken or soften the force of an utterance.
Example: I suspect that he is a bit unreliable.
High (H) diglossic variety
Definition: Variety used for formal functions and in formal contexts in a diglossic situation.
Example: French in Haiti; Standard German in Switzerland; Spanish in Paraguay; and 
Classical Arabic, the language of the Quran/​Koran across Arabic-​speaking countries.
High rising terminal (HRT)
Definition: Rising question intonation used in a declarative utterance to make a statement.
Example: [? indicates rising intonation.] I went home at six? And then I had my dinner? And 
then I watched TV?
Honorifics
Definition: Expressions which indicate the relative status or social roles of the speaker and 
addressee (e.g. the higher status of the addressee).
Example: (Army private to corporal) Yes sir.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
676
Hypercorrection
Definition: Hypercorrection is when individuals over-​extend a particular usage in trying 
to emulate others. This tends to occur in situations where speakers can monitor their 
own speech; for instance, when reading word lists. Hypercorrect usage goes beyond the 
norm.
Example: In Labov’s 1966 New York City study he found that lower middle-​class speakers 
used even more of the prestigious post-​vocalic [r]‌ in their more formal styles than the upper 
middle class.
Imperative
Definition: The standard form of a sentence used to express a command or order in a lan-
guage. In English, this usually involves using the verb without any subject.
Example: sit down! and cook the dinner!
Indicator
Definition: In variationist sociolinguistics, an indicator is a feature which (unlike a stereotype 
and a marker) does not have any overt social evaluation attached to it and which generally 
does not attract explicit attention within a speech community.
Example: Vowels which distinguish regional groups: e.g. in the north of England, the vowel in 
words like grass and bath is short and produced at the front of the mouth, like the vowel 
in trap. Also, the pronunciation of the word bed in a way that sounds to outsiders like bid 
is an indicator in the New Zealand speech community.
Inflections
Definition: Affixes added to word roots to signal grammatical information such as number, 
case, gender, tense or aspect.
Example: The -​s at the end of books is an inflection, and so is the -​s on loves in she loves 
books.
Intensifiers
Definition: Modifiers which boost or emphasise the meaning of another word or phrase.
Example: very good; really awful; and so delicious.
Interrogatives
Definition: The standard form of a sentence used to express a question in a language. In 
English, this generally involves reversal of the verb and subject; it may also be signalled by 
rising intonation alone.
Example: Has he cooked the dinner? and Where are you going? and You dídn’t buy a paper?
Inter-​sentential code-​switching
Definition: Changing codes between sentences.
Example: [French is in small captials.]
Marie:	
il  pleut aujourdhui. (It’s raining today.) I hate rainy days!
Intra-​sentential code-​switching
Definition: Changing codes within sentences.
Example: [French is in small captials.]
Pascal:	 c’est une big MAISON (It’s a big house).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
677
Irish English
Definition: The variety of English associated with Ireland (also known as Hibernian English).
Example: Daniel Day Lewis in the film In the Name of the Father; Brendan Gleeson in The 
Guard; and the variety used in the film Waking Ned Devine.
Isogloss
Definition: Boundary which distinguishes an area on a map where a certain linguistic feature 
is found from areas in which it is absent.
Example: Near the South Australia/​Victoria border, there is an isogloss that runs from midway 
between Renmark and Dareton, south to midway between Penopa and Edenhope. People 
on the South Australian side say slippery dip while those on the other side say slide.
Jargon
Definition: The particular and often technical language, especially vocabulary, used by a group 
of specialists (such as doctors and lawyers) to talk about their speciality; a feature of occu-
pational style.
Example: The label Corporate Responsibility Analyst to describe a role that involves exam-
ining the effects of an organisation on the environment.
Kinship terminology
Definition: Labels for relationships based on genealogy and biology: parenthood, marriage 
relationships, gender and generation are distinctions expressed in some way in most 
systems.
Example: mother, husband, cousin, nephew and granddaughter.
Koine
Definition: A variety which is the result of dialect contact. Both linguistic and social factors 
contribute to its creation. The koine typically has some features from each of the contrib-
uting dialects, with most features typically coming from the dialect of the largest group of 
speakers.
Example: People moved into the new English town of Milton Keyes from many different 
regions in the 1960s and 1970s, but most came from the East End of London. Consequently, 
many of the features of the koine which developed in Milton Keyes could be traced back 
to this London dialect.
Language attitudes
Definition: How people feel about different languages and dialects. This generally reflects their 
views of the people who use them.
Example: “Danish is not a language, but a throat disease”, wrote one Norwegian respondent 
in reply to a 1950s postal questionnaire asking for Scandinavian people’s opinions of the 
relative aesthetic qualities of Swedish, Danish and Norwegian.
Language change
Definition: Change within a language over a period of time.
Example: The substitution of a glottal stop for [t]‌ in certain positions is increasing in Norwich.
Language death
Definition: The situation where all the speakers of a language die so that their language dies 
with them.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
678
Example: Of the more than 250 Aboriginal languages spoken in Australia when the Europeans 
arrived, between 50 and 70 disappeared as a direct result of the massacre of the Aboriginal 
people or their death from diseases introduced by Europeans.
Language loss
Definition: Attrition process, when an individual’s proficiency in their first language diminishes.
Example: Annie is a young speaker of Dyirbal, an Australian Aboriginal language. She also 
speaks English which she has learned at school. There is no written Dyirbal material for her 
to read, and there are fewer and fewer contexts in which she can appropriately hear and 
speak the language. She is steadily becoming less proficient in it. She can understand the 
Dyirbal she hears used by the older people in her community, and she uses it to speak to 
her grandmother. But her grandmother is scathing about Annie’s ability in Dyirbal, saying 
she doesn’t speak the language properly.
Language maintenance
Definition: Process by which a minority language community sets out to inhibit the shift or 
loss of their language. Several factors may contribute to language maintenance, such as:   
(1) the degree to which the language is considered an important symbol of the group’s iden-
tity; (2) frequent contact with other speakers in the community; and (3) frequent contact 
with the homeland, through visits home or new migrants or visitors.
Example: Speech communities engaged in language maintenance efforts include: Samoan in 
New Zealand; Greek in Sydney; and Cree in Canada.
Language planning
Definition: A deliberate, systematic attempt to address the communication issues of a society 
by studying the varieties (languages/​dialects), and developing a policy concerning their 
form, selection and/​or use.
Example: In the nineteenth century, Finland, being a close neighbour of Imperial Russia and 
Sweden, developed the form of its language to differentiate itself from these two countries.
Language revival
Also known as Language reclamation
Definition: A conscious effort by a community to revitalise a language that is in danger of 
disappearing.
Example: David is Welsh and he lives in Llandudno in Gwynedd. He is 14 years old and he 
goes to a Welsh-​medium boys’ secondary school where he is taught maths, physics and 
chemistry in English, and history, geography and social studies in Welsh. Like most of the 
boys in his class he went to a Welsh-​medium primary school where almost all the teaching 
and learning was in Welsh. His parents speak some Welsh but they are not fluent, and he 
reckons he knows a lot more Welsh vocabulary than they do.
Language shift
Definition: When a community moves from using one language to using another for everyday 
communication. This can be a gradual process over several generations.
Example: Before the First World War the town of Oberwart (known then by its Hungarian 
name Felsöör) was part of Hungary, and most of the townspeople used Hungarian most 
of the time. However, because the town had been surrounded by German-​speaking villages 
for over 400 years, many people also knew some German. At the end of the war, Oberwart 
became part of Austria, and German became the official language. In the 1920s Oberwart 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
679
was a small place and the peasants continued to use Hungarian to each other, and German 
with outsiders. As Oberwart grew and industry replaced farming as the main source of 
jobs, the functions of German expanded and people began to use German in domains 
where Hungarian had formerly been the norm.
Levelling
Definition: A simplification process which eliminates marked variants from the contributing 
dialects to a koine.
Example: If people who speak dialects with post-​vocalic [r]‌ come into contact with people 
who do not, levelling generally leads to the disappearance of post-​vocalic [r] in the koine. 
This has happened in large parts of England.
Lexical borrowing
Definition: The process by which words are adopted into one language from another; also 
known as a “loan word”.
Example: kumara (sweet potato) borrowed from Māori into New Zealand English; bungalow 
borrowed from Gujarati bangalo into British English; and garage from French into English.
Lexical diffusion
Definition: The process whereby sound changes spread through different words in the lexicon 
of a community one by one.
Example: In Belfast, a vowel change affected the vowel in the word pull before put, and put 
before should, although they all started off with the same vowel sound, and they all ended 
up with the identical different vowel sound at a later date.
Lexical item
Definition: A unit in the dictionary of a language. It may consist of more than one ortho-
graphic word.
Example: made up is one lexical item in she made up a story.
Lexifier and substrate languages
Definition: In a pidgin language, the language which supplies most of the vocabulary is 
known as the “lexifier” (or sometimes “superstrate”) language, while the language which 
influences the grammatical structure is called the “substrate”.
Example: In Papua New Guinea, English is the lexifier language for Tok Pisin, while Tolai 
contributes to the substrate.
Lexis
Definition: Vocabulary; the total stock of words in a language.
Example: Many linguists undertake research in the area of lexis, studying features of the 
vocabulary of a language. The result may be a new dictionary.
Linear polyglossia
Definition: Where there is more than one set of languages/​language varieties which arrange 
themselves in order of High (H1, H2 ...) and Low (L1, L2 …). There may also be inter-
mediate or Middle varieties (M).
Example: The language situation for some English-​educated Malaysian Hokkien Chinese. 
Formal Malaysian English =​ H1, Bahasa Malaysia =​ H2, Mandarin =​ DH (i.e. Dummy 
High, mainly symbolic and rarely used), colloquial Malaysian English =​ M1, formal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
680
Hokkien =​ M2, colloquial Hokkien =​ L1, rarely used. Other Chinese languages, e.g. 
Teochew =​ L2, not used extensively (if at all) and Bazaar Malay =​ L3.
Lingua franca
Definition: A language serving as a means of communication between speakers whose first 
languages differ.
Example: In Tanzania, people tend to use Swahili as a lingua franca when speaking to someone 
from a different tribal group.
Linguistic competence
Definition: Chomsky defined linguistic competence as the knowledge of language of “the ideal 
speaker–​hearer in a completely homogeneous speech community”.
Example: Speakers’ knowledge about the grammar of a language: e.g. how to express ideas 
grammatically in their variety.
Linguistic conservatism
Definition: Use of older more established language forms.
Example: Using he as a generic third person singular pronoun.
Linguistic determinism
Definition: Strong form of the Sapir–​Whorf hypothesis, stating that perceptions of reality are 
determined by the language people use.
Example: Linguistic determinism claims that a person who speaks Hopi perceives reality dif-
ferently to an English speaker because Hopi has different linguistic (syntactic–​semantic) 
categories than English.
Linguistic innovation
Definition: Use of newer language forms.
Example: Using hir instead of her or him to refer to a person of unspecified or non-binary 
gender.
Linguistic insecurity
Definition: Anxiety or lack of confidence about “correct” or standard linguistic usage, espe-
cially in formal situations. People sometimes hypercorrect or over-​extend a particular 
usage when they are unsure of themselves.
Example: Latin-​based English grammars used by schoolteachers in an earlier era resulted in 
linguistic insecurity about when it is appropriate to use I vs. me in utterances such as It is 
I/​me.
Linguistic landscape
Definition: The language used in public texts. Often a rich source of information about the 
sociolinguistic complexities of a community.
Example: Language used in restaurant signs, shop signs, church signs or advertisements, graf-
fiti, posters, etc.
Linguistic relativity
Definition: Weaker form of the Sapir–​Whorf hypothesis, stating that language influences our 
perception, attitudes and thoughts, and potentially affects our behaviour.
Example: Many languages have a rich array of terms to describe natural phenomena. French, 
for example, distinguishes between rivière, a river that flows into another river, as opposed 
to fleuve, a river that runs directly to the sea.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
681
Linguistic (speech) variable
Definition: Linguistic feature with more than one realisation (or variant).
Example: Pronunciation of the consonant in -​ing as either a velar nasal [ŋ] or as an alveolar 
nasal [n] at the end of words such as running, hopping; pronunciation of t as either [t] or 
as a glottal stop between two vowels in words such as butter, matter.
Loan words
Definition: Words that have been adopted or borrowed by one language from another.
Example: Marae =​ traditional meeting place (from Māori into New Zealand English); and 
déjà vu (from French into English).
Low (L) diglossic variety
Definition: In a diglossia, the variety used as a colloquial means of everyday communication, 
and especially in the home.
Example: Haitian Creole in Haiti; Swiss German in Switzerland; and Guaraní in Paraguay.
Maˉori English
Definition: A variety of New Zealand English often associated with Māori speakers but also 
used by some non-​Māori people with Māori networks.
Example: Variety used by Billy T. James playing the newsreader in the YouTube excerpt Te 
News and character in the New Zealand film Came a Hot Friday. Also the variety used by 
Taika Waititi in the film Boy.
Marker
Definition: In variationist sociolinguistics, a marker is a linguistic feature which can indicate 
people’s social class, style and identity.
Example: When New Yorkers pronounce post-​vocalic [r]‌ in more formal contexts, they will 
usually be evaluated as educated and as speaking appropriately. This feature is a marker 
since it stratifies for both style and social group.
Matched guise technique
Definition: Technique used in language attitude research. It employs speakers who can convin-
cingly switch varieties (language, dialect or accent), and thus adopt different “guises”. The 
speakers produce the same utterances, first in the guise of a fluent speaker of one variety and 
then in the guise of another. Listeners are unaware that the different forms are produced 
by a single speaker, and they therefore respond not to any individual characteristics of the 
speaker’s voice or the content of the text, which remain constant, but only to the language, 
dialect or accent being employed. Using this technique, people’s attitudes to different var-
ieties can be identified.
Example: Howard Giles asked children to listen to three accents and rate them in terms 
of the prestige of the speaker and the pleasantness of the voice. All three accents were 
actually produced by a single speaker, although the children were not aware of this. 
They rated them differently according to their stereotypes of the speakers of the different 
accents.
Matrix Language Frame (MLF)
Definition: A basic structure which imposes constraints on code-​switched utterances.
Example: The order in which morphemes occur in code-​switched utterances is determined 
by the matrix language. The other language in use is called the “embedded language”. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
682
In California, the matrix language might be Spanish with embedded English lexis; or in 
Canada, it could be English with French embedded lexis.
Memes
Definition: Memes are multimodal elements of culture which are passed online from one 
person to another. They combine images and text in picture or video form and, as they are 
copied and spread, they are modified in interesting and clever ways.
Example: The Trojan horse meme illustrated in ­chapter 14 originally appeared in The New 
York Times in 2015, but then became the source of a series of memes. The original illus-
tration commented on social media companies infiltrating the mainstream media, but a 
later meme suggests a scenario where an over-​enthusiastic discourse analyst chats to unsus-
pecting partygoers, all the while preparing to derail the conversation to Critical Discourse 
Analysis.
Mesolect
See Acrolect, mesolect and basilect
Metaphorical code-​switching
Definition: Changing language varieties to draw on the social meanings associated with each 
variety. This kind of switching involves rhetorical skill.
Example: At a village meeting among the Buang people in Papua New Guinea, the main 
village entrepreneur uses both Buang and Tok Pisin to persuade people who have put 
money into a village store to leave it there. [Tok Pisin is in italics. Buang is not italicised.]
Ikamap trovel o wonem, mi kenstretim olgeta toktok. Orait. Pasin ke ken be, meni ti ken nyep 
la, su ok lam memba re, olo ba miting autim olgeta tok ...
[English translation: If any problem comes up, I will be able to settle all the arguments. OK. 
This is the way –​ the money that is there can’t go back to the shareholders, and the meeting 
brought up all these arguments ...]
Microaggression
Definition: Brief and commonplace daily indignities, often (though not only) verbal, whether 
intentional or unintentional, that communicate hostile, derogatory or negative attitudes 
to the target person or community. Any social group can be the target of such behaviour, 
which often goes unnoticed by those who are not the target. Even when unintended, such 
negative verbal and discursive behaviour can cause discomfort or anger.
Example: Subtle discrimination based on accent or dialect; repeated mispronunciation of 
a person’s name; and telling someone who looks non-​white that they “speak very good 
English”.
Minority language
Definition: Language used by a minority speech community in a society where the majority 
language is regarded as the norm.
Example: Spanish in America and Gujarati in England.
Modal items
Definition: Elements which express speakers’ attitudes to the truth of their assertions, or 
express obligation or permission.
Example: English modal verbs include will, would, may, might, can, could, should and must. 
Other modal items are words such as perhaps, probably and maybe.
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
683
Modes of communication
Definition: Actions that communicate meaning, such as gesture, gaze, posture, speech, and 
so on.
Example: Ann says: “These people need to be supported as you said Helen, and we should 
take steps to assist them”. As she says “as you said Helen”, she turns towards Helen and 
makes a small hand gesture in her direction (gesture). She then looks around the whole 
group as she finishes her utterance (gaze).
Monolingualism
Definition: Knowledge of only one language.
Example: Kerry is from Whangarei in New Zealand. Recently she traveled around Europe. 
She found it difficult since she could speak only English.
Morphology
Definition: The word structure of languages; and the study of word structure.
Example: A morphologist would analyse the word wonderfully into three components or 
morphemes: wonder, and ful (adjectival suffix), and -​ly (adverbial suffix); and the word 
boys into two components: boy and s (plural suffix).
Multicultural London English (MLE)
Definition: An ethnic speech variety identified in the early twenty-​first century which is used 
in ethnically diverse areas of inner-​city London, such as Hackney, and used mainly by 
adolescents from a range of ethnic backgrounds, including Jamaican, African and Asian 
backgrounds.
Example: Linguistic features of MLE include monophthongs where other varieties use 
diphthongs, e.g. [fe:s] for face; a house is referred to as a yard; nuff means very; and trainers 
are creps. These features will no doubt change over time. 
Multi-​ethnolect
Definition: A variety which develops in cities where people from many different ethnic groups 
mix and communicate. It has many distinctive features as a result of the languages and 
dialects which different speakers bring to its construction.
Example: In multi-​ethnic areas of London, Multicultural London English has features such as 
the use of a rather than an before a noun beginning with a vowel: e.g. a orange and a apple.
Multiplex network
Definition: A network in which people are involved with a range of different individuals in a 
variety of distinct spheres or activities.
Example: Gavin plays basketball with Tom and Sid, works with Pam, and shares a flat with 
Sid. His social network is multiplex.
National language
Definition: The language of a political, cultural and social unit, generally developed and used 
as a symbol of national unity.
Example: Guaraní is the national language of Paraguay; and Swahili is the national language 
of Tanzania.
Negative face needs
Definition: An individual’s desire not to be imposed upon nor impeded in action.
Example: Your need to not have others expect you to join in activities you don’t like.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
684
Negative politeness
Definition: The use of language which indicates awareness of an individual’s negative face 
needs.
Example: I don’t suppose there’s any chance you’re going past my place, is there? =​ a nega-
tively polite way of asking for a lift.
Network density
Definition: A measure of the extent to which members of a person’s social network are in 
touch with each other.
Example: If all your friends know each other independently of you, then network density is 
high.
Network plexity
Definition: A measure of the range of different types of relationships people are involved in 
with different individuals.
Example: Fred, Nick and Jo work together. Fred and Jo also belong to the same indoor netball 
team and Nick and Jo attend the same church. Their networks are multiplex.
New Englishes
See World Englishes
New Zealandism
Definition: A word or usage distinctive to New Zealand English.
Example: plunket nurse =​ nurse who advises on babies’ needs; and dairy =​ corner shop.
New Zealand English
Definition: The variety of English associated with New Zealand.
Example: The variety used by Jemaine Clement, Bret McKenzie and Rhys Darby in the TV 
series Flight of the Conchords.
Non-​standard
Definition: Linguistic forms or varieties that do not conform to the standard.
Example: West Yorkshire English and African American Vernacular English.
Norms
Definition: The accepted ways of doing something within a community: e.g. way of opening 
an interaction or way of gaining the floor.
Example: In some Australian Aboriginal communities, it is not appropriate to ask direct 
questions. In some North American Indigenous communities, it is not appropriate to speak 
directly to strangers.
Observer’s paradox
Definition: Given that the aim of linguistic research is to find out how people speak when they 
are not being systematically observed, the paradox is that data of this kind is only available 
through systematic observation.
Example: Labov developed the “danger of death” question to combat the observer’s paradox. 
When people become emotionally involved in a story which describes an occasion when 
they were in serious danger, they tend to forget about the recording device/​the observer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
685
Official language
Definition: A language used for government business with a primarily utilitarian rather than 
symbolic function.
Example: Swahili and English are both official languages in Tanzania but only Swahili is the 
national language. In Vanuatu, Bislama, French and English are all official languages but 
only Bislama is the national language.
Overt prestige
Definition: Favourable connotations generally associated with the features of the language 
variety used by influential members of society. People may deliberately use such features to 
convey an educated or cultured impression.
Example: The language behaviour of the lower middle class in Labov’s 1966 New York City 
study indicated that post-​vocalic [r]‌ had overt prestige in the community.
Paˉkehaˉ
Definition: A non-​Polynesian New Zealander, usually used to refer specifically to a New 
Zealander of European origin.
Example: Sir Edmund Hillary was a famous Pākehā New Zealander. Bret McKenzie from the 
Flight of the Conchords is also Pākehā.
Passive voice
Definition: In English, the passive voice uses the auxiliary be +​ the past participle of the main 
verb.
Example: The plant is watered every day by Mary. (Active voice =​ Mary waters the plant every 
day.)
Phatic communication
Definition: Talk that is solely for the purpose of forging a social link between people. It is usu-
ally low in referential or informative content but high in affective content.
Example:
Bob:	
Hi, how are you?
Ann:	
Fine, lovely day isn’t it?
Phonology
Definition: The sound systems of human languages and the study of sound systems.
Example: Many linguists undertake research in the area of phonology, studying features of 
language sound systems such as intonation patterns, consonant distribution and vowel 
systems.
Pidgin
Definition: A pidgin is a language which has no native speakers. Pidgins develop as a means 
of communication between people who do not have a common language. So a pidgin is 
no-​one’s native language or mother tongue.
Example: Juba Arabic is a pidgin language spoken in the southern Sudan.
Polyglossia
Definition: Where more than two distinctive languages are used for different functions in a 
community.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
686
Example: In a city such as Bukavu, in the eastern Democratic Republic of the Congo  (Zaire), 
people use many different languages for different purposes. For instance, Kalala uses 
informal Shi when dealing with vendors in the marketplace who are from his own ethnic 
group. When carrying out official transactions, however, he uses Zairean Swahili and when 
talking to his friends he uses lndoubil, a very in-​group colloquial variety based on Swahili, 
but including features of languages like French, English and Italian.
Positive face needs
Definition: An individual’s need to maintain a positive self-​image and sense of belonging, and 
of being appreciated by others.
Example: The need to have your group membership acknowledged by others; the need to have 
others approve of your choice of clothes.
Positive politeness
Definition: The use of language to reinforce the hearer’s positive face and/​or to emphasise 
solidarity.
Example: Hey pal, gonna give me a ride? =​ a positively polite way of asking for a lift.
Post-​vocalic [r]‌
Definition: The sound [r]‌ when it follows a vowel. In sociolinguistic studies the focus is typ-
ically on [r] pronunciation at the end of a word or preceding a consonant at the end of a 
syllable.
Example: car, card and cardigan.
Pragmatic particles
Definition: Forms which typically occur in informal speech. Their exact functions are diffi-
cult to define since they vary with context. They have been described by some researchers 
as “fillers” since they give the speaker planning time in speech. Others describe them as 
“hedges” when they soften the force of a statement, or as “boosters” when they have an 
emphatic function.
Example: well, you see, you know, anyway, of course and I think.
Pragmatics
Definition: Studies explanations for how individuals use linguistic resources to produce and 
interpret meaning in interaction.
Example: you didn’t buy a paper? =​ a request for information or a complaint or a rebuke 
according to its social context.
Prestige form
Definition: Form which people admire and which people associate with high status speech.
Example: Post-​vocalic [r]‌ in New York City; and absence of post-​vocalic [r] in RP.
Rapport management framework
Definition: This theory emphasises the dynamic character of interaction in context, and 
examines how we use language to maintain, enhance, or challenge harmonious social 
relationships. In particular, it develops the notion of “face sensitivities”, and pays attention 
to sociality rights and obligations –​ the right to fair treatment, social inclusion, and respect, 
which differ in different sociocultural contexts.
Example: British managers interacting with their German counterparts complained at the 
distancing effect of the German managers’ use of titles and surnames in interaction. The 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
687
Germans were being respectful in a formal context, while the British managers preferred to 
reduce the formality of the interaction.
Real-​time study
Definition: A study which investigates language change in a community by comparing data 
gathered at different points in time.
Example: Fifteen years after his original study in Norwich, Peter Trudgill returned to collect 
more data so that he could identify linguistic changes which had occurred in the inter-
vening period.
Referee design
Definition: Speaker’s stylistic variation which is influenced by an absent third party, the 
referee.
Example: Radio announcers in New Zealand may vary their speech to incorporate some 
features of British English; and advertisements in Japan may incorporate some English.
Referential code-​switching
Definition: Changing from one language/​variety to another because of the content and 
function.
Example: Two German–​English bilingual children are playing. The older child reads a comic 
book to the younger child. [German is in small capitals.]
Kristoff:	The man says STOP THIS!
Regional accent
Definition: Variation in pronunciation relating to geographic location.
Example: Northern British English: /gras/​ and southern British English: /​gra:s/​.
Regional dialect
Definition: Variation in vocabulary and/​or grammar and phonology relating to geographic 
location.
Example: Scottish English vs. Irish English and Swiss German vs. Austrian German.
Register
Definition: May refer to types of language used in different situations, including differences in 
lexical choices. More often used in a narrower sense to refer to specialist jargon associated 
with certain activities or groups of people.
Example: Cricket terms such as silly mid-​off; and legal language.
Revitalisation
Definition: Conscious attempt to use a language which has fallen out of use.
Example: Promotion of greater use of Māori in New Zealand schools, media, literature, etc.
Rhotic accent
Definition: Dialects where the [r]‌ following a vowel (i.e. post-​vocalic [r]) is pronounced.
Example: Scottish accents and most North American accents.
RP (Received pronunciation)
Definition: Regionally neutral accent in the UK associated with the most highly educated 
sections of British English society. Sometimes called BBC English since it is used by some 
BBC newsreaders.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
688
Example: Edward grew up in a wealthy British family; he was educated at Eton and 
Cambridge. This is where he acquired RP, the accent with which he now speaks. Also, Sir 
David Attenborough’s variety of speech is an example of BBC English.
Scottish English
Definition: The variety of English associated with speakers from Scotland.
Example: Varieties spoken by Billy Connolly; Ewan MacGregor; David Tennant (as himself, 
not as The Doctor); and Peter Capaldi (as himself and as The Doctor).
Semantics
Definition: The meaning expressed by human languages and the study of meaning, especially 
word meaning and sentence meaning.
Example: Many linguists undertake research in the area of semantics, studying features of 
word meaning, such as synonymy and metaphor.
Sexist language
Definition: Language use which marginalises or discriminates against someone on the basis 
of their gender.
Example: Use of third person pronoun he in English to refer generically to any person.
Sharp stratification
Definition: Where a linguistic feature (often a grammatical feature) very clearly distinguishes 
between social classes (typically middle class and lower/​working class groups) in terms of 
its frequency of use.
Example: Use of standard she walks to school vs. vernacular she walk to school.
Situational code-​switching
Definition: Changing between languages in response to contextual factors such as changes in 
setting or participants.
Example: [Māori is in small capitals. The translation is in italics.]
Sarah:	
I think everyone’s here except Mere.
John:	
She said she might be a bit late but actually I think that’s her arriving now.
Sarah:	
You’re right. kia ora mere. haere mai. kei te pehea koe?
 	 	
[Hi mere. Come in. How are you?]
Mere:	
kia ora e hoa. kei te pai. Have you started yet?
 	 	
[Hello my friend. I’m fine.]
Slang
Definition: A type of informal, vernacular vocabulary (which is subject to rapid change).
Example: That’s really naff/​mingen =​ that’s really bad; and sweet/​choice =​ good.
Social accent
Definition: Variation in pronunciation relating to social background.
Example: As soon as she said “grass”, I knew she had been to a private school.
Social constructionism
Definition: An approach which analyses the linguistic and discourse variables used as resources 
for negotiating particular kinds of social identities in specific social contexts; detailed ana-
lysis of the way individuals are constantly engaged in “performing” and “constructing” 
their social identities in interaction.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
689
Example: Using linguistic features of English working-​class speech may contribute to 
constructing a more “masculine” gender identity.
Social dialect
Definition: Variation in language (pronunciation, vocabulary and/​or grammar) relating to the 
speaker’s social background.
Example: Working-​class Cockney; language used by Brahmin in India; and variety used by a 
“Boston Brahman” =​ a descendant of an old New England family.
Social dialectology
Definition: The study of language features employed by a range of social groups.
Example: Labov’s 1966 New York City study; Trudgill’s 1974 Norwich study; and Holmes, 
Bell and Boyce’s 1991 Wellington dialect survey.
Social distance
Definition: The degree of closeness of the relationship between participants in an interaction: 
i.e. how well they know each other.
Example: The social distance between brothers is minimal but it is greater between a client 
and their lawyer or doctor.
Social network
Definition: The pattern of informal relationships that people are involved in on a regular basis.
Example: Tom lives in Ballymacarrett, a Protestant area in Belfast. He works as an apprentice 
in the shipyard. His cousin Mike also works there. He and Mike live in the same street and 
most nights they have a beer together after work. They also run a disco with two friends. 
These people form a social network.
Social variables
Definition: Social factors, such as age, gender, ethnicity or social background, which may 
account for the use of one speech feature rather than another.
Example: Miriam Meyerhoff found that younger people in the Wellington area in New 
Zealand used more American lexical items than older people in the same community. The 
social variable here is age.
Socioeconomic status
Definition: Refers to a person’s social and economic position in society, often measured by 
education, occupation and income.
Example: People who live in Belgravia in London, Manhattan in New York, or Remuera in 
Auckland typically have high socioeconomic status.
Sociolinguistic competence
Definition: Knowledge of not only the linguistic code, but also how to use it appropriately, e.g. 
what to say to whom and how to say it appropriately in different situations.
Example: Growing up in Brazil, a Cahinahua child learns that a direct answer to a first 
question implies that the speaker has no time to talk, while a vague answer means that the 
question will be answered more directly the second time, and that talk can continue.
Sociolinguistic universals
Definition: Generalisations concerning the relationships between language and society which, 
it is proposed, can be applied to any speech community.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
690
Example: If a particular pronunciation or grammatical feature is used to express a shift 
in formality of style, the same feature will be used to signal differences in social group 
membership.
Sociolinguistic variable
See Linguistic variable
Sociopragmatic competence
Definition: Interpreting the social meaning conveyed by talk-​in-​interaction, and encoding 
social meaning appropriately in different social contexts.
Example: Knowing whether to interpret the use of dear in an interaction as an endearment or 
a patronising microaggression.
Speech Accommodation Theory
See Communication Accommodation Theory
Speech community
Definition: A regionally or socially definable human group, all of whose members share at 
least a single code/​variety and a set of norms and rules for its appropriate use.
Example: Italians in Aosta; Greek community in Melbourne; and French-​speaking community 
in Quebec.
Speech convergence
Definition: Ways in which speakers emphasise similarities between their speech and that of 
others. When people like the person they are talking to or wish to please them or put them 
at ease, their speech often becomes more similar: i.e. their speech converges.
Example: A travel agent in Wales using Welsh when talking to Welsh clients and English to 
English clients.
Speech divergence
Definition: Ways in which speakers emphasise differences between their speech and that of 
others. When people do not like the person they are talking to or find them irritating, 
features of their speech often become more different: i.e. their speech diverges.
Example: A number of people learning Welsh were asked to help with a survey. In their sep-
arate booths in the language laboratory, they were asked a number of questions by a 
standard English speaker. At one point this speaker arrogantly challenged the listeners’ 
reasons for learning Welsh which he called a “dying language which had a dismal future”. 
In responding to this statement, the learners generally broadened their Welsh accents. Some 
introduced Welsh words into their answers, while others used an aggressive tone.
Speech function
Definition: Purpose of utterances; reason for saying/​writing something.
Example: Communication might be expressive, directive or persuasive (e.g. an advert gener-
ally has a persuasive function).
Standard variety
Definition: Language variety which generally has a written form and which has undergone 
some degree of codification. It is the variety taught in schools and has high prestige. It is 
generally regarded by the community as the “correct” variety.
Example: Standard British English in England; and Standard American English in the USA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
691
Stereotype
Definition: In everyday language, a stereotype generally refers to a generalisation about a par-
ticular group which is usually over-​simplified, often negative, and may be inaccurate. In 
variationist sociolinguistics, a stereotype is a linguistic feature which is generally negatively 
evaluated or stigmatised. People are aware of stereotypes and generally avoid them.
Example: ain’t is a classic stereotype feature of lower class or uneducated speech in much of 
the USA. Labov’s example of a feature which is a stereotype is the pronunciation of “th” as 
[t]‌, as toity-​toid (thirty-​third) in New York City.
Style
Definition: Variation in speech features according to a range of possible aspects of the social 
context, including features of the setting and addressee(s).
Example: Conversation with friends is typically informal, while a lecture is usually more 
formal in style.
Stylisation
Definition: When someone goes beyond their usual or normal ways of speaking and behaving 
and engages in a “high” or “strong” performance of some sort;  a kind of multi-​voiced 
discourse.
Example:  The British comedian Catherine Tate when she performs an antagonistic teenage 
girl using the phrases am I bovvered? and I ain’t bovvered. Also, young white English 
teenagers when they adopt features of Indian or Panjabi English speech, “crossing” over 
into the other group momentarily for special stylistic effect.
Substrate language
See Lexifer and substrate languages
Synchronic
Definition: A synchronic study of a language is a study at a particular point in time, without 
regard for previous or succeeding states of the language.
Example: Holmes, Bell and Boyce undertook a synchronic study of the English of people 
living in an area of Greater Wellington in 1989–​90.
Syntax
Definition: The structure of sentences and the study of sentence structure.
Example: Many linguists undertake research in the area of syntax, studying features of the 
grammar of a language, such as the normal word order of components in a noun phrase 
or a sentence.
Tag questions
Definition: Forms such as isn’t it? and don’t they? which serve such functions as seeking con-
firmation or expressing uncertaintly about the preceding proposition.
Example: The train leaves at six o’clock doesn’t it? Informal tag question forms include eh? 
and right?. French has a tag question form n’est-​ce pas? and German has a tag question 
form nicht wahr?
Translanguaging
Definition: The process of fluidly using multiple semiotic resources to maximise communication.
Example: A Samoan child in a New Zealand school drawing on both Samoan and English to 
explain a maths problem to another pupil.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sociolinguistics
692
Uniplex network
Definition: A social network measure which indicates that two people interact in only one 
area of their social lives.
Example: Sue and Todd work together, but never see each other outside of work. Their social 
network is uniplex.
Variant
Also known as Sociolinguistic variant
Definition: The realisation/​expression of a (socio)linguistic variable.
Example: The variable -​ing can be realised/​expressed/​pronounced as the variant [in] or the 
variant [iŋ].
Variety (or Code)
Definition: Any set of linguistic forms which patterns according to social factors, i.e. used 
under specific social circumstances. The term includes different accents, different linguistic 
styles, different dialects and even different languages which contrast with each other for 
social reasons.
Example: In Eggenwil, a town in the Aargau canton of Switzerland, Silvia, a bank-​teller, knows 
two very distinct varieties of German. One is the local Swiss German dialect of her canton 
which she uses in her everyday interactions. The other is standard German which she learnt 
at school, and though she understands it very well indeed, she rarely uses it in speech.
Verbal (linguistic) repertoire
Definition: The range of codes or varieties available in a community from which an individual 
selects according to the social context.
Example: Kalala is 16 years old. He lives in Bukavu, a city in eastern Democratic Republic 
of the Congo (Zaire) with a population of about 220,000. It is a multicultural, multilin-
gual city with more people coming and going for work and business reasons than people 
who live there permanently. Over 40 groups speaking different languages can be found 
in the city. Kalala, like many of his friends, spends his day roaming the streets, stopping 
off periodically at regular meeting places in the marketplace, in the park or at a friend’s 
house. During the day he draws on at least three different varieties or codes from his 
verbal repertoire, and sometimes more.
Vernacular
Definition: There are at least three components of this term: (1) an uncodified or unstandardised 
variety; (2) acquired in the home; and (3) typically used for informal colloquial interaction 
with family and friends. The term is often used in ways which emphasise one or other of 
these three components. So generally refers to a language that has not been standardised 
and which has no official status, but some people extend the term to refer to any language 
which does not have official status. It is therefore sometimes used to refer to the language 
of a regional speech community, or to a language used in a monolingual community, espe-
cially when there is no written form. The term is also used to refer to the most colloquial 
variety in a person’s verbal repertoire; the variety used in the home and with close friends 
(which may be a distinct language, a dialect or a style compared to the variety used, say, in 
school). It is also sometimes used simply to indicate that a variety is used in everyday inter-
action. In popular usage the vernacular often refers to the use of swear words.
Example: Shi in Democratic Republic of the Congo (Zaire); informal English in Britain; 
Spanish in the USA but not in Spain or Uruguay; Greek in Australia but not in Greece.
 
 
 
 
 

key words AND concepts
693
Vernacularisation
Definition: Development of a language used in formal domains, such as religion, for use as a 
language of everyday communication.
Example: Hebrew was a language of ritual and religion with no native speakers. It has now 
been developed as the national language of Israel and is used in many different domains 
including casual conversation between friends and family.
Wave theory (of language change)
Definition: Metaphor to describe how the spread of a linguistic feature may propagate 
throughout a community, through its gradual introduction into new social groups by 
individuals.
Example: Linguistic changes may infiltrate groups through the speech of marginal or “middle” 
people –​ intermediaries who have contact with more than one social or regional group.
World Englishes
Definition: The terms World Englishes and New Englishes refer to the wide range of different 
varieties of English that have developed across the world since the nineteenth century.
Example: Malaysian English, Australian English, Singapore English, South African English, 
Chinese English, Irish English and New Zealand English.
 
 
 

694
Index
Note: Entries in bold denote tables; entries in italics denote figures.
AAL (African American 
Language) 260–​3, 270, 
282; attitudes to 580–​2, 
585–​6; and educational 
disadvantage 589–​90; 
and social background 
of addressee 346
Aasen, Ivar 155, 160
accent triangle 196
accents 7; discrimination 
based on 601; local 
264, 573–​4, 579, 603; 
regional and social 
variation in 189, 
196–​8, 218; and speech 
divergence 349–​51
accommodation problems 
352–​3
accommodation theory 
273, 347–​53
acquiescence bias 586
acquisition planning  
167–​9, 178–​9
address forms: appropriate 
16–​17, 402, 407; and 
backstage talk 559; 
and gender 447; and 
politeness 398
adjacency pairs 530–​4, 
560–​1, 618
adjectives: empty 426; 
feminine 447
advertisements: language 
used in 584–​5; in 
minority language 93
affective function scale 12
affective functions 319, 
621, 623–​4; code-​
switching for 47–​8, 77; 
and greeting formulas 
414; of tags 432
African Americans: in 
education 582, 589, 593; 
in gangs 273; gender 
and race 278, 595; and 
hip hop 55; and Korean 
shopkeepers 514; social 
networks of 275–​6; see 
also AAL
age, of addressee 341–​3
age differences: in Māori 
culture 485–​6; and 
politeness 404, 406; and 
social distance 341
age-​graded features of 
speech 242–​8, 253–​4, 
280, 282; and language 
change 249–​50
AI (Artificial Intelligence) 
105
allusiveness 595, 605
Alsatian dialect 46
ambiguity, intentional 
389–​90
American English 188; 
regional variations of 
190; see also MWAE
Amharic language 91–​2
animal imagery, and 
gender 453
apostrophes 171, 173
apparent-​time method 
303–​5
Arabic language: as 
official language 143; 
varieties of 34, 622;  
see also MSA
Arabic script 572
Argentina: indigenous 
languages of 90; migrant 
communities in 76
Asian languages, politeness 
devices in 511–​12
attention signals 535
Australia: migrant 
minorities in 87–​8, 90; 
uptalk in 309
Australian Aboriginal 
culture 82, 617; 
discourse patterns of 
489–​92
Australian Aboriginal 
languages 57, 82, 107, 
166; and code-​switching 
57; and colonization 
81; death of 82–​4; 
gender-​exclusive forms 
in 224–​5; grammar of 
483–​4; kinship in 486; 
and pidgins 125; unique 
aspects of 489
Australian English 189, 
260, 268
autism 473–​4
Ayapaneco language 82
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
695
Aymara language 170
Azerbaijani language 76–​7, 
85–​6, 312
baby-​talk 342–​3, 382, 451; 
as register 370
back-​channelling 511
backstage 523, 559
Bahasa Indonesia 102, 
133, 143, 148, 172, 368
Bahasa Malay 125; and 
Bahasa Indonesia 133; 
as official language 143
Baker, Paul 466, 476
Ballymacarrett 232, 271, 
274, 276, 311–​12
Baugh, John 601
Bazaar Malay 9
Belfast 232, 272; gender 
and sound change 
in 311–​12; Milroy’s 
research in 279–​80; 
silences in conversation 
522; social networks in 
271, 274
Belgium, official languages 
in 146
Bell, Allan 215
Bengali language 146, 224; 
and social status 226–​7
Ben-​Yehuda, Eliezer 160
Berber language 177
Bernstein, Basil 494
bias, unconscious 498
the Bible, translations of 
161
bidialectalism 85, 582
bilingual education 98, 
104, 627; in Quechua 
171; in Wales 92, 96
bilingualism: advantages of 
105–​6; and age 247–​8, 
250–​1; language shift 
causing 85; official 
recognition of 161; and 
Whorf’s ideas 482, 500
Bislama 37, 121, 142–​3; 
broadcasting in 166
Black British English 263–​5, 
268, 575–​7, 579, 596
Black Lives Matter 498
Black Midlands English 
264–​5
Blom, Jan-​Petter 5–​6
Bokmål: in Hemnesberget 
6, 11, 19n2, 45–​6, 68; 
and Nynorsk 153–​6, 
166–​7, 172; see also 
Norwegian language, 
forms of
Bolinger, Dwight 452
boosters 428–​9, 432, 460
Boyce, Mary 215
Brasília 242, 274
Brazil 83, 117, 118, 223
bricolage 364
British English 188; 
gendered titles in 466; 
politeness in 402–​4, 
403; regional varieties 
of 189–​91; in Singapore 
116; standard 112, 198, 
307, 577–​8; see also 
Black British English; 
MLE
Broome Pearling Luggers 
Pidgin 125–​6
Buang language 110, 131; 
and code-​switching 51
Bukavu 23, 24, 29; code 
choice in 31–​2, 67; 
code-​switching in 45; 
polyglossia in 39
bullying 542, 544
Bumbar language 110
CA (Conversation 
Analysis) 524, 530–​3,  
555–​6, 561, 618; 
and CDA 543; and 
conversational feedback 
534–​6; interruptions 
and overlaps 536–​40; 
keeping to the text 
540–​2
Cameron, David 383
Cameron, Deborah 439, 
462, 473–​4, 601
Cameroon Pidgin English 
123, 124, 130, 136
camp talk 450, 452
Canada: French dialect 
of 188; French-​English 
code choice in 56–​7,  
59, 525; language 
attitudes in 571; 
migrant languages 
in 86, 92; official 
languages in 146
Cantonese language: and 
code-​switching 45–​6, 69; 
and language shift 102; 
in Singapore 30, 39
Capiznon 168, 178
cartoons, and language 
features 207, 446, 482, 
584
caste dialects 199–​200, 
202
casual style 238, 300,  
355–​7, 366, 381, 401, 
614; see also vernacular 
style
Catalan language 194, 349
CDA (Critical Discourse 
Analysis) 499, 542, 
556; components of 
analysis 551, 562–​3; and 
ideology 547–​52; memes 
on 554; and power 
543–​6
Cebuano language 148
Central Africa 150
Charmey 309
Cherokee language 88
Cheshire, Jenny 240–​1, 
252, 356
children: code-​switching 
by 621; and directive 
utterances 392–​5, 400; 
style of addressing  
342–​3, 348
Chile 82–​3, 110
Chiles, Tina 466
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
696
China: Cultural Revolution 
in 474–​5; promotion of 
Mandarin in 167–​8
Chinese languages 30, 
194–​5; in migrant 
communities 90; in 
Singapore 167
Chinese Pidgin 132
Chiquitano language 224
Chomsky, Noam 611
Clark, Helen 242–​3, 579
Clonard 274, 276, 311–​12
Coates, Jennifer 442, 540
Cockney: distinctive 
features of 189–​90; and 
Estuary English 197; 
and Milton Keynes 
koine 295; and MLE 
333
code choice 26, 28–​32, 29, 
67, 262–​3, 339
code-​meshing 53
code-​mixing see 
metaphorical 
code-​switching
code-​switching 621; 
attitudes to 59–​60, 131; 
as contextualisation 
cue 527; linguistic 
constraints on 56–​9; 
and social group 
membership 625–​6; and 
translanguaging 60–​1, 
63–​4; types of 42–​54
codification 112–​13; of 
national languages 149, 
151, 176; of Norwegian 
varieties 154–​5; of 
orthography  
160–​3
cognition 476, 481, 488, 
493–​4, 616
cognitive limitations 478, 
488, 494
colloquial style see 
vernacular style
Colombia 117, 118, 223
colour commentary 371
colour terms 426; in 
different languages  
478–​81; in women’s 
language 426
colours, association of 498
communicative events: 
analysing 521; 
components of 516–​20
communities of practice 
276–​7, 558–​9
confidence, and women’s 
language 424–​5, 427–​9
consonant clusters 123, 
262, 344, 378
contextualisation cues 
525–​8, 530, 618
conversation, basic model 
of 537
conversational feedback 
271, 440, 534–​6
conversational maxims 
507–​8
cooperative conversation 
237, 440–​1
copula verb 261
Cornish language 82
corpus analysis 65, 459, 
476
corpus data 173, 320
corpus planning 149, 167, 
178
Coupland, Nikolas 157
court cases, linguistic 
strategies in 596–​7, 599–​
600, 605–​6
covert prestige 68, 235, 
315, 334, 572–​5; of 
regional accents 579
COVID-​19 pandemic 
83, 279, 283; new 
vocabulary around 320
creoles 57, 119, 126, 612; 
attitudes to 131, 571; 
functions of 130–​1; 
origins and endings of 
133–​4; status of 137; 
structural features of 
127–​30
creolisation 128, 131, 294, 
497
Critical Discourse Studies 
542–​3
cultural context 411, 510, 
515
cultural norms 413, 528, 
558, 562
culture: and discourse 
patterns 489–​92; 
embodied in language 
485–​90; use of term 
482, 500
culture order 497, 617
Cuna Indians 521
Danish language 148,  
154–​6, 194, 569
DAR (definite article 
reduction) 313, 325
de Jong, Pia 429
declaratives 391, 394, 426
decreolisation 133–​4, 137
definite article, pre-​vocalic 
570–​1
Democratic Republic 
of the Congo: lingua 
franca in 118; linguistic 
repertoires in 23–​4, 25, 
41, 109, 611; national 
and official languages of 
143–​4
derogatory terms 59, 
474–​6
Desano language 223
determiner deletion 17, 
345, 379
Detroit: AAL in 261; 
grammatical patterns 
in 212, 213; multiple 
negation in 253, 262, 
282; pronunciation 
changes in 319–​20
Dhimotiki 33–​4, 40, 102
dialect chains 193–​4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
697
dialect contact 294, 322
dialects: linguistic 
variation between 4, 
6–​7; representation in 
novels 584
diglossia 32–​7; and 
bilingualism 36, 37; 
changes in 40–​1; 
extending scope of 38, 
42; and formality 622; 
and language shift 85; 
and politeness styles  
368
directive utterances  
388–​97, 417–​18
discourse, use of term 505
discourse analysis 504–​5,  
555, 617–​18; and 
forensic linguistics 599
discourse markers 384, 
532, 537, 546
discourse moves 526
discourse norms 504, 
528–​9
discourse patterns 489–​92, 
497
discrimination 582, 601, 
616
discursive psychology 505, 
557
domain compartmental­
isation 101
domain-​based approach 
30, 66
domains of language use 
25, 26–​7, 66; and code 
choice 28–​32
the dozens 281
Dumézil, George 487
Dyirbal language 84,  
89, 111, 135, 483,  
484, 497
Eades, Diana 490, 599
East Anglia 218, 300–​1
Eastenders 315
Ebonics see AAL
Eckert, Penelope 35, 194, 
241, 276, 279, 281, 319, 
364
-​ed, deletion of 303
education, and variations 
in pronunciation 209
educational documents, 
language used in 584
educational testing 591–​5
Eggenwil 32–​3, 38
Ehrlich, Susan 599
elderly people, style of 
addressing 343
elocution classes 572–​3
embedded language 56
emblematic code-​switching 
44
emoji 379, 555, 563
emoticons 369, 383
emotional tone 516
endearments: and intimacy 
15, 17, 354; and 
politeness 402, 509, 
511; and social identity 
335
endonormative 
stabilisation 307
England: dialect 
boundaries of 191, 192; 
h-​dropping in 203–​4; 
social variation in 
195–​7, 196; vernacular 
grammatical patterns in 
214
English language: attitudes 
to vernacular forms 
579–​83; British regional 
pronunciations 48; 
change over time 287; 
as creole 131; and 
diglossia 34; and French 
40; as global lingua 
franca 492–​3; Graeco-​
Latin vocabulary in 
594; inner, outer and 
expanding circles 115, 
134–​5; as language 
killer 79, 81, 84, 88; 
and migrant minorities 
74–​5; minority language 
children’s practices with 
61–​3, 69–​70; national 
pride in 147; as official 
language 143–​5, 174; 
regional variations of 
114–​16, 186–​93; and 
sexism 452–​5; social 
variations in 201–​6, 205, 
211; spelling system 
19n1; standard versions 
see standard Englishes; 
in Tanzania 151; in 
Timor-​Leste 157–​8; 
see also New Englishes; 
World Englishes
Estonia 146
Estuary English 197
ethnic group membership 
48, 172
ethnicity 185, 251–​2, 
258; and code choice 
44, 262–​3; signalling in 
language 258–​60
ethnography of speaking 
515–​20, 555, 618; and 
CA 540–​1; insiders and 
outsiders in 521–​2;  
and interactional 
sociolinguistics 524
ethnolects 269–​71
ethnolinguistic vitality 93
euphemisms 426, 460, 474
Evans, Nick 488
exonormative stabilisation 
307
explicitness 501, 595, 605
expressive utterances  
388–​9, 417
extended interaction 335
eyebrows, raised 527, 561
face sensitivities 513
Facebook 65, 100, 104, 
283, 378
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
698
face-​to-​face interaction 
284, 314, 316, 400
facilitative tag 561
Fairclough, Norman 556
Farsi language 76–​7, 85; 
Tehran variety of 210, 
366
feedback, cultural 
differences in 535–​6
femininity: indices of 447, 
616; and standard forms 
236
Ferguson, Charles 33
fillers 426–​7
fine stratification 216
first names: and intimacy 
354; of parents 16; and 
politeness 402, 404–​7, 
419–​20; and status 11, 
227, 624–​5
Fishman, Joshua 26, 522, 
558
Flores, Renata 169
Floyd, George 582
food, and politeness 
412–​13
foreigner talk 343, 348
forensic linguistics 545, 
569, 595–​9
formal contexts 41; and 
directive utterances 392; 
H languages in 140; 
and language choice 
104; and politeness 408; 
pronunciation in 362; 
standard forms used 
in 225, 238; and style 
353–​4
formal interviews, speech 
forms in 237–​8
formality scale 10, 12, 610, 
622–​4; and code choice 
31–​2; and code-​switching 
45; and vernacular 
languages 136
formulas, in sports 
commentary 373–​4
Foucault, Michel 505
Francoprovençal 36
French language: in 
Belgium 146; in 
Canada 146–​7; and 
code-​switching 46; 
and diglossia 33, 
35–​6, 40–​1, 54; English 
borrowings from 308; 
gendered forms in 458; 
international status of 
89; as official language 
143, 177; Quebec 
variety of 571; regional 
variations of 188–​9, 
193–​4; social variations 
in pronunciation 210; 
sound change in 301, 
302, 322, 323
Friulian language 8, 29
frontstage 523, 559
functional dimension 377
functional scales 10, 12, 
610, 623
fused lect 53, 59
Gaelic see Scottish Gaelic
Gal, Susan 274
gangs: and educational 
testing 594–​5; and 
multiple negation  
212–​13; and ritual 
insults 514; and soundin’ 
270–​1; and vernacular 
forms 247, 273
gay speech 363, 450
gaze 534, 541, 552
gender: assigning to 
objects 357–​8; and 
directive utterances 395; 
and generic forms  
454–​5, 465; and 
interaction 436–​41; and 
language change  
309–​13, 324; and 
politeness devices 
431–​6, 511; as social 
construction 446, 
448, 464; and social 
networks 274–​6; and 
speech convergence 
352; and standard and 
vernacular forms  
228–​42, 615; use of 
term 222; and verbal 
skills 595, 605; and 
vocal pitch 242–​3; 
see also women's 
language
gender differences, 
interpreting 462
gender identity 172, 
217, 424; linguistic 
construction of 446–​8, 
460, 616; and speech 
variation 229, 240–​1, 
278
gender order 451, 459, 
615–​16
gender roles 86, 129, 225, 
227, 233
gender-​diverse people 457, 
472
gender-​exclusive speech 
forms 222–​7
gender-​preferential speech 
features 227–​8
genre analysis 505, 557
German language: and 
code-​switching 49–​50; 
and diglossia 38, 54; in 
Sauris 8
Germany, ethnolects in 
270
gestures 60, 521; as 
contextualisation cues 
527; inability to see 
284; in interactional 
linguistics 541
Gilliéron, Jules 194
Glasgow: dialect and social 
identity in 329–​31, 336; 
pronunciation changes 
in 315–​16
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
699
Global Corpus of Web-​
based English 217
globalisation, and language 
shift 98–​9
glottalisation 240, 333
Goffman, Ervine 523
Google Books Ngram 
corpus 320
gossip 12, 442–​7
government documents, 
language used in 584
graffiti 382; and minority 
languages 93, 99–​101
grammar, linguistic 
variation in 4–​5
grammar teaching 583
grammatical patterns 186; 
and language loss 84; 
social variation in  
211–​13, 212, 214
grammatical variation 6, 
198, 321
Greek language: diglossia 
in 33–​4, 40–​1; 
international status 
of 89; , in migrant 
communities 90–​1, 
368; as vernacular 110; 
writing system of 160
greeting routines 271, 
413–​15
Grice, Paul 507–​8
Guaraní language 27–​8, 
140–​3, 173, 175, 621
Gujarati language 74–​5, 
90, 109, 135, 263
Gumperz, John 6, 61, 522, 
524–​5, 558
Guyanese Creole 133
Haiti: diglossia in 33, 
35–​7, 40; national and 
official languages of 144
Haitian Creole 33, 35–​7, 
131–​3, 144, 612, 622
Halliday, Michael 390
Harris, Kamala 263
hate speech 496, 498
Hawaiian language 603–​4
h-​dropping 11, 203–​8, 
204, 216–​17; in casual 
style 381; and gender 
228; in MLE 333; in 
North of England 252
Hebrew language: as 
official language 143, 
176; revival of 92, 
94, 99, 102, 153; 
vernacularisation of 111, 
160, 164
hedges 426–​9, 432–​4, 
446–​7, 460, 508–​9,  
536
Hemnesberget 5–​6, 7, 11, 
14, 19n2;  
code-​switching in 45–​6, 
59; diglossia in 68
hesitation markers 509
heuristic function 390
Hindi language 54, 317; 
in Fiji 49; as official 
language 143
Hindustani language 
109–​10
hip hop 55
Hiri Motu language 118
Hixkaryana language 488
Hokkien language 30, 39, 
167
Holliday, Nicole 263
homogeneity, linguistic 
462
Hopi language 477–​8, 481
HRT (high rising terminal) 
see uptalk
Hull, vernacular speech 
forms in 213, 214, 219, 
249, 254
humour: backstage 559; 
and politeness 401; and 
verbal hygiene 470, 474
Hungarian language, in 
Oberwart 49–​50, 77–​8, 
101, 274
Hymes, Dell 516, 522, 
558, 611
hypercorrection 360–​2, 
426
Iceland 37, 314
identity 329, 376–​7; and 
language change 614
identity construction 64, 
330–​6; ethnic 260; as 
function of interaction  
398–​400; and stylistic 
choices 364
ideologies 451, 465, 542–​
3, 547–​51, 613
Igbo proverbs 510
Ilocano language 148
imperatives 17, 99, 391–​7
implicatures 507–​8
imposition, the ranking of 
the 509
indexicality 331, 332, 
334–​5
India 318; multilingualism 
in 79, 99, 109; official 
languages of 143; 
official languages of 
182n1; social dialects 
in 199
Indian English 114, 268, 
306, 333
Indian languages: caste 
variations in 199; 
contact-​induced 
similarities of 317–​19; 
lexical borrowing into 
54
indicators 362–​3
Indigenous languages: 
of Canada 146; and 
colonialism 79–​81; 
death of 82–​3;  
gender-​exclusive forms 
in 222–​4; in Latin 
America 140; and 
natural environment 
484, 488; revival of 94
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
700
Indonesia: national 
language of 148; social 
dialects in 199
Indonesian language see 
Bahasa Indonesia
Indoubil 24, 31–​2, 45
inflections 54, 56, 122–​3, 
127, 319
informal interviews, 
questions for 256–​7
information, requests for 
339
-​ing (suffix) 205–​6, 
216–​17, 227; and age 
245–​6; as marker 362; 
and social identity 278, 
334–​5
insecurity, linguistic 361
insults, ritual 271, 281, 
514, 517
intensifiers, in women’s 
language 426, 446, 460
interaction, as performance 
523
interactional linguistics 
541, 552
interactional 
sociolinguistics 524–​30, 
555, 560, 562, 618; and 
CA 541–​2
intermarriage, and 
language shift 87–​8, 91, 
102–​3
International Mother 
Language Day 146
interrogatives 391, 393–​4, 
509
interrupting behaviour 
437–​9, 438, 441, 462–​3
interruptions: CA on  
536–​40; disruptive 462, 
505, 539, 561
inter-​sentential code-​
switching 57
intertextuality 554–​5
interviews: after-​match 376, 
383–​4; different styles 
within 354–​6; see also 
formal interviews; police 
interviews
intimate talk 451
intonation contour 375, 
532
intra-​sentential code-​
switching 56
Iran, language shift in  
76–​7, 85–​6, 312
Irish language 79, 89; 
standardisation of 156
-​ish 429
Italian language 193–​4; in 
Sauris 8
Italian migrant 
communities 260
Jamaican Creole: and 
Black British English 
264–​5; and code-​
switching 47–​8; and 
MLE 333; see also 
Patois
Japan 226, 365; multilingual 
signage in 94
Japanese language: gender-​
exclusive forms in 225; 
politeness styles in 341, 
365–​6
jargon 348, 370
Jaru language 57–​8
Java 367
Javanese language 148, 
626; politeness styles in 
367–​8, 407; social status 
in 199, 200
Jeantel, Rachel 582
Jewish Americans 260, 281
Johnson, Samuel 159–​60
jokes 449, 470
Juba Arabic 122
Kachru, Braj 114–​15
kangaroo, Kunwinjku 
terms for 484
Kannada language 199, 317
Katharévousa 33–​4, 40–​1
kava-​drinking 515–​18
Kerswill, Paul 19
Kiezdeutsch 270, 296
killer languages 79
Kina, Robyn 489–​92, 497, 
596
Kingwana 23–​4, 29, 31, 
45, 611–​12
kinship terms 404–​5, 486
kōhanga reo 168
koineisation 294
koines 273, 294–​6, 322
Korean language, 
politeness styles in 366
Kozlowski, Martin 553–​4
Kriol 57–​8, 127
Kunwinjku language 484, 
488
Kupwar 317–​19
Kwakiutl language 483
l, post-​vocalic 305
Labov, William: on 
asymmetrical interviews 
605; and covert prestige 
573–​4; eliciting styles 
204–​5, 355–​6; and 
Martha’s Vineyard 
pronunciation 292–​3; 
and post-​vocalic r 
206, 291, 303, 360; on 
speech communities 522, 
558; on stereotypes, 
markers and indicators 
362–​3; and vowel 
pronunciation 208
Labovian methodology 
355
Lakoff, Robin: features of 
women’s language  
425–​9, 431–​2, 451, 460, 
462, 469n1; politeness 
rules 508, 557
Landsmål see Nynorsk
language: basic functions 
of 319; social functions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
701
of 1–​2; variations 
between 9
language academies 113, 
160
language attitudes 568–​72, 
619; collecting data 
on 574–​5, 584–​8; 
and ethnic minorities 
575–​7; and identity 
construction 335; and 
indexicality 331
language change 280, 
287–​8, 614, 624; and 
age-​grading 248–​50; 
apparent-​time studies 
of 302–​4; comments 
on in-​progress 321; 
contact-​induced 306–​7; 
economic factors and 
119; first-​ and second-​
wave approaches to 
studying 319–​20; and 
gender 309–​13; and 
interaction 313–​19; and 
language variation  
288–​97; pidgins and 
creoles and 130; 
progress of 300; in real 
time 305–​6; and social 
status 308–​9; spread of 
297–​302, 298–​9; and 
value changes 625; and 
variations 216
language choice: and 
identity 329; social 
influences on 4, 10–​12, 
14–​15, 24–​6; see also 
code choice
language death 74, 82–​4; 
attitudes to 492–​3
language ideology 157, 569
language loss 84; costs of 
487–​9
language maintenance 87, 
89–​93; and acquisition 
planning 169–​71; 
collecting information 
on 99; dimensions for 
analysing 97, 98; factors 
contributing to 103
language ownership 36
language planning: 
collecting data for  
172–​3; linguists’ role in 
159–​68, 171–​2; steps in 
149
language reclamation 83
language revival 94
language shift: and 
colonialism 79–​81, 83; 
dimensions in analysing 
97; factors contributing 
to 85–​9; and language 
death 82–​5; and migrant 
minorities 74–​5; in  
non-​migrant communities 
76–​7; relative speed of 
612; and technological 
change 105
language skills, scale for 
65–​6
language styles 41–​2
language variation 8, 
14, 185; over time see 
language change
Larrosa, Reinaldo Decoud 
140
Latin alphabet 146, 572
Latin language 33; 
church use of 111, 116; 
influence on English 
361, 381
l-​deletion 188, 210, 213; 
and gender 227
leakage 31
legal text 382
levelling 197, 295
Lewis, Moira 589
lexical borrowing 54
lexical diffusion 301
lexicographers 160, 173
lexifier languages 125, 132, 
136–​7, 176; English as 
122, 128, 134
Li Wei 60
Lingala language 23, 144
lingua francas 116–​18; 
MSA as 34; in Papua 
New Guinea 51; pidgins 
as 131; Swahili as 23; 
in Vanuatu 37; and 
vernacular languages 
612
linguistic capital 232–​3
linguistic competence 175, 
611
linguistic deficit 582, 591–​2
linguistic determinism 478, 
494
linguistic distinctiveness 119
linguistic diversity 109–​10; 
within languages 172
linguistic landscapes 76, 
93, 101, 157, 584
linguistic profiling 591
linguistic relativity 478–​9
linguistic repertoire 9, 
23–​4, 25; of different 
generations 611–​12
linguistic variation 3–​9; 
explanations of 13–​14; 
social dimensions of  
10–​13; social factors in 10
linguistic varieties, research 
methods for 134
link-​persons 315–​16
local dialect 6, 10, 35, 40, 
49, 59, 418
London, Greater 266
Luxembourg 53–​4, 93
Luxembourgish language 
54
Lyons, John 522, 558
Madagascar 435, 436, 445
majority groups: 
differentiating from 
260, 282; migrant 79; 
pressure for language 
shift from 88; social 
reality of 497
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
702
Malagasy community 436, 
445, 508
Malay language see Bahasa 
Malay
Malaysia: code-​switching 
in 59; linguistic 
repertoires 9
Malaysian English 282, 
306
Maltese language, in 
Australia 87
Mandarin Chinese 30, 
172; and code-​switching 
44–​5, 47; government 
promotion of 167; in 
Singapore 39
Manx language 82
Mao Zedong 474–​5
Māori culture: humility in 
529; and language  
485–​6, 501
Māori discourse norms 
and rules 562
Māori English 267–​8, 283, 
511
Māori greeting routines 
271, 414
Māori language: attitudes 
to 585–​6; broadcasting in 
166; and code-​switching 
43–​4, 47; dialects of 190; 
education in 168; kinship 
terms 485–​6, 501; and 
language shift 79–​81,  
85–​8; lexical 
borrowing from 54; 
as official language 
145; orthography of 
161–​3; revival of 94; 
and speech divergence 
349; survival in isolated 
areas 313; varieties of 42; 
vocabulary development 
164–​5
Māori Language 
Commission 81, 163–​6, 
177
Mapuche language 82–​3, 
110
Marathi language 54, 109, 
317
markers 362
Martha’s Vineyard 292–​3, 
300, 305–​6, 311
Martin, Trayvon 582
Martuthunira language 83
masculinity: social 
construction 615–​16; 
and vernacular forms 
235–​6, 331, 336
matched guise technique 
577, 586, 603
McWhorter, John 493
medium of expression 17
memes 552–​6
men’s interactions 443–​4, 
463
metalinguistic utterances 
388
metaphorical code-​
switching 42, 51–​3, 350, 
380
methods 65, 99, 134, 172, 
217, 251, 280, 320, 377, 
416, 459, 498, 556, 602
Mexican Americans, and 
code-​switching 44, 59
microaggressions 439, 457, 
498, 601–​2, 606
migrant communities, and 
language shift 74–​6, 
86–​7
Mihaka, Dun 145
Milroy, Lesley 272,  
279–​80, 356
Milton Keynes: koine of 
294–​5; social networks 
in 273; vernacular 
speech forms in 213, 
214, 249, 254
minimal feedback 511
minimal pairs 355, 360
minimal response signals 
541, 561
minority languages: 
children’s practices with 
60–​3, 69–​70; domains 
used in 101; factors 
in maintenance and 
shift 97, 98–​9, 102–​3; 
indigenous 76–​85; 
institutional support for 
92, 104; migrant 74–​6; 
as official languages 
146; researching 100; 
signage in 93–​4; social 
attitudes to 88–​9, 
103, 105; and speech 
divergence 349; see also 
language maintenance; 
language shift; 
vernacular language
miscommunication 335; 
and cultural differences 
411, 497, 555, 598; and 
gender differences 441, 
463; and interactional 
sociolinguistics 527–​9, 
619
missionaries, and 
orthographic 
codification 161–​2
MLE (Multicultural 
London English) 265–​7, 
270, 333–​4, 576–​7, 579; 
pronunciation of 316; 
quotative form in 296, 
325
MLF (matrix language 
frame) 56
modal particles 511
modal verbs, and 
politeness 391, 509,  
511
moeity membership 486
Moldavia 146
Montreal: bilingualism and 
age in 247–​8, 250–​1; 
l-​deletion in 188, 210, 
227
Morocco 159
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
703
MSA (Modern Standard 
Arabic) 34–​5, 118, 174, 
177
multilingual speech 
communities 14, 
558, 611; collecting 
information on 65; 
domains of use in 28; 
role switching and 
code-​switching 45; 
stylistic variation in 377; 
vernaculars in 380
multimodal analysis 552–​6
multiple negation 212, 
213, 216, 219; and 
age 245–​6, 247; and 
ethnicity 262; and 
gender 230–​1, 241, 253; 
for Jocks and Burnouts 
277, 283
multiplex networks 272, 
276, 312
Murtha, Reon 373–​4
MWAE (Mainstream 
White American English) 
269, 577, 580–​2, 
589–​90
national languages 140–​2, 
174–​5, 612; and official 
languages 143–​4; 
planning for 148–​9, 153; 
political importance of 
147–​8
Native American languages 
477, 483, 617
nativisation 307
Navajo language 81, 161, 
166, 479, 487
negative concord see 
multiple negation
negative politeness 402, 
436, 492,  
509–​12, 615, 621–​2, 
625–​6
Negerhollands 133
network plexity 272
New Caledonia, indigenous 
languages of 160
New Englishes 114, 268–​9; 
pattern of development 
307
New York City 190; covert 
prestige in 573; gang 
members in 247; post-​
vocalic r in 220, 290–​1, 
299, 303, 308, 360,  
361; social variation in  
204–​8, 207
New Zealand 80; 
colloquial style in 358; 
language shift in 80–​1; 
migrant communities 
in 86–​8, 90–​2; official 
languages in 145; radio 
newsreaders in 344, 345; 
see also Māori language
New Zealand English 
54, 160; age-​graded 
pronunciation features 
248, 253; attitudes to 
accent 578–​9; indicators 
in 363; Māori features 
in 259, 267, 511; as 
New English 268; 
pronunciation change 
over time 289, 293, 301; 
pronunciation variations 
in 208–​9
New Zealand Sign 
Language 145, 174
newspapers, intended 
audience of 345, 379
newsreaders 81, 344–​5, 
380
Nicaraguan Sign Language 
130
Njamal language 486
non-​binary individuals 
424, 457
non-​essential words 434, 
461
non-​verbal communication 
335, 420, 516, 527
Norwegian language: 
code-​switching in 45–​6, 
49, 68, 368; forms of 6, 
19n2; planning of  
166–​7; standard 
varieties of 153–​6
Norwich: covert prestige in 
573; gender and social 
class in 229, 232, 242; 
grammatical patterns 
in 212; pronunciation 
changes in 303, 306, 
308–​9, 311, 315–​16; 
pronunciations in 203, 
204, 205, 303; social 
background of addressee 
347; social class and 
style in 359
noun classes 483, 484
noun modification, heavy 
372–​3
numbers, names for 479, 
480
Nynorsk 153–​6, 160, 166, 
172, 174
Oberwart 49, 50; language 
shift in 77, 78, 86, 102, 
311, 324; social networks 
in 274
objects, animation of 
357–​8
observer’s paradox 355, 
378
official languages 144, 
174, 612; attitudes to 
571; creoles as 131, 133; 
in DR Congo 23; in 
Ethiopia 91; in Greece 
40; Russian as 118; on 
social dimensions  
621–​2; Spanish as 90, 
110, 143; Tok Pisin as 
51–​2, 119
orthography, codification 
of 160–​1
Osmanian script 572
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
704
overlap 252, 378, 524, 
535–​6; and interruptions 
462–​3, 505, 536–​40, 
561; transcriptions of 
541
overt prestige 199, 235, 
572–​3, 578
p, glottalised 240
Pamaka language 44–​5, 
64, 70, 134
Panjabi language 59, 90, 
175, 263
Papua New Guinea (PNG) 
37, 51, 52, 127; code-​
switching in 59–​60; 
lingua franca in 117–​18; 
vernacular languages in 
110
Paraguay: code-​switching 
in 45, 49; diglossia 
in 38, 68; domains of 
language use 27, 28; 
national and official 
languages of 140–​3
paralinguistic features 69, 
399, 540, 560
paralinguistic resources 
60, 63
passive voice 549
Patois 281; attitudes to 
575–​6, 579; and Black 
British English 264–​5; 
and code-​switching 
47–​8; and educational 
disadvantage 589
patronisation 343, 352, 
471, 543, 550–​1, 602, 
616
Pawley, Andy 356
perception, and language 
471–​82, 484, 496–​7, 
617
personal ads 451, 460
phatic utterances 388–​9, 
417, 463
Philippine English 306
Philippines, national 
language of 148, 168, 
177–​8
phonetic symbols 19n1
pidginisation 131
pidgins 119–​22, 612; 
attitudes to 124, 571; 
and creoles 126, 128, 
130–​1; lifecycle and 
origins of 125; linguistic 
structure of 122–​4, 123; 
origins of 132–​3; and 
referential function 623; 
status of 137
plagiarism, detecting  
596–​7, 603
play-​by-​play description 
371, 374
poetic utterances 388
police interviews 596, 
598–​9
politeness 387, 614–​15; 
and address forms 
400–​8, 403; and 
conversational maxims 
508–​10; in different 
cultures 411–​13, 420; 
interpreting 408–​10, 
420; in Japanese 
225, 341, 365–​6; 
and Lakoff’s features 
431–​4, 436; and rapport 
management 510–​15; 
and speech functions 
397–​8
politeness devices 511, 626
politeness theory 505, 
508–​11
political correctness 472–​5
polyglossia 39, 41
Polynesian culture 415, 527
polysemy 124
Poplack, Shana 56–​7
Portuguese language: in 
Brazil 274; in migrant 
communities 28, 146; 
and pidgins 120, 125, 
132; in Timor-​Leste 
157–​8
positive politeness 402, 
431–​2, 434, 436, 492, 
509–​10, 512, 621
possession, semantic 
categories of 487, 501
post-​creole continuum 133
power relationships 459, 
542–​7, 556, 563
powerless forms 429
Pragji, Usha 203
pragmatic hedges 560
pragmatic particles 217, 
283, 379, 447
pragmatics 505–​6, 555, 
617; cross-​cultural 515
pre-​closing formula 421, 
535
prestige: in Belfast 311; 
in diglossia 35, 68; of 
dominant languages 
81, 83, 89; of English 
114; of French 177; 
of Hebrew 176; and 
language attitudes 569; 
and the media 316; 
of national languages 
153; of pidgins 124–​5, 
131; of post-​vocalic r 
290–​1, 295, 319, 360; 
and social status 308; 
of Swahili 151, 175; 
see also covert prestige; 
overt prestige
prestige forms: and age 
247–​8, 303; and gender 
309–​10, 324, 578; as 
linguistic capital 232; 
RP as 209
prestige planning 149, 167, 
172, 180, 208, 310, 360
prestige varieties 38; in 
pidgins 122
problem pages 472
pronouns: and CDA  
549–​51, 563; in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
705
directives 395–​6; and 
gender 225–​6, 252,  
455–​7; tu-​vous 
distinction in 369, 382, 
407, 419, 511
pronunciation: attitudes 
to 568–​71; change 
over time in 287–​94; 
collecting data on 
252; convergence and 
divergence 353; as 
linguistic variation 4–​5; 
linguistic variation in 5, 
321; regional variations 
in 193; and social 
background of addressee 
344–​6; social variation 
in 202–​11, 205, 207, 
209
Puttenham, George 
111–​12
Quebec 146, 188, 571
Quechua language 170, 
171, 178–​9
queer, use of term 449
quotative forms 296, 317, 
325
r, post-​vocalic 221n3: and 
formal context 362; 
and hypercorrection 
360–​1; introduction to 
New York 308; in New 
Zealand 321, 350; and 
social group 206, 207; 
spread and status 290–​1, 
299
race-​calling 370, 373–​4, 
375
racist language 496, 543
Rampton, Ben 351
Ranamål 6; see also 
Norwegian language, 
forms of
rapport management  
510–​11, 513–​14
Reading: gender variations 
in 240–​1; post-​vocalic r 
in 206, 207; vernacular 
speech forms in 213, 
214, 249, 254
reading style 360, 366–​7
redundancies 461
referee design 350
referential code-​switching 
46–​7
referential function scale 
12
referential information 
17–​18
referential meaning 48, 97, 
104, 319, 431, 616, 623
referential utterances  
388–​9, 417, 623
regional dialects, and 
accents 218
regional variation 186–​95,  
198; collecting 
information on 217
registers 339–​40, 362, 
370–​6, 614
relative status 11; and 
accommodation 295; 
and code choice 32; and 
directive utterances 392, 
395; and gender 459; 
and politeness levels 
148, 366, 368, 401, 404, 
407
relaxed speech 356; 
eliciting 252
rhetoric 48, 543, 551
rhotic accents 290, 321
rising intonation 296, 426, 
431, 490, 534, 538; 
see also uptalk
Riskin, Jessica 478
r-​less accents 568–​9
Romaine, Suzanne 124, 
481
Romance languages: 
dialect chains of 193–​4; 
standard versions of 113
Roper River Creole 127
routines, in sports 
commentaries 373
RP (Received 
Pronunciation) 195–​7; 
and age 244; attitudes 
to 578–​9; insulting 234; 
and local accents 209, 
308–​9, 311, 316, 573; 
reactions to 348, 352
Rubin, Joan 27
rudeness, deliberate 409, 
514–​15
Russian language 118
Sabir (lingua franca) 132
SAE (Standard American 
English) see MWAE
Samnorsk 155
Samoan culture: and non-​
verbal communication 
420–​1; and politeness 
devices 436
Samoan language: and 
code-​switching 52–​3; 
orthography of 161–​2
Sapir, Edward 279, 477
Sapir-​Whorf hypothesis 
478
Saudi Arabia 253
Sauris 8, 9, 11; diglossia 
in 38; language shift 
in 102; model for code 
choice in 29
Scandinavian languages 
194, 569–​70
schemas 528, 559–​60
Schneider, Edgar 307, 324
schools, and language shift 
75
Scottish English 186, 260, 
316
Scottish Gaelic 44, 79, 
104, 313, 571
Scouse 189, 308, 363
second language learning 
602, 615, 627
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
706
semiotic resources 60, 63, 
69–​70
settler colonies 269
sex, use of term 222
sexist language 452–​7, 
464–​5, 470–​2, 496, 498, 
543, 616; alternatives to 
472–​3
sexuality, linguistic 
construction of  
449–​52, 616
sharp stratification  
212–​13, 216
Shi language 23–​4, 41, 45, 
172
Shuy, Roger 236
side sequences 533, 561
signage: bilingual 161, 
163; top-​down and 
bottom-​up 157, 159
simplification 133, 295, 
322; of consonant 
clusters 231, 262, 304, 
344
Singapore: bilingualism in 
99; Chinese ethnicity in 
259; linguistic repertoire 
in 31, 66–​7; Mandarin 
Chinese in 167; 
polyglossia in 39
Singapore English 30–​1, 
268–​9, 281–​2, 307, 324; 
diglossia in 39; see also 
Singlish
Singlish 114, 269, 586
sing-​song intonation 
342–​3
situational code-​switching 
43, 46, 368
slang 613–​14; and age 
244–​5; apparent-​time 
analysis of 303; changes 
over time in 289
slippage 464
social backgrounds 2, 5, 
16; of addressee 344–​6; 
and code choice 172, 
199, 203, 216; and 
gender 237
social changes 77, 311, 
457, 497
social class: cognition and 
language 493–​6; and 
educational testing  
591–​4; and ethnicity 
263; and gender 
228–​42; and language 
variation 201–​2, 205, 
217; and style 358–​61
social constructionist 
approach 277, 424, 470, 
492, 500, 615
social contexts: and 
creoles 133, 264; and 
linguistic variation 1–​2, 
4, 7, 9–​10, 12, 14, 17, 
387; markers of 362; in 
non-​English speaking 
societies 364, 367; and 
speech functions 416; 
and style 367; women’s 
sensitivity to 239
social dialect interviews 
229, 237–​9, 320
social dialect research: 
first wave 251, 278; and 
gender 425
social dialects 197–​215, 
218; and age 245–​6; 
collecting information 
on 217, 251–​2; and 
gender difference 232,  
237–​8; methodology for 
studying 215–​16
social dimensions 10–​13, 
31–​2, 610,  
620–​4; and politeness 
387, 392, 399, 412, 416
social distance: and code 
choice 31–​2, 45, 52, 
69, 77; and directive 
utterances 392, 395; 
factors determining 
341; in interviews 252; 
and politeness 401–​2, 
404–​6, 408, 412, 625–​6; 
and standard speech 
forms 239; and women’s 
language 434
social distance dimension 
10–​11, 44, 509, 610, 
613, 621
social distancing 18
social group membership 
359–​60, 364, 366–​7, 
369, 613, 625
social identities 1–​2; and 
code-​switching 64, 70; 
construction of 276–​9, 
446–​7, 470; language 
signalling 185–​7; and 
vernacular languages 
136
social information 3–​4, 14
social meanings 363–​4, 
623
social media: collecting 
information on 65, 100, 
134, 173, 217; during 
COVID-​19 pandemic 
283; identifying gender 
in posts on 435
social networks 185, 258, 
271–​6, 273; in COVID-​
19 pandemic 283–​4; and 
gender 241; in Oberwart 
78; and sound changes 
312, 315
social relationships 1, 15
social roles 31; and gender 
227, 241; and style 239, 
353–​4
social status 185, 213;  
and code choice 66, 69; 
and dialect 199–​201; 
and gender differences 
226, 232, 234, 240;  
and language change 
295, 300, 308, 316,  
319; of language 
varieties 279–​80; and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
707
pronunciation 11; and 
social distance 405; and 
style 341
social values 402, 413, 
416, 497, 615, 617, 625
social variation 190,  
195–​7, 198, 216–​17, 288
sociality rights 513–​14, 
615, 621, 626
sociocultural values 459
sociolinguistic competence 
494, 610–​17, 619–​20
sociolinguistic norms 64
sociolinguistic universals 
611, 624–​6
sociolinguistics 1–​2; 
applied 569, 602; critical 
557
sociopragmatic 
competence 511, 617–​18
solidarity dimension 
see social distance 
dimension
solidarity markers 44, 246, 
308–​9, 419, 578
Somali language 147, 572
Sotheran, Cheryll 552
sound change 289, 292, 
306; and dialect contact 
322; and gender 309, 
311; spread of 301, 302
soundin’ 270–​1
South America 141; 
Quechua and Aymara 
in 170
South Carolina 275, 316
Spanish language: and 
code-​switching 44; 
gendered forms in 457–​8; 
and Indigenous languages 
83; local varieties of 188; 
in migrant communities 
87, 89; in Paraguay 27–​8, 
31, 140–​2; as vernacular 
110
speaker innovation 288
speech act theory 505, 557
speech acts: in CDA 551; 
ordering of 516
speech communities: 
and bilingualism 105; 
code choice in 24, 26, 
28–​9; and communities 
of practice 558–​9; 
delimiting 558, 587; 
diglossia in 36–​9, 42; in 
ethnography of speaking 
522–​3; identifying as 
member of 263, 329, 
331, 334
speech convergence 347–​8, 
379–​80; overdoing 352
speech divergence 348–​50, 
352
speech events: components 
of 505; formal Māori 
87, 414
speech functions 5, 222, 
387–​90, 416
speech norms, shared 587
speech styles 205, 335, 
339–​40; of ethnic 
minorities 260; and 
gender 445–​6; spread of 
299, 319
Spencer-​Oatey, Helen 513
Spender, Dale 601
sports commentators  
370–​5, 378, 623
Sranan Tongo language 
44–​5, 70, 134
stance 334–​5
standard dialects 6,  
113–​14, 136, 156, 198, 
280; in education 583, 
589–​91, 604, 619–​20
standard Englishes  
112–​14, 147, 197–​8; 
social status of 583
standard languages  
111–​13; and creoles 
133; development of 
154–​6; and lingua 
francas 612
standard speech forms: 
and addressee 340; 
and age 246–​7, 304; 
children’s use of 590–​1; 
and gender 228, 231–​7, 
380, 434; as hegemony 
556; and social class 
208, 211; and social 
context 239, 583; and 
social distance 621; 
teaching in schools 604
status planning 149, 172, 
178
status scale 10–​11, 610, 
613, 620–​2, 624–​6; 
and code choice 31; 
and code-​switching 45; 
see also social status
stereotypes 330–​4, 332; 
Labov on 362–​3; and 
language attitudes 570; 
of vernacular forms 580
stranger effect 355
Strasbourg 46
stress, emphatic 426, 460
Stuart-​Smith, Jane 315
style: context and social 
class 353–​63; influence 
of addressee on 340–​7; 
in non-​English speaking 
societies 364–​70; of 
third party 350; third-​
wave variationist 
approaches to 363–​4
styles 336, 339; and 
registers 370
stylisation 350–​1, 380
stylistic choices, dynamic 
nature of 364
stylistic features 339, 359, 
362
stylistic variation 200, 359, 
366–​7, 377, 381
subordinate clauses 69, 
343, 382, 393
superpolite forms 426, 460
Suriname 44, 134
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
708
Swahili language 172; 
attitudes to 151; and 
code-​switching 56; 
and diglossia 41; as 
lingua franca 117, 
119; Mombasa variety 
of 210, 237, 340; as 
official language 143–​4, 
148, 150–​3, 175, 177; 
in Tanzania 102, 175; 
varieties of 23–​5, 31, 172
swearing 613; and age 
243–​4; apparent-​time 
studies of 303; and 
gender 241, 426; speech 
functions of 398–​9, 419
Swedish language 194, 
411, 569
Swiss German 33–​4, 53
Sydney: gender and 
pronunciation in 227–​8, 
240, 252; uptalk in 297, 
304, 324
syntactic inversion 372, 
374, 383
syntactic reduction 371–​2, 
383
syntax, linguistic variation 
in 4, 17
system morphemes 56
systematics 533–​4
t, glottal stop replacing 
189, 213, 300, 303, 316
tag questions 217, 334, 
378; by function and 
gender of speaker 433; 
as politeness device  
431–​2; in women’s 
language 426, 428, 460
Tagalog language 148
tags, in New Englishes 114
Tahitian culture 485
Tanzania: lingua franca in 
117–​18; national and 
official languages of 143, 
147–​52, 175
Tapiete language 110
Tate, Catherine 334, 351
teacher-​pupil 
communication 392–​3
teasing 16, 357, 448, 505, 
525
Tehrani Persian see Farsi 
language, Tehran variety 
of
telephone conversations 
408, 413, 417, 421; 
and discourse analysis 
504; social norms of 
615; verbal feedback in 
534–​5
Telugu language 143
tense markers 33, 211–​12, 
216, 267
tense switching 283
terms of address see 
address forms
Tetun language 157–​8
Texas 322
text messaging 369–​70, 
376, 379, 382–​3, 534, 
596, 618
Thatcher, Margaret 243
th-​fronting 249–​50, 254, 
293, 315, 330, 333
time, perception of 480–​1, 
500
Timor-​Leste 157, 158, 161
titles, gendered 458, 460, 
466
Toba language 90
Tok Pisin 172; and 
code-​switching 51–​2; 
as creole 126, 131; 
future tense in 497; as 
lingua franca 117, 119; 
linguistic structure of 
122–​3, 128, 129, 136; 
as official language 133; 
standardization of 160
Tolai language 122
Tongan language 25–​6, 92
Torres Strait Creole 598
toughness 235, 241–​2, 
278, 330–​1, 336, 364, 
447
trade languages 119–​20, 
123, 148
transactional relationships 
406
translanguaging 60–​5, 70
Treaty of Waitangi 165
Trotter, Ron 538–​9, 542–​3, 
552, 562
TRP (transition-​relevance 
place) 537, 539
Trudgill, Peter 231, 306, 
347, 573
t-​shirts 585
Tukano language 117, 119
turn-​taking: organisation 
of 533–​4, 537; and 
power relationships 
543–​5
Tuyuka language 117, 223, 
489
Twitter 65; during 
COVID-​19 283; identity 
construction on 400
Tyneside 189, 357, 
362; gender and 
pronunciation 240
Tzeltal language 626
Ubykh language 82, 487
Ucieda 310
Ukrainian language, in 
Canada 86, 92
uncertainty, expressing 
425, 427–​9, 431–​2, 461
unfamiliar languages and 
dialects, responses to 
603
uniplex networks 272
uptalk 296–​7, 304, 309, 
324, 538; and gender 
312; as stereotype 363; 
in women’s language 
426
Urdu language 317
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
709
Valley Talk 244, 296, 363
van Dijk, Teun 551–​2, 562
Vanuatu: bilingualism in 
37; kava-​drinking in 
516–​17; lingua franca 
in 121; national and 
official languages of 
142–​3
variationist approach: 
second-​wave 278; third-​
wave 331, 336, 362–​4, 
424
variationist sociolinguistics 
204–​5, 227
variety 7
Vaupés area 117–​19, 118
verbal abuse 408–​9, 542, 
603; competitive 444
verbal fillers 259, 379
verbal hygiene 472–​5, 498
vernacular changes 254, 
292–​3, 299, 300, 309, 
311, 320, 324–​5
vernacular dialects 
198–​9, 280, 588; 
attitudes to 578, 
583; and educational 
disadvantage 588–​90,  
595, 604, 620; negative 
concord in 212; 
standard language 
overtaking 102
vernacular languages 
110–​11, 136, 380, 612; 
displaced by lingua 
francas 118–​19; and 
pidgins 121–​2; and 
solidarity 621
vernacular speech forms: 
and addressee 340; and 
age 245, 246, 305, 323; 
apparent-​time studies of 
303–​4; attitudes to  
579–​84; Bernstein on 
494; in educational 
testing 591–​2; in English 
towns 214, 219, 249; 
and ethnicity 613; and 
formality 198–​9, 622; 
and gender 228–​33, 
235–​8, 241–​2, 253, 311, 
380, 615; and social 
class 211–​13, 216; and 
social networks 271–​3; 
spread over time see 
vernacular changes; use 
and context of 582–​4
vernacular style 42, 355–​8, 
359, 381
vocabulary: age-​graded 
aspects of 244; collecting 
data on 252; developing 
164; differences between 
English dialects 187; 
linguistic variation in 
4–​5, 17; social variation 
in 201–​2
vowels, pronunciation of 
208, 293, 363
wave theory 297, 323
The Weakest Link 409, 
514
weddings 518–​19
WEIRD (Western Educated 
Industrialised Rich & 
Democratic) 312, 586
welcome rituals 517
Welsh language 3, 79; 
attitudes to 585–​7; 
broadcasting in 166; 
institutional support for 
160–​1; maintenance of 
92; as official language 
145; revival of 94–​6, 95, 
99; social status of 105
West, Mae 452
West Midlands 48, 264, 
266
Whatsapp 65, 283–​4, 417
Whiting, Cliff 538–​9, 543, 
552, 562
Whorf, Benjamin Lee 456, 
464, 476–​8, 481–​2, 484, 
494, 497
women: African American 
275; identifying social 
class of 237; Māori 267, 
278; sexist imagery of 
453–​4; speech of 226, 
228–​9, 232, 234, 240
women’s language 615; 
criticism of 571; 
in gossip 442; and 
interactions with men 
463; Lakoff’s features of 
424–​9, 431–​4, 460, 462; 
in phone sex 451
word lists 304, 320
World Englishes 114, 306
Yana language 224
Yanyuwa language 224–​5
Yiddish language 176–​7, 
260
Yoruba language 98, 105
YouTube 104, 134, 217
Zimmerman, George 582
Zoom 65, 283–​4, 417, 556
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

