Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Incremental accumulation of linguistic
context in artiﬁcial and biological neural
networks
Refael Tikochinski
1
, Ariel Goldstein2, Yoav Meiri
1, Uri Hasson
3 &
Roi Reichart1
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown success in predicting neural sig-
nals associated with narrative processing, but their approach to integrating
context over large timescales differs fundamentally from that of the human
brain. In this study, we show how the brain, unlike LLMs that process large text
windows in parallel, integrates short-term and long-term contextual informa-
tion through an incremental mechanism. Using fMRI data from 219 partici-
pants listening to spoken narratives, we ﬁrst demonstrate that LLMs predict
brain activity effectively only when using short contextual windows of up to a
few dozen words. Next, we introduce an alternative LLM-based incremental-
context model that combines incoming short-term context with an aggre-
gated, dynamically updated summary of prior context. This model sig-
niﬁcantly enhances the prediction of neural activity in higher-order regions
involved in long-timescale processing. Our ﬁndings reveal how the brain’s
hierarchical temporal processing mechanisms enable the ﬂexible integration
of information over time, providing valuable insights for both cognitive neu-
roscience and AI development.
Recent works in cognitive neuroscience have demonstrated the power
of computational large language models (LLMs) in predicting
language-evoked neural signals among humans1–10. LLMs have revolu-
tionized the natural language processing (NLP) ﬁeld, demonstrating
human- and super-human-level performance in many language
tasks11–13. These models are capable of producing a rich language
representation, manifested via multidimensional numerical vectors,
also known as word embedding representations. The representations
are also contextualized as the embedding representation of a word
may be changed according to the context in which it appears, namely
the preceding words in the input text. A growing number of studies
show that these contextual representations can be linearly mapped to
neural signals (e.g., fMRI, EEG, ECoG) recorded from human partici-
pants listening to spoken narratives—an analysis commonly referred to
as neural encoding4,7,8,10. In this method, a contextualized word
embedding vector is extracted for each word in the narrative by
providing the LLM with that word, along with a context window of the N
preceding words (Fig. 1c). The extracted vectors then serve as the input
to a linear regression model that predicts the neural signal evoked by
the corresponding words. The success of the neural encoding method,
together with the human-like cognitive mechanism that leverages
contextual information in the LLM, suggests that the internal language
representations and processes of LLMs could shed light on the internal
neural representations and processes of language in the human
brain10,14,15.
One of the drawbacks in considering LLMs as cognitive models,
however, is manifested in the way these models process natural texts,
such as stories or narratives, which unfold over long timescales. In
contrast to the human brain, LLM digests large bodies of text, com-
prising thousands of words in parallel, using a ﬁxed-size contextual
window. Thanks to the underlined attention mechanism16, the LLM can
learn the contextual dependencies across all words in parallel. In
Received: 18 July 2024
Accepted: 8 January 2025
Check for updates
1The Faculty of Data and Decisions Sciences, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel. 2Department of Cognitive and Brain Sciences, The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. 3Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA.
e-mail: Rafyona@gmail.com
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
1
1234567890():,;
1234567890():,;

contrast, the human brain processes the incoming linguistic input
serially, word by word, as speech and text unfold over time. Further-
more, while listening to a long narrative, humans do not have the
ability to hold all the hundreds and thousands of words in their
working memory that have been processed since the beginning of the
narrative. Rather, humans operate an online mechanism for accumu-
lating information and integrating it into a broader contextual mem-
ory, which is changed and updated as the story unfolds17,18. In this
study, we aim to provide an alternative model for how the brain, as
opposed to current LLMs, integrates linguistic information over short-
term and long-term contexts.
A series of studies showed that the brain gradually integrates
temporal information across cortical areas in a topographic hier-
archical manner. In such a topography, the temporal receptive
windows (TRW) gradually increase along the cortical processing hier-
archy, with early sensory areas integrating speech-related information
(e.g., phonemes) into words over short periods of time (tens to hun-
dreds of milliseconds). Adjacent cortical regions then integrate word-
level information into sentences over several seconds and transfer the
information into adjacent areas, which integrate the sentences into
paragraphs. Finally, areas along the default mode network (DMN),
located at the top of the temporal integration hierarchy, can integrate
the paragraphs into a coherent narrative by integrating information
accumulated over hundreds of seconds as the story unfolds, with
relevant past information stored in long-term memories (Fig. 1a)18–20.
Such temporal processing hierarchical topography provides an alter-
native processing scheme for integrating short-term and long-term
linguistic information over time within the DMN (Fig. 1b).
Fig. 1 | Contextual processing in the brain vs. large language models. a The
neuroanatomical hierarchical organization according to multiple timescales of
processing. Partially adapted from ref. 18 with the authors’ permission. b Our
proposed neural mechanism of integrating long-term contextual information at the
top level of the timescale hierarchy. c The baseline implementation of contextual
integration via Large Language Models (LLMs). The model is exposed to the entire
incoming context window and processes it in a parallel manner. d Our proposed
alternative model of contextual integration via LLM. Instead of processing the
entire context window at once, the incremental-context LLM is applied sequentially
along the story. The LLM accumulates long-term contextual information by gen-
erating a concise summary of the past, and, at each step, integrating this summary
with the incoming context window and updating the summary to be used in the
next step (see more details in Fig. 3 and S3).
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
2

We hypothesize that unlike LLMs which process large contextual
windows of thousands of words, DMN networks can receive informa-
tion about the incoming context (IC) through a small window of just
tens of words (Fig. 1b). To test this hypothesis, a group of participants
listened to several spoken stories while undergoing fMRI scans (a total
of 297 scans recorded from 219 individuals). We then designed and
implemented several encoding models to predict their BOLD respon-
ses using contextual embeddings extracted from an LLM after para-
metrically adjusting the contextual window size of the LLM from just a
few words to a thousand words. We demonstrate empirically that the
ﬁt between the LLM and the brain decreases as the size of the LLM’s
context window increases beyond tens of words, and that the maximal
ﬁt is obtained when the context window size is ~32 tokens in length.
This result supports our prediction that the incoming contextual
information to the brain integrates information over a few sentences.
Next, we hypothesize that incoming contextual information at
time n (ICn) is integrated with the aggregated context information
(ACn−1) already accumulated in the DMN (Fig. 1b). At the beginning of a
story, where no contextual information has been accumulated yet, the
accumulated context matches the IC (AC1 = IC1). As the story unfolds,
the accumulated contextual information is the sum of the incoming
and aggregated context information. To test this prediction, we sug-
gested an alternative LLM-based incremental-context model that fuses
the incoming short-term context (ICn) with the aggregated context
(ACn-1). The aggregated prior context is operationalized by asking the
LLM to generate a concise summary of the incoming contextual
Fig. 2 | The effect of the size of the context window (in # of tokens) fed into the
LLM on its ability to predict the neural signals. a Cortical maps for different
window sizes showing voxels where the neural encoder score (Pearson’s r calcu-
lated between the predicted and the original signals, averaged across 297 fMRI
scans) was statistically signiﬁcant using a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test
and FDR correction. b Averaged r-scores by window size for ﬁve different voxels,
each located in a different language-related region of interest (ROI) in the left
hemisphere. Error bars represent the 95% conﬁdence interval of the mean as cal-
culated via 10,000-iterations bootstrap analysis. Anatomical locations are provided
as MNI coordinates. c A cortical map showing ROIs that were predicted signiﬁcantly
better using a window size of 32 tokens than with a window size of up to 2048
tokens (red areas), or vice versa (green areas). A1 primary auditory cortex, STG
superior temporal gyrus, IFG inferior frontal gyrus, TPJ temporoparietal junction.
Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
3

information—a summary that is incrementally changed and updated as
the model progresses through the narrative (see Figs. 1d and 3b, S3,
and Method). Adding a summary of the aggregated context informa-
tion to the incoming information greatly improved our ability to pre-
dict the BOLD responses in the brain while processing all narratives,
and this improvement was mainly evident in the higher-order areas
among the DMN. Combined, our results suggest that the DMN con-
stantly engages in online summarization and integration of paragraph-
level incoming contextual information with information accumulated
across minutes, hours, and even days. Such online summarization and
integration provide the brain with the necessary capacity to ﬂexibly
integrate information accumulated over multiple timescales, a capa-
city that is currently lacking in the ﬁxed contextual window archi-
tecture of many LLMs.
Results
Overview
The results and analyses are divided into three consecutive phases.
First, we carried out a systematic analysis to investigate the effect of
increasing the size of the IC window of the LLM’s input on the ability to
predict the fMRI signals from the LLM’s embedding representations.
For that, we applied the well-established neural-encoding analysis7,8,10
and tested its performances while varying the size of the context
window from 8 tokens to the maximal possible size of 2048 tokens. In
the second stage, we introduced our incremental context model,
which combines both a short-term IC window and a long-term aggre-
gated context. Then, we tested our model’s performance in predicting
brain activity compared to a baseline LLM with either a long or short IC
window. Lastly, in the third complementary stage, we performed a
spectral analysis on the BOLD signal for each brain area to estimate
how fast/slow the information changes—a measurement that is
equivalent to estimating the amount of prior context the brain area
processes in the present. Based on the results of this analysis, we
identiﬁed brain areas that utilize long/short context windows and
tested whether our incremental long-term context model predicts
their activity better/worse than a short-term context model. All these
stages are detailed in the following sections.
IC is processed in the brain through small context windows
From the Narratives fMRI dataset21, we extracted data from 219 indi-
viduals who passively listened to narrative stimuli. The data contained
a total of 297 scans from 8 different relatively long stories/narratives
(~7 min or longer), which together encompass 15,978 tokens (See
Table S1 and Method). Word-embedding representations were created
for each story using a state-of-the-art, open-source GPT-3-like model
(GPT-neoX22) and were subsequently used to predict the neural signals
recorded from individuals who listened to that story, via the well-
established neural-encoding analysis7,10,23 (see Method). The neural
encoding analysis was applied on a voxel-by-voxel basis across the
9258 stimulus-locked voxels (i.e., voxels that yielded a signiﬁcant inter-
subjects correlation score, see Method). We systematically tested the
model’s predictions while varying the amount of prior context (i.e., the
number of tokens) the model was exposed to during the word
embedding extraction. We tested the following context window sizes:
8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, and 512 tokens, as well as the maximal window
size containing the entire narrative (up to 2048 tokens; this size is
different from narrative to narrative, see Table S1). The neural encoder
model was trained and tested using ﬁvefold cross-validation for each
window size, scan, and voxel, as detailed in the Method section.
The pattern of the results was clear. As Fig. 2 presents, the per-
formances of the neural encoder (as measured via the averaged
Pearson’s r correlation between the original and the predicted signal)
are getting better as the window size increases, but only up to a win-
dow size of 32 tokens. From that point onwards, however, the per-
formance tends to decrease as the window size increases, eventually
reaching a plateau above 128 tokens. This pattern is reﬂected both in
terms of the extent of cortical areas where the averaged r-score was
statistically signiﬁcant (from big clusters of voxels across temporal,
parietal, and frontal areas at window size = 32 tokens to only a few
small clusters in the parietal lobule for larger window sizes; see Fig. 2a),
as well as in the magnitude of the averaged r-scores (ranging from
−0.02 to 0.02, 0.00 to 0.13, −0.01 to 0.15, −0.01 to 0.07, −0.02 to 0.08,
−0.01 to 0.063, −0.03 to 0.069, and 0.00 to 0.07 for window sizes of 8,
16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, and Max tokens, respectively). The same
pattern is demonstrated in Fig. 2b for ﬁve selected voxels, each taken
from a different language-related region of interest (ROI). These
results are replicated almost identically when using the (relatively)
older GPT-2 model, as presented in Fig. S1. Moreover, in Fig. S2 we
show that the failure of large context-window LLMs in predicting the
brain is also observed with other LLMs that were designed speciﬁcally
for long contexts: Long T524, Transformer XL25, and Longformer26.
To further validate the results, we also conducted a direct com-
parison between the short window size of 32 tokens and the maximal
long window size of up to 2048 tokens. For each voxel, we calculated
Δr32tokensMAX tokens which equals to the averaged r-score obtained
from the LLM with a window size of 32 tokens, minus the averaged r-
score obtained from the LLM with a large window size of up to 2048
tokens. The resulted map yielded 2594 signiﬁcant voxels, all of which
were in favor of the short window size (i.e., positive Δr32tokensMAX tokens
value; qFDR < 0.05; Max = 0.028, Mean = 0.01, SD = 0.004; Fig. 2c red
areas). None of the voxels have shown a signiﬁcant negative
Δr32tokensMAX tokens value (qFDR>0.05).
The above results suggest that the success of ﬁxed-size context
LLMs in predicting language-related BOLD responses is effective only
when the encoded information is related to a relatively short context
window, equivalent to a timescale of several sentences. Moreover, as
illustrated in Fig. 2, this limitation was not only observed in temporal
areas, which were previously linked to short timescales19,20, but also
identiﬁed in higher-order areas at the DMN associated with longer
timescales. This conﬁrms our ﬁrst hypothesis that the IC to the brain is
limited to small context windows containing up to tens of words, as the
brain, unlike LLMs, cannot compute hundreds and thousands of
tokens in parallel. In the next section, we present an alternative model
that is capable of incorporating and maintaining very long contextual
information in a sequential and incremental manner—similar to how
we believe the human brain functions.
An alternative cognitively plausible model for short and long-
context integration—the incremental context model
The main limitation in using LLMs with large context windows to
model long-term contextual computing in the human brain is the
necessity to process hundreds of words in parallel. To cope with this
limitation, we designed an alternative model where the window size of
the input is kept (relatively) small and yet contains both short-term and
long-term contextual information. In this model, the context window
comprises two components: incoming short-term context and aggre-
gated long-term context. The IC consists of the last N words, where N is
no more than several dozen tokens. The long-term component con-
tains earlier information that appeared outside the narrower short-
term window. Importantly, this information is no longer the original
(hundreds or thousands) words from the stimulus, but instead a con-
cise summary that is generated by the model itself.
Speciﬁcally, using a dedicated prompt design (see Method), we
interactwith the model and requestit to generate a short summarybased
on previous information. This interaction was applied every several
words, such that the summary is continuously updated and changed as
the model advances through the story. Importantly, in order to capture
long-term context, the summary ofeach step was generated based on the
content of both the last several tokens, as well as the summary from the
previous step (See Figs. 3b and S3b, and Method). In this way, the model
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
4

always maintains an incremental long-term context through natural lan-
guage text, which can then be used as input to the model again. As
depicted in Fig. 3b, a word embedding representation of a token is
obtained from this model by concatenating two elements into its input: a
short-term context window (consisting of the last 32 tokens; see the
Method section for details on this choice) and the most recent state of
the incremental summary, which provides the long-term context. A more
detailed schematic illustration, including a textual example from the
actual data, is presented in Fig. S3.
The incremental context model better predicts neural activity in
many higher-order brain areas
Toassess the predictive power ofthe incremental model in modelling the
integration between short- and long-term contexts in the human brain,
we directly compared its performance in neural encoding against the
following two baseline models: An LLM with a short-term IC window of 32
tokens (we chose 32 tokens as it was the optimal model in our ﬁrst
analysis. See Fig. 2) and a “full-size” LLM with the maximum length of
window size, i.e., up to 2048 tokens. Note that all three models (i.e.,
Incremental context, 32 tokens window size, and MAX-tokens window
size) are based on the same pre-trained LLM and they differ only in the
type/size of the context used in the input during the encoding phase (i.e.,
the extraction of the word-embedding representations).
Figure 4 presents the cortical maps of the comparisons between
the models. For each pair of models, we calculated Δr per voxel, which
equals the difference between the averaged neural encoder r-score of
one model and of the other model. First, compared to the MAX tokens
model, our incremental context model signiﬁcantly improves the
r-score in many parietal, temporal, and frontal areas, as reﬂected
by positive ΔrIncremental ContextMAX tokens values (a total of 5023 sig-
niﬁcant voxels; Max = 0.02, Mean = 0.008, SD = 0.001; Fig. 4a). Fur-
thermore,
none
of
the
voxels
showed
a
signiﬁcant
negative
ΔrIncremental ContextMAX tokens score, namely, there are no brain areas
where their signal is predicted better by the MAX-tokens model
comparing to the incremental context model. The results of this
comparison demonstrate the substantial advantage of modeling long-
term context in the brain using an incremental mechanism instead of
parallel computing over hundreds of tokens.
Second, we compared the results of our incremental context model
to the results of the 32 tokens model, which according to our previous
analysis (Fig. 2) is the best model for the incoming short-term context.
Fig. 4b presents the cortical map of the ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values
and discovers both brain areas that are better predicted by the incre-
mental model (positive ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values), as well as
brain areas that are better predicted by the short-term context model
(negative ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values). Our long-term context
model (incremental context) signiﬁcantly outperforms the short-term
context model (32 tokens) in many areas among the DMN, including
parietal (Precuneus and TPJ) and frontal (mainly among the medial
prefrontal cortex) areas, as depicted in Fig. 4b (679 signiﬁcant voxels,
Max = 0.02, Mean = 0.006, SD = 0.003; blue areas). On the other hand,
we also found brain areas that were predicted signiﬁcantly better by the
short-term context model (32 tokens), compared to the long-term
incremental context model. This effect was mainly observed in the
superior temporal gyrus, including the primary auditory cortex, as well
as the “Broca” area in the inferior frontal gyrus (435 signiﬁcant voxels;
Min = −0.01, Mean = −0.003, SD = 0.0007; Fig. 4b red areas).
Importantly, the full cortical map of the ΔrIncremental Context32tokens
values (Fig. 4a, b) is aligned with the hierarchical structure of the
timescale changes discovered elsewhere19,20, where the primary audi-
tory cortex (located on the superior temporal gyrus) is involved in the
most short-scale processing, and the more high-order DMN areas in
the parietal lobule, as the TPJ and the precuneus, are associated with
more long-term processing (Fig. 1a). Moreover, the ﬁnding that DMN
areas were better predicted by our incremental model, while the lower-
level areas were better predicted by the short- IC LLM, is well aligned
Fig. 3 | Schematic illustrations depicting the process of extracting contextual
embedding representations for a single token using both the baseline short-
term context model and the incremental context model. a The short-term,
N-tokens (N = 32) model. The word embedding representation of the token i is
extracted by providing the LLM with that token, as well as the preceding N tokens.
b The long-term, incremental context model. To extract the word embedding
representation for the same token i, the input to the model included both the short
N-token window (as in the N-tokens model) and a concise natural language sum-
mary generated by the model, which was based on information from the long-term
context. This long-term contextual summary is updated as the model progresses
through the story. It is generated based on the text that appeared before the short
N-token window, as well as on the summary generated at the previous update step
by the model. See Fig. S3 for more details.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
5

with our second hypothesis. That is, higher-order DMN areas receive
the incoming paragraph-level (i.e., short window of ~32 tokens) con-
textual information from the downstream, lower-level areas, and
engage in online summarization and integration of this information
with information accumulated across the narrative (Fig. 1b).
A model-free spectral analysis of the frequency domain sup-
ports the model-based analyses
In this analysis we focused on the above-presented cortical map of the
contrast between the r-scores of our incremental model and the short-
term context model (i.e., the ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values; Fig. 4b).
As mentioned earlier, this map revealed a hierarchical organization of
the cortex in terms of the timescale of the context processing and
conﬁrmed our hypothesis regarding the long-term contextual inte-
gration at the top level of the hierarchy. In Fig. 5a we re-visualize
this map, this time over the entire set of 9258 stimulus-locked voxels
(i.e.,
voxels
that
yielded
signiﬁcant
inter-subjects
correlation
scores, see Method), with no statistical threshold (as in Fig. 4b).
This map demonstrates the gradient between the red areas—areas that
are
more
associated
with
the
short-term
context
(negative
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens
values)—and
the
blue
areas,
which
are
more
associated
with
the
long-term
context
(positive
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values). In the subsequent analysis, we
conducted a complementary, model-free analysis on the fMRI (BOLD)
signals, which provides additional validation for the timescale hier-
archy revealed through the models.
Timescale differences were investigated by looking at the fre-
quency domain of the signal. Intuitively, when a signal mostly consists
of low frequencies, it indicates that the encoded information changes
slowly and gradually. As a result, the information at a certain time point
does not deviate signiﬁcantly from the information encoded far away
in the past. Conversely, high frequencies in the signal suggest rapid
changes in the information, and as such, the value of a certain time
point is merely inﬂuenced by nearby time points, with less impact from
distant past information. Therefore, performing a spectral analysis of
the fMRI signal provides a reliable approximation of the extent of past
contextual information processed by a certain brain area20.
For each voxel, we estimated the power spectral density (PSD) of
the averaged signal (See Method for detailed information), which illus-
trates how the power of the signal is distributed across different fre-
quencies (see Fig. 5b for selective ROIs). Next, we quantiﬁed the power of
the high frequencies of the signal (which are equivalent to short context
window sizes) by calculating the area under the PSD curve within the
high frequencies range. Since the optimal size of the IC to the LLM is 32
tokens (Fig. 2), we chose frequencies that demonstrate cycles (wave-
lengths) equivalent to the time taken to produce 32 tokens or less.
Fig. 4 | Comparisons between our incremental context model, the baseline
long-term full-transformer (up to 2048 tokens) model, and the baseline short-
term context model (32 tokens). a, b Cortical maps show the differences between
the models in the neural encoder scores. The following comparisons were made:
Incremental Context vs. MAX tokens (a), and Incremental Context vs. 32 tokens (b).
The maps display only the voxels that demonstrate a signiﬁcant difference using a
non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test and FDR correction. c Bar plots display
the averaged neural encoder results (y axis) for selected voxels located at different
language-related ROIs, depending on the model used for embedding representa-
tions (32 tokens/MAX-tokens/Incremental Context). Error bars represent the 95%
conﬁdence interval of the mean as calculated via 10,000-iterations bootstrap
analysis. A1 primary auditory cortex, STG superior temporal gyrus, IFG inferior
frontal gyrus, TPJ temporoparietal junction. Source data are provided as a Source
Data ﬁle.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
6

According to our data, this time interval is approximately 12 s, and the
corresponding frequency is ~0.08 Hz (0:08Hz  1=12). Therefore, we
calculated the integral of the PSD function between 0.08 Hz and the
Nyquist frequency, 0.33 Hz, and denoted this value as the high-
frequency power (HFP) of the signal (HFP =
R 0:33
0:08PSD Hz
ð
Þdx; Fig. 5c).
Most importantly, we found a strong signiﬁcant negative correlation
between the HFP and the ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values (r = −0.63,
p < 0.0001; Fig. 5e). Namely, the higher the power of high frequencies
within the voxel, the better it is predicted by the short-term context
model compared to the long-term context model (i.e., a more negative
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens value).
The above analysis was replicated for the low frequencies as well.
We calculated the low-frequency power (LFP) of the ROI’s signal by
taking
the
integral
of
the
PSD
between
0 Hz
to
0.02 Hz
(LFP =
R 0:02
0
PSD Hz
ð
Þdx; Fig. 5d). This range of frequencies is equivalent
to window sizes of 256 tokens or longer (the cutoff of 256 tokens best
demonstrates our results, but the overall pattern is preserved for dif-
ferent thresholds above 32 tokens as well). In contrast to the HFP, the
LFP
scores
showed
a
strong
positive
correlation
with
the
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens values (r = 0.66, p < 0.0001; Fig. 5f). This
means that the greater the presence of LFP in the voxel, the better it is
predicted by the long-term incremental-context model compared to
the short-term context model.
Discussion
We hypothesized that, unlike the ability of current LLMs to process
large contextual windows of hundreds and thousands of words in
parallel, the human brain applies a different, more sequential, and
ﬂexible mechanism. In line with previous studies that demonstrated
the topographical timescale hierarchy of temporal processing in the
brain (Fig. 1a)18–20, we proposed that (1) downstream, primary areas in
the brain process the entire IC window up to tens of words (i.e.,
paragraph level), and that (2) higher-order areas in the DMN constantly
engage in online summarization and integration of this short incoming
contextual information with information accumulated across minutes,
hours, and even days. First, we demonstrated that the default imple-
mentation of the IC window in LLMs, i.e., simply feeding the last N
tokens into the model, can be considered a good model for the brain
only when N is relatively small (N = 32). However, when it comes to
longer window sizes, the LLMs are no longer efﬁcient in predicting the
fMRI signal (Fig. 2). This supports our ﬁrst hypothesis that the brain
can process the entire IC window only when the window contains no
more than tens of words (equivalent to a paragraph-level).
Second, according to our second hypothesis, we proposed an
alternative LLM-based incremental model for integrating long-term
context information, beyond the recent tens of words. In contrast to
feeding the entire text all at once to the model, our incremental con-
text model preserves a modest number of tokens for parallel proces-
sing while retaining essential contextual information from tokens that
were processed much earlier. By employing prompt-engineering
techniques27, we have the model intermittently interact with the text
and generate a natural language aggregated summarization that is
integrated with the incoming short context window (Fig. 3). Next, we
empirically show that our incremental context model outperforms the
alternative long context-window LLM in predicting neural signals of
long narratives (Fig. 4). Moreover, in line with our second hypothesis,
we found that among the DMN areas (located at the top level of the
timescale hierarchy), the incremental model (which integrates both
incoming and aggregated contexts) outperforms the short- (32 tokens)
IC window LLM. In contrast, the short-context LLM outperforms the
Fig. 5 | The complementary spectral analysis. a The cortical map of the
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens (abbreviated as ΔrIncCon32T) scores replicated from
Fig. 3b but with no statistical thresholding. This map shows the overall pattern of
the cortical hierarchy between voxels that are better predicted by the long-term
Incremental context model (more blue areas) and voxels that are better predicted
by the short-term (32 tokens) model (more red areas). b The power spectral density
(PSD) calculated for the BOLD signal within four important ROIs: inferior parietal
lobule (IPL), dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), the Precuneus, and the
primary auditory area. Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁle. c, d Cortical
maps showing the power of high (c) and low (d) frequencies across the cortex.
These measurements were extracted from the PSD curve as described in the
Method. e, f Scatter plots representing the correlation between the
ΔrIncremental Context32tokens scores (Fig. 4a) and the high (e) or low (f) frequency
power of the signal. The statistical signiﬁcance of the correlations was tested using
Fisher’s Z test for correlation coefﬁcients.
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
7

incremental model in predicting lower-level brain areas located
downstream of the timescale hierarchy (e.g., STG). Finally, we used a
complementary spectral analysis to map cortical areas on a scale ran-
ging from short- to long-term contextual processing by quantifying the
power of low and high frequencies (the lower the frequency of the
signal, the slower its ﬂuctuations, and consequently, its timescale).
Next, we demonstrated that the more dominant the brain area is in low
frequencies, the better its signal was predicted by our long-term
incremental context model. Similarly, when a brain area exhibited
more high frequencies, it was predicted more accurately by the short-
term context (32 tokens) implementation of the LLM (Fig. 5).
It is important to emphasize that our research does not aim to
argue that LLMs are a feasible cognitive model for language processing
in the brain. Rather, we focus on a key difference between LLMs and
the human brain: how they integrate information over multiple time-
scales. While LLMs can simultaneously process information across all
words within its contextual window, the brain accumulates informa-
tion gradually and sequentially as the narrative unfolds. Indeed, we
observed that by restricting LLMs’ contextual window to match the
DLM’s temporalintegration windows, there was an improvement in the
alignment between their internal representations. Additionally, we
found that enhancing LLM’s paragraph-level contextual window with
an incremental summarization term enhanced its internal repre-
sentations to better ﬁt with the human brain. This provides evidence
that the human brain, unlike LLMs, has an internal mechanism to
summarize and accumulate contextual information over a broader
range of timescales rather than processing all words within a ﬁxed
large contextual window in parallel.
Although the results of this study suggest that our incremental
contextmodelisa better ﬁtforlong-termcontextprocessing in the brain,
it is not guaranteed that this model is completely cognitively plausible,
but rather that it is more plausible than the default transformer model.
First, it is not clear whether the long-term context is aggregated in the
brain in the form of discrete words, as implemented in our model (i.e.,
through the generated summary), or rather in a more continuous way.
Second, it is not clear whether aggregating information via summariza-
tion is, in fact, cognitively plausible. It could be that there are other, more
cognitively plausible methods of aggregating contextual information
rather than via summarization. As one way of justifying our proposed
model as a cognitive mechanism, we have considered several alternative
aggregation methods, such as extraction of key sentences from the ear-
lier information or asking the model to generate leading keywords out of
the text. All of these alternative aggregation methods were substantially
inferior compared to our proposed summary generation model. Never-
theless, we do not rule out the possibility that future studies may uncover
more effective alternatives.
In addition to the above, there is another limitation concerning
the ﬁnding that the incremental context model predicts long-term
context in the brain better than a transformer model with a maximum
window. Previous studies have shown that LLMs with large context
windows tend to lose information that appears in the middle of the
window and are biased towards tokens appearing at the beginning or
end of the sequence28. Therefore, the incremental context model
might be preferable not because it is more cognitively plausible, but
because it overcomes this issue and optimally utilizes the full context.
Either way, this alternative explanation does not necessarily contradict
the hypothesis we presented regarding the cognitive mechanism of
long context processing in the brain, as it is possible that the brain
evolved to process long context incrementally because it is the most
efﬁcient way to avoid losing content.
This study is the ﬁrst to use LLMs for modeling (very) long-term
context processing of language comprehension in the brain. Previous
studies in the neural encoding literature all used LLMs that were only
aware of the short-term context, i.e., where the context window size was
as large as several tens of words1–10. This was the case even though the
participants in these studies were exposed to language stimuli that
encompassed hundreds and even thousands ofwords. To the best of our
knowledge, no study has yet systematically investigated the effect of the
LLM input contextual window size on neural encoding performance with
language comprehension data. It should be noted here that one recent
study by Aw & Toneva29 reported a similar systematic input context-size
analysis, but their fMRI data involved participants who were reading the
story (i.e., language production) rather than passively listening (lan-
guage comprehension), as in our study. Their main ﬁndings suggest that
models trained (ﬁne-tuned) to summarize long narratives were sig-
niﬁcantly better in neural encoding compared to baseline models, spe-
ciﬁcally for large context windows (20–1000 words). This method
resembles our incremental-model method, as in both studies, summar-
ization plays a crucial role in guiding the model on how to process long
contexts. However, unlike their method, which involves two different
models (base and ﬁne-tuned), our prompt-based mechanism allows us
to use the same model for both short-term and long-term contextual
processing (i.e., with or without the incremental-summary module). This
single model approach allows us to make a direct comparison between
short- and long-term contexts. Moreover, a single model that operates
differently in short vs. long contexts is more cognitively plausible than
two distinct (ﬁne-tuned) models for short and long contexts. Never-
theless, future studies are needed to compare both methods, as well as
to compare language comprehension and production.
In the same context, it is also important to refer here to Cauche-
teux’s et al.’s4 work, where they empirically investigated the timescale
hierarchy in the brain using LLMs. The current work is different for two
reasons. First, unlike the current study, they did not manipulate the
timescale by varying the number of tokens in the input; instead, they
achieved this by scrambling the text at multiple levels (words, sentence
etc.), similar to Lerner’s et al.’s work19. Second, in all experimental
conditions, they used a ﬁxed window size of 256 tokens in the context.
Consequently, the maximum timescale of processing they could
investigate was limited to the size of one or two paragraphs. In our
study, on the other hand, we primarily focused on very large time-
scales, spanning hundreds and thousands of tokens.
From the NLP-ﬁeld perspective, our proposed incremental con-
text model provides a new approach to dealing with the processing of
very large texts30. Apart from the cognitive plausibility gap addressed
in this paper, the parallel computing nature of the transformer-based
LLMs yields a quadratic computational complexity (Oðn2Þ) which
makes the processing of long texts signiﬁcantly more expensive. Sev-
eral solutions have been proposed in recent years to cope with this
computational complexity problem. These included novel archi-
tectures of the attention matrix (e.g., sparse-attention31, dilated sliding
window26,30,32,
transient
global
attention24,
LLM
with
external
memory33,
and
others),
hierarchical
combination
of
multiple
transformers9,34, and implementations of RNN-like (recurrent neural
network) modules within the transformer block25. To the best of our
knowledge, our incremental context model is the only model that
instead of processing the entire text all at once, repeatedly applies
itself along the text, interacting with the information in a manner akin
to human-like comprehension [note that the Transformer XL model25
incorporates some form of recurrent processing within the transfor-
mer block, but it still takes the entire text as its input in parallel. In
Fig. S2, we empirically demonstrate that this model is indeed less
effective at predicting human neural signals.]. While this study does
not delve into assessing the incremental context model’s performance
in various NLP tasks related to long texts, we hold the belief that its
potential extends far beyond the ﬁeld of cognitive neuroscience.
Methods
FMRI data
The data for the present research was retrieved from the narratives
dataset published elsewhere21. The narratives dataset contains a
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
8

variety of functional MRI datasets collected while human subjects
listened to naturalistic spoken stories. Since the current work focuses
on long-term context, we only gathered data on stimuli that contain a
single coherent long story (there are stories like “Schema” and “The
21st Year” that contain multiple narratives within the story), and that
do not contain any ambiguities or special experimental manipula-
tions (such as “Shape” and “Green eyes”). Our ﬁnal sample included
data from 8 stories (“Lucy”, “Merlin”, “Pie man”, “Tunnel”, “Bronx”,
“Sherlock”, “Not the fall”, and “Milky way”). It consists of 297 scans
recorded from 219 individuals (78 individuals participated in more
than a single stimulus; ages 18–53 years, mean age 22.1 ± 3.1 years, 171
reported female), after excluding ‘bad’ scans based on the publisher’s
recommendation. Table S1 describes, for each story, the number of
individuals, number of tokens in the story (according to the GPT’s
tokenizer), and the number of TRs. The publishers’ dataset paper
reports the technical details regarding the MRI acquisition, as well as
the entire preprocessing pipeline of the data21. For our analyses, we
downloaded the version of the data that was normalized to a surface
template (the fsaverage6 template of the FreeSurfer software35).
To ﬁlter out stimulus-irrelevant voxels, we executed a voxel-wise
inter-subject correlation analysis36 across all of the gray matter: for
each voxel, we isolated each subject’s time-course and correlated it
with the averaged time-course of the remaining subjects. The voxel’s
ISC-score is calculated by averaging the correlation scores (after
Fisher’s Z transformation) obtained from repeating this process for all
subjects. To assess how signiﬁcantly each ISC-score is different from
zero, we conducted a non-parametric permutation test by randomiz-
ing the phase of the signal37 1000 times prior to ISC calculation and
used the obtained null distribution to estimate the p value. We ran this
procedure separately for each narrative and selected for subsequent
analyses only voxels that achieved a signiﬁcant ISC-score (p < 0.01,
corrected for multiple tests using FDR) in all narratives. The process
yielded a total of 9258 ‘stimulus-locked’ voxels.
Language model
All of the main analyses and models in this paper were based on the open-
source, 20 billion parameters, GPT-NeoXT model (retrieved from https://
huggingface.co/togethercomputer/GPT-NeoXT-Chat-Base-20B),
devel-
oped by Together.ai and Eleuther.ai. This model is similar to Eleuther.ai’s
GPT-NeoX model22, but it has undergone further ﬁne-tuning using a small
amount of feedback data. According to the developers, GPT-NeoX and
GPT-NeoXT are considered comparable to OpenAI’s GPT-3 and ChatGPT
models, respectively. For replication and validation we also used the
OpenAI’sGPT-2model11, aswellasotherLLMsdesigned for longcontexts,
Long T524, Transformer XL25, and Longformer26.
Analyzing the effect of the context window size on neural
encoding
Story representations. For each story in our dataset (out of 8 stories),
we extracted word embedding representation for every single token.
The word embedding representation is a 6144-dimensional vector
provided in the last layer of the GPT-NeoXT model. To extract a
representation for a token, the token is fed into the model together
with tokens that appeared in the text prior to this token (i.e., the
context window). We varied the number of tokens in the context
window between 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, and MAX tokens (up to
2048 tokens; this size is different from narrative to narrative, see
Table S1; on average, a single token contains 0.75 words). This process
yielded eight sets of word embedding representation vectors, corre-
sponding to the eight window sizes. Each set takes the form of a d by k
matrix, where d is the dimensionality of the word embedding vector
and k is the number of tokens in the story, or the “time” dimension. To
match the time resolution of the fMRI data (which was sampled every
TR = 1.5 s), we down-sampled the token-based time signal of the word
embedding vectors to n, where n equals the number of TRs in the scan.
This was done by averaging the vectors of all the tokens that appeared
within each TR interval.
Neural encoder model. For each narrative and participant (a total of
297 scans) we constructed a voxel wised neural encoder model, which
is simply a linear regression model that predicts the neural signal, for
each voxel (9258 ‘stimulus-locked’ voxels), from the word embedding
representation vectors. Formally, the neural encoder maps the
embedding vectors matrix, Md, n, to the neural data matrix, Y 9258, n,
where n is the length of the story (i.e., number of TRs) and d is the
dimensionality of the word embedding representation. Following
previous studies9,10 we reduced the dimensionality of the word
embedding representations, d, into 32 dimensions via principal com-
ponent analysis (PCA). To train and test the neural encoder model, we
applied 5-fold cross-validation. The story was split into ﬁve sections,
and for each iteration, we left one section out for testing and trained
the model on the remaining sections. The model was evaluated by
calculating Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcient (r) between the predicted
signal and the actual brain signal of the test section. The r-scores
obtained from the ﬁve folds were transformed to Fisher’s Z, averaged
together, and then converted back to r score.
Statistical testing. The signiﬁcance scores (p value) of the results were
assessed using a non-parametric Wilcoxon signed-rack test. Correction
for multiple hypothesis testing was applied using the false discovery
rate (FDR) method38. 95% conﬁdence intervals were calculated using a
10,000-iteration bootstrap analysis.
The incremental context model
In the ﬁrst analysis, we varied the context window size of the model and
found that a window size of 32 tokens is optimal (Fig. 2), and that
increasing the context window is not beneﬁcial in modeling long-term
context. In our incremental context model, the long-term context is not
embodied with more tokens from the past, but rather with a compressed
version of the past, which is a self-generated textual summary. Formally,
when extracting the word embedding representation of a token i, the
input to the model takes the following form:
}Background} : + summaryk + }Continuation of the story : }

+ windowi32:i + tokeni

Speciﬁcally, the token i is concatenated with the preceding 32
tokens, denoted as windowi32:i, and before them, the kth (i.e., last
updated, as described below) summary is presented. The strings
''Background : '' and ''Continuationofthestory : '' are attached in
the right places to help the model distinguish between the summary
and the context window (see example in Fig. S3). Note that k is dif-
ferent from i as the summary is not updated from toke to token, but for
every 50 tokens. We adopted this slow updating method to (1) pre-
serve a stable long-term summary and (2) because of the extreme
computational and time resources that the model consumes during
textual generation.
To obtain summaryk (once in 50 tokens as described above), we
used the pre-trained language model head of the model to generate
new text. The input to the model then was as follows:
Prompt + } Background : } + summaryk1

+ }Continuation of the story : } + windowi32l:i32

Where ‘Prompt’ refers to our speciﬁcally designed textual instruction
for the model, which was chosen after manual testing of several pos-
sibilities. The request prompt was “Here are paragraphs taken
from a story. Can you summarize the main theme in a few short
sentences?”. “summaryk1” represents the last summary generated
at the previous step (we set summary0 to an empty string). The
Article
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-025-56162-9
Nature Communications|         (2025) 16:803 
9

expression “windowi32l:i32” refers to the text from the story thatwill
be summarized along with the previous summary (Fig. 3b). We tested
multiple values of l (50, 100, 150, 200, and 250) by manually inspecting
the generated text in some portions of the data (~20%) and eventually
set l = 100. Note from the subscript of “windowi32l:i32” that the text
for summarization does not include the last 32 tokens, as this window
is preserved intact in the input to the model when extracting the word
embedding of token i, as described above.
In the summary generation, we limited the length of the gener-
ated text to a maximum of 50 tokens. As a result, the total length of
the input to the model during word embedding extraction was never
>90 tokens (the last token + 32 tokens of windowi32:i + 50 tokens of
summaryk + 7 tokens of the strings in between). Importantly, this
method allows us to provide the model with long-term context while
preserving a reasonable number of tokens to be computed in par-
allel. We used the recommended method for text generation in this
model22, which was multinomial sampling with temperature of 0.9.
Direct comparisons between the models
To test the performance of the Incremental context model in neural
encoding, we directly compare its r scores to two baseline models. One
baseline was a short-term context model that takes only the last
32 tokens as its input (i.e., {windowi32:i + tokeni}) with no additional
long-term information. The other baseline model was a long-term
context model that does not compress the long-term information but
takes in its input all the tokens preceding the current tokens (up to the
maximal possibility of 2048 tokens; i.e.,{windowi2048:i + tokeni}).
For each pair of models {Incremental context vs. 32 tokens,
Incremental context vs. MAX tokens, 32 tokens vs. MAX tokens}, we
subtracted the r scores of one model (9258 r-scores in total, corre-
sponding to the 9258 ‘stimulus-locked’ voxels) from the r-scores of
the other model and denoted the results as 4rmodel amodel b. In total,
we
calculated
the
following
scores:
4rIncremental Context32 tokens,
4rIncremental ContextMAX tokens, and 4r32 tokensMAX tokens. To test the
statistical signiﬁcance of the results, we applied a non-parametric
Wilcoxon signed-rack test. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing
was applied using the FDR method38.
Correlating low-frequency and HFD with
4 rIncremental Context32 tokens
The fMRI BOLD signal of each voxel was ﬁrst analyzed through a
spectral analysis. After Z-normalizing the signal to mean = 0 and var-
iance = 1, we calculated the PSD of the signal using the Welch method39
with a Hann window of 100 s and 50% overlap. The PSD curve describes
how the power in a signal is distributed across different frequencies in
the spectrum. Speciﬁcally, it is well-suited to our data as it enables the
processing of signals with varying durations. Given that we have eight
different stories, each with its unique duration, this method allows us to
normalize the power to units of Hz in a consistent manner.
From the PSD curve, we derived the LFP and HFP scores as follows:
(1)
HFP =
R 0:33
0:08PSD Hz
ð
Þdx
(2)
LFP =
R 0:02
0
PSD Hz
ð
Þdx
The lower bound for the integral of HFP is 0.08 Hz because it is
equivalent to a wavelength (cycle) of 32 tokens (32 tokens takes ~12 s,
and therefore, 0.08 Hz ≈1/12), and the higher bound, 0.33 Hz, is the
Nyquist frequency (the maximum decomposed frequency). The range
of the integral on LFP starts from Zero (the minimum decomposed
frequency) to 0.02 Hz, which is equivalent to a window of 256 tokens.
0.02 Hz was chosen because it maximizes the correlation between LFP
and 4rIncremental Context32tokens, however, the pattern of the results is
preserved for different thresholds as well.
HFP and LFP scores were subsequently averaged across the
297
scans.
Last,
we
calculated
the
correlations
between
4rIncremental Context32tokens and both the HFP and the LFP scores, over
the 9258 voxels, using Pearson’s r.
Reporting summary
Further information on research design is available in the Nature
Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article.
Data availability
The data for the present research were retrieved from the narratives
dataset published elsewhere21 and can be accessed at https://datasets.
datalad.org/?dir=/labs/hasson/narratives.
Source data are provided
with this paper.
Code availability
Code for the analysis of this paper can be found at https://github.com/
RefaelTikochinski/Incremental-Accumulation-of-Linguistic-Context-
in-Artiﬁcial-and-Biological-Neural-Networks
