
Introduction to Neurolinguistics


Introduction  
to Neurolinguistics
Elisabeth Ahlsén
Göteborg University
John Benjamins Publishing Company
Amsterdam / Philadelphia

The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of American 
National Standard for Information Sciences — Permanence of Paper for Printed 
Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-1984.
Cover design: Françoise Berserik
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Ahlsén, Elisabeth
 
Introduction to Neurolinguistics /  by Elisabeth Ahlsén
  p.  cm. 
 
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 . Neurolinguistics. I. Title.
QP399.A39  
2006
62.8’2336--dc22  
2006042986
ISBN 90 272 3233 4 (Hb; alk. paper) / 90 272 3234 2 (Pb; alk. paper)
© 2006 – John Benjamins B.V.
No part of this book may be reproduced in any form, by print, photoprint, microﬁlm, or any 
other means, without written permission from the publisher.
John Benjamins Publishing Company • P.O. Box 36224 • 020 me Amsterdam • The Netherlands
John Benjamins North America • P.O. Box 2759 • Philadelphia PA 98-059 • USA
 
4-

Table of contents
Preface
vii
Copyright acknowledgement
ix
List of tables
x
List of ﬁgures
xi
Part I:  Introduction to neurolinguistics
1.
What is neurolinguistics? 
3
2.
The development of theories about brain and language
9
3.
Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
35
Part II:  Neurolinguistics for diﬀerent components of language
4.
Phonology in neurolinguistics
55
5.
Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
67
6.
Lexical semantics
79
7.
The semantics and pragmatics of communicative contributions in 
context from a neurolinguistic perspective
97
Part III: Speciﬁc topics in neurolinguistics
8.
Reading and writing from a neurolinguistic perspective
111
9.
Neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism
121
10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and 
language
129
11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
145

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
vi
Part IV: Resource chapters
12. Methods of investigating the brain
161
13. Modeling the brain 
167
14. Some basic concepts in neuroscience
179
References
189
Index
205

Preface
It is not uncommon to search for a particular type of book, only to discover that you 
will have to write it yourself. The idea of this book emanates from a conversation with a 
representative of John Benjamins at an International Cognitive Linguistics Conference 
some years ago, concerning the diﬃculty of ﬁnding an up-to-date book of reasonable 
size, price and coverage for introductory courses in neurolinguistics. By then, I had 
been teaching such courses for students of linguistics and communication disorders 
for a long time. Both of us were well aware of this problem, and when it was suggested 
that I should write such a book, I agreed. We were also in agreement concerning the 
relative lack of communication between neurolinguistics and cognitive linguistics, 
pragmatics and communication studies at the time and the need for these areas to be 
better integrated into basic neurolinguistics. This discussion and further reﬂections 
on the “state of the art” led to the fairly broad selection of topics that are covered in 
this book and to the relative weighting given to the diﬀerent chapters. One important 
concern has been to place the diﬀerent theories, methods and studies discussed in a 
historical perspective, showing how diﬀerent frameworks have developed, sometimes 
in parallel, sometimes in sequence, and left their traces on the ways we think about 
language and the brain and how we apply this thinking in our research and therapy. 
The book grew gradually out of many years’ work, as preliminary versions were used 
in introductory courses, and chapters were revised and added.
This book is a basic introduction to neurolinguistics, intended for anybody who 
wants to acquire a grounding in the ﬁeld. It was written for students of linguistics and 
communication disorders, but students of psychology, neuroscience and other disci-
plines will also ﬁnd it valuable. It can be used as coursebook for introductory courses 
or as a source of information on speciﬁc topics in neurolinguistics. The only prereq-
uisite for using it is a basic knowledge of linguistics, including linguistic terminology. 
Students who have no linguistic background at all should ﬁrst read an introductory 
linguistics text. As for students who have no background in neuroanatomy and neuro-
physiology, some basic information about the brain is provided in Chapter 14. 
The book is divided into four parts. The ﬁrst is an introduction to what neurolin-
guistics is, what the important questions are, and how the main neurolinguistic frame-
works have developed over time. This section provides an important background for 
understanding why the representatives of speciﬁc present-day approaches presented 
later in the book reason in the way they do. The second part constitutes the linguis-
tic core of the book, in which diﬀerent components or aspects of neurolinguistics 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
viii
(phonology, morphology, syntax, lexical semantics, and semantics and pragmatics 
in communication) are described. The third part contains chapters on selected top-
ics that are of central interest to many neurolinguists and other scientists seeking to 
understand how language and the brain interact. The four topics are reading and writ-
ing, bilingualism, the evolution of language, and multimodality in communication, all 
viewed from the perspective of describing and explaining disorders of language and 
communication. The fourth part contains an introduction to the brain, which can read 
before the rest of the book or used as a reference, and two additional resource chapters 
on matters that are often referred to in neurolinguistics: neuroimaging (and other 
methods for investigating brain activity and brain damage) and modeling, especially 
with artiﬁcial neural networks. These chapters are not the core of the book, but should 
be regarded as resources to be consulted for more information.
Each chapter has a short table of contents at the beginning and a summary at the 
end. It also suggests further readings from the reference list that will help students 
learn more about the topics covered in that particular chapter. Each chapter (except the 
resource chapters) also has a set of assignments at the end. These assignments are not 
simple factual questions, but are designed to make students apply, think, reason about 
and discuss the contents of the chapter and what they imply. They are mainly intended 
for homework, group work and discussion in seminars, for example.
As mentioned above, the book’s aim is to provide an up-to-date linguistic per-
spective, focusing especially on semantics and pragmatics, evolutionary perspectives, 
neural network modeling and multimodality, areas that may have been neglected by 
earlier introductory works. It presents theories from the 19th century, when many of 
our most basic ideas about language and the brain were formed (the Wernicke-Lich-
theim model, Jackson’s evolutionary perspective, etc., as well as more holistic views), 
classical frameworks that have had and still have a considerable inﬂuence on clinical 
practice (the neoclassical “Bostonian” and Lurian approaches), and frameworks that 
are in their development phase today (pragmatics and communication, multimodal-
ity, communication technology, cognitive neuropsychology and neurolinguistics), as 
well as some brief information on emerging topics and frameworks that are likely to 
inﬂuence neurolinguistics in the near future (mirror neuron ﬁndings, embodiment 
and alignment in communication).
Over the years, many people have contributed in various ways to the approach, 
contents and form of this book. I have been greatly inﬂuenced by the books that 
focused my interest on neurolinguistics in the 1980s: the Studies in neurolinguistics 
series published by Whitaker and Whitaker, Ruth Lesser’s book on linguistics and 
aphasia, and the work of my supervisor in logopedics, Bibi Fex, who directed my 
clinical interest towards aphasia and brain damage. I am also indebted to the teachers 
and fellow students at the 1982 Linguistic Institute on Neuro- and Psycholinguistics 
at the University of Maryland, the members of Lise Menn and Loraine Obler’s Cross 
Language Aphasia Study project and my colleagues in the Nordic Linguistic Network. 

Preface
ix
An important inﬂuence on my particular perspective on linguistics and neurolinguis-
tics is the work of colleagues at the Department of Linguistics and the SSKKII Center 
for Cognitive Science, Göteborg University, especially my former supervisor Jens All-
wood, whose theories on communication as cooperation and action made me look at 
neurolinguistics with a critical eye and relate it more to theories from semantics, prag-
matics, communication and cognitive linguistics. Special thanks are also due to the 
research group on neurolinguistics and communication disorders, my Ph.D. students, 
and the numerous students of linguistics and logopedics who have been subjected to 
earlier versions of the book and who have given me valuable feedback. 
I would probably neither have started nor ﬁnished this project without the sup-
port and encouragement I received from Benjamins, especially Kees Vaes, and the text 
would not have been in its present shape without the meticulous copy-editing work of 
Zoﬁa Laubitz and of Shirley Nicholson for earlier versions.
This book has mainly been a project I worked on in my “spare time,” but I have 
received some valuable support for related research projects ﬁnanced by the Swedish 
Council for Working Life and Social Science Research, the Swedish Research Council 
and the Vårdal Foundation. During my time as a research fellow in the Embodied Com-
munication group at the ZiF Interdisciplinary Center for Research, University of Biele-
feld, in 2005 and 2006, I was given the possibility of ﬁnishing the manuscript at last.
I would like to express my thanks to everyone mentioned above and many others, 
not least the patients and research subjects who have given me new insight into the 
intriguing relationship between language and the brain.
Copyright acknowledgement
The author and publisher tried to obtain permission for reproduction of the ﬁgures whenever possible 
and received permission for the following: The intelligence localized in the ventricles, from Clark, E. & 
Dewhurst, F. (1972). An illustrated history of brain function. Oxford: Sandford publ.; The function of the 
pineal gland (Descartes), from Adam, C. & Tannery, P. (1974). Œvres de Descartes. Paris: J. Vrin; Gall’s map 
of the cranium, from Clark, E. & Dewhurst, F. (1972). An illustrated history of brain function. Oxford: Sand-
ford publ.; The brain of Leborgne (Tan), b. Broca’s area, from De Ajuriaguerra, J. & Hécaen, H. (1960). Le 
cortex cerebral, etude neuro psycho-pathologique. Paris: Masson et Cie.; Localization of the language areas. 
Wernicke’s area, the inferior parietal lobe, angular gyrus, Broca’s area, from Hécaen, H. (1972). Introduction 
à la neuropsychologie. Paris: Libraire Larousse; Linguistic ‘ﬂow chart’ according to Wernicke, from Wer-
nicke, C. (1903). Der aphasische Symptomen Complex. Deutsche Klinik; The Wernicke-Lichtheim ‘house’ 
model of 1855, from Caplan, D. (1987). Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology: An introduction. Cam-
bridge: CUP; Freud’s language ﬁeld, from Caplan, D. (1987). Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology: An 
introduction. Cambridge: CUP; Syllable structure and vulnerability of consonants in the word play, from 
Harris (1998) in Visch-Brink, E. & Bastiaanse, R. (eds), Linguistic levels in aphasiology. London: Singular; 
Semantic associative ﬁelds, from Goodglass, H. & Baker, E. (1976). Semantic ﬁeld, naming and auditory 
comprehension in aphasia. Brain and Language 3; Reading and writing processes, from Ellis, A. (1984). 
Reading, writing and dyslexia: A cognitive analysis. London: LEA; OR network & AND network & NOT 
network & XOR network, from Franklin, S. (1999). Artiﬁcial minds. Cambridge MA: The MIT Press.

List of tables
Table 2.1. Jakobson’s description of Luria’s aphasia types
29
Table 3.1. Aphasia types, according to BDAE
40
Table 3.2. The most typical locations of lesions for the BDAE aphasia types
41
Table 6.1. Semantic features distinguishing some categories denoting humans
82
Table 7.1. Pragmatic and discourse phenomena (relevant objects of study)
100
Table 10.1. Levels in Brown’s evolution-based model of brain structure
137
Table 10.2. Feeling, thought, perception, and language in Brown’s model
137
Table 10.3. Disorders in Brown’s model
138
Table 10.4. A uniﬁed theory of child-onset language disorders
141
Table 11.1. Types of information and degrees of intentionality and control in 
ordinary face-to-face interaction
151

List of ﬁgures
Figure 2.1. The localist–holist continuum, with a simpliﬁed placement of 
diﬀerent views
10
Figure 2.2. Intelligence localized in the ventricles (Herophilus)
12
Figure 2.3. The function of the pineal gland (Descartes)
13
Figure 2.4. Gall’s map of the cranium
15
Figure 2.5. a. The brain of Leborgne (Tan), b. Broca’s area
17
Figure 2.6. Wernicke’s area
18
Figure 2.7. Localization of the language areas. Wernicke’s area, the inferior 
parietal lobe, angular gyrus, Broca’s area
19
Figure 2.8. Linguistic “ﬂow chart” according to Wernicke
19
Figure 2.9. The Wernicke-Lichtheim “house” model of 1855 
20
Figure 2.10. Freud’s language ﬁeld
23
Figure 3.1. How naming happens, according to Geschwind 
39
Figure 3.2. Typical localizations of lesions associated with types, according to 
the Boston classiﬁcation
42
Figure 3.3. Blocks (units) and zones of the brain, according to Luria
43
Figure 3.4. Types of aphasia, with approximate localization of main factor, 
according to Luria
44
Figure 3.5. PALPA model of word comprehension and production
48
Figure 4.1. Paradigmatic substitution
57
Figure 4.2. Syntagmatic substitution
57
Figure 4.3. Syllable structure and vulnerability of consonants in the word 
play (from Harris, 1998, p. 97)
62
Figure 5.1. Syntactic tree structure of The man was eaten by the frog
72
Figure 5.2. Syntactic tree for the corresponding active sentence, The frog ate 
the man
73
Figure 5.3. “Minimalist” syntactic tree, showing tense and agreement nodes 
(the curved line marks the site of agrammatic “pruning”)
76
Figure 6.1. A partial prototype ﬁeld for BIRD (the words in the ﬁgure stand 
for images)
81

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
xii
Figure 6.2. Examples of objects: glass – cup – bowl – plate
82
Figure 6.3. Semantic ﬁeld relations (similarity and contiguity)
84
Figure 6.4. Semantic associative ﬁelds from Goodglass and Baker (1976)
84
Figure 6.5. Levelt’s serial production model
92
Figure 6.6. How an interactive model with layers for semantics, words, and 
phonemes might look (simpliﬁed)
93
Figure 8.1. Reading and writing processes (Main source: Ellis, 1984)
113
Figure 9.1. Parallel recovery
122
Figure 9.2. Selective recovery
123
Figure 9.3. Diﬀerential recovery (L1 and L2 not recovered to the same extent)
123
Figure 9.4. Successive recovery (L1 and L2 not recovered at the same time)
124
Figure 9.5. Alternating antagonism
124
Figure 13.1. Formal neuron
170
Figure 13.2. OR network
170
Figure 13.3. AND network
170
Figure 13.4. NOT network
170
Figure 13.5. XOR network
171
Figure 13.6. A weight matrix representing the weight space for an XOR 
network
174
Figure 14.1. Lateral view: Cortex, brain stem, cerebellum, cingulate (brain 
stem)
180
Figure 14.2. Schematic cross-section showing commissures 
180
Figure 14.3. Left cortex: lobes and sulci (ﬁssures) 
181
Figure 14.4. Neuron
184
Figure 14.5. Synapse
185
Figure 14.6. Brodmann map
186

Part I
Introduction to neurolinguistics


Chapter 1
What is neurolinguistics?
In this chapter:
• 
What is included in neurolinguistics?
• 
Diﬀerent views of the relation between brain 
and language
• 
The central questions of neurolinguistics
• 
Outline of the book
What is neurolinguistics?
Neurolinguistics studies the relation of language and communication to diﬀerent as-
pects of brain function, in other words it tries to explore how the brain understands 
and produces language and communication. This involves attempting to combine 
neurological/neurophysiological theory (how the brain is structured and how it func-
tions) with linguistic theory (how language is structured and how it functions). Apart 
from neurology and linguistics, psychology is another central source discipline for 
neurolinguistics. Neurolinguistics has a very close relationship to psycholinguistics, 
but focuses more on studies of the brain. Studies of language and communication after 
brain damage are perhaps the most common type of neurolinguistic studies. However, 
experiments, model construction, computer simulations, and neuroimaging studies 
are also very frequently used methods today.
In order to identify relevant models and frameworks of neurolinguistics, let us ﬁrst 
try to delimit this research ﬁeld. The main questions of interest for neurolinguistics 
(see the section with this title below) were ﬁrst addressed very far back in history. 
There was a period of intensiﬁed focus in the late 19th century; since then, they have 
become central to researchers in many disciplines. “Neurolinguistics” became the es-
tablished term for the ﬁeld in the 1960s, under the inﬂuence of the Chomskyan boost 
to linguistics and the development of psycholinguistics as a deﬁned ﬁeld. The subject 
matter of neurolinguistics is described in the introduction to the series of volumes 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
4
known as Studies in Neurolinguistics, edited by Whitaker and Whitaker in the 1970s, 
as follows: even though the ﬁeld of neurolinguistics is frankly interdisciplinary, there 
is a common theme of the relationships between language and the brain (Whitaker & 
Whitaker, 1976, p. xi). 
A similar description, although more focused on functional aspects, can be found 
in the introductory description of Brain and Language, one of the most inﬂuential 
journals in this ﬁeld:
human language or communication (speech, hearing, reading, writing, or nonverbal 
modalities) related to any aspect of the brain or brain function (Brain and Language: 
“Description”)
The common problem in relating aspects of language or communication to brain 
function in this dynamic formulation, is posed by Luria in Basic problems in neuro-
linguistics: what are the real processes of formation of verbal communication and its 
comprehension, and what are the components of these processes and the conditions 
under which they take place (Luria, 1976, p. 3).
The interdisciplinary character of the ﬁeld
The many disciplines dealing with neurolinguistics provide inspiration and energy 
to the ﬁeld. They introduce many diﬀerent kinds of data, theories, and models for 
research.
The editors of Studies in Neurolinguistics in the 1970s described the series as “het-
erogeneous both in theoretical perspective and in topical coverage” and they claimed 
that the discipline at the time was “not working under a uniform paradigm and there 
[were] not a few, narrowly deﬁned areas of research” (Whitaker & Whitaker, 1979, 
p. xi). They also refer to substantial disagreements among the researchers in the ﬁeld. 
They do, however, also mention the positive side of heterogeneity: the richness and 
diversity of ideas and the fact that “attempts at synthesis must take account of many 
diﬀerent kinds of data” (Whitaker & Whitaker, 1977, p. xi). To these points, we should 
add that not only data, but also theories, paradigms, models, and frameworks from 
diﬀerent disciplines need to be taken into account, that synthesis seems necessary in 
this diverse ﬁeld, and that, at the same time, diversity necessarily increases with further 
specialization. 
Which disciplines have to be taken into account in neurolinguistics? Brain and 
Language states that its interdisciplinary focus includes the ﬁelds of linguistics, neu-
roanatomy, neurology, neurophysiology, philosophy, psychology, psychiatry, speech 
pathology, and computer science. These disciplines may be the ones most involved 
in neurolinguistics, but several other disciplines are also highly relevant, having 
contributed to theories, methods, and ﬁndings in neurolinguistics. They include 

Chapter 1. What is neurolinguistics?
5
neurobiology, anthropology, chemistry, cognitive science, and artiﬁcial intelligence. 
Thus, the humanities, and medical, natural, and social sciences, as well as technology 
are all represented.
Diﬀerent views on the relation between brain and language
A number of diﬀerent views about the relationship between brain and language have 
existed and still do. Some of those that have had a considerable inﬂuence are men-
tioned below.
Localism tries to ﬁnd locations or centers in the brain for diﬀerent language 
functions. Associationism situates language functions in the connections between 
diﬀerent areas of the brain, making it possible to associate, for example, perceptions 
of diﬀerent senses with words and/or “concepts.” Dynamic localization of function 
assumes that functional systems of localized subfunctions perform language functions. 
Such systems are dynamic, and thus they can be reorganized during language devel-
opment or after brain damage. Holistic theories consider many language functions 
to be handled by widespread areas of the brain working together. Evolution-based 
theories stress the relationship between how the brain and language evolved over time 
in diﬀerent species, how they develop in children, and how adults perform language 
functions.
The central questions of neurolinguistics
Some of the central questions for neurolinguistics are:
• 
What happens to language and communication after brain damage of diﬀerent 
types?
• 
How did the ability to communicate and the ability to use language develop as 
the species evolved? How can we relate this development to the evolution of the 
brain?
• 
How do children learn to communicate and use language? How can we relate their 
acquisition of language to the development of their brains?
• 
How can we measure and visualize processes in the brain that are involved in 
language and communication?
• 
How can we make good models of language and communication processes that 
will help us to explain the linguistic phenomena that we study? 
• 
How can we make computer simulations of language processing, language devel-
opment, and language loss?
• 
How can we design experiments that will allow us to test our models and hypoth-
eses about language processing?

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
6
The ﬁrst of the questions above occupies a special place in neurolinguistics. Aphasia 
is deﬁned as “language loss due to brain damage.” The cause can, for example, be an 
infarction (blockage of blood vessels in the brain), a hemorrhage (bursting of a blood 
vessel), or a head trauma. The eﬀect of the lesion is that the comprehension and/or 
production of language is changed. By studying these changes, we can study how 
functional systems related to language work and which brain structures are involved 
in them. People have always studied the loss of diﬀerent abilities in order to map the 
functions of the brain. When it comes to higher cognitive abilities, such as language, 
this poses many problems, but the data acquired from studies of aphasia have roughly 
the same degree of reliability as the data obtained with other neurolinguistic methods. 
Aphasiology or linguistic aphasiology is the dominant branch of neurolinguistics. 
Aphasia is an acquired language disorder, often deﬁned as a focal lesion (i.e., a lesion 
of one or more speciﬁc areas). Acquired disorders are also caused by progressive neu-
rological diseases, such as dementias. Language and memory are closely connected 
and interdependent, especially in complex higher cognitive functions. 
Not only acquired language disorders, but also developmental language dis-
orders, that is, disorders that are found in children who have not experienced any 
speciﬁc lesion event, are of interest to neurolinguistics. Neurolinguistic approaches 
to developmental language disorders, such as SLI (speciﬁc language disorder), and 
developmental reading and writing problems, including dyslexia, typically compare 
these conditions to similar acquired disorders, bearing in mind the special condi-
tions of language acquisition and the plasticity (ability to be molded) of young brains. 
Neurolinguists also study the language development of children with nonspeciﬁc 
developmental disorders aﬀecting language.
The development of language and speech and prerequisites for language and 
speech in the evolution of the species also need to be considered by neurolinguists. 
The changes in the structures and function of the brain are compared to diﬀerent spe-
cies’ ways of living. Animal communication systems are studied under natural condi-
tions, especially those of primates, and experiments are carried out with primates that 
are being taught human communication systems.
For a neurolinguist, an essential source of knowledge is the possibility of measur-
ing brain activity during language tasks in normal and damaged brains. Static pictures 
of the brain, where lesion sites can be seen, such as the CT scan (computer tomography 
scan), which constructs a three-dimensional picture of a lesion from X-rays of many 
planes of the brain, or the MRI (magnetic resonance image) are standard information 
in hospitals today. The measurement of dynamic activity in the brain during language 
tasks by methods such as EEG (electroencephalography), PET (positron emission 
tomography), fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging), and MEG (magnetic 
encephalography) is an important tool for research. 

Chapter 1. What is neurolinguistics?
7
Psycholinguistics, often in combination with information about brain activity in 
diﬀerent areas of the brain, provides the basis for neurolinguistic modeling of pro-
cesses for language comprehension, linguistic memory, language production, language 
acquisition, and language loss. Such models can be the basis of computer simulations 
using serial (i.e., basically “box-and-arrow”) models, models with parallel processes 
running at the same time, interconnections between processes, and feedback loops 
between levels of process models. Computer simulations involving so-called “artiﬁcial 
neural networks” (ANN) or connectionist networks are also used. The models are 
also the basis of oﬀ-line and on-line (i.e., with real-time measurement of processes) 
experiments on language functions.
Outline of the book
This introductory section will be followed by a historical overview, tracing the diﬀerent 
theoretical standpoints of neurolinguistics to their roots and following the develop-
ment of neurolinguistics. The models and frameworks that form the basis of today’s 
neurolinguistic research and practice will then be presented in more detail.
In the second part of the book, we will examine diﬀerent aspects of neurolinguis-
tics, (i.e., phonetics/phonology, morphology/syntax, lexicon/semantics, and pragmat-
ics). The interaction between the diﬀerent aspects will also be stressed.
The third part covers certain speciﬁc themes and phenomena from a neurolin-
guistic perspective. These phenomena are reading and writing processes, multilin-
gualism, evolutionary and developmental perspectives on brain and language, and 
multimodality.
The book also contains a fourth part with three resource chapters. The ﬁrst chap-
ter of part 4 brieﬂy presents some methods for investigating the brain (neuroimaging 
techniques) and the second chapter introduces computer simulation using artiﬁcial 
neural network (ANN) models. The chapter on ANN is included, since ANN model-
ing is increasingly popular in neurolinguistics . It is, however, a bit more technical than 
the other chapters . A ﬁnal resource chapter provides a short introduction to neuro-
anatomy and neurophysiology; this chapter can be read at the outset of the course or 
consulted during the reading of the other chapters.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
8
Summary
This introductory chapter delimits the scope of neurolinguistics by deﬁning it as the study of 
the relation between brain and language. It mentions some of the deﬁnitions given and central 
questions raised by leading researchers in the area, such as the focus on language processing, 
involving predictive and explanatory psycholinguistic models, experimental studies, computer 
simulations, and the measurement of brain activity during language tasks. The central position 
of studies of language pathology after brain damage — aphasia and related disorders — and 
the related questions of language development in the species and the human individual are 
also emphasized. The main contributing disciplines — linguistics, medical neurosciences, 
psychology, and speech-language pathology — are identiﬁed. The chapter also brieﬂy outlines 
the contents of the book.
Further reading
More extensive overviews of diﬀerent areas in neurolinguistics can be found in David Caplan’s 
introductory book from 1987 and in the Handbook of Neurolinguistics, which contains short 
chapters on a number of topics in neurolinguistics.
Caplan, D. (1987). Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology. An introduction. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Stemmer, B., & Whitaker, H. (Eds.) (1998). Handbook of neurolinguistics. New York: Academic 
Press.
Assignments
1. 
Try to think of three important questions about language and brain that you would like 
to ﬁnd an answer to. Think about the diﬀerent contributing disciplines and what type of 
relevant investigations, methods, and potential ﬁndings they might come up with to help 
answer the question.
2. 
Imagine a study you would like to carry out on one of these questions. Try to develop an 
outline of the actual design using methods that the diﬀerent disciplines might contribute.
3. 
Try to describe what you think happens when you (silently) read (a) a word, (b) a text. 
Which diﬀerent functions are needed and in what order?
4. 
Now, try to describe what happens when a child reads his or her ﬁrst words. How does this 
diﬀer from when you read a word?
Keep your answers to these questions handy and return to them when you have read the main 
parts of the book.

Chapter 2
The development of theories 
about brain and language
In this chapter:
• 
Diﬀerent views of the brain–language relationship
• 
Ideas about brain and language before the 19th 
century
• 
The foundations of neurolinguistic theories in the 
late 19th century
• 
Further developments in the 20th century
Diﬀerent views of the brain–language relationship
As we saw in Chapter 1, a number of diﬀerent views of the relationship between the 
brain and language have existed and still exist. We will ﬁrst very brieﬂy describe some 
that have had a relatively great inﬂuence. We will return to them later in the chapter 
and see how they ﬁrst arose, how they developed, and what their inﬂuence is today.
Figure 2.1 below presents an approximation of diﬀerent views of the language–
brain relationship along the continuum from localism to holism.
Localism
Localism claims that diﬀerent “higher functions” are localized in diﬀerent centers of 
the brain, mainly the cortex. Either these centers can be seen as “sisters,” being equally 
important, or one center, such as the prefrontal area (in front of the frontal lobes), may 
be seen as superordinate to the others. In this view, aphasia is seen as the result of a 
lesion in a language center. Well-known localists include Gall and Broca.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
10
Associationism (or connectionism)
Associationism assumes that higher functions are dependent on the connections 
between diﬀerent centers in the cortex. Linguistic ability is seen as the relationship 
between images and words. Aphasia results from broken connections between the cen-
ters that are needed for linguistic function. Representatives of this view are Wernicke, 
Lichtheim, and Geschwind. This view is also sometimes called the classical (Wernicke-
Lichtheim) or neoclassical (Geschwind) view.
Dynamic localization of function
With this type of theory, diﬀerent subfunctions are seen as localized in diﬀerent parts 
of the brain. These subfunctions must be combined in order to achieve more complex 
functions, which can be “put together” in a number of diﬀerent ways. The relationship 
between a localized lesion and the functions that are disturbed becomes more complex 
in this case. This is the view of Luria, for example.
Hierarchical or evolution-based view
Evolution-based theories emphasize the layered structure of the brain from inner/
lower and more primitive structures to the later developed and superimposed cortical 
layer and the role of all of these layers in language and communication. Jackson is an 
early representative of this view, Brown a contemporary one.
Localism
Gall
Broca
Associationism/
Connectionism/
Classical/
Neoclassical
Wernicke-Lichtheim
Geschwind
Dynamic
localization of
function
Vygotsky
Luria
Hierarchical/
Evolutionary
Jackson,
Brown
Holism
Marie
Head
Goldstein
Figure 2.1. The localist–holist continuum, with a simpliﬁed placement of diﬀerent views

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
11
Holism
Holism is the opinion that the brain works as a whole, at least to accomplish higher 
functions. The cortex is said to handle, for example, “higher cognitive functions,” 
“symbolic thinking,” “intelligence,” or “abstraction,” and aphasia is a sign of a general 
cognitive loss, not a speciﬁc language loss. This view has also been called “cognitiv-
ism” and some representatives are Marie, Head, and Goldstein. Hierarchical views are 
also sometimes deemed to be holistic and Jackson is regarded as the founder of the 
“cognitive school.”
Other terms: Unitarism and equipotentiality
Other terms that are used for one unitary function of the brain are “unitarism,” the 
view that the soul is one and cannot be divided, and “equipotentiality,” which means 
that all parts of the cortex have the same functional potential and that the size of a 
brain lesion determines the extent of the aphasia (the mass eﬀect).
Ideas about Brain and Language before the 19th Century
Ancient Egypt, Greece, and Rome
The ﬁrst reference to the brain as the center of language is found in the Edwin Smith 
papyrus from about 3500 BC. Here we ﬁnd observations that damage to the head can 
result in symptoms in other parts of the body and that this must depend on the func-
tion of the brain. Language loss is said to be caused by an external god or death sending 
its spirit or breath into the brain, so that the patient becomes “silent in sadness.” This 
condition was cured by trepanation, or drilling a hole in the skull to let the god’s spirit 
out. The earlier view that the soul resided in the heart continued to exist.
In writings from Greek antiquity, language disorders are discussed, for example, by 
Hippocrates (400 BC), who described a man who lost his memory for letters; he also 
observed that language disorders coincided with hemiparesis (paralysis of one side 
of the body) in the side of the body opposite to that of the brain lesion. According to 
Hippocrates, the brain was the organ of the intellect (mnemonikon) and the heart was 
the organ of the senses. Around the same time, Democritus compared the brain to a 
guard or sentinel with two functions: the internal function of guarding the intelligence 
and the external function of guarding the senses. Herophilus localized intelligence in 
the ventricles (cavities) of the brain at about 300 BC. This view remained dominant for 
a long time and was still found as late as the end of the 18th century.
Plato (4th century BC) wanted to localize the diﬀerent abilities of the soul in dif-
ferent parts of the brain, which he saw as the center of all senses. It was with Plato that 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
12
the idea arose that a function could have a one-to-one relationship with an area in 
the brain. Aristotle, on the other hand, claimed that the brain was just a refrigerating 
system, while the heart was the center of all nerves; this opinion did not have much 
inﬂuence in the long run. His “ﬂow charts” for psychological processes, from the sense 
organs to cognition and from cognition to motor functions — e.g., sense organ → 
sensation → perception → cognition → memory — did, on the other hand, inﬂuence 
later models of language functions.
Galen (3rd century BC) further developed the view that diﬀerent abilities were lo-
calized in diﬀerent ventricles. Pneuma in the ventricles was described as “instruments 
of the soul.” Galen was a doctor for the Roman gladiators and found support for his 
theory in the brain lesions that he saw, which only seemed to disturb consciousness if 
they were deep enough to aﬀect the ventricles.
From the Middle Ages to 1800
During this period, a number of case descriptions appeared, describing diﬀerent 
types of language disorders. Theoretically, the discussion of the ventricles of the brain 
continued. Memory was assumed to be localized in the fourth ventricle and the Ital-
ian physician Antonio Guainerio suggested in the 15th century that word sparsity 
and naming errors were symptoms of a disturbance of memory, caused by too much 
phlegm in the fourth ventricle. In the 16th century, these theories about the ventricles 
Figure 2.2. Intelligence localized in the ventricles (Herophilus)

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
13
were criticized by anatomists Costanzo Varolius and Andreas Vesalius, both of whom 
wanted to localize psychological functions in the soft substance of the brain and to 
stress the importance of brain volume.
In the 17th century, the school of unitarism. René Descartes held the view that the 
soul was “indivisible” and had its center in the pineal gland, an organ that is located 
in the middle of the brain (cf. Descartes, 1974). Physician Thomas Willis (1664,1672) 
placed the imagination in the corpus callosum (a bundle of ﬁbers connecting the two 
brain hemispheres). Memory traces of pictures were also placed in the corpus callosum. 
The corpus striatum (an organ inside the brain) was believed to be able to create a picture 
of sensory impressions, but this picture could not be complete without “help” from the 
corpus callosum. François de la Peyronie (1741), a French surgeon, also saw the corpus 
callosum as the center of the soul. Unitarian theories were criticized by the anatomist 
Albrecht von Haller as “theories without knowledge.” They were, however, supported by 
the church and the monarchy at the time, since the idea of the soul as one unit, possibly 
located in one central brain structure, was consistent with religious dogma.
In 1770, the German physician Johann Gesner wrote a monograph called “Speech 
amnesia,” which contained six case studies. He saw speech disorders as a type of 
memory disorder, caused by inertia in the connections between the diﬀerent parts of 
the brain. These disorders were assumed to cause diﬃculties in associating images or 
abstract ideas with linguistic signs. Here, we ﬁnd the ﬁrst expression of an association-
ism which is clearly combined with neurophysiological speculation.
Localist views were also being expressed at this time and descriptions of personal 
experiences of speech and language loss were published, for example, Goethe’s story 
Figure 2.3. The function of the pineal gland (Descartes)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
14
about his grandfather and Samuel Johnson’s description of his own transient speech 
disturbance.
To sum up, at the turn of the 19th century, both theories and knowledge about 
aphasia existed. Almost all clinical types of aphasia had been described, the relation 
between aphasia and brain damage was known, and the hypothesis that aphasia was 
caused by a disconnection between “ideas” and their linguistic signs had appeared. 
Theories focused on damage to the memory organ or association processes, and 
the neurological causes were believed to be lesions in the ventricles or the brain 
substance.
The foundations of neurolinguistic theories in the late 19th century
Gall
The anatomist Franz Joseph Gall was the ﬁrst person to localize mental faculties in the 
brain cortex. The cortex had earlier been considered to be an expansion of the brain 
membranes with the function of supplying nourishment to the brain. The brain gyri 
(ridges or convolutions) in humans (as opposed to in animals) were assumed to vary 
between individuals and to be diﬀerent in the two brain hemispheres. Gall also saw 
the cortex as a morphologically uniform, continuous layer. He based this view on two 
observations: (a) cases of hydrocephalus, where the cortex had been stretched out 
because of too much liquid and thereby had lost its convolutions, but brain functions 
were unchanged; (b) the possibility of changing the structure of the convolutions by 
externally aﬀecting the cortex. Gall decided to explore and map out the surface of the 
brain (Gall & Spurzheim, 1810–1819). He explained that the cortex was the highest 
level of organization of the brain and that the cortex and other areas of gray matter are 
connected by ﬁbers of white matter.
Gall made several assumptions as the basis for his theory:
• 
that a number of innate abilities exist;
• 
that it is impossible to reduce these abilities to a unity and that they are indepen-
dent of each other;
• 
that the real nature of the abilities cannot be examined, only their material condi-
tions, which are in the organism;
• 
that these material conditions must be in the cortex.
The background of these assumptions was empirical. Gall started from observations 
of behavior, but found (unlike the pure sensationalists, who claimed that all abilities 
can be reduced to sensory impressions) that certain abilities had to be innate, since 
they could not be explained in any other way. He exempliﬁed the view of the plurality 

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
15
of mental abilities with dreams, where certain abilities are resting, while others are 
active. There ought to be many abilities and they could not be too general. The role of 
the cortex was motivated by its importance for sensory and motor functions and for 
phenomena like phantom pain (in amputated limbs), its size, and the relation between 
the size of a brain lesion and the severity of symptoms. All of these assumptions exer-
cised a major inﬂuence for about 150 years.
In order to ﬁnd out what the abilities of the soul were, Gall started from studies 
of language and, ﬁrst and foremost, from the biographies of well-known persons. In 
this way, he identiﬁed 27 human abilities. In mapping these abilities, Gall assumed 
that the development of the skull depended on the size of the cortex under it. Con-
sequently, by observing the cranium, it would be “almost” possible to examine the 
cortex. This procedure was named cranioscopy and it was from cranioscopy that 
phrenology developed; phrenology, of course, later fell into disrepute. Gall studied 
the diﬀerent abilities in a number of persons and examined their skulls. The result 
was that each of the 27 abilities was related to one cortical area, bilaterally. These areas 
included two areas for language, both in the frontal lobes, one for speech articulation 
and the other for word memory. This localization was based on Gall’s observations 
of persons with frontal lobe lesions and speech disorders. To sum up, Gall’s opinions 
were extremely localist.
Figure 2.4. Gall’s map of the cranium

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
16
After Gall
When Gall, who worked in Paris, proposed his theory (1791 and 1810), a lively debate 
followed between unitarists and localists. The conﬂict was partially political. Local-
ists were seen as hostile to the church, the pope, and the king, and as deniers of the 
immortality of the soul, while unitarists were champions of the church, the pope, and 
the divine right of kings. Those who criticized Gall, including the philosophers Hegel, 
Schopenhauer, and Comte, were more inﬂuential during this period. These critics 
claimed that it was impossible to combine two such radically diﬀerent things as be-
havior and parts of the cortex, that the abilities were too abstract, and that the theory 
had no morphological anatomical basis.
Gall’s major antagonist was French physiologist Pierre Flourens (1824). He 
claimed that there was a certain division of functions in the brain, but that the cortex 
had to work as one uniﬁed whole. He made experiments on animals, mostly birds, and 
found that it was possible to remove large parts of the cortex without any functions dis-
appearing. These ideas were to reappear later under the name of “equipotentiality.”
During this period, extensive work was done in mapping the anatomy of the cor-
tex, for example, by Luigi Rolando and Louis-Pierre Gratiolet (who was, surprisingly, 
a supporter of Flourens against Gall), and the structural layers of the cortex were 
examined in by histologists. 
Bouillaud and Auburtin
Jean-Baptiste Bouillaud can be seen as a link between Gall and Broca. He was Gall’s 
student and supported him. Bouillaud (1825) decided to prove that lesions in the 
frontal lobes caused loss of speech. He claimed, against Flourens, that limited cortical 
lesions cause partial muscle paralysis, which showed that there were speciﬁc centers in 
the cortex. He presented a series of cases where speech disorders were correlated with 
frontal lobe lesions and a series of cases with lesions of other lobes where there were 
no speech disorders. Bouillaud found two types of speech disorders connected to brain 
damage: disorders of “speech movements” and disorders of “word memory”; this was 
in accordance with the abilities assumed by Gall. The unitarists made counterargu-
ments. They produced patients who had lesions in the frontal lobes but no speech loss, 
and patients who had speech loss following lesions in other lobes. Progress had been 
made since Gall in two respects: (a) there was a better idea of what to localize, after 
clinical observations of language loss, among other things; (b) there was also a better 
idea of where to localize, because of the mapping of the cortex.
Ernest Auburtin was Bouillaud’s son-in-law and introduced his ideas to the an-
thropological society of Paris in 1861. He had found a patient who had attempted to 
commit suicide and shot away his skull bone over the frontal lobes. The frontal lobes 

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
17
were intact but “accessible.” Auburtin had discovered that if you pressed the frontal 
lobes with a spatula, the patient stopped talking, and he saw this as a proof of the lo-
calization of speech in the frontal lobes. The surgeon and anthropologist Paul Broca, 
who was present at the meeting, shortly thereafter found a patient who was dying and 
who had a severe speech disorder. He decided to provide further evidence in the form 
of that patient’s brain.
Broca
Traditionally, neurolinguistics is said to have been born in 1861, when Paul Broca pre-
sented his theory, based on a patient’s symptoms and the dissection of his brain. The 
patient, Leborgne, had major diﬃculties producing speech. He was called “Tan,” since 
this was his only speech output. At the autopsy, the oldest brain damage, which had 
probably caused his speech disorder (other symptoms had been added later), aﬀected 
a speciﬁc area in the brain that came to be known as Broca’s area, the third frontal 
convolution (gyrus) (pars triangularis and pars opercularis) in the left hemisphere.
After studying this patient and several others with similar symptoms, Broca pre-
sented two important hypotheses in 1865:
1. that it was possible to localize psychological functions in brain convolutions;
2. that linguistic symptoms were caused by lesions in the left hemisphere and that 
consequently language was lateralized, which was totally unexpected.
a.
 
b.
Broca’s area 
 
Figure 2.5. a. The brain of Leborgne (Tan), b. Broca’s are

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
18
Broca called the linguistic disorder aphémie (inability to speak). Broca’s theory led 
to new conﬂicts between unitarists (mostly conservative) and localists (mostly lib-
eral republicans). Furthermore, an article by Marc Dax was raised, in which he had 
already localized language in the left hemisphere as early as 1836 (Dax, 1865). Dax’s 
son claimed that he had presented his theory at a conference in Montpelier and that 
Broca was guilty of plagiarism. Broca, however, won the dispute, since it could never 
be proven that Dax had presented his theory and the article had never been published. 
Localism now became very popular and researchers worked to localize symptoms such 
as “agraphia,” “word deafness,” and “word blindness.” 
Meynert
Theodor Meynert (1885/1968) was an anatomist who became very inﬂuential because 
of his associationist theory. He examined nerve ﬁbers in the white matter in animals 
and found that they were of two types: (a) projection ﬁbers between the cortex and 
the spinal cord, and (b) association ﬁbers between diﬀerent convolutions within each 
hemisphere or between the two hemispheres. Meynert claimed that consciousness, 
intelligence, and memory were cortical but not localized. Inductive thinking was 
the result of associations between perceptions and deductive thinking was simply an 
external result of induction. He also compared the cortex of primates and humans 
and found that the human cortex was most developed around the Sylvian ﬁssure; he 
therefore believed that this area ought to be related to language function.
Other researchers examined the cortex with the help of electrical stimulation and 
found the motor, auditory, visual, and sensory centers in the dog. A couple of these 
researchers, Eduard Hitzig and David Ferrier (1886), claimed that intelligence resided 
in the frontal lobes.
Wernicke
In 1874, neurologist Carl Wernicke presented a theory based on Broca’s ﬁndings and 
on his own dissections of the brains of patients with problems understanding language. 
Wernicke’s area
Figure 2.6. Wernicke’s area

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
19
He further developed the idea that functions were localized in the brain convolutions 
(gyri). Patients with reduced language comprehension had lesions in an area that came 
to be known as Wernicke’s area, the posterior part of the ﬁrst or superior temporal 
gyrus and adjacent areas (parts of the angular gyrus, the supramarginal gyrus, and the 
second temporal gyrus are included)
Wernicke imagined that there was a speciﬁc “language gyrus” ranging from 
Wernicke’s area (responsible for the receptive function) to Broca’s area (responsible for 
Figure 2.7. Localization of the language areas. Wernicke’s area, the inferior parietal lobe, 
angular gyrus, Broca’s area
Figure 2.8. Linguistic “ﬂow chart” according to Wernicke. (Acoustique = hearing, Optique 
= vision, Tactile = tactile, Mot = word, Audition des mots = word hearing, Articulation des 
mots = word articulation) 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
20
the expressive function). Lesions in either of these areas or in the connection between 
them would cause aphasia.
Wernicke’s theory was a more elaborate model of the relationship between lin-
guistic functions and brain structures than had ever existed before. It should be noted 
that lesions in Wernicke’s area or in the connection between Wernicke’s and Broca’s 
areas also cause symptoms in language production, since the input to Broca’s area is 
disturbed. Important parts of Wernicke’s theory are:
• 
the identiﬁcation of symptom complexes,
• 
the idea of the ﬂow of information (a sort of high-level “reﬂex arc”),
• 
the idea of representation. Broca’s area is said to have a “motor representation” of 
speech, while Wernicke’s area is said to have an “auditory sound representation.” 
By assuming that aphasia could be caused by damage to the connection between 
Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas, Wernicke predicted the discovery of the type of aphasia 
now called “conduction aphasia” (most likely caused by a lesion aﬀecting the arcu-
ate fasciculus, the bundle of ﬁbers connecting the two areas, according to Norman 
Geschwind).
The theoretical viewpoint behind Wernicke’s “sensory aphasia” (also called Wer-
nicke’s aphasia) is as follows: association ﬁbers connect diﬀerent cortical areas and 
create associations between visual, auditory, and tactile representations/conceptions/
ideas of the same object. The view is that each item is born out of associations that are 
repeated and stabilized, so that for example the visual image alone is enough to evoke 
the other representations. Through the association paths, we move from “primary 
images” in one sensory modality to “secondary images,” which combine and unite all 
the images of an object, and then on to “tertiary images,” which are the foundations of 
abstract concepts and words. Consciousness of the external world is, at all times, the 
result of the state of all these connections. For example, the idea of causality exists in 
the brain and thanks to these connections. Wernicke’s view is strictly associationist and 
Figure 2.9. The Wernicke-Lichtheim “house” model of 1855 

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
21
also idealist from the philosophical perspective. Experiences of the external world do 
not correspond to states in the world but to states within of the brain. Some other well-
known associationists of that period were Jean Martin Charcot and Joseph Déjerine.
Lichtheim
German physician Ludwig Lichtheim(1885) found it necessary to postulate a third 
language center with an unspeciﬁed localization, the “concept center,” in the model 
of language function which he theoretically constructed on the basis of Wernicke’s 
model. The model includes auditory input and analysis into auditory word representa-
tions in Wernicke’s area. Then there is either transmission to Broca’s area, where motor 
word representations are formed and can be executed in articulation (repetition), or 
transmission to a concept center which can interpret the meaning of the word (un-
derstanding). Utterances can also be initiated from the concept center. In this case, 
concepts are transmitted to Broca’s area, where motor word representations are formed 
and are sent on to motor commands for speech.
In Lichtheim’s model, the following kinds of aphasia exist:
• 
Broca’s aphasia: disturbed expressive function;
• 
Wernicke’s aphasia: disturbed receptive function;
• 
Conduction aphasia (disrupted connection between Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas): 
normal comprehension, speech as in Wernicke’s aphasia, disturbed repetition;
• 
Transcortical sensory aphasia (disrupted connection between Wernicke’s area 
and the concept center): disturbed comprehension, normal spontaneous speech, 
normal repetition;
• 
Transcortical motor aphasia (disrupted connection between the concept center 
and Broca’s area): normal comprehension, disturbed spontaneous speech, normal 
repetition.
The period after Broca, Wernicke, and Lichtheim
After Broca, Wernicke, and Lichtheim, localism and associationism became the domi-
nant views. But protests had already been made in the early stages, even though they 
did not become very inﬂuential until the 1920s, when the holistic, so-called cognitive 
school started to dominate.
Armand Trousseau was the ﬁrst to challenge the localist view that thinking as such 
was not aﬀected by aphasia. He attacked Broca and concluded, on clinical grounds, 
that “intelligence is always damaged in aphasia.” The term aphasia was borrowed from 
Greek antiquity, when Sextus Empiricus had used it to denote a philosophical branch 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
22
which avoided making statements for or against anything. The term aphasia replaced 
aphemia, which could also be interpreted as meaning “bad reputation.”
In England, philosophical empiricism and associationism led to a view that dif-
fered from Wernicke’s associationism. Psychologist Alexander Bain claimed that there 
is a psycho-physical parallelism — that everything that happens psychologically also 
happens physically at the same time. Meanwhile, Herbert Spencer introduced evolu-
tionary thinking, whereby repeated associations modify the nervous system in a way 
that is then inherited from generation to generation and forms the basis of the brain’s 
intelligence. Both inﬂuenced the founder of the cognitive school, John Hughlings 
Jackson.
Jackson
Jackson was not interested in anatomical localization. Instead, he studied how stimuli 
evoke responses and how complex these responses are. Jackson distinguished two 
levels of language: automatic and propositional. The automatic level consists of ste-
reotyped sentences, certain neologisms (newly created words), and swearing. The 
propositional level is deﬁned partly by its form (sentences that express a relationship 
between two objects) and partly by its degree of ﬂexibility (the fact that it can be af-
fected by semantics and by the situation). The use of propositions is seen as a super-
imposed level. Speech is viewed as a part of thinking. Aphasia represents an inability 
to “propositionalize,” that is, to use language in the service of thought, which is why 
intelligence is necessarily reduced. Brain damage to a given area does not cause a total 
loss of function; the ability to speak still exists in aphasia, but it becomes dependent 
on emotional conditions, since the “intellectual” level has been damaged.
Jackson applied Spencer’s evolutionary principles and considered the nervous 
system as functioning and developing in a hierarchical way:
1. from simple to more complex,
2. from lower centers to higher centers,
3. from more organized centers to more complex centers,
4. from automatic to intentional.
He distinguished three levels of function: elementary reﬂexes, automatic actions, and 
intentional actions. These levels are not localized in any centers. Rather, localization is 
vertically oriented, from the low level (spinal column and brain stem) to the interme-
diate level (motor and sensory), and then on to the high level (frontal). Jackson’s often 
cited warning to other researchers was that “localization of symptoms can never be 
identiﬁed with localization of function,” which means that you cannot conclude from 
the fact that the loss of a certain ability is correlated with a lesion in a speciﬁc area that 
that function was localized in that area. He was not strictly against localization, but his 

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
23
ideas were taken up by the idealists as counterarguments to the materialist orientation 
that had been dominant in classical neurology.
Jackson was followed by David Ferrier (1886) and Karl Maria Finkelnburg (1870), 
who introduced the concept of asymbolia, or a generally decreased ability for symbolic 
thinking underlying aphasia, and Adolph Kussmaul (1876), who named the same 
disorder asemia (inability to use signs). Jackson’s theories were presented as early as 
1874 and 1875, but remained relatively unknown until they were adopted by Head in 
the 1920s (Jackson, 1932, Head 1926).
Freud
Sigmund Freud also attacked Wernicke’s and Lichtheim’s associationism in his mono-
graph “On aphasia” in 1891. His criticism was that the syndromes that deﬁned diﬀer-
ent types of aphasia were really only symptoms that happened to co-occur and that 
these symptoms must be aﬀected by external conditions. Freud claimed that other 
symptom complexes were as frequent as the ones Lichtheim’s model showed and that 
this model was therefore incomplete. He suggested that language could be represented 
in a “ﬁeld” in the border area between the temporal, parietal and occipital lobes, where 
all the properties of an object were connected in a network (smell, taste, look, sound 
representation, etc.). Lesions in the periphery of this network were claimed to be com-
mon in aphasia.
Freud did not work out his theory in more detail. It did not attract much notice 
during his lifetime and had no inﬂuence on research at that time. In later years, it 
became popular, since it contained thoughts that pointed forward, for instance, about 
the pragmatic inﬂuence on linguistic symptoms.
a.
b.
Figure 2.10. a, b. Freud’s language ﬁeld

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
24
Further developments in the 20th century
The strengthening of holism: Marie, von Monakow, Head, Goldstein, 
Lashley, Bay, and Brown
By around 1900, localism and associationism were totally dominant. But at this time, 
support for holism was increasing in philosophy and the wind started to change. In 
1896, the philosopher Henri Bergson argued in favor of idealism, in which active, 
dynamic plans are the basis of consciousness (and thus there is no material “brain 
memory”). The Würzburg school of psychology claimed that abstract thoughts are 
primary and independent and cannot be reduced to sensory impressions and images. 
A return to “Platonism” (i.e., primary abstract ideas) was suggested.
A holistic school of neurologists and psychologists now claimed that “symbolic 
activity” is the main mental process and that brain damage results in a reduction of 
this function. In these researchers’ view, the description of behavior and psychological 
analyses was more important than examinations of the brain.
Another important event occurred in 1898, when Albert Pitres described “am-
nestic aphasia,” or diﬃculties in ﬁnding words in spontaneous speech and in naming 
objects. This type of aphasia did not ﬁt into the localist-associationist models.
Neurologist Pierre Marie saw aphasia as a disorder that had to contain an intellec-
tual defect. This “lack in general intelligence” was the same as Wernicke’s aphasia, while 
Broca’s aphasia constituted aphasia plus anarthria (articulatory diﬃculties). By “general 
intelligence,” Marie meant the “ability to manipulate acquired knowledge.” His article 
“The third frontal lobe convolution has no linguistic function whatsoever” in 1906 was 
a ﬁerce attack on Broca and attracted a lot of attention. It contained clinical data that 
showed that Broca’s area was not necessarily the center of speech production.
At ﬁrst, Constantin von Monakow was a localist, but then he changed sides. He 
argued for “localization in time” instead of in space. According to von Monakow 
(1911, 1914), there are, on the one hand, neural mechanisms that perform primitive 
(sensory and motor) functions immediately; damage to these mechanisms produce 
deﬁned eﬀects. On the other hand, there are neural mechanisms that work over time 
and perform higher functions. Lesions in the latter mechanisms produce an inhibitory 
eﬀect that aﬀects the entire cortex. This hits the latest acquired and least automatic 
functions. Thus, the damage aﬀects functions, not centers, and it is the process in time 
that is damaged, for instance, by a change of thresholds for nerve activation. When 
acquired intentional functions are destroyed, they are replaced by more automatic 
ones (in a regression to an earlier stage).
Henry Head, who published Jackson’s work, was the most severe critic of localism 
and associationism, the proponents of which he called “diagram makers” and accused 
of having achieved “chaos” with their increasingly complex models.

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
25
Head himself was an adherent of Jackson’s and von Monakow’s theories about 
the brain as a hierarchic organization of functions as a result of evolution. In his view, 
brain damage caused “asymbolia” aﬀecting both verbal and nonverbal functions. He 
developed a test battery where verbal tasks were supplemented by nonverbal tasks, 
such as imitating a body posture, drawing pictures, and setting watches. According to 
Head, the extent of the lesion determined the seriousness of the symbolic disturbance. 
He found four diﬀerent types of aphasia, which he claimed represented diﬀerent “as-
pects of symbolic thinking”: verbal aphasia (motor), syntactic aphasia (agrammatism), 
nominal aphasia (naming disorder), and semantic aphasia (meaning disorder), and in 
fact he also tried to localize them. 
The principles underlying Head’s theory were as follows:
1. When all levels of an activity are damaged, the most complex and the most recent 
are damaged ﬁrst and most.
2. Negative manifestations of a lesion are noticed at the damaged level.
3. A lesion causes eﬀects that are positive and disinhibits activities that are normally 
controlled by functions at the damaged level.
4. The functions of the central nervous system have developed slowly in a process 
from lower to higher functions.
5. The integration of the function of the whole nerve system is based on competition 
between many physiological activities for the possibility to be expressed.
The idea of negative and positive eﬀects of damage was a new formulation of Jackson’s 
ideas. According to Head, aphasia was dominated by negative phenomena. On the 
positive side, only automatisms occurred. Head exerted a major inﬂuence on research 
during the ﬁrst half of the 20th century.
The psychiatrist Kurt Goldstein was another holist, and one who was to become 
even more inﬂuential. His ideas coincided with a growing interest in holistic methods 
and he had a reputation as a broad-minded neurologist who produced fascinating ac-
counts of speech disorders. Goldstein was inﬂuenced by gestalt theory and experimen-
tal rationalism. Together with the psychologist Adhemar Gelb, he examined amnestic 
aphasia (naming disorders). This type of aphasia seemed to coincide with an inability 
to sort and categorize colors and objects. In 1948, Goldstein presented his theory that 
an “inability to assume an abstract attitude” caused aphasia. “Abstract attitude,” accord-
ing to Goldstein, involves being able to:
• 
take initiative,
• 
change and choose aspects,
• 
simultaneously keep diﬀerent aspects in memory,
• 
extract what is important from a totality,
• 
plan symbolic use,
• 
distinguish the self from the external world.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
26
Abstract attitude is lacking in patients with anomia (inability to name), since they 
cannot categorize, and in patients with agrammatism (diﬃculties using grammatical 
morphemes and function words), since they cannot use elements that “have no mean-
ing in isolation.” In his description of abstract attitude, Goldstein mixes psychological 
factors, such as the ability to separate ﬁgure and ground, with physiological factors, 
like spreading and activation (i.e., the fact that stimuli can activate an abnormally large 
area in the cortex if thresholds of activation for neurons are changed by brain damage, 
which makes the patient unable to detect, for example, exactly where somebody is 
touching his skin). An abstract attitude is required for the fully eﬃcient use of language 
and therefore the linguistic disorder arises secondarily. Words lose their function to 
organize the external world.
Goldstein assumed diﬀerent positions with respect to localization, but he was 
mainly an anti-localist. He claimed that the cortex could be separated into a “pe-
ripheral part” with structural localization and a “central part” which is equipotential 
and constructs “dynamic structures” against a “dynamic background.” Lesions in the 
central part cause a loss of abstract attitude.
It was Karl Lashley (1933, 1950), a physiologist, who presented the theory of cere-
bral equipotentiality and mass eﬀect. Equipotentiality means that all parts of the cortex 
have the same “ability” and mass eﬀect means that functions are dependent on how 
much of the cortex is used. Lashley claimed that studies of humans were too unreliable, 
due to humans’ complex behavior, and therefore concentrated on experiments with 
rats in mazes. He accepted speciﬁed functions only for motor and sensory projection 
areas and objected to attempts to localize mental functions. He emphasized that psy-
chological unity does not guarantee neurological unity; for example, many structures 
participate in intentional movements. Lashley tried to identify diﬀerent integrative 
mechanisms, such as intensity, spatial orientation and serial ordering.
Inspired by Marie, Bay (1962) suggested that speech is dependent on a large 
number of “extralinguistic” factors, which are disturbed by brain damage. In aphasia, 
the transmission of information is disturbed. This disorder always involves a reduced 
intellect. The aphasic patient’s concepts become pathologically distorted, which can be 
seen in tasks like drawing or sculpting. The same defect is noticed in speech: concepts 
become fuzzy, deformed, and poorly diﬀerentiated. 
Jason Brown’s theory of aphasia is inspired by Jackson, von Monakow, and Freud. 
It contains, among other things, evolutionary aspects and a regression hypothesis com-
bined with a functional view of aphasia. He raises the connections between emotions, 
degree of consciousness and intentionality, creativity, and language. Brown’s theory is 
presented in several books, including Mind, brain and consciousness from 1977. (See 
also Chapter 10.)

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
27
Localism and associationism
Localism continued to survive but it did not attract much attention during the ﬁrst half 
of the 20th century. Some examples are mentioned below.
Swedish neurologist Salomon Henschen (1926) formulated a detailed model on 
the basis of all the clinical pathological cases of aphasia that had been described to that 
point. The model contained a large number of separate centers for diﬀerent aspects of 
language function.
Korbinian Brodmann (1909), another neurologist, divided the cortex into numer-
ous histologically deﬁned areas, each of which had a determined physiological func-
tion. His numbering system is still used to give exact references to areas of the brain 
(see Figure 14.6 in Chapter 14).
Karl Kleist (1916) investigated war injuries from the First World War and tried 
to ﬁnd a psychological explanation for each cyto- and myeloarchitectonic (related to 
cellular patterns and myelinated nerve cell patterns, respectively) area. Speech and 
language were localized according to tradition.
Johannes Nielsen (1947) devoted himself to the anatomical-physiological classiﬁ-
cation of cortical functions. He distinguished between receptive and aﬀerent signals, 
and between primary identiﬁcation through one sense and secondary identiﬁcation 
via associations of diﬀerent senses at a higher level. According to Nielsen, recognition 
means receiving impressions and comparing them to engrams (physical alterations 
of nerve tissue in response to stimuli). Remembering, on the other hand, is starting 
from the concept and identifying it with an engram, which takes place at a higher level. 
Two types of aphasia can then occur: (a) a type that changes the connection between 
language and recognition, and (b) a type that changes the “signiﬁcation” (what Head 
called “semantic aphasia”). The latter is not localized in speciﬁc areas; rather, any le-
sion can aﬀect the whole system. The destruction of a projection area causes a total 
loss of function, while the destruction of an adjacent zone causes agnosia (inability 
to recognize) and the destruction of association zones that are not localized results in 
memory disorders. Thus, this theory is strongly inspired by associationism.
Associationism is rediscovered by Geschwind
Associationism continues to be very inﬂuential today. It was Norman Geschwind who 
rediscovered associationism and made it known as “connectionism,” or the neoclas-
sical school of neurolinguistics, in his 1965 book Disconnection syndromes in animals 
and man. (For more information, see Chapter 3.)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
28
Dynamic localization of function: Pavlov, Vygotsky, and Luria
Dynamic localization of function is a tradition originating in Russia which developed 
during the 20th century in parallel with the other traditions. Today, it also has consid-
erable inﬂuence in Western Europe and the U.S.
The well-known physiologist Ivan Pavlov (1949) claimed that complex behavior 
could not be handled by isolated and ﬁxed brain structures, but must emerge during 
the ontogenetic development of dynamic systems. These systems were said to consist 
of connected structures in diﬀerent places within the nervous system.
Psychologist Lev Vygotsky emphasized that it is necessary to ﬁrst investigate what 
is to be localized, before asking the question where. Functions must be analyzed with 
respect to ontogenetic development. Vygotsky (1970) saw a function as a complex ac-
tivity whereby the whole organism adapts to a task. The activity can be performed in 
diﬀerent ways, because of the cooperation of several organs. This dynamic cooperation 
is controlled by neural structures that monitor diﬀerent organs and are localized in 
diﬀerent places. Vygotsky also formulated a theory about the development of language 
and thinking that became very inﬂuential.
The noted psychologist and aphasiologist Alexander Luria studied aphasia within 
the framework of the theory of dynamic localization of function. Luria’s work has been 
extremely inﬂuential in aphasia research, and especially in clinical work. (It will be 
further discussed in Chapter 3.)
The test psychological tradition
Theodore Weisenburg and Katherine McBride investigated cognitive factors in per-
sons with aphasia, persons with right-hemisphere lesions, and control subjects, using a 
large test battery of verbal and nonverbal tasks. Their methodology became the model 
for a large number of studies. The results showed that persons with aphasia varied a 
great deal cognitively. In general, aphasia was associated with a cognitive disorder, but 
there was no necessary correlation. Certain persons with severe aphasia had excellent 
results on nonverbal tests. Thus, there was no support for Head’s theories. Weisenburg 
and McBride claimed that the importance of language for thinking must diﬀer in dif-
ferent individuals and that the intellect before the lesion must be determinant.
Many psychologists were inspired by Weisenburg and McBride and by Goldstein 
and developed experiments for testing “symbolic thinking” in aphasics. Subjects with 
aphasia performed classiﬁcation tasks, Raven’s matrices (analogy tests), and similar 
tests. The results most often showed considerable variability, and the general conclu-
sion was that the cognitive disorder, where such a disorder existed, could not be attrib-
uted to the linguistic disorder. Nevertheless, certain types of cognitive disorders were 
often found in persons with aphasia, such as diﬃculties in discriminating faces and 

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
29
interpreting mimed actions, as well as construction apraxia (i.e., problems performing 
spatial construction tasks).
Linguists and the linguistic inﬂuence on aphasiology
Aphasia research was traditionally an area for neurologists, but philosophers and psy-
chologists have also had considerable inﬂuence on the area. In the middle of the 20th 
century, linguists joined this group. They saw studies of aphasia as a means of testing 
general theories about language. By functionally analyzing diﬀerent disorders using 
the descriptive methods of linguistics, they aimed to gain better understanding of the 
role of the brain in normal speech. The term neurolinguistics was eventually adopted 
for these studies. In 1941, Roman Jakobson published the book Kindersprache, Aphasie 
und allgemeine Lautgesetze (“Child language, aphasia and phonological universals”), in 
which he pointed out parallels between linguistic universals, children’s language devel-
opment, and symptoms of aphasia. At this point, he was the only linguist to systemati-
cally describe aphasia within the structuralist framework. Jakobson applied Ferdinand 
de Saussure’s principle of paradigmatic and syntagmatic relations in language. If lan-
guage consisted of two types of operations — choice of units and combination of units 
— then two types of aphasia should be possible: (a) a disturbance of similarity, that is, 
problems choosing the right unit (paraphasias and anomia), and (b) a disturbance of 
contiguity, or problems combining units (agrammatism) (Jakobson, 1964).
After entering into contact with Luria, Jakobson extended his theory in 1964. He 
now envisaged three dichotomies for aphasia:
1. encoding — decoding (problems constructing and reconstructing utterances);
2. restriction — interruption (a diﬀerence in degree of disorder);
Table 2.1. Jakobson’s description of Luria’s aphasia types
Aphasia
eﬀerent
sensory
dynamic
semantic
aﬀerent
amnestic
Disturbed:
encoding (+) or
decoding (–)
+
–
+
–
+
–
sequence (+) or
co-occurrence (–)
+
–
+
–
–
+
Present:
interruption (+)
or
restriction (–)
+
+
–
–
(Source: Jakobson, 1964)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
30
3. sequence — co-occurrence (problems combining units or performing “simultane-
ous synthesis”; closely related to 1).
With the help of these factors, Jakobson tried to describe Luria’s aphasia types within 
the schema shown below. His description, however, is not completely clear. (Compare 
the description of Luria’s aphasia types in Chapter 3.)
Luria applied used linguistic insights in his descriptions of aphasia from quite an 
early phase and extended the linguistic parts of his writings more and more.
Linguist Noam Chomsky and the theories about language he presented in 1957 
and 1965 (the so-called “standard theory,” transformational grammar, or generative 
grammar, later minimalism) had a major inﬂuence on the linguistically oriented 
aphasia research, which started to blossom, especially in the U.S., but also in other 
countries. The theory described an abstract linguistic system, with an underlying “deep 
structure” separate from the “surface structure” of utterances and assumed intermedi-
ary “transformations.” Linguists also made a distinction between the language user’s 
competence and performance. Competence was the knowledge of a central language 
system, while performance was the observed language use. Researchers started to 
investigate how this model could be applied to aphasic symptoms. Data from aphasia 
could be used to test the theory’s “psychological reality.” Since transformational gram-
mar focused on syntax and morphology, these aspects of language were studied most, 
but studies of phonology were also done. A general theory of the biological basis for 
language, building on Chomsky’s work, was presented by Eric Lenneberg in 1967 and 
aﬀected the views of linguists and psychologists many years (as it still does today). In 
summary, Lenneberg claimed:
• 
that language is determined by innate, species-speciﬁc, biological features (spe-
cies-speciﬁc cerebral function);
• 
that this makes certain features of human languages universal (the inner form is 
common for all languages);
• 
that ontogenetic development comes about through physical maturation — “lan-
guage readiness” and progressive diﬀerentiation — up to the teenage years;
• 
that contact with the surroundings only brings the ability into play, by functioning 
as the “trigger” of an innate mechanism.
In the early 1970s, a number of neurolinguistic studies appeared, most of which ap-
plied transformational grammar to the ﬁeld, for example, Harry Whitaker’s (1971) 
On the representation of language in the human brain. He claimed that certain types 
of aphasia, such as agrammatism, pointed to a disruption of competence. He made 
the assumption that “Loss of X caused by a lesion can be seen as proof that X is part 
of the competence of a normal native speaker.” In 1971, Whitaker emphasized that 
aphasia must always constitute damage to the central language system (not the pe-

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
31
ripheral language modalities) and therefore a disorder of competence. The distinction 
between competence and performance would not be of any value to neurolinguistics, 
if both were always aﬀected. Weigl and Bierwisch (1970), on the other hand, claimed 
that aphasia data showed that the diﬀerence between competence and performance 
was real and that aphasics had disturbed performance but intact competence. Neither 
Whitaker’s nor Weigl and Bierwisch’s arguments were watertight. Arguments about 
competence and performance in aphasia are still going on.
Linguistic descriptions also contributed the descriptive aspects or “levels” of lan-
guage: semantic, syntactic, lexical, phonological, and phonetic (Whitaker, 1971) and 
researchers sought to ﬁnd “neurological evidence” from aphasia that these “levels” 
could be separated. This is another question that is still being discussed.
The transformational grammar framework for describing aphasic symptoms 
is, of course, not the only possible one. It was criticized by Crystal, Fletcher & Gar-
man (1976), who pointed out that the syntactic problems in aphasia, especially 
comprehension problems, could not readily be described in transformational gram-
mar and that another theoretical framework was needed. The structuralist methods 
of description were, according to Crystal, Fletcher and Garman, more useful. Other, 
more recent, linguistic frameworks will be presented in Part 2 of this book.
Commentary
The problems of relating the brain’s structures and dynamics to speciﬁc functions 
are many; this is especially true of the higher cognitive functions such as the use of 
language. To have a strictly materialist view of these functions and thus follow the 
same patterns as with the “simpler” motor and sensory functions means searching for 
centers or structures responsible for functions or parts of functions, localized corti-
cally or subcortically. Associationism and dynamic localization of function are more 
sophisticated views than pure localism, but still take basically the same approach. Ho-
lism, on the other hand, has a diﬀerent theoretical background, where higher cognitive 
abilities are seen as diﬀerent in nature from simpler ones and as, in principle, impos-
sible to localize in speciﬁc cortical areas. These theories are therefore more dependent 
on psychology and less dependent on anatomy and physiology.
To use data from pathological conditions in order to claim what is normal is also 
connected to great uncertainty. Brown (1977) summarizes these problems for a symp-
tom like paralysis in the following way:
Given a series of stages in the production of movement A – B – C, a damage in B 
can either remove function B from the repertoire of performance, block function A 
or disinhibit function C; a damage in B can also evoke a disturbed function B, allow 
function A to “overﬂow” or fail to activate function C. This only concerns the loss eﬀect 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
32
of the damage, and a similar set of possibilities apply to the stimulation of B. Does the 
ﬁnal symptom mirror function A, B or C, the disturbed function of the whole system 
ABC, or the rest of the brain sans [without] ABC? (Brown, 1977, p. 5)
These problems, of course, apply even more to language functions. This should be 
kept in mind when studying data from neurolinguistics and neuropsychology. “Lesion 
data” are fascinating and inspire many theories, but it is very hard to draw any deﬁnite 
conclusions about normal function from pathological ﬁndings alone.

Chapter 2. The development of theories about brain and language
33
Summary
This chapter has ﬁrst taken us through the development of neurolinguistic theories, from the 
earliest ﬁndings and ideas up to the late 19th century. We have read about Gall’s localism, 
about the localization of language functions in the convolutions of the cortex by Broca and 
Wernicke, the development of associationist frameworks by Wernicke and Lichtheim, and the 
opposition from researchers with more holist-cognitivist views, such as Marie and Jackson. 
We have also followed the developments of associationism and holism, including evolution-
based theories, and of Luria’s dynamic localization of function in the 20th century. We have 
also traced some important inﬂuences from the test psychological tradition on the methods 
of neurolinguistic experiments, and of linguistic theories, notably structuralism and generative 
linguistics, on the description and explanation of neurolinguistic phenomena. 
Further reading
The historical descriptions in this chapter are based on a number of sources, mainly the 
original works by the classical researchers, which can be recommended to anyone who is spe-
ciﬁcally interested in going further. Good overviews can be found, for example, in Caplan’s Neu-
rolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology from 1987 and in Hécaen and Lanteri-Laura’s Évolution 
des connaissances et des doctrines sur les localisations cérébrales from 1977. The four volumes of 
Studies in neurolinguistics edited by Whitaker and Whitaker in 1976–1979 contain examples of 
neurolinguistic studies from the 1970s and a good overview called Linguistic investigations in 
aphasia was provided by Ruth Lesser in 1978. 
Caplan, D. (1987). Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology: An introduction. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Hécaen, H., & Lanteri-Laura, G. (1977). Évolution des connaissances et des doctrines sur les locali-
sations cérébrales. Paris: Desclée de Brouwer.
Lesser, R. (1978). Linguistic investigations in aphasia. London: Edward Arnold.
Whitaker, H., & coeditors (1976–1979). Studies in neurolinguistics. New York: Academic Press.

Assignments
1. 
Discuss the main reasons for assuming localization of language in:
 
a. 
a central structure in the brain, such as the pineal gland or corpus callosum;
 
b. 
the ventricles (i.e., central cavities in the brain ﬁlled with cerebrospinal liquid);
 
c. 
the brain substance;
 
d. 
diﬀerent speciﬁed areas or convolutions of the cortex;
 
e. 
 widespread functional systems or networks of subfunctions involving large parts of 
the brain;
 
f. 
hierarchical layers of brain structures.

Chapter 3
Models and frameworks in 
neurolinguistics today
In this chapter:
• 
Inﬂuences: Linguistics, psychology, clinical work, 
neuroimaging, computer simulation
• 
Clusters of inﬂuence
• 
Two basic frameworks: the neoclassical and 
dynamic localization of function  approaches
• 
Developing areas: linguistic and cognitive linguistic 
theories, communication research, cognitive 
neuropsychology
Inﬂuences: Linguistics, psychology, clinical work, neuroimaging, 
computer simulation
This chapter provides an overview of the main inﬂuences on neurolinguistics at the 
beginning of the 21st century. We will see how the more classical inﬂuences, for ex-
ample, the neoclassical and Lurian traditions, as well as more hierarchical and holistic 
theories developed and how they are being combined with new theories and tech-
niques. The two basic frameworks are given a more thorough presentation here and 
new approaches and techniques are brieﬂy presented with references to Parts 2, 3, and 
4 of the book, where they will be examined in more detail.
Linguistics
One of the main linguistic inﬂuences has been the structuralist tradition (de Saussure, 
1916), where languages are described in terms of the structure of systems representing 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
36
diﬀerent aspects of language: phonology, morphology, syntax, and the lexicon are thus 
treated separately. Generative grammar, mainly in the form proposed by Chomsky 
(1965), subsequently had a large impact on one branch of neurolinguistics, dealing 
mainly with syntax. Cognitive semantics, that is, attempts to make “mental models” of 
semantic processes, has a certain inﬂuence on the study of semantic problems in apha-
sia, and vice versa. In recent years, the question of whether there is any sense in study-
ing semantics separately from pragmatics has come into focus cf. Allwood (1981). The 
contextual inﬂuence on language in interaction, interaction patterns, and conventional 
and conversational principles are considerations from pragmatics. The inﬂuence of 
philosophy, anthropology, and sociology is also noticeable. Functionalism, as opposed 
to structuralism, takes language functions to be the main objects of study.
Psychology and cognitive science (artiﬁcial intelligence)
In psychology, we ﬁnd that the methodology of test psychology, as used by Weisenburg 
and McBride (1935) in their studies of linguistic and “nonlinguistic” cognitive ability 
in aphasics and control groups, had a considerable impact on neurolinguistic method-
ology. Group studies of aphasics, using experimental design and statistical analysis, were 
widely used in the 1960s and 1970s and indeed are still used, while a methodological 
discussion, leading to increased popularity for the single case study design took place 
in the 1980s cf. Caramazza (1984). This discussion was mainly based on the consider-
able heterogeneity in groups of persons with diﬀerent types of aphasia according to 
the neoclassical typology and in general.
The use of models in neurolinguistics is very old (we can go back to the Wernicke-
Lichtheim model and even further). The serial type of process modeling, which also 
mirrors the possibilities of serial computational modeling in artiﬁcial intelligence, 
is still widely used in this area. Parallel processing and connectionist modeling, on 
the other hand, are currently the most promising computational sources of inspira-
tion (which is, of course, not unexpected, since the main principles emanate from 
the neural network metaphor). (You can read more on serial and ANN modeling in 
Chapters 6 and 13 of this book.)
Clinical work — Therapy for language disorders related to the brain
In aphasia therapy, certain methods that are used for diagnostics and training are di-
rectly related to classical frameworks, such as Luria’s theory, which targets the stepwise 
restoration of functional systems. Such methods have, for example, been designed by 
Luria (1963), Christensen (1974) and Weigl & Bierwish (1970).
Other therapies are more or less speciﬁcally and directly related to the theoreti-
cal assumptions of the Wernicke-Lichtheim-Geschwind framework. Here we might 

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
37
mention VIC (Visual Communication) (Gardner, Zurif, Berry & Baker, 1976), VAT 
(Visual Activation Therapy) (Helm-Estabrooks, Fitzpatrick & Barresi, 1982), and MIT 
(Melodic Intonation Therapy) (Albert, Goodglass, & Helm, 1973) as examples, where 
activation of nondamaged centers in the brain that are not primarily used for language 
is attempted in order to mediate language functions. 
Still other therapies are more communicatively based, for example PACE (Promot-
ing Aphasics’ Communicative Eﬃciency) (Carlomagno, 1994).
We also ﬁnd therapies that are built on more extensive use of another sign system, 
such as Bliss, which uses visual signs on paper, and Amerind, which uses hand signs. 
These sign systems are not primarily designed for use with patients with language dis-
orders and frameworks motivating and explaining their use seem to have developed 
mainly from clinical users of the systems.
If we look at current aphasia therapy, we can use the classiﬁcation by Howard and 
Hatﬁeld (1987). The main general frameworks for therapy are still the Reorganization 
of Function School (e.g., Luria) and the Neoclassical School. Although still fairly new 
and very much involved in current trends, the Pragmatic School, the Neurolinguistic 
School, and the Cognitive Neuropsychology School, which are presented later in this 
chapter, are now well established and increasingly inﬂuential.
Neuroimaging and studies of dynamic processes in the brain
The development of neuroimaging techniques, from static ones, such as the CT scan 
and MRI, to today’s very popular dynamic techniques, PET, SPECT, fMRI, MEG, EEG, 
and evoked potentials (see Chapter 12 for these terms), constitutes a major break-
through for neurolinguistic research. They make it possible to study brain activity 
during linguistic and other cognitive processes in real time in both normally function-
ing and lesioned brains. The activity patterns can then be compared to model-based 
hypotheses about the cognitive steps in the processes. The combination of neuroimag-
ing and psycholinguistic experimental techniques is far from trivial and nor are the 
interpretation of results and development of models, but this is a highly interesting 
and informative area, which is very productive. (You can read more about this area in 
Chapter 12.)
Computer simulation of language and other cognitive processes
Computer simulation is a way of implementing and ﬁne-tuning the psycholinguistic 
process models that neurolinguistics postulates. Simulations demand extreme explicit-
ness and make it possible, for example, to trace the results of hypothetical “lesions” in 
hypothetical models of cognitive processes. Serial models of the linguistic production 
and comprehension processes have been used for a long time. (We should recall that 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
38
this approach dates as far back as Aristotle, as we saw in Chapter 2.) They have been 
the frameworks for most psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic experimental studies 
with both normal and brain-damaged subjects in recent decades. Computer simula-
tions have used serial modeling (box and arrow models) and parallel models since the 
1980s. In later years, artiﬁcial neural network (connectionist) simulations of diﬀerent 
types have become increasingly popular. These networks can be of many diﬀerent 
types and can produce diﬀerent types of simulations. (You can read more about this 
area in Chapters 6 and 13 of the book.)
Clusters of inﬂuence
We can detect certain clusters of compatible inﬂuences (here only very crudely 
sketched) that emanate from diﬀerent disciplines, yet co-exist fairly peacefully within 
groups of neurolinguists.
The predominant cluster of inﬂuences in neurolinguistics during the 1970s and 
1980s, and still today, combines the following parts: (a) classical inﬂuence from the Li-
chtheim-Geschwind models, (b) linguistic structuralism and/or generative grammar, 
(c) test psychology, group studies using statistics (lately also case studies), (d) serial 
modeling, and (e) therapy of a mainly “neoclassical” or “cognitive neuropsychology” 
type (in the terminology of Howard & Hatﬁeld, 1987).
Another cluster is based on the Russian tradition in neuropsychology, in other 
words, ideas from Vygotsky and Luria, together with ideas from general systems 
theory (Bertalanﬀy, 1968). In linguistics, both structuralism and generative grammar 
have played a role in this cluster; case studies are widely used (although group stud-
ies also have their place) and serial modeling is mostly used. This cluster has a strong 
therapeutic tradition, as seen in Chapter 2.
A third cluster, which has fairly recently become further developed in neurolin-
guistics, is based on philosophical, anthropological, and linguistic ideas in the ﬁeld 
of pragmatics. Representatives of this cluster are often inﬂuenced by holistic and/or 
evolutionary approaches, as well as functionalism. Connectionist modeling is seen as 
more promising than serial modeling. Therapy methods are pragmatically and com-
municatively oriented.
There are many other possible and actual combinations of inﬂuences in neurolin-
guistics, and this is merely an attempt to point out clusters with a substantial number 
of adherents. We also notice that the diﬀerence in outlook between these clusters is 
substantial.
The neoclassical and Lurian frameworks, which will be the focus later in this chap-
ter, are basic frameworks underlying much of the clinical tradition today.

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
39
The hierarchical (evolution-based), cognitivist frameworks and a number of the 
ideas presented in more holistic theories are still around; in some cases, they are sepa-
rately pursued, as in Jason Brown’s structural model and theory of microgenesis, but 
they are also partly integrated into new approaches such as cognitive semantics, func-
tionalist approaches, pragmatics, and embodied and/or multimodal communication. 
(More on these topics can be found in Parts 2 and 3 of this book.)
Two basic frameworks: The neoclassical and dynamic localization of 
function approaches
The two most inﬂuential “schools” in aphasia research and therapy today are Alexan-
der R. Luria’s theories and the theories issuing from the Aphasia Research Center in 
Boston, inspired by Geschwind and others.
The neoclassical framework — Geschwind and the Boston School
Geschwind brought associationism into today’s neurology, when he presented his 
theory in “Disconnection syndromes in animal and man” in 1965. It is anatomically 
based and posits the following disconnection syndromes: aphasia, agnosia (inability to 
identify sensory impressions), and apraxia (inability to perform intentional actions). 
Aphasia is connected to sensory and motor systems. The notion of cortical center is 
key; it is (1) an anatomical site, and (2) a collection of linguistic representations, as-
sociated with (3) some aspect of “processing” of these representations. Geschwind 
gives a careful anatomical description of the connections between the right and the left 
hemisphere and within each of the hemispheres. When the connections are disrupted, 
diﬀerent disconnection syndromes arise, including forms of aphasia. The theory is an 
extension of Lichtheim’s model (see Chapter 2).
Angular
gyrus
Primary motor
cortex
Figure 3.1. How naming happens, according to Geschwind

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
40
Geschwind identiﬁes an area in the inferior parietal lobe, which is speciﬁc to the 
human brain (the angular gyrus and the supramarginal gyrus); in his view, this area is 
important for the ability to name, which is a prerequisite for speech (see Figure 3.1). 
The diﬀerence between animals and man is said to reside in this area, which makes 
associations between nonlimbic stimuli possible. Animals are only able to associate 
a nonlimbic stimulus with a limbic stimulus. (Limbic stimuli go to the limbic system 
deep in the brain, which deals with basic instincts, such as hunger.) Subsequent re-
search, however, has shown naming to be more complex than Geschwind’s theory 
claims and the argument does not hold (Caplan, 1982).
The Boston school
Geschwind was very inﬂuential in the so-called Boston school, a group of aphasia 
researchers connected to the Aphasia Research Center in Boston. This was the most 
inﬂuential group in aphasia research in the U.S., and in large parts of the western 
world, from the 1960s. It was also strongly inﬂuenced by Noam Chomsky’s linguistic 
theories and by the test psychology tradition.
The Boston group developed the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination (BDAE) 
(Goodglass & Kaplan, 1973), which is used to classify aphasics in most linguistic re-
search. The Boston classiﬁcation has been criticized by many researchers as being too 
crude for many research purposes, but the test and the terminology are very widely 
used and have been the model for many other tests.
The patients are divided into the following groups, according to their test proﬁles 
(cf. the Wernicke-Lichtheim model in Chapter 2).
This table of symptoms is only a summary of much more complex test results. We 
can note that the ﬁve ﬁrst types of aphasia were already present in Lichtheim’s model 
(see Chapter 2). The three new types are:
Table 3.1. Aphasia types, according to BDAE
Fluent speech
Speech 
comprehension
Repetition
Naming
Wernicke’s
+
–
–
–
Transcortical sensory
+
–
+
–
Conduction 
+
+
–
–
Transcortical motor
–
+
+
–
Broca’s
–
+
–
–
Global
–
–
–
–
Anomic
+
+
+
–
Isolated speech area
–
–
+
–

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
41
Global aphasia: the most serious type of aphasia, where the patient basically has no 
linguistic ability;
Anomic aphasia: inability to name;
Isolated speech area: a combination of transcortical sensory and transcortical motor 
aphasia.
In reality, many patients are not easy to classify into any of these groups. In any model, 
it is important to know whether the basis for classiﬁcation is the combination of symp-
toms or the localization of the brain lesion. The term Broca’s aphasia may, for example, 
be ambiguous, standing for either the syndrome deﬁned in the table above or “aphasia 
after a lesion in Broca’s area.” These terms are usually used in the former sense, that 
is, based on symptoms. The two classiﬁcation methods do not necessarily coincide; in 
fact, they often do not.
The suggested “typical lesions” for the aphasia types listed above are the follow-
ing:
Table 3.2. The most typical locations of lesions for the BDAE aphasia types
Aphasia type
Most typical location of lesion
Wernicke’s aphasia 
Wernicke’s area
Transcortical sensory aphasia 
Posterior parietal lobe
Conduction aphasia 
Often deep lesion between Wernicke’s and Broca’s areas, 
including white ﬁber bundles (the arcuate fasciculus)
Transcortical motor aphasia 
Area in front of the Rolandic ﬁssure (the supplementary 
motor area)
Broca’s aphasia 
Broca’s area
Global aphasia 
Large cortical and subcortical areas around the Sylvian ﬁssure
Anomic aphasia 
Often impossible to localize, traditionally said to result from 
lesions aﬀecting the angular gyrus
Isolated speech area 
Like transcortical sensory plus transcortical motor aphasia, 
in so-called “watershed areas” (borders between the areas of 
supply for the diﬀerent arteries)
The lesions do, however, vary considerably and these types are statistically based gen-
eralizations.
Dynamic localization of function — Luria
Luria saw the brain as a functionally connected system, where a task can be per-
formed by diﬀerent mechanisms with the same result. The activity is complex and 
demands cooperation between several zones. It is therefore not possible to localize a 
language function in a certain area simply because the function is lost when that area 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
42
is damaged. On the other hand, diﬀerent cortical and subcortical areas make speciﬁc 
contributions to every complex system of activity, which is why antilocalism cannot 
be accepted.
By starting from clinical studies of local brain damage and the changes they caused 
in mental processes, Luria tried to determine the contributions of diﬀerent areas to 
these processes. He called his method “neuropsychology.”
According to Luria, the brain has three functional units (blocks) and every activity 
demands cooperation between all three.
Block I, subcortical structures (including the limbic system) and the brain stem 
(including the reticular formation), has the function of regulating tone (tension) or 
degree of awareness. According to Pavlov, organized goal-directed activity requires 
sustained optimal cortical tone. This comes from three sources: (1) metabolic process-
es, (2) stimuli from the external world, and (3) intentions and plans that are formed 
consciously with the help of speech, in block III (see below).
Damage to Block I causes a nonspeciﬁc reduction of cortical tone, which reduces 
the selectivity of psychological processes.
Block II, the postcentral cortex (including visual, auditory, and sensory areas in 
the parietal, occipital, and temporal lobes) receives, analyzes, and stores information. 
Primary zones are highly modality-speciﬁc (e.g., the auditory center) and handle 
perception. Secondary zones handle the analysis within each modality, and tertiary 
zones coordinate the analyses from the diﬀerent modalities. The tertiary zones are in 
the border areas of the cortex between the occipital, temporal, and parietal lobes and 
are seen as speciﬁcally human.
Block II is said to be responsible for the paradigmatic organization of verbal com-
munication, that is, the organization of phonematic, lexical, morphological, syntactic, 
and semantic units in the linguistic code.
Broca’s 
aphasia
Wernicke’s 
aphasia
Transcortical 
sensory
aphasia
Transcortical 
motor aphasia 
Anomic
aphasia
Conduction 
aphasia
(subcortical) 
Figure 3.2. Typical localizations of lesions associated with types, according to the Boston 
classiﬁcation

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
43
Block III, the precentral cortex (the frontal lobes) programs, regulates, and controls 
mental activity. Primary, modality-speciﬁc zones are in the motor cortex, secondary 
zones in the premotor cortex, and tertiary zones in the prefrontal parts of the frontal 
lobes. The tertiary zones form intentions and programs and are seen as superordinate 
to all other parts of the cerebral cortex; they monitor behavior.
Block III is responsible for the syntagmatic organization of verbal communication, 
that is to say, the organization of connected utterances.
Three diﬀerent laws apply to the blocks:
1. The law of hierarchical structure of cortical zones (primary – secondary – tertia-
ry): Tertiary zones are superordinate to secondary zones, which are superordinate 
to primary zones.
2. The law of diminishing speciﬁcity in the hierarchically ordered cortical zones: 
primary zones are most speciﬁc, tertiary zones least so.
3. The law of progressive lateralization of function: least in primary zones, most in 
tertiary zones.
The types of aphasia associated with lesions in particular blocks are shown in Fig-
ure 3.4.
Block III 
Tertiary 
zone
Block II 
Tertiary zone 
Block III 
Secondary 
zone (Motor, 
incl. SMA 
and Area 44)
Block II 
Secondary 
zone 
(Sensory/ 
kinesthetic)
Block II 
Secondary 
zone
(Visual) 
Block II 
Secondary 
zone
(Auditory) 
Block I 
(Alertness) 
Block II
Primary zone 
(Sensory/kinesthetic 
cortex)
Block III 
Primary zone 
(Motor cortex)
Block II 
Primary zone 
(Auditory) 
Block II 
Primary zone 
(Visual) 
Figure 3.3. Blocks (units) and zones of the brain, according to Luria

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
44
Block II (paradigmatic organization):
Aﬀerent motor aphasia
Lesion: Block II, sensory secondary zone
Symptoms: Phoneme exchanges (phonological paraphasias), which the patients attempts but is 
not able to correct, because of a lack of kinesthetic feedback about the articulatory movements 
to the secondary zones in Block II.
Acoustic-gnostic aphasia (or sensory aphasia)
Lesion: Block II, auditory secondary zone (including Wernicke’s area)
Symptoms: Problems recognizing and discriminating phonemes. The patient speaks with severe 
phoneme paraphasias (substitutions) and does not react to them. The syntactic and prosodic 
pattern remains intact and speech is ﬂuent. In language comprehension, the patient can inter-
pret part of what is said with the help of these patterns.
Acoustic-mnestic aphasia
Lesion: Block II, medial zones, deep in the left temporal lobe
Symptoms: Problems in retaining series of audio-verbal traces in memory long enough, which 
leads to paraphasias (exchanges of phonemes and words) in naming and spontaneous speech. 
Syntax and prosody remain intact in this case as well.
Amnestic aphasia (or semantic aphasia)
Lesion: Block II, posterior tertiary zone (posterior and inferior parietal lobe or the border 
between the parietal and occipital lobes)
Symptoms: 1. Disturbances in the semantic network of words, which lead to semantic parapha-
sias (word substitutions), searching for words, and circumlocutions (paraphrases). 2. Diﬃcul-
ties handling complex grammatical relations.
Dynamic 
aphasia
Eﬀerent 
motor aphasia 
Semantic 
/ Amnestic 
aphasia
Acoustic-
gnostic/Sensory 
aphasia
Acoustic-
mnestic aphasia 
Aﬀerent 
motor 
aphasia
Figure 3.4. Types of aphasia, with approximate localization of main factor, according to 
Luria

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
45
Block III (syntagmatic organization):
Dynamic aphasia
Lesion: Block III, tertiary zone
Symptoms: Inability to transform a semantic plan into linearly ordered speech via “inner 
speech,” absence of spontaneous speech. The patient repeats and names correctly.
Eﬀerent motor aphasia
Lesion: Block III, motor secondary zone (including Broca’s area)
Symptoms: Diﬃculties changing from one phoneme to another, perseveration (pathological 
inertia, repetition). (A nonspeciﬁc disturbance that also aﬀects other movements.)
Examples of prerequisites for diﬀerent linguistic processes and aphasia types caused by 
lesions in brain areas that are critical for these processes, according to Luria (adapted 
from Luria, 1973)
Speech comprehension
Input (speech)
Linguistic process
Brain area
Type of aphasia
I. Comprehension of a word
1. Isolation of phonemes (acous-
tic analysis)
secondary auditory zone, 
left hemisphere
acoustic-gnostic aphasia
2. Identiﬁcation of meaning 
(“image”)
tertiary, posterior zone, 
left hemisphere
amnestic aphasia
II. Comprehension of meaning in a phrase as a whole
1. Keeping elements in memory secondary, auditory zone + 
deep medial-temporal zone,
left hemisphere
acoustic-mnestic aphasia
2. Simultaneous synthesis and 
logical plans
tertiary, posterior zone,
left hemisphere
amnestic aphasia
3. Active analysis of the most 
signiﬁcant elements
frontal zones
Spontaneous speech
Linguistic process
Brain area
Type of aphasia
1. Intention, plan
frontal lobes
general lack of initiative
2. Inner speech with predicative 
structure (linear plan)
frontal lobes
dynamic aphasia
Flexibility in nerve processes/
Articulation
premotor cortex, 
left hemisphere
eﬀerent motor aphasia with 
perseverations

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
46
And further on to articulation/ﬂexibility in nerve processes
Confrontation naming (naming of presented objects)
Visual “image” → Coding in words
Linguistic process
Brain area
Type of aphasia
Visual perception
parietal-occipital lobes
optic amnestic aphasia
Acoustic structure of speech
temporal lobe, secondary 
auditory zone, left hemisphere
acoustic-mnestic aphasia with 
literal paraphasias
Activation and inhibition
tertiary, posterior zone, left 
hemisphere
amnestic aphasia with verbal 
paraphasias
Flexibility in nerve processes/
Articulation
premotor cortex, left hemisphere
eﬀerent motor aphasia with 
perseverations
Repetition
Linguistic process
Brain area
Type of aphasia
Phonematic hearing
temporal lobe, secondary auditory 
zone, left hemisphere
acoustic aphasia with literal 
paraphasias
Abstraction
frontal lobes
conduction aphasia
Articulation
parietal lobe, secondary sensory 
zone, left hemisphere
aﬀerent motor aphasia with 
literal paraphasias
Flexibility in articulation/
nerve processes
Premotor cortex, left hemisphere
eﬀerent motor aphasia with 
perseverations
Many people consider Luria’s theory to be the most developed analysis of neuropsy-
chological phenomena so far; it is also directly related to therapy for “restoration of 
language functions.” His inﬂuence has been enormous in Eastern Europe and also in 
large parts of Western Europe and the rest of the world (Luria, 1963, 1966,1970, 1973, 
1976).
Developing areas: Linguistic and cognitive linguistic theories, 
communication research, cognitive neuropsychology
Some areas of neurolinguistics that are currently undergoing a period of develop-
ment, either in combination with one of the two basic frameworks or on their own, 
are introduced below.

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
47
Pragmatics, communication, and discourse, including body communication
This area is highly dynamic, both in research and in the clinical application of neu-
rolinguistics. It follows from the development of pragmatics and communication 
research within linguistics, with inspiration from anthropology and sociology as well. 
While mainstream neurolinguistics has been rather late in adopting pragmatics as a 
branch, neurolinguistic research in this area has been going on since the 1980s. Some 
of the inﬂuential theories concern speech acts and language games, context, activity, 
conversational principles, conversation patterns, body communication, gesture, and 
picture communication. One approach used for interaction analysis is Conversation 
Analysis: microanalysis of recorded interaction sequences. The social approach to 
therapy has also led to a number of suggested procedures for handling aphasia. (This 
area is examined in the chapters about pragmatics and evolution in Parts 2 and 3: 
Chapters 7, 10, and 11.) 
Cognitive neuropsychology: Model-based research
This approach was developed in Britain and has considerable inﬂuence on research 
and clinical applications. It involves working from models of linguistic processes and 
hypotheses about disorders and therapy related to these models. It now has a strong 
clinical tradition, including, for example, the PALPA investigation (Kay, Lesser & 
Coltheart, 1992; Whitworth, Webster, & Howard, 2005), the Pyramids and Palm Trees 
test (Howard & Patterson, 1992), and the documentation of model-based clinical 
work (Byng, Pound, Lindsay, & Swinburn, 2001). Examples of research areas studied 
extensively in this framework are lexical semantics and reading. (This approach is 
involved in many of the studies discussed in Parts 2, 3, and 4). A typical model used 
in an analysis applying cognitive neuropsychology is the one shown in Figure 3.5. By 
using this model to interpret aphasic symptoms, the researcher or therapist establishes 
a hypothesis concerning where and how the process of language comprehension is 
disturbed and can then test this hypothesis and apply it in therapy.
Linguistics-based research: The application of recent linguistic theories 
Pragmatics is an aspect of linguistics that has been singled out for speciﬁc treatment in 
this book, since it is developing rapidly in a context of interdisciplinary cooperation, 
and since it has traditionally not been the focus of neurolinguistics, although it should 
by now be integrated, following the development of linguistics in general (cf. Joanette 
& Ansaldo, 1999). But apart from pragmatics, other aspects of linguistics — phonol-
ogy, morphology, lexical semantics, and syntax — are in constant development and 
the most recent theories in these areas also have to be integrated into neurolinguistics. 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
48
Some examples include the integration of nonlinear phonology, diﬀerent theories 
about syntax, and theories from cognitive semantics. (These approaches are speciﬁ-
cally covered in Part 2, but are also discussed in Part 3.)
Neuroimaging results: Integration, application
The application and integration of neuroimaging techniques in neurolinguistic re-
search is a very dynamic, rapidly developing area. New interdisciplinary centers and 
networks with the combinations of competences needed for this research are being 
established and the challenge of combining activation patterns with neurolinguistic 
models is the main occupation of many neurolinguists. Interesting ﬁndings concern 
mirror neurons, that is, neurons that are activated by both performing and observing 
an action and that might be very important in evolution (e.g., Jeannerod, 1997). (This 
area is speciﬁcally covered in Chapter 12.)
pictures, seen objects
speech
print
acoustic–phonological 
conversion 
abstract letter 
identiﬁcation 
visual object
recognition system
phonological 
input buﬀer 
orthographic input
lexicon
semantic system
sound-to-letter rules 
phonological 
input lexicon 
letter-to-sound rules
phonological 
output lexicon 
orthographic 
output lexicon 
phonological
output buﬀer
orthographic 
output buﬀer 
speech
print 
Figure 3.5. PALPA model of word comprehension and production

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
49
Computer simulation
The focus in this area is currently on artiﬁcial neural network modeling of linguistic 
processes, language learning, and language loss. The combination of simulation tech-
niques with neurolinguistic theories and models is challenging but provides interest-
ing new possibilities. The results of neuroimaging and computer simulation should, 
ideally, also be compatible in terms of their neurolinguistic interpretation. (This issue 
is discussed in Chapter 13.)
Documentation and evaluation of therapy
One inﬂuence on neurolinguistics from clinical work in many of the areas presented 
above is the need for evaluation of aphasia therapy. The cognitive neuropsychology 
and linguistic — including pragmatic — approaches, as well as neuroimaging tech-
niques, are used in so-called eﬃcacy studies. The aim is to study the eﬀect of speciﬁed 
and well-documented therapies over time.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
50
Summary
This chapter has presented an overview of the diﬀerent models and frameworks that are 
applied today in neurolinguistic research and clinical applications. Inﬂuences from diﬀerent 
disciplines, such as linguistics and psychology, and diﬀerent techniques, such as neuroimaging 
and computer simulation, are summarized, as are interdisciplinary clusters of inﬂuence. Two 
main “schools” applied in both clinical work and research are the “dynamic localization of func-
tion” and “classical–neoclassical” frameworks, which are described more in detail, with schemas 
presenting their classiﬁcations of aphasia. We then turned to areas which are under develop-
ment today and becoming very inﬂuential. Two such areas are pragmatics/communication 
analysis, including the analysis of body language, picture communication, etc., and cognitive 
neuropsychology, providing a model-based process analysis.
Further reading
The literature below includes general overview as well as more speciﬁc readings on dynamic 
localization of function (Christensen Kagan & Saling, Luria), classical–neoclassical frameworks 
(Caplan, Goodglass & Kaplan), and cognitive neuropsychology (Kay et al, Whitworth et al.). (As 
mentioned above, pragmatics /communication analysis will be presented further in Chap-
ters 7, 10 and 11.)
Caplan, D. (1987). Neurolinguistics and linguistic aphasiology. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Christensen, A.-L. (1974). Luria’s neuropsychological investigation. Copenhagen: Munksgaard.
Goodglass, H., & Kaplan, E. (1973). The assessment of aphasia and related disorders. Philadelphia: 
Lea & Febiger.
Howard, D., & Hatﬁeld, F. M. (1987). Aphasia therapy: Historical and contemporary issues. London: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Kagan, A., & Saling, M. (1988). An introduction to Luria’s aphasiology: Theory and application. 
Johannesburg: Witwatersrand University Press.
Kay, J., Lesser, R., & Coltheart, M. (1992). Psycholinguistic assessment of language processing 
(PALPA). Hove, Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lesser, R., & Milroy. L. (1993). Linguistics and aphasia: Psycholinguistic and pragmatic aspects of 
intervention. London: Longman. 
Luria, A. R. (1973). The working brain: An introduction to neuropsychology. Hove: Basil Haigh.
Stemmer, B., & Whitaker, H. (Eds.) (1998). Handbook of neurolinguistics. San Diego: Academic Press. 
Visch-Brink, E., & Bastiaanse, R. (Eds.) (1998). Linguistic levels in aphasia. London: Singular Pub-
lishing Group.
Whitworth, A., Webster, J., & Howard, D. (2005). A cognitive neuropsychological approach to as-
sessment and intervention in aphasia. A clinician’s guide. Hove: Psychology Press.

Chapter 3: Models and frameworks in neurolinguistics today
51
Assignments
Four descriptions of typical linguistic symptoms or combinations of symptoms (syndromes) in 
aphasia follow:
1. 
Anomia, or word-ﬁnding problems in language production 
2. 
Severe language comprehension problems
3. 
Inability to repeat words or sentences
4. 
Perseveration, that is, “getting stuck” in what you have just said and repeating it when you 
want to move on to something new
Try to apply to each one of them what this chapter has taught you about:
a. 
Dynamic localization of function (Luria)
b. 
The classical–neoclassical model (Wernicke-Geschwind-Boston)
c. 
Cognitive neuropsychology (the model in Figure 3.5) 
Try to describe and explain the type of aphasia associated with each symptom or syndrome. 
Apply the ﬁgures, tables, and schemas used by the diﬀerent frameworks.


Part II
Neurolinguistics for diﬀerent 
components of language


Chapter 4
Phonology in neurolinguistics
In this chapter:
• 
Frameworks in phonology
• 
Phonological paraphasias and neologisms — 
classical questions and investigations
• 
Phonology in theories of agrammatism
• 
Units and features of analysis in phonology
• 
Frameworks and models in the analysis of 
phonological disorders 
Frameworks in phonology
Today, there is no one generally accepted framework for phonological studies. The 
older and more established frameworks are most frequently used in basic education 
and clinical application. This means a structuralist framework, where phonemes and 
distinctive features are the basic units, although they are also critically discussed. More 
segmentally oriented phonology is supplemented by prosodic features. Most studies 
done in neurolinguistics have applied this type of framework, and we will ﬁrst report 
some well-known neurolinguistic studies in this tradition. There are also studies that 
rely mainly on syntactic theories in explaining agrammatism as a syntactic-phonologi-
cal phenomenon, some of them in the Chomskyan tradition, and we will take a look 
at some examples. But nonlinear phonology is now ﬁrmly established in phonological 
research, and also to some extent in neurolinguistic studies. We will therefore also look 
at the basic units and features of nonlinear phonology and examples of how they have 
been used in neurolinguistic studies.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
56
Phonological paraphasias and neologisms — Classical questions and 
investigations
Phonemic (and to some extent semantic) paraphasias (substitutions, etc., of phonemes) 
and neologisms (newly made-up words) are produced especially often in Wernicke’s 
aphasia, but also in other forms of aphasia (see below). Some researchers have also 
proposed that agrammatism has its phonological aspects (mainly in Broca’s aphasia). 
We will ﬁrst consider some “classical” questions and studies. Then we will move on to 
present-day units, features, and frameworks of analysis in phonological neurolinguis-
tic studies and discuss some examples of their use.
Questions that researchers have tried to answer are:
• 
How are neologisms created?
• 
Are paraphasias similar in all types of aphasia?
• 
Are paraphasias of persons with aphasia similar to slips of the tongue in normal 
speakers?
• 
Do paraphasias follow universal rules?
• 
What physiological, phonetic, and phonological aspects play a role in causing 
paraphasias?
• 
How can paraphasias and neologisms be related to models of speech produc-
tion?
Diﬀerent terms are used for phonological paraphasias:
Paraphasias
Phonological or pho-
neme (phonemic)
paraphasias
= literal 
Addition
Deletion
Substitution
Form-based
Semantic or
word paraphasias
= verbal
Substitution
Form-based
Meaning-based
Unrelated
Examples:
Phoneme paraphasia:
• 
addition: butcher → butchler
• 
deletion: butcher → buter
• 
substitution: butcher → betcher
Word paraphasia:
• 
form-based: butcher → bitch
• 
meaning-based: butcher → grocer

Chapter 4. Phonology in neurolinguistics
57
• 
unrelated: butcher → train
Some phoneme paraphasias, of course, give rise to another word, thereby becoming 
word paraphasias as well.
Paraphasias can be paradigmatically and/or syntagmatically aﬀected. In a para-
digmatic (choice-based) substitution, one item that can ﬁll a particular slot in speech 
or writing is substituted by another that can ﬁll the same slot; for example, b (/b/) ﬁlls 
the slot instead of c (/k/) when a person says bat instead of cat. 
(c)
a
t
b
a
t
Figure 4.1. Paradigmatic substitution
In a syntagmatic (combination-based) substitution, another sound in the environment 
aﬀects the production, so that it is repeated (or appears too early), for example, in a big 
bog instead of a big dog, where the b of big comes back instead of the d in dog.
a
b
i
g
(d)
o
g
a
b
i
g
b
o
g
Figure 4.2. Syntagmatic substitution
We can see that the categories paradigmatic and syntagmatic are not mutually exclu-
sive; in other words, a paraphasia that takes the form of substitution can be both at the 
same time. The big bog example is syntagmatically inﬂuenced by its surroundings but 
the b also replaces the d in a particular slot. Other types of paraphasias can, however, 
be more purely syntagmatic; for example, when an extra phoneme is inserted, as in 
blue blook for blue book. Exchanges (or metathesis) take place where two phonemes or 
words change places, such as god for dog, where g and d are exchanged.
Neologisms
People have tried to explain neologisms in diﬀerent ways, for example as a word para-
phasia directly followed by a phoneme paraphasia, which together make the relation 
between the target word and the produced word unrecognizable (the so-called two-
step hypothesis of Lecours & Lhermitte, 1979; cf. Brown, 1981). This hypothesis pre-
sumes that there is some degree of access to a target word, which is then distorted.
Example: cat → dog (semantic word paraphasia) → rog (phoneme paraphasia)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
58
Butterworth (1979) analyzed pause lengths before neologisms and paraphasias and 
then suggested that there is a speciﬁc “generating device,” that is, a mechanism that 
creates words according to the phonotactic rules of the language in question (i.e., rules 
for how phonemes can be combined). This mechanism comes into play if a target 
word is not found within a speciﬁc time. This hypothesis presumes that there is an 
underlying anomia. Buckingham (1981) supported this theory in his article “Where 
do neologisms come from?” where he raised the possibility that a neologism that has 
been generated by the mechanism is then perseverated (repeated) when there are 
word-ﬁnding problems. This could explain the fact that neologisms often have certain 
recurring phonological patterns.
Example: Utterance by a person with Wernicke’s aphasia/jargon aphasia containing 
many neologisms: 
a frog frock frossy that is fro that is frabbing is fog is frob
A good reason for assuming that the target word is not accessible is that when the 
patients get better, they often become anomic, that is, the neologisms disappear but 
are not initially replaced by the target words.
Phoneme paraphasias
A careful case study including a linguistic classiﬁcation of jargon aphasic symptoms 
and a description of the progression of jargon aphasia was made by Green (1969). 
Green’s patient ﬁrst produced an abundance of neologisms and unrelated word para-
phasias. According to Green, both these phenomena were examples of the same type 
of error — unrelated word paraphasias were neologisms that happened to be words. 
Later, the patient’s speech came to be dominated by anomia (diﬃculties in ﬁnding 
content words), circumlocutions, and semantic paraphasias. These observations have 
been conﬁrmed in other case studies and provide the basis for the hypothesis that 
anomia underlies the neologisms in persons with jargon aphasia.
Lecours and Lhermitte’ (1979) systematically described the errors of two patients 
with a purely phonematic jargon aphasia from a paradigmatic and syntagmatic point 
of view.
Examples: [parabol] → [parapol]
 
 
paradigmatic inﬂuence: [b] → [p] 
 
 
syntagmatic inﬂuence: initial [p] is repeated medially
Paradigmatic substitutions were made between phonologically similar phonemes 
and similar or identical phonemes in the context increased the risk of substitutions. 
Lecours and Lhermitte claimed that the cause of paraphasias is purely phonological, 

Chapter 4. Phonology in neurolinguistics
59
that they aﬀect whole words or a “superordinate articulatory unit.” Apart from pho-
nological similarity and contiguity (temporal closeness), this theory also requires 
consideration of phonotactic rules (i.e., rules for combining phonemes). According 
to Lecours and Lhermitte, similar errors occur in writing and speech. The study only 
dealt with repetition and reading of single words. Thus, all the target words were also 
known.
Blumstein (1973) analyzed phonological paraphasias in diﬀerent types of aphasia. 
(She used theories of markedness and distinctive features in the tradition of Roman 
Jakobson — see below in this chapter.) Her conclusion was that phonological parapha-
sias were of the same type in diﬀerent types of patients. Some objections were raised, 
for example, that the selection of patient groups was not accounted for and the analysis 
only concerned paradigmatic substitutions, with no consideration of the inﬂuence of 
context. Blumstein used spontaneous speech, which made it hard to control which 
target words were intended. Many paraphasias were omitted from the analysis for this 
reason and this may also have aﬀected the result.
Blumstein’s results inspired many researchers in the ﬁeld. If a single mechanism 
causes the errors made by all types of aphasics, is it also the same mechanism that 
causes slips of the tongue in normal speech?
This question was addressed by, among others, Fromkin (1971), Buckingham 
(1980), and Garrett (1982a), all of whom claimed that the answer to the question 
above was “yes.” Models of speech planning and speech production in normal speakers 
were applied and were found to adequately explain all or most aphasic paraphasias. 
Examples of similarities that were pointed out are:
• 
that the same elements are aﬀected, that is, stressed content words, mostly nouns 
and verbs, and the initial phonemes of these words;
• 
that phonotactic rules and prosodic structure are followed.
Other researchers pointed out the diﬀerences between speech errors produced by 
persons with normal speech and paraphasias produced by persons with aphasia, and 
assumed that the underlying factors were diﬀerent. They therefore wanted to answer 
“no” to the question above. This applies to, among others, Butterworth (1979, 1981) 
and Nespoulous, Lecours, and Joanette (1982). These researchers also claimed that 
there are clear diﬀerences between paraphasias produced by persons with diﬀerent 
types of aphasia (contrary to Blumstein’s claim).
Nespoulous et al. (1982) found several diﬀerences between paraphasias produced 
by Broca’s aphasics and conduction aphasics, which indicate that they should not be 
explained in the same way. They claimed that paraphasias in Broca’s aphasia can be 
seen as phonetic, whereas those in conduction aphasia can be seen as phonematic (or 
phonological).

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
60
An investigation by Söderpalm (1979) also showed clear diﬀerences between 
paraphasias in aphasia and ordinary speech errors. In aphasia, there were more para-
digmatic errors and less awareness of one’s own errors.
So-called “blends,” or mixtures of two words or expressions, indicating that two 
alternative plans are involved, are produced by persons with and without aphasia. But-
terworth (1981) pointed out that these errors cannot be explained by serial top-down 
models of speech production of the type most widely used at that time. In these mod-
els, the lexicon is accessed ﬁrst and phonology later. He suggested an alternative model, 
where lexicon, syntax, and phonology were accessible simultaneously and could aﬀect 
each other. This is necessary to avoid the over-generation of errors that never occur.
Phonology in theories of agrammatism
Agrammatism, or sparseness of grammatical structure, typically involving short or in-
complete sentences and omission or substitution of syntagmatic (function) words and 
grammatical morphemes, is covered in Chapter 5. Some of the suggested explanations 
of agrammatism are, however, phonological and will be presented brieﬂy here.
Goodglass (1976) claimed that agrammatic persons primarily have diﬃculties ini-
tiating speech and need a phonologically salient (stressed) element to start with. This 
makes categorematic (content) words easier than unstressed articles in utterance-ini-
tial position, which according to Goodglass is why articles are often omitted. Syllabic 
suﬃxes are also easier to produce than nonsyllabic ones, so that the plural suﬃx –es in 
horses is less likely to be omitted than the plural suﬃx –s in dogs.
Another claim about phonological inﬂuence on agrammatism was made by Kean 
in 1977. She hypothesized that phonological clitics (elements that do not contribute 
to the stress pattern unless emphatically stressed) tend to be omitted in agrammatism. 
Such elements include articles, some prepositions, and inﬂectional suﬃxes (in other 
words, the class of “closed-class items” or syncategorematic (function) words, accord-
ing to Kean). This hypothesis, however, turned out to be hard to apply to languages like 
Italian or Hebrew, and was therefore not a candidate for a universal explanation.
Units and features of analysis in phonology
The phoneme has been the classical unit of study in analyzing phonological disorders. 
There are several reasons for this, one being the general “written language bias” in 
earlier linguistic analyses (Linell, 1982) and another, related, one being the relative 
ease of handling “everyday” phonological analysis in terms of phonemes. Phonemic 
repertoires, systems, processes, and features are fairly “handy” for some types of analy-

Chapter 4. Phonology in neurolinguistics
61
sis. In more recent years, however, the awareness of phonemes’ being based on letters 
and perhaps not being the most natural units for phonological analysis in general has 
inﬂuenced phonological studies in neurolinguistics as well. 
The units that are used today are, apart from segments, features, syllables (syllable 
structure: onset, nucleus, and coda), sonority, and prosodic features such as stress, 
tones, and intonation contours. In nonlinear phonology, prosody (including syllabic 
features) and melody (including articulatory features) are the central dimensions of 
analysis. Source features, such as the voicing feature and voice onset time (VOT) are 
also examined.
Features: Distinctive features, such as place and manner of articulation
Syllables: A syllable consists of an onset and a rhyme (sometimes spelled rime), which further 
consists of a nucleus and a coda.
 
 
Syllable
 
 
/ 
\
 
Onset Rhyme
 
/ \  
/ \
 
 
Nucleus Coda
 
| | 
| |
 
X X X X
 
g l æ d
 
glad
A syllable is a string of sounds organized in such a way that sonority rises from the beginning 
to a peak and then falls (vowels correspond to peaks, since they have the highest sonority).
Sonority: The higher the sonority, the higher the salience.
The higher the sonority, the more open the vocal tract.
Prosody: Includes syllabic features (see above).
Melody: Includes articulatory features, such as place and manner of articulation (also some 
tonal features in some languages).
(Note that the terms prosody and melody are used diﬀerently here from their more conventional 
senses.)
Other useful concepts in phonological analysis are underspeciﬁcation and markedness. 
Underspeciﬁcation can, for example, mean that not all features have to be speciﬁed at 
all levels of planning, since diﬀerent principles interact to “ﬁll in” speciﬁcations in the 
production or perception/comprehension processes. Markedness is related to the fact 
that some features are more frequent, “natural,” or in other ways “expected” and can 
be considered as default (unmarked) features, while a more unusual alternative may 
be considered as “marked” when it occurs; for instance, an unvoiced ﬁnal stop would 
be less marked than a voiced stop for articulatory reasons (ﬁnal devoicing).
These units and features of analysis are examined in a number of neurolinguistic 
studies and arguments that we shall now brieﬂy consider.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
62
The discussion of whether phonological errors are the same or diﬀerent in all types 
of aphasia did not abate (e.g., Blumstein, 1994; Kohn, 1993). Kohn claimed that the 
phonological behavior of diﬀerent types of aphasia can be distinguished by phonologi-
cal analysis, while Butterworth (1992) criticized this view. The suggestion was that the 
phonological errors Wernicke’s aphasics make are caused by an impairment in their 
access to underlying phonological representations, while those of conduction aphasics 
are caused by problems in constructing phonemic representations, and those of Broca’s 
aphasics by a phonetic disturbance (cf. Gandour, 1998). This is a discussion of errors 
in terms of segments or possibly features. 
Features are the basis of the discussion of diﬀerent “tiers,” such as an independent 
laryngeal “tier,” which may be disturbed in some types of aphasia (e.g., Dogil, 1989; 
Gandour, 1998).
The syllable unit or constituent is used in many studies of language disorders. 
For instance, diﬀerent parts of the syllable are diﬀerentially sensitive to disturbance. 
A study of neologistic Wernicke’s aphasia by Stark and Stark (1990) revealed that the 
coda is more sensitive than the onset and that the nucleus is the least vulnerable part. 
A syllable-based analysis can also explain why consonants adjacent to vowels are more 
sensitive to errors than other consonants in a cluster. If the leftmost consonant in the 
cluster of the example word below (Figure 4.3) is interpreted as the “head,” or domi-
nant one, it will take the onset place if the two consonants compete for a single place on 
the onset node (Harris, 1998). In order to save both consonants, a vowel sound could 
be inserted between them, thus making an initial syllable of p plus a vowel, which also 
often happens in language disorders. We would then get something like /peley/, that 
is, a CVCV sequence word-initially.
This is, in other words, an account of “omission” and possible compensation for 
this in terms of prosody.
Sonority is the relative degree of perceptual prominence of a phoneme (also sec-
ondarily deﬁned as articulatory openness of the vocal tract). Obstruents have very low 
sonority, while vowels have the highest. Sonority sequencing rules have been used to 
explain neologisms (e.g., Christman, 1992); for example, sonority should rise in the 
syllable until the vowel peak, then fall again, and this would aﬀect which phonemes 
are produced. A case study by Romani and Calabrese (1998) applies the Sonority Dis-
persion Principle (Clements, 1990), which states that the sharper the rise in sonority 
Onset Nucleus
Onset Nucleus
|  \   |   \
p     a  y
x     x  x
|     |  |   \
p l     a  y
x x     x  x
play
pay
Figure 4.3. Syllable structure and vulnerability of consonants in the word play (from Harris, 
1998, p. 97)

Chapter 4. Phonology in neurolinguistics
63
between the beginning of the syllable and the nucleus, the better-formed the syllable, 
in explaining the phonological errors of a subject with aphasia. As an alternative to 
the phonological simpliﬁcation or repair strategies suggested by other researchers, 
they suggest that syllabic markedness with respect to sonority dispersion accounts for 
a number of errors.
Stress has been used in investigating hemispheric specialization for prosody, in its 
traditional sense (cf. Gandour, 1998). Stress has been found to be impaired in patients 
with left-hemisphere damage (LHD), especially with regard to duration, which means 
that their linguistic prosodic problems could be due to timing problems.
Tones have been investigated in tone languages, such as Mandarin Chinese, as well 
as in Norwegian for pitch accent. For example, linguistically signiﬁcant F0 (fundamen-
tal frequency) contrasts were found to be selectively vulnerable to LHD in Norwegian 
(e.g., Moen & Sundet, 1996).
Intonation can also be aﬀected by LHD (even more than by right-hemisphere 
damage), most severely in Broca’s aphasia, but also in Wernicke’s aphasia (Danly, Coo-
per, & Shapiro, 1983). Some cross-linguistic ﬁndings point to an underlying timing 
deﬁcit here as well (cf. Gandour, 1998).
Melody is aﬀected by “substitution” and “distortion” of phoneme quality. These 
processes usually aﬀect classes of sounds by aﬀecting one subsegmental property, that 
is, a feature, such as place of articulation.
Voicing disorders, detectable as eﬀects on VOT (Voice Onset Time), are also found 
in aphasia. VOT paraphasias where the VOT diﬀerences between phonemes are re-
tained, but are incorrectly placed in words are often found in Wernicke’s, conduction, 
and transcortical motor aphasia. VOT paraphasias where the contrasts between pho-
nemes are collapsed are, on the other hand, more often found in Broca’s aphasics.
Frameworks and models in the analysis of phonological disorders
The theoretical frameworks that are employed in phonology research are, on the one 
hand, the Chomskyan Minimalism framework and, on the other hand, Optimality 
Theory, processability ranking, etc., which consider vulnerability in terms of aspects 
of processing conditions, that is, by ranking and making hierarchies of phonological 
complexity, which can be used for predicting errors.
(In clinical practice, the structuralist systems and operations based on phonemes, 
features and phonological processes are probably still the most frequently used, but 
parts of the more recent frameworks are gaining in inﬂuence.)
The traditionally used serial models of speech production and perception have, as 
we have seen above, been criticized for a long time. (See, for example, the discussion 
of blends in the section on word production data in Chapter 6.) Today, there are many 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
64
alternative modeling frameworks with both local and distributed neural network 
models being popular in applications where phonological and other disorders are 
simulated. (See Chapters 6 and 13 for more about models.)

Chapter 4. Phonology in neurolinguistics
65
Summary
This chapter has tried to capture the state of the art concerning phonology in neurolinguistics. 
We have seen how traditional structuralist phonology has been applied in a number of studies 
of phonological paraphasias and neologisms and we have also presented examples of studies 
where the framework of non-linear phonology has been used.
Further reading
The works below give overviews and examples of phonology in neurolinguistics. For non-lin-
ear phonology, Blevins gives a summary of the relevant features to consider in relation to the 
syllable, and Nespoulous and Moreay provide an example of how such features are applied to 
the study of aphasia.
Blevins, J. (1995). The syllable in phonological theory. In J. A. Goldsmith (Ed.), The handbook of 
phonological theory (pp. 206–235). Cambridge: Blackwell.
Gandour, J. (1998). Phonetics and phonology. In B. Stemmer & H. A. Whitaker (Eds.), (1998). 
Handbook of neurolinguistics (pp. 207–219). San Diego: Academic Press.
Harris, J. (1998). Phonological universals and phonological disorders. In E. Visch-Brink & R. Bas-
tiaanse (Eds.) Linguistic levels in aphasia (pp. 91–118). London: Singular Publishing Group.
Nespoulous, J.-L., & Moreay, N. (1998). Repair strategies and the production of segmental errors 
in aphasia. In E. Visch-Brink & R. Bastiaanse (Eds.), Linguistic levels in aphasia (pp. 133–146). 
London: Singular Publishing Group.
Assignments
1. 
Make or simply listen to a recording of the speech production of a person with aphasia 
including a phonological disorder (or read a careful transcription) and try to ﬁnd examples 
of as many relevant symptoms as possible involving the types of units and features dis-
cussed above in describing the phonology of the person’s speech.
2. 
Consider a model of speech production and a model of speech comprehension and try to 
explain the phenomena found in your analysis in part 1 in relation to the model. A model 
of speech comprehension and production is presented in Figure 3.5 and models of speech 
production in Figures 6.5. and 6.6.


Chapter 5
Morphology and syntax 
in neurolinguistics
In this chapter:
• 
Disturbances of grammar in aphasia: syndromes, 
agrammatism, and paragrammatism
• 
The role of the verb in grammar and disturbances 
of grammar
• 
Morphology, grammar, and cross-linguistic 
ﬁndings 
• 
Three frameworks for describing agrammatism 
– The mapping hypothesis 
– The adaptation hypothesis 
– The trace deletion hypothesis (TDH)
Disturbances of grammar in aphasia: Syndromes, agrammatism, 
and paragrammatism
Disturbances of grammar have attracted many linguists, since many linguistic theories 
consider grammar to be especially central to the language system. This fact has nour-
ished debates and encouraged research related to grammar in aphasia.
The traditional view of grammatical disorders in aphasia was linked to two main 
syndromes. One of them is Wernicke’s aphasia, which results from posterior lesions 
(i.e., posterior to the central ﬁssure, aﬀecting the temporal and parietal lobes) and is 
characterized by ﬂuent speech. The grammar of these patients was characterized as 
paragrammatism and did not really attract much attention from researchers. The ﬂuent 
speech of these patients is characterized by frequent self-interruptions, restarts, and 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
68
circumlocutions, caused by their anomic problems (word-ﬁnding diﬃculties). This 
makes it contain more “grammatical frames” or parts of grammatical frames, with 
a relative lack of nouns in particular, but also of adjectives and main verbs and with 
substitutions of grammatical morphemes. Since paragrammatism was interpreted as 
possibly being a secondary phenomenon to word-ﬁnding problems and since these 
patients often have comprehension problems, making their participation in experi-
mental studies diﬃcult, their grammar was not the best starting point for traditional 
research into this issue.
The second main syndrome was Broca’s aphasia, which results from frontal lesions 
and is characterized by nonﬂuent speech. The grammar of these patients is often very 
sparse, and they have even been characterized as agrammatic. They tend to speak in 
very short, simple sentences or even shorter structures mainly containing nouns, main 
verbs and adjectives, but omitting most grammatical morphemes (such as noun and 
verb inﬂections) and so-called function words (conjunctions, articles, etc.). Agram-
matism has been the main object of studies of grammar and aphasia.
The basic description of agrammatism in Broca’s aphasia above, however, is much 
too simple to do justice to the grammatical disturbances in aphasia. The status of the 
traditional division of grammatical disorders into agrammatism and paragrammatism 
has also been called into question by cross-linguistic research into aphasia and gram-
matical disorders.
Studies of agrammatism are the main basis for theories about morphology and 
syntax in neurolinguistics. There is an extensive body of research on agrammatism 
in relation to speciﬁc hypotheses about the grammatical features of structures and 
processes.
Some of the questions that have been discussed are:
1. The relationship between comprehension and production. Are disorders of 
grammar central, thus aﬀecting both comprehension and production, or can 
production be selectively disturbed while comprehension is maintained? Al-
though many patients with aphasia show disturbances of both comprehension 
and production, there are clear cases of dissociation, where only production is af-
fected (e.g., Miceli, Mazzuchi, Menn, & Goodglass, 1983). It has also been shown 
(Linebarger, Schwartz, & Saﬀran, 1983) that there are persons who show disorders 
of comprehension as well as production in tests of grammar, but can still make 
metalinguistic judgments about whether a sentence is correct or not, which indi-
cates that some grammatical ability remains. 
2. The relationship between agrammatism and paragrammatism. Are agramma-
tism and paragrammatism really two fundamentally diﬀerent phenomena or are 
they diﬀerent surface manifestations of grammatical problems that are basically 
similar but are accompanied by diﬀerent sets of additional symptoms in Broca’s 

Chapter 5. Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
69
and Wernicke’s aphasia? Cross-linguistic studies have pointed to diﬃculties with 
the traditional deﬁnitions of agrammatism and paragrammatism. These deﬁni-
tions can only partially be applied to languages with a rich morphology, such as 
Italian (Miceli, Silveri, Romani, & Caramazza, 1989) and languages where gram-
matical morphemes are not segments that can be omitted, such as Hebrew (Grodz-
insky, 1984, 1986). Examples of necessary modiﬁcations include the ﬁndings that 
substitutions of grammatical morphemes seem to be just as common as omissions 
and that main verbs are often omitted. The borderline between agrammatism and 
paragrammatism might thus have been more due to their occurrence with certain 
aphasic syndromes than to any neurolinguistic motivation.
The role of the verb in grammar and disturbances of grammar
The role of the verb in grammar is a central topic for research on disorders aﬀecting 
grammar. As we have seen above, for a long time there was a fairly strong belief in 
the classical aphasiological tradition about the localization of “word meanings.” Word 
meanings, concepts, the mental lexicon, or whatever term was used to capture the 
semantic representation and/or processes associated with words (especially nouns, 
verbs, and adjectives) were strictly posterior left-hemisphere phenomena. On the 
other hand, more holistic, cognitively oriented theories often claimed that a more 
distributed representation, requiring widespread networks or functional systems, was 
more likely. However, we have seen a change and nowadays the right hemisphere is 
considered to play an important role with respect to semantics. We have also seen 
that, especially for the activation of at least certain verbs of motion and action, frontal 
lobe activity seems to be essential. This development is partly a result of brain activa-
tion imaging studies. Disturbances of grammar have traditionally been linked to left-
hemisphere frontal lesions. We can now see that the role of verb semantics and the 
structural constraints used in the formation of grammatical structures and sequences 
can become central and link semantics and syntax, which opens the way for diﬀerent 
hypotheses about grammatical disturbances. A recent suggestion of a link between 
mirror neurons for goal-directed grasping in the monkey and schemata for handling 
verb-argument structures is made by Arbib (2005).
Morphology, grammar, and cross-linguistic ﬁndings
In the last 20 years, a large number of studies of grammatical disturbances (usually 
deﬁned as agrammatism) in typologically diﬀerent languages and comparative stud-
ies using several languages have increased our knowledge of grammatical disorders 
in aphasia. In this section, some of the main ﬁndings from multi- and cross-linguis-

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
70
tic studies of agrammatism (e.g., Bates & Wulfeck, 1989; Menn & Obler, 1990ab) 
will be mentioned and their potential interpretations discussed. We will start with 
morphology.
Morphology
1. 
 Free grammatical morphemes (e.g., function words) tend to be omitted, but they are some-
times substituted as well.
2. 
 Bound grammatical morphemes (e.g., inﬂectional endings) are rarely omitted, but are often 
substituted.
There seems to be a diﬀerence between free and bound grammatical morphemes. Both 
types can be substituted, but only free morphemes are omitted. Forms such as inﬁni-
tives and verb stems (if they can occur as words) are produced and diﬀerent inﬂections 
are substituted.
Depending on the type of language, the border between morphology and syntax 
can vary. Some syntactic phenomena characterizing aphasia are listed below, but some 
of them can also be seen as morpholexical.
Syntax
1. 
 Agrammatism (deﬁned only by short phrase length and slow speech rate) seems to exist in 
most languages and is usually combined with reduced variety in syntax. 
2. 
 There is great variation between languages, but a selective vulnerability of grammatical inﬂec-
tions and function words can be found in all aphasics, according to Bates and Wulfeck (1989) 
(who advocate a type of morpholexical interpretation of agrammatism).
3. 
 A substantial number of main verbs are omitted. Many studies give verbs a central role 
in the formation of the syntactic structure of utterances (see below, for example under 
“The Mapping Hypothesis”).
Since languages vary a great deal in grammatical structure, it has been a matter of 
discussion whether agrammatism of some kind can be found in all languages. (Chi-
nese with its very sparse grammar has been a test case.) So far, some phenomena that 
have been considered to be comparable have been found in all the languages studied, 
even though this makes the deﬁnition very short and unspeciﬁc. The division between 
syndromes that are mainly linked to anterior lesions with nonﬂuent speech or to 
posterior lesions with ﬂuent speech is, as we have already seen, oversimpliﬁed from a 
neurolinguistic point of view. Bates and Wulfeck’s claim about the general vulnerability 
of grammatical inﬂections and function words is interesting in this context and can 
be compared to the widespread occurrence of anomia in aphasia. Whether problems 
aﬀecting main verbs should be considered as mainly lexical, morphological, syntactic, 
or all of these is a matter for both semantic and syntactic theory that we will return 
to below. It does, however, seem clear that the role of verbs is especially interesting in 
relation to disorders of grammar. This was not really in focus in earlier deﬁnitions of 

Chapter 5. Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
71
grammatical disorders. Further observations of the eﬀects of syntactic complexity add 
to the argument for considering morpholexical and syntactic factors as interacting.
Morphological and syntactic complexity interact 
Morphological and syntactic complexity interact in making a grammatical structure hard to 
process. Processing conditions seem to matter in that 
a. 
simpliﬁcation is attempted, and 
b. 
complex structures tend to break down and contain many errors. 
This points to “access problems” as a likely underlying cause.
Finally, the role of semantic-pragmatic factors in what we have called grammatical 
disorders has to be considered. Depending on the theoretical framework, semantic-
pragmatic factors can be considered as fundamental to, interacting with, or adding to 
surface manifestations of grammatical disorders. Some of the observations relating to 
semantic and pragmatic inﬂuence are listed below.
Interaction with semantics-pragmatics
Semantic-pragmatic aspects also interact with grammatical disorders:
1. 
 Bates and Wulfeck (1989) state that pragmatic aspects are involved in agrammatic speech 
production.
2. 
 Menn and Obler (1990a) also point to the interplay between strategies and grammar in pro-
ducing speech, which is reﬂected in the output.
3. 
 Kolk and colleagues (e.g., Kolk, 1987; Kolk & Heeschen, 1992) emphasize adaptation as the 
main factor behind agrammatism (see below, under “The Adaptation Hypothesis”).
Three frameworks for describing agrammatism
The Mapping Hypothesis
The Mapping Hypothesis was proposed by Saﬀran, Schwartz, and Marin in 1980 and 
by Linebarger, Schwartz,and Saﬀran in 1983. This group of researchers has shown that 
persons with agrammatism can still make judgments about the correctness of a given 
complex sentence, for example, a reversible passive, such as The dog was chased by the 
cat. In their view, the main problem in agrammatic comprehension is the mapping of 
syntactic representations into semantic representations, whereas syntactic parsing is 
not aﬀected. Examples of thematic roles are agent, patient, experiencer, instrument, 
goal, and theme of the event given by the central verb (cf. Fillmore 1968). The subjects 
and objects of the syntactic structure must be mapped onto such roles to achieve a 
semantic interpretation. Grammatical judgment requires only syntactic parsing, and 
can therefore be performed even when mapping is disrupted. These researchers also 
leave open the possibility that agrammatism could be a processing limitation, which 
allows parsing to take place, but not parsing and mapping at the same time. This means 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
72
that thematic roles cannot be assigned and certain features cannot be checked and, 
thus, semantic processing is prevented. In this situation, a variety of heuristics inﬂu-
ence performance. Apart from the syntactic route, the lexico-inferential route, and the 
canonical order route are two alternatives that come into play in agrammatic sentence 
comprehension. (Accounts of these three routes can be found in Slobin, 1966, and 
Caplan, 1992.) 
Use of the syntactic route can be simpliﬁed with respect to parsing, by the use of a 
simple canonical order strategy, such as N V N order, and with respect to mapping, by 
the use of a thematic hierarchy with principles like ﬁrst noun = agent. 
Using the canonical order route means using the linear order of nouns in the event 
process to determine their thematic roles. The sequence of nouns or noun phrases is, 
therefore, simply mapped onto a sequence of thematic roles without considering the 
semantics of the particular verb.
The lexico-inferential route uses semantic constraint-checking predictively and 
assigns thematic roles to nouns based only on whether they satisfy the selection 
constraints of the verb. Thus, it is the meaning of the component words that is used 
without regard to syntactic structure or linear order.
Let us consider an example:
The man was eaten by the frog.
The man                        was eaten                by                   the frog. 
S
NP
VP
PP
V
P
NP
Figure 5.1. Syntactic tree structure of The man was eaten by the frog
The full use of the syntactic route involves a structural analysis into a representational 
tree structure, [The man [NP] [was eaten [V] [by [P] [the frog [NP]PP]VP]S]]; the 
relation of this tree structure to the corresponding active sentence The frog ate the man; 
and the assignment of subject and object roles as a basis for mapping onto thematic 
roles, where the subject is the frog, which is the agent, and the object is the man, who 
is the patient. (See Figure 5.2.)

Chapter 5. Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
73
The use of the canonical order route would make the ﬁrst noun phrase into the agent 
and the second noun phrase into the patient; in other words, the man = agent, the frog 
= patient.
The lexico-inferential route would apply the semantic constraints of the verb 
in combination with the semantic features of the noun phrases. In this case, it might 
well determine that the man was the agent and the frog was the patient, since it would 
be semantically more plausible that a man would eat a frog than that a frog would eat 
a man.
The claim of the mapping hypothesis is that all three routes interact in normal 
processing. 
In agrammatic comprehension, we also see an interplay between syntactic process-
ing and the other routes representing heuristics, which sometimes help, but sometimes 
do not. The canonical order and lexico-inferential routes, and possibly other heuristics, 
are abnormally inﬂuential, according to Linebarger (1998).
Mapping therapy. The mapping hypothesis is applied in mapping therapy. In short, 
mapping therapy involves, for example, using strategies to map thematic roles onto 
parts of speech of sentences. This can be done, for example, by color-coding subjects 
as red slots, verbs as blue slots, and objects as green slots and then determining which 
word goes in which slot, given a picture of a speciﬁc event (Schwartz, Saﬀran, Fink, 
Myers, & Martin, 1993)
The Adaptation Hypothesis
The idea that agrammatic speech production takes the form it does as the result of a 
strategy has been around for a long time. As early as the beginning of the 20th century, 
the economy of eﬀort hypothesis existed; it claimed that the articulation diﬃculties of 
many agrammatic persons led to their reduced grammar because of adaptation to their 
need to speak more slowly and in a more reduced way. (The main argument against 
this hypothesis was that agrammatism also often aﬀects language comprehension. A 
The frog                                      ate                          the man.
S
NP
VP
V
NP
Figure 5.2. Syntactic tree for the corresponding active sentence, The frog ate the man

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
74
central disorder of “representation” or “competence” was hypothesized by, for example, 
Caramazza and Zurif, 1976).
The present-day adaptation hypothesis, put forward by Kolk (e.g., Kolk, 1987; 
Kolk & Heeschen, 1992) and others, focuses on agrammatism as a processing disorder 
rather than a central representational disorder. The underlying disorder is seen as a 
disorder aﬀecting the timing of activation of sentence information, either by delay 
or by too rapid decay of activation. This allows us to see agrammatism as a disorder 
characterized by variations in severity. The basis is the Capacity Model of language 
processing (Just & Carpenter, 1992). According to the Capacity Model, reduced ef-
ﬁciency or maintenance can result from a shortage of capacity (e.g., slow activation 
and fast decay of activation). One eﬀect of this timing disorder may be that syntactic 
tree constructions disintegrate prematurely (Kolk, 1987) in sentence generation. The 
disorder also aﬀects the activation of lexical items, since the synchrony between the 
generation of syntactic slots and lexical items is disturbed. This leads to more complex 
structures having more errors, resulting in both paraphasias and paragrammatism 
(Kolk, 1987, 1998ab).
In this framework, agrammatism involves adaptation to the timing deﬁcit. This 
adaptation to the “reduced temporal window” leads to three types of strategies:
1. simpliﬁcation: reduced variety, isolated phrases (as a result of preventive adapta-
tion or economy of syntactic computation);
2. restart: faster activation by restarting and proﬁting from the activation of the ﬁrst 
attempt (corrective adaptation);
3. slow rate of speech.
The claim is that the operations underlying adaptation are parts of the normal process, 
which are just used more often as the result of learning and controlled selection. This 
involves awareness of the problems and selection of subsentential syntactic structures. 
Furthermore, adaptation is optional, which can be seen in diﬀerences between diﬀer-
ent types of talk, for instance, test situations and informal conversation.
Syntactic simpliﬁcation therapy. The type of therapy that builds on the adaptation 
hypothesis is called syntactic simpliﬁcation therapy and involves training aphasic 
persons to consciously use adaptation strategies, such as the choice of shorter gram-
matical structures. The claim is that the conscious application of such strategies makes 
communication more eﬃcient.
The trace deletion hypothesis (TDH) or trace based account and the tree 
pruning hypothesis
The trace deletion hypothesis of language comprehension disorders in agramma-
tism was presented by Grodzinsky in the mid-1980s. It directly relates to Chomsky’s 

Chapter 5. Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
75
Minimalist Program, which builds on earlier Chomskyan frameworks; it assumes an 
autonomous syntax and describes agrammatism as a speciﬁc type of disorder aﬀecting 
the syntactic tree structure. For a deeper understanding of this view, Chomsky’s (1992) 
A minimalist program describes the theory, and articles by Grodzinsky (1986, 1990, 
1995, 1998) describe the TDH.
The main suggestion of this hypothesis is that the disturbance speciﬁcally aﬀects 
traces, or the empty positions that are left when movement transformations are per-
formed.
What is a transformation and what is a trace? The notion of transformation rests 
on the theory that a more basic syntactic structure is changed into another form for 
output; for example, a transformation can make a basic active declarative sentence like 
The dog chases the cat into a passive sentence like The cat is chased by the dog. In this 
account, sentence construction starts with the most basic forms and some parts of the 
sentence are moved by the transformation. When this happens, traces of the parts that 
have been moved are left behind in a mental representation of the sentence structure. 
These traces are also used in the interpretation of a sentence. When they are not avail-
able, a passive sentence, for example, cannot be interpreted. More speciﬁcally, the parts 
of the sentence cannot be assigned their so-called theta-roles for semantic interpreta-
tion. Theta-roles are comparable to thematic roles in an argument structure; thus, 
agent is a thematic role that is typically assigned to a subject in a basic active sentence 
(cf. the thematic structures in the section on the mapping hypothesis above). 
The trace deletion hypothesis was originally phrased as follows.
The Trace Deletion Hypothesis (Grodzinsky, 1986, 1990):
 
Delete all traces.
 
Link every NP in non-theta position to a theta-role by default (mostly NP1 = agent)
(Grodzinsky, 1998)
When an NP has been moved to another position, it is not interpreted semantically, 
because the trace is deleted. It then has to be interpreted by some other strategy and a 
default strategy is assumed.
The TDH was revised into the trace based account in 1995, in response to some 
points of criticism and some ﬁndings that were not easily accounted for by the earlier 
TDH.
Revised TDH — Trace Based Account (Grodzinsky, 1995):
1. 
 Trace-Deletion: Traces in theta-positions are deleted from agrammatic representation.
2. 
 R(eferential)-strategy: Assign a referential NP a role by its linear position if it has no theta-
role.
(Grodzinsky, 1998)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
76
Another hypothesis based on the Minimalist framework is the Tree Pruning Hypoth-
esis (TPH), which was originally proposed as an account for dissociations between 
tense and agreement inﬂections. (Friedmann, 2001). In a study of speakers of Hebrew 
and Arabic, Friedmann and Grodzinsky (2000) found a dissociation between tense and 
agreement inﬂection in agrammatic sentence production. Tense was more vulnerable 
than agreement and it was suggested that this was a result of their diﬀerent positions in 
the Minimalist syntactic tree. The tense node was suggested to be impaired, while the 
agreement node was not. It was also suggested that more severe agrammatism would 
be caused by an impairment at a lower node in the tree than milder forms. The TPH 
then states that when a node is impaired, the tree is “pruned” upward, so that all nodes 
above it become inaccessible. See Figure 5.3 (from Pollock, 1989).
Compatibility of Approaches
The three approaches discussed above are clearly in competition with each other. 
They put diﬀerent emphasis on agrammatic language comprehension, as opposed to 
production, and they diﬀer in focus. Nevertheless, some of their proponents (Kolk, 
1998b; Linebarger, 1998) also point to their similarities, and they are probably not 
completely incompatible.
   CP
(Wh)                   C1
          C0
           TP
(complementizer)
T1
NegP
T0
              AgrP
(tense)
Agr0                                           VP
(agreement)
              V1
                               NP
V0                     NP
Figure 5.3. “Minimalist” syntactic tree, showing tense and agreement nodes (the curved line 
marks the site of agrammatic “pruning”)

Chapter 5. Morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics
77
Summary
We have discussed disturbances of grammar in aphasia, especially the use of the terms agram-
matism and paragrammatism and how the study of agrammatism in diﬀerent types of lan-
guages has aﬀected the deﬁnition and view of grammatical disturbances. The role of the verb 
in grammatical structures was emphasized as a central question in aphasiology. Cross-linguis-
tic ﬁndings were summarized and similarities were discussed. Three main types of hypotheses 
about agrammatism — the mapping hypothesis, the adaptation hypothesis, and the trace 
deletion hypothesis/tree pruning hypothesis — were then presented.
Further reading
There are many studies of morphology and syntax in neurolinguistics. Most studies concern 
agrammatism and theories of grammar applied to data from aphasia. Cross-linguistic stud-
ies that are comprehensive and often cited are the Menn and Obler volume from 1990 and 
Bates and Wulfeck’s chapter from 1989. The three main hypotheses about agrammatism are 
described by Linebarger, Kolk, and Grodzinsky and good overviews are provided by chapters 
in Visch-Brink and Bastiaanse (1998) and in the Handbook of neurolinguistics. Articles about 
agrammatism from Brain and Language are collected in Whitaker (1999). 
Bates, E., & Wulfeck, B. (1989). Crosslinguistic studies of aphasia. In B. McWhinney & E. Bates 
(Eds.), The crosslinguistic study of sentence processing (pp. 328–371). New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Grodzinsky, Y. (1998). Comparative aphasiology: Some preliminary notes. In E. Visch-Brink & R. 
Bastiaanse (Eds.), Linguistic levels in aphasiology (pp. 175–192). London: Singular Publishing 
Group.
Kolk, H. (1998a). Disorders of syntax in aphasia. In H. Whitaker & B. Stemmer (Eds.), Handbook of 
neurolinguistics (pp. 249–260). San Diego: Academic Press.
Kolk, H. (1998b). The malleability of agrammatic symptoms and its implications for therapy. In 
E. Visch-Brink & R. Bastiaanse (Eds.), Linguistic levels in aphasiology (pp. 193–210). London: 
Singular Publishing Group.
Linebarger, M. (1998). Algorithmic and heuristic processes in agrammatic language com-
prehension. In E. Visch-Brink & R. Bastiaanse (Eds.), Linguistic levels in aphasiology (pp. 
153–174). London: Singular Publishing Group.
Menn, L., & Obler, L. (Eds.) (1990). Cross-language agrammatic source book. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Schwartz, M., Saﬀran, E., Fink, R.., Myers, J., & Martin, N. (1993). Mapping therapy: A treatment 
program for agrammatism. Aphasiology, 8, 19–54.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
78
Visch-Brink, E., & Bastiaanse, R. (Eds.) (1998). Linguistic levels in aphasia. London: Singular Pub-
lishing Group.
Whitaker, H. (Ed.) (1999). Agrammatism. New York: Academic Press.
Assignments
Study the following text transcribed from the speech of a person with agrammatism and try to 
answer the following questions.
Agrammatism has sometimes been called “telegraphic style.” 
1. 
What are the similarities between the transcribed speech and a typical “telegraphic” mes-
sage (telegram, SMS or short note for memory, e.g., a “to-do list”)? 
2. 
What are the diﬀerences? 
3. 
Try to explain the similarities and diﬀerences.
4. 
Try to rewrite the transcription, applying the strategy of only using short sentences of 
simple Subject-Verb or Subject-Verb-Object types. Discuss the possible advantages and 
disadvantages of such a strategy.
Example of agrammatic speech (Little Red Riding Hood)
Red Riding Hood–pretty girl. Mother grandmother /stik/ … um home, uh forest … uh wolf .. 
um eat … us . Grandmother … uh. Eat . g-grandmother . uh wolves–wolf eat grandmother, Uh 
Riding Hood, pretty girl, basket, uh uh (sighs) you know? “Pretty girl” … Uh … likes grandmoth-
er’s voice, uh noodles … (laughs).
‘n likes uh Riding Hood–uh memory–uh–looks uh voice, looks . uh dress, looks, bed, uh looks 
… uh … uh … Riding Hood … Riding Hood …
 (Extracted and adapted from Menn & Obler, 1990a, p. 168)

Chapter 6
Lexical semantics
In this chapter:
• 
What is meaning and how is it linked to word forms 
and to larger linguistic units?
• 
Word semantics 
– Prototype theory 
– Semantic distinctive features 
– Semantic ﬁelds 
– Semantic features and operations in aphasia
• 
Sources of data and theories 
– Deep dyslexia 
– Category-speciﬁc anomia 
– Right-hemisphere lesions and lexical-semantic 
problems 
– Semantic dementia
• 
Methodological considerations 
– Group studies versus case studies 
– Central or access disorder 
– Mapping of form and meaning
• 
Types of process models 
– Word comprehension 
– Word production
• 
Simulation
• 
Links to therapy

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
80
What is meaning and how is it linked to word forms and to 
larger linguistic units?
There are many diﬀerent theories of meaning. One classical distinction divides theories 
in three main types. Nominalism is the stance that there are objects and phenomena 
in the world and words to denote them; nothing else (i.e., no intermediate represen-
tation) is needed. Conceptualism is the opinion most often found in neurolinguistic 
studies: that there are concepts in our minds that link words to objects and phenomena 
in the world. What concepts are, how they are formed, and how they can be disturbed 
are some of the main objects of study for cognitive linguistics, neurolinguistics, and 
semantics. A third possible position is that of conceptual realism, which claims that 
concepts exist in themselves, independently of human minds (e.g., so-called Platonic 
ideas).
There are also diﬀerent opinions about what is or can be the basic units of mean-
ing. Are words, parts of words, or even smaller features basic, or are sentences, utter-
ances, contributions, longer texts, monologues, or dialogues basic for meaning in use? 
Or could they all be? And what is the relationship between the meanings of linguistic 
units and their context of use? 
We will start by looking at word semantics or lexical semantics, since this is the 
area that has been studied by far the most in neuro- and psycholinguistics.
Word semantics
Anomia (diﬃculties in ﬁnding “content words”) is a symptom shared by almost all 
persons with aphasia. (In the type of aphasia called “anomic aphasia,” this is the only 
symptom; while in the other types of aphasia, it is one of several symptoms.) Anomia 
creates problems in tasks such as naming objects (visually displayed, from verbal 
descriptions, or from memory). Aphasic ways of searching for words and aphasic se-
mantic word substitutions (semantic paraphasias) have been used to test diﬀerent hy-
potheses about how a “mental lexicon” can be organized. A basic question is whether 
the “lexicon” can be disturbed in itself — that is, can its organization be aﬀected? — or 
whether only the ways of accessing the lexicon can be disturbed. Since we are dealing 
with patterns of activation in the brain, this is really a pseudo-question, or rather a 
question regarding the quality, degree, or variation in activation patterns. An example 
of anomic speech is presented below. (The person with anomia (A) is trying to name 
the object in the picture presented by a therapist (T).)

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
81
Picture naming by person with anomia
Target word: LADDER
A: yes there we have it there… he had one of those yesterday the one who picked apples I know so 
well what it’s called we have one over there by the shed no cannot
Target word: SHOEMAKER
A: carpen … no it isn’t that shoebake … shoebaker, no carpen carpen
T: shoemake …
A: shoebaker
T: no shoemake …
P: shoemaker
The example shows that the target word is hard to “ﬁnd” and how associations and 
words related to the target are activated. 
The phenomenon of word-ﬁnding problems in language production and compre-
hension has been studied from diﬀerent perspectives. Below we will describe three 
frameworks that have been used to describe word-ﬁnding problems and illustrate 
them with some “classical” studies of lexical semantics in aphasia (mostly from the 
1970s).
Prototype theory
Prototype theory was introduced by Rosch (1975) and proposes that categories are or-
ganized around the most prototypical exemplars, which are central and more “stable.” 
The theory predicts that “prototypical” items, that is, the most typical exemplars of a 
category, are named more easily and consistently than more “atypical” exemplars and 
that exemplars that are borderline between categories are associated with the “fuzzy” 
fringes of the ﬁelds. Figure 6.1 illustrates a prototype ﬁeld for bird with the prototype 
in the middle, some associated, but less central phenomena further out, and a “bor-
derline” phenomenon associated at the fringe. 
BAT 
MAGPIE 
HEN
SPARROW
Figure 6.1. A partial prototype ﬁeld for BIRD (the words in the ﬁgure stand for images)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
82
Prototype theory was applied by Whitehouse, Caramazza, and Zurif (1978) (in 
an experiment designed by Labov, 1973). They found that Broca’s aphasics used the 
same strategies as controls for classifying objects, while anomic aphasics either showed 
a total inability to name objects systematically or used rules that were too simple. 
They were also unable to use the added context in a picture as a cue. The task was to 
determine whether drawn objects were “cups,” “plates,” or “glasses.” Stimuli gradually 
became more similar and it was noted where each person drew the limits between the 
diﬀerent types of objects.
Prototype theory has been combined with considerations of diﬀerent levels of 
abstraction in a hierarchical organization of semantic categories into superordinate, 
basic, and subordinate levels. For example, animal is superordinate and poodle is sub-
ordinate to dog, which is a base-level word. It has been claimed that base-level words 
are more likely to be prototypical, and remain more “robust” for many persons with 
aphasia. Some aphasic persons also ﬁnd superordinate and more general categories 
easier, while subordinate, more speciﬁc categories are harder. On the other hand, ab-
straction is often a problem for aphasic subjects, and moving from a lower to a higher 
level of abstraction, for example, naming the category that poodles and terriers both 
belong to, can be diﬃcult for persons with anomia.
Semantic distinctive features
Semantic distinctive features have been used in descriptions of linguistic categories 
since antiquity. The idea is that a category can be identiﬁed and described with refer-
ence to the necessary and suﬃcient conditions for belonging to that category. This 
process therefore involves decomposition into more primitive or basic features. 
Examples of semantic distinctive features are [+living], [+male], [–adult] for boy. 
The use of semantic features by normal control subjects and diﬀerent types of 
aphasics was studied by Zurif, Caramazza, Myerson, and Galvis (1974). They found 
Figure 6.2. Examples of objects: glass – cup – bowl – plate
Table 6.1. Semantic features distinguishing some categories denoting humans
Male
Female
Adult
Child
Man
+
–
+
–
Woman
–
+
+
–
Boy
+
–
–
+
Girl
–
+
–
+
Note that the table can be reduced to two features, adulthood and gender.

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
83
that controls used semantic features in a systematic, “technical” way. Broca’s aphasics 
used temporary and conspicuous features and were more dependent on emotional 
and situational inﬂuences. Wernicke’s aphasics used indeterminate and deviant fea-
tures and were generally “out of focus.” The words the participants had to classify were 
mother, wife, cook, partner, knight, husband, shark, trout, dog, tiger, turtle, and crocodile. 
The controls tended to classify the words into the human and animal categories, while 
Broca’s aphasics divided them into human + dog versus other animals. Controls then 
sorted the animals according to species, while Broca’s aphasics sorted them into more 
or less dangerous groups.
Semantic ﬁelds
Semantic ﬁelds or networks are groupings of words according to semantic similarity, 
or contiguity (co-occurrence), relations. They have been used by several researchers 
and in a number of diﬀerent ways. A well-known example is the hierarchical and 
similarity-based word association network used by Collins and Quillian (1969). The 
network is based on “is a” relations between words; for example, a poodle is a dog, a 
dog is an animal. Especially for natural kinds, this is a good way of describing paradig-
matic, similarity-based relations. Collins and Loftus (1975) presented a model of word 
meanings based on semantic similarity. Words are activated by spreading activation in 
the network when related words are aroused. This is the basis for semantic priming of 
word recognition (i.e., that a word is recognized faster if it has been preceded by a se-
mantically related word). There are, however, also syntagmatic semantic ﬁeld relations 
between words, based on contiguity or co-occurrence. Such relations exist between 
word pairs such as cat and dog, eat and food, or red and light. Similarity and contiguity 
relations interact in determining association strength between words. For example, cat 
and dog both belong to the same category in a hierarchical, similarity-based ﬁeld, but 
they also tend to co-occur in expressions such as cats and dogs. Semantic ﬁelds can 
be based on relations between words, which are in turn based on relations between 
objects, events, and properties in the world. 
Semantic word substitutions seem to keep “within category” and resemble “speech 
errors” made by normal speakers (e.g., big becomes small) (Buckingham, 1979). Oth-
ers have studied conceptual organization. Zurif, Caramazza, Foldi, and Gardner (1979) 
found that both Broca’s and Wernicke’s aphasics had diﬃculties in structuring lexical 
knowledge by conceptual features. The subjects ﬁrst had to sort words according to 
thematic relations and common conceptual features. Then they were given a word 
recognition test in order to see whether these relations were actually used. The words 
were related in the following ways:

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
84
NECK – HEAD  – locative – CAP                 SAW – instrumental –  WOOD – BRICK
relation
                    relation                 |                |
+body      +body
   +building    +building
   part         part
                                                                     material     material
|            |
Figure 6.3. Semantic ﬁeld relations (similarity and contiguity)
Wernicke’s aphasics in particular had diﬃculties in recognizing and using the rela-
tions. Luria (1976) claimed that words have graded semantic associative ﬁelds. Good-
glass and Baker (1976) found that parts of these ﬁelds could be damaged selectively 
and that object naming was aﬀected by how much of the semantic ﬁeld was accessible. 
They let persons with aphasia name objects and then judge whether other words were 
associated with the object names. The speed of recognizing associated words was mea-
sured. All subjects had shorter response times for words associated with objects that 
they had been able to name. Certain associated words were consistently easier, while 
others were harder to recognize. Thus, the semantic association ﬁeld around a word 
seemed to be organized as shown in Figure 6.4:
Example:
Guitar
Beat
Loud
Drum
DRUM
Contrastive coordination 
Functional association 
Attribute                                 Identity
Functional context          Superordinate
TARGET WORD 
Band
    Instrument
Figure 6.4. Semantic associative ﬁelds from Goodglass and Baker (1976)
Derouesné and Lecours (1972) obtained similar results when they made aphasics sort 
words which were associated to diﬀerent degrees. The ﬁeld of association tended to be 
made either smaller or wider by patients with anomia. 
The authors of both of these studies claim that they point to a central semantic 
disorder. In other experiments, naming therapy for a speciﬁc category has been found 

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
85
to aﬀect the ability to name other categories as well and this is claimed to indicate a 
disturbance of the access paths and not the semantic ﬁeld in itself (Rochford, 1971; 
Seron, Deloche, Bastard, Chassin, & Hermand, 1979; and others). Studies by Kiran 
and colleagues have shown that there is a semantic complexity eﬀect, in that training 
on atypical examples of animate and inanimate categories and their semantic features 
leads to improvement in the naming of more typical exemplars as well, whereas the 
reverse does not hold (Kiran, Ntourou, Eubanks, & Shamapant, 2005).
Meaning potential and semantic operations
Another perspective is to look at words as having meaning potentials and to have their 
speciﬁc meaning determined by the current context (Allwood 1999, 2003). According 
to this theory, context determination of meaning is crucial and lexical semantics works 
by semantic operations on meaning potentials. Semantics and pragmatics are, thus, 
uniﬁed. This perspective is also important when looking at communicative contribu-
tions in context (see Chapter 7). 
Semantic features and operations in aphasia
As we have seen, an intended target word is very often replaced by a word that is se-
mantically and/or phonologically related to it. The semantic relation can be based on 
similarity or contiguity (i.e., co-occurrence ). Some semantic relations that are often 
found in these situations are same semantic category, superordinate, subordinate, part 
for whole, attribute, spatial relation, and functional-causal relation. This can apply to 
words denoting objects, functions, processes, and properties. Many semantic substi-
tutions and paraphrases (circumlocutions) describe situational features, indicating a 
need to contextualize. More substitutions seem to move in the direction from abstract 
to concrete than in the opposite direction, indicating diﬃculties with abstraction (All-
wood & Ahlsén, 1986, 1991).
Examples:
Same category: cat for dog
Superordinate: dog for poodle
Subordinate: poodle for dog
Part for whole: trunk for elephant
Attribute: yellow for banana
Spatial relation: head for cap
Functional causal relation: kick for ball
Circumlocution: he had one of those yesterday, the one who picked apples we have one 
over by the shed for ladder

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
86
Further factors to consider in studies of lexical semantics and anomia include modality 
(visual versus auditory) and factors that may underlie category-speciﬁc anomias (see 
below), such as physical properties versus function.
Sources of data and theories
Some of the main types of evidence used in neurolinguistic theories of lexical seman-
tics have come from certain intriguing syndromes and symptoms in aphasia (see, for 
instance, Hagoort, 1998).
Deep dyslexia
One source of data for neurolinguistic lexical theories is deep dyslexia and the types 
of semantic substitutions made by persons with this syndrome when they read (see 
Chapter 8). Since semantic reading errors are the most typical feature of deep dyslexia, 
it is naturally interesting to study the nature of these errors and also their combina-
tion with visual orthographic errors. An example of a semantic reading error would 
be reading school instead of university, while reading universally instead of university 
would be a visual error. A hypothetical visual plus semantic error would be reading 
generally instead of university (university → universally → generally). Persons with deep 
dyslexia are usually unable to read by grapheme-to-phoneme conversion (i.e., sound 
out the words), and therefore have to rely on their visual and semantic abilities to iden-
tify words; at the same time, they make these interesting types of errors. Whether this 
depends on one speciﬁc, not yet totally understood disturbance or several disturbances 
that co-occur for anatomical reasons is not fully known. (See also Chapter 8.)
Category-speciﬁc anomia
Another intriguing phenomenon is so-called category-speciﬁc anomia, in which a 
person has an anomia that aﬀects a certain category of words, but leaves other catego-
ries unaﬀected.
One recurring observation is that nouns and verbs can be selectively disturbed 
in relation to each other. Verbs seem to be more often aﬀected in nonﬂuent, agram-
matic aphasics with frontal lobe lesions. Nouns, on the other hand are more often 
problematic for persons with anomia, who have temporal-parietal lesions. (We have 
already observed this diﬀerence to some extent in Chapter 5.) The verb disorder can 
be considered in relation to a possible frontal encoding of verbs of movement and ac-
tion (cf. Pulvermüller, Shtyrov, & Ilmoniemi, 2005). It may also be related to the role 
of verbs in grammatical structure. The noun disorder would be more related to the 
association of sensory features.

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
87
Further observations, however, have been made in a number of studies of cat-
egory-speciﬁc disturbances aﬀecting subgroups of nouns.
One such diﬀerence is between concrete and abstract nouns, most often shown as 
a concreteness eﬀect, namely that concrete nouns are more easily activated. It has been 
suggested that concrete nouns have richer representational structures in memory, in-
cluding, for example, a nonverbal image coding (Paivio, 1991), more contextual infor-
mation (Schwanenﬂugel, 1991), or a larger set of semantic features (Plaut & Shallice, 
1993), but this does not explain why some (albeit few) persons with aphasia activate 
abstract nouns more easily. Another argument is that concrete nouns are speciﬁcally 
associated with sensorimotor (including perceptual) attributes (Breedin, Martin, & 
Saﬀran, 1994). If these attributes are disturbed, abstract nouns would be easier to ac-
cess than concrete ones.
Another diﬀerence — perhaps the best-known one — is between natural or living 
objects and artifacts. There are reports of cases of selective disturbances of words for 
either natural objects (animal, fruits, vegetables) or artifacts (tools, furniture, etc). Such 
patients may have very vague semantic information about one of the category types, 
but very detailed semantic information about the other type. Competing interpreta-
tions exist, one of which attributes the diﬀerence between the two categories to their 
mainly perceptual/sensory versus mainly functional/motor basis (for natural objects 
and artifacts, respectively) (e.g., Farah & McClelland, 1991; Warrington & Shallice, 
1984). Some support for this interpretation comes from lesion data for known cases 
(Gainotti, Silveri, Daniele, & Guistolisi, 1995, Gainotti, 1998) and a PET imaging study 
(Martin, Gagnon, Schwartz, Dell, & Saﬀran, 1996), where naming of animals resulted 
in activation in the left medial occipital lobe, while naming of tools activated the left 
premotor area. (Both groups of stimuli also resulted in bilateral ventral temporal lobe 
activation.) The other main interpretation claims that we really have more detailed 
category-speciﬁcity in the organization of our mental lexicon; this has been suggested 
by Caramazza and colleagues (e.g., Caramazza & Hillis, 1990).
A related question is whether there are category-speciﬁc semantic disorders, 
which are also speciﬁc to a certain modality. This question has not yet been settled, 
although cases have been presented that might point in this direction. This question is 
related to the question concerning disrupted access versus central disturbance.
Right-hemisphere lesions and lexical-semantic problems
While semantic problems, such as anomia and semantic substitutions, are common 
in persons with aphasia as a result of left-hemisphere lesions, they are not as obvious 
in persons with right-hemisphere damage (RHD). However, RHD subjects also have 
some lexical-semantic problems, which are of interest. According to Myers (1999), 
RHD subjects mainly have problems with divergent language tasks. Divergent tasks 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
88
are typically more “open” than so-called convergent tasks, which require one speciﬁc 
response, and they demand sensitivity to semantic relations. Examples of divergent 
tasks are verbal ﬂuency tasks, where the subject is asked to name as many members of a 
category as possible in a minute, naming categories for a number of objects, and deter-
mining whether two items are related. Diﬃculties in performing these tasks have been 
noted in a number of studies. They seem to point to problems in handling multiple, 
peripheral, associated meanings, for example, less frequent and primarily connotative 
meanings. RHD subjects tend to focus on central or prototypical meanings and have 
problems with, for example, metaphoric meaning and ambiguities, which can lead 
to language comprehension problems. This points to the right hemisphere as being 
responsible for more reﬂective semantic interpretation, involving the interpretation 
of more peripheral meaning.
Semantic dementia
Semantic dementia is a progressive disorder, which starts out as a selective semantic 
problem (Hodges, Graham, & Patterson, 1995). The left temporal lobe is aﬀected. This 
is a speciﬁc disorder that aﬀects certain speciﬁed semantic information about catego-
ries, while superordinate information can still be activated (e.g., animal for dog). The 
decline seems to follow the same pattern for both production and comprehension.
Methodological considerations
Group studies versus case studies
Semantic group studies of aphasics were done in the 1970s, as we have seen. They as-
sumed that small groups of aphasics, sorted based on the syndromes of the neoclassical 
model, could be used for group study comparisons. Later, however, this assumption 
was strongly questioned, since the syndromes yield groups that are too internally het-
erogeneous. Another methodology, the extensive case study, has taken over in much of 
this research. Most of the later studies of lexical semantics in neurolinguistics, includ-
ing studies of category-speciﬁc anomias and deep dyslexia, are case studies.
Central or access disorder
Is anomia a central disorder, aﬀecting certain kinds of representations (or processes) 
that can be called “the mental lexicon” in itself or is it a disorder aﬀecting access to “the 
mental lexicon”? How one wants to answer this question is closely related to speciﬁc 

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
89
assumptions about the nature of “the mental lexicon” in terms of activation-inhibi-
tion patterns. It might even be the case that there is no certain way of drawing a line 
between representations and access processes (cf. Allwood & Ahlsén, 1984, 1986). 
Much of the research in this area is dependent on which particular process model is 
chosen.
Mapping of form and meaning
Some of the main questions in lexical-semantic studies have concerned how words are 
processed, that is, how form and meaning are mapped onto each other in language 
production and comprehension. Indeed, such questions are no less relevant today.
In relation to process models of diﬀerent types and to the units studied, how 
much top-down versus bottom-up processing is assumed to take place? When we 
understand speech, do we start by mapping words or morphemes to meaning units 
and construct the meaning of larger units from this mapping, or do we start with 
expectations and hypotheses about the meaning of a speciﬁc word or utterance based 
on background knowledge, situation, and linguistic context? Or do the two types of 
processing interact and, if so, how?
Types of process models
What types of process models should be used in the study of lexical semantics? Neu-
rolinguistic studies have played a major role in the design of process models. Many of 
the earlier studies, and present-day studies as well, are based on serial models, such 
as Garrett’s (1982a,b) or Levelt’s (1989) model of speech production (see Figure 6.5 
below), or the PALPA model (Kay, Lesser & Coltheart, 1992) (see Figure 3.5) of speech 
recognition/comprehension, as well as the search and cohort models for visual and 
auditory word recognition presented below. 
Interactive activation models, simulated in artiﬁcial neural networks (ANN) are, 
however, being used more and more, for example, the TRACE model for recogni-
tion/ comprehension and the IAM model for production used by Dell and coworkers 
(e.g., Dell, Schwartz, Martin, Saﬀran, & Gagnon, 1997) (see below in this chapter and 
Chapter 13).
Word comprehension
Models: Diﬀerent models of lexical access have been tried out, such as Forster’s active 
search model and Morton’s logogen model, which posit a passively responsive lexicon 
where diﬀerent units are activated by incoming stimuli (Forster, 1976; Morton, 1969); 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
90
the cohort model proposed by Marslen-Wilson and Tyler (1980); and the TRACE 
model of McClelland and Elman (1986).
In an active, direct search lexicon, it is assumed that one searches for matches of 
an incoming stimulus word in “bins” containing word representations (auditory or 
visual) which are ordered by some principle, for example, how frequently they have 
been encountered. The word representations in the “bins” are then linked to a “lexical 
master ﬁle,” where phonological and semantic cross-references exist. Similarly, a word 
can be accessed from a semantic representation in production.
In a passive, indirect, responsive model, like the logogen model, auditory and visual 
incoming word stimuli can activate a speciﬁc “logogen” (recognition unit) if the stimu-
lus is strong enough (i.e., contains enough activation and not too much inhibition in 
relation to the features of the logogen to get over its activation threshold). The logogens 
are also connected to a semantic cognitive lexicon, which can increase or decrease the 
activation and thus aﬀect which logogen is activated.
A cohort model stresses the incremental build-up of activation as, for example, 
a written word is encountered letter by letter and a particular word is selected at a 
particular decision point. An early perceptual analysis determines that a set of words 
are possible candidates and recognition proceeds by eliminating the candidates from 
left to right.
The TRACE model is a highly interactive model for spoken word recognition, em-
phasizing top-down processing, or dependence on the context, in word recognition. It 
claims that lexical knowledge helps acoustic perceptual processes.
Data: On-line experiments (lexical decision studies). Lexical organization is often 
studied in lexical decision experiments. The task in a lexical decision experiment is to 
determine whether a letter string (or a spoken auditory stimulus) is a real word or not. 
The stimuli consist of a mix of real words and nonwords that are similar in structure 
to the real words. Groups of diﬀerent types of real words are included and compared 
to each other. The independent variables are, thus, real word versus nonword and 
type of word. The dependent variable is the reaction time for determining whether a 
word is a real word or not. Based on diﬀerences in reaction times, hypotheses about 
the processing of diﬀerent word types are tried out. For example, if a group of very 
frequent words and a group of infrequent words are included, the decision times will 
be shorter for the very frequent words.
A possible design for a lexical decision experiment: stimuli.
Words
Nonwords (made by changing 
letters in real words)
Frequent bisyllabic nouns
40
40
Infrequent bisyllabic nouns
40
40

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
91
A speciﬁc instance of the lexical decision task is semantic priming, where the rela-
tionship between two stimuli is investigated. The ﬁrst stimulus is presented, followed 
by the second, which is the target word to decide on (as a real word or a nonword). 
Semantic priming tasks can establish patterns of association. It has been shown that a 
semantically related word as prime word facilitates the recognition (lexical decision) 
of the target word, when compared to a unrelated prime word. For example, the word 
orange is recognized faster as a real word if it has been preceded by the prime word 
apple, than if it has been preceded by, for example, the word chair.
All of the above models have to be able to account for a number of eﬀects found 
in lexical decision tasks, such as the following:
• 
The frequency eﬀect: The more frequent a word is, the faster it is recognized.
• 
The length eﬀect: The shorter a word is, the faster it is recognized.
• 
The concreteness eﬀect: The more concrete a word is, the faster it is recognized.
• 
The word superiority eﬀect: A letter is recognized faster in a word than if it occurs 
in isolation.
• 
The word/nonword eﬀect: Words are identiﬁed as words faster than nonwords are 
identiﬁed as nonwords.
• 
The context eﬀect: words are identiﬁed faster in context.
• 
The degradation or stimulus quality eﬀect: A word that is presented clearly is rec-
ognized faster than a word that is blurred in some way (e.g., covered by a grid), if 
it is presented visually.
They also, of course, have to account for other semantically, visually, and phonological-
ly inﬂuenced perception and comprehension errors in normal and pathological data.
Word production
Models: Aphasic word substitutions, like speech errors produced by typical speakers, 
have been used as evidence for diﬀerent levels of processing in production. Predictions 
of levels of representation and processes are made based on what parts of words can be 
substituted as units and what order diﬀerent parts of production processes are applied 
in, as reﬂected in substituted units.
Garrett’s (1982a) production model and Levelt’s (1989) model for speaking are 
examples of inﬂuential serial production models, while interactive activation mod-
els have been presented by Dell and coworkers, Harley, and others (e.g., Dell & Reich, 
1981; Harley, 1993b). Levelt’s model contains the following components:

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
92
(* a lemma is an entity abstracting over the inﬂection forms of the same word stem) 
CONCEPTUAL PREPARATION (employing knowledge of the external and 
internal world, such as model of addressee/Theory of Mind and discourse 
model)
GRAMMATICAL ENCODING  (employing lemmas* from the mental 
lexicon) 
MORPHOPHONOLOGICAL ENCODING (employing morpho-
phonological codes from the mental lexicon) 
PHONETIC ENCODING (employing syllabary with gestural scores) 
ARTICULATION. (The model also includes some feedback based on the 
perception of own speech.) 
Figure 6.5. Levelt’s serial production model
Data: Aphasic word substitutions (as well as word substitutions produced by non-
aphasic speakers, e.g., so-called Freudian slips) have, however, also provided counter-
evidence to serial models (see Butterworth, 1981; cf. Harley, 1993a). So-called blends, 
where two word forms are combined in the “word” that is ﬁnally produced, have 
inspired models advocating parallel processing and feedback loops between “levels,” 
where lexical semantics and phonology can mutually inﬂuence each other. An example 
of a “blend” is plower, combining plant and ﬂower.
Substitutions where the target and the substitute have both a semantic and a pho-
nological relation (e.g., cat for rat, thumb for tongue) are much more frequent than 
one would expect if the two levels did not interrelate in some way (e.g., Dell & Reich, 
1981; Harley, 1984; Martin et al., 1996). But experiments have also shown that the in-
teraction is limited, so that processing is only semantic at ﬁrst, while in the last stages 
phonology seems to dominate (Saﬀran, Dell, & Schwartz, 2000).
Simulation
Simulations of aphasic word substitutions have been done, using artiﬁcial neural 
networks (e.g., Martin, Dell, Saﬀran, & Schwartz, 1994; Schwartz, Dell, Martin, & 
Saﬀran, 1994; Martin et al., 1996), also in this case modeling the interaction between 

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
93
phonology and semantics. Interactive activation models are nonmodular (i.e., each 
process is not self-contained). Activation spreads bidirectionally in a continuous ﬂow. 
In this way, earlier and later “stages of processing” inﬂuence each other. A compro-
mise model which is interactive but contains a lexical and a phonological stage was 
developed by Dell et al. (1997) and can be used as an example. It is a localist model, 
that is, nodes correspond to psychological properties (one-to-one). Three levels of 
nodes are included: semantic features, known words, and phonemes (see Figure 6.6). 
All connections between nodes are excitatory and bidirectional. All connections have 
the same (preset) weight and there is a preset decay factor (which determines how fast 
the activation of nodes decays) and normally distributed noise. External updating is 
used initially by activating the semantic features of the target word. This model allows 
simulation of dissociations between patients with mostly semantic and mostly phono-
logical errors. Lesions aﬀecting the decay factor produced semantic, mixed, and formal 
errors. If they were not severe, there was a semantic component in most errors. Lesions 
aﬀecting connection weight, on the other hand, produced mostly phonological errors. 
Combinations of the two types of lesions resulted in intermediate, mixed patterns. The 
model could also simulate longitudinal data for the patients, with the same factors 
simulating the later stage, only closer to normal values. The model is limited by being 
too simple to handle all the details of phonological errors, variations in response time, 
and purely semantic errors that exist in real life.
Simulation models provide new and promising methods for gaining a better un-
derstanding of lexical-semantic organization in the brain. 
Links to therapy
Lexical-semantic research at the single-word level has inspired a number of therapy 
methods, which are designed to train word association patterns, for example, Luria’s 
Semantics
Activated 
Words 
Onsets
Vowels
Codas 
Phonemes 
Figure 6.6. How an interactive model with layers for semantics, words, and phonemes might 
look (simpliﬁed)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
94
restoration therapy (Luria, 1963), Deblocking therapy (Weigl & Bierwisch, 1970), BOX 
therapy (Visch-Brink, Bajema, & Van de Sandt-Koenderman, 1997), and Semantic 
Association therapy (e.g., Martin & Laine, 2000).

Chapter 6. Lexical semantics
95
Summary
In this chapter, we have looked at lexical semantic aspects of neurolinguistics, starting with 
the meaning of words. We presented four diﬀerent theories for analyzing word meaning: 
prototype theory, semantic distinctive features, semantic ﬁelds and meaning potentials with 
semantic operations, and we related the theories to aphasia. We then turned to four intriguing 
phenomena that are important sources of data and theories: deep dyslexia, category-speciﬁc 
anomia, lexical-semantic problems following right-hemisphere lesions and semantic dementia. 
The pervasive nature of lexical-semantic problems and the extensive experimental studies of 
such problems motivate the sections on experimental methods and models of word process-
ing. Finally, we took a brief look at simulation of lexical semantic problems and links to therapy 
for disorders aﬀecting lexical semantics.
Further reading
There is an abundance of literature in the area of lexical semantics. The selection below gives 
a good introduction to the themes that we have examined in this chapter, especially current 
models and theories in lexical semantics, together with some examples of relevant ﬁndings 
from neurolinguistics . Further literature on speciﬁc topics can be found in the references.
Caramazza, A., & Hillis, A. (1991). Lexical organization of nouns and verbs in the brain. Nature, 
349, 788–790.
Dell, G., Schwartz, M., Martin, N., Saﬀran, E., & Gagnon, D. (1997). Lexical access in aphasic and 
nonaphasic speakers. Psychological Review, 104, 801–838.
Hagoort, P. (1998). The shadows of lexical meaning in patients with semantic impairments. In 
B. Stemmer & H. Whitaker (Eds.), Handbook of neurolinguistics (pp. 235–248). New York: 
Academic Press.
Harley, T. (1984). A critique of top-down independent levels models of speech production. 
Evidence from non-plan-internal speech production. Cognitive Science, 8, 191–219.
Harley, T. (1993b). Connectionist approaches to language disorders. Aphasiology, 7, 221–249.
Kay, J., Lesser, R., & Coltheart, M. (1992). Psycholinguistic assessments of language processing in 
aphasia. Hove: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Warrington, E., & Shallice, T. (1984). Category speciﬁc semantic impairments. Brain, 107, 
829–854.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
96
Assignments
Look at the following list of semantic word substitutions: 
1. 
football → balloon
2. 
hose → house
3. 
poodle → lion
4. 
zebra → trunk
5. 
donkey → horse
6. 
doll → cap
7. 
boy → man
8. 
spade → garden thing
9. 
orange → apple
10. green → purple
Try to explain each substitution:
a. 
in terms of semantic ﬁelds, prototype theory, or semantic distinctive features;
b. 
in terms of one or more diagnoses, indicating in which patients such a substitution might 
occur; 
c. 
in terms of what type of model — a serial (Levelt-type) model or an interactive activation 
(Dell-type) model — you think would best explain the substitution.

Chapter 7
The semantics and pragmatics of 
communicative contributions in 
context from a neurolinguistic 
perspective
In this chapter:
• 
Introduction: Objects of study, theories, and sources 
of data
• 
Aphasia: The scope of the term 
– Aphasia, especially after left-hemisphere lesions 
– Right-hemisphere lesions 
– Dementia, especially of Alzheimer type 
– Traumatic brain injury
• 
Links to therapy
Introduction: Objects of study, theories, and sources of data
Objects of study (phenomena) and theories
As we saw in Chapter 6, word-level semantics has been studied in many experiments 
involving persons with brain damage. But from the point of view of achieving “ecologi-
cal validity” in relation to everyday language use, it is essential to study how words and 
utterances are used in context and in real-life interaction, in order to ﬁnd out more 
about semantics (meaning in language) and pragmatics (use of language). As we will 
see in this chapter, semantics and pragmatics are closely interlinked with respect to 
many of the phenomena that are studied in neurolinguistics.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
98
A number of phenomena can be studied in relation to the semantics and pragmat-
ics of utterances, or communicative contributions in context. Some of these are listed 
in Table 7.1 below. 
The list starts out with the simple extension of semantics to longer units, such as 
sentences, utterances (since not all utterances are sentences), or contributions (since not 
all contributions in communication are verbal-vocal utterances, for example a head 
nod can mean “yes”). 
Contributions should generally be analyzed with respect to their structure and 
function in relation to the context where they occur; for example, how was a contribu-
tion related to the previous one and what did it lead to? With respect to function, an 
utterance can, for example, be analyzed as an action: a speech act (Austin, 1962; Searle, 
1969). For example, the utterance “hand me a towel” can be described as a request or 
a command. An indirect speech act has the grammatical form of one speech act while 
really representing another. For example, “can you hand me the towel?” has the form 
of a question, but is really also a request. Similarly, communicative interaction can be 
seen as a language game (Wittgenstein, 1953), where the participants make diﬀerent 
moves.
A conversation requires the participants to make assumptions about certain coop-
erative principles, if it is to work at all: participants must take each other into cognitive 
and ethical consideration (Allwood, 1976; Grice, 1975). This means that, unless some-
thing else is expressed or expected, we expect each other to maintain quality (say what 
we believe is true) and quantity (say as much as the listener needs and no more). It also 
means presenting information that is relevant in an orderly manner. These principles 
make it possible to joke and use irony, which is done by ﬂouting or breaking them in 
various ways.
As soon as sequences of utterances occur in monologue or dialogue, things are 
communicated that are not said in words. The sequencing of utterances follows certain 
principles and what is mentioned or not mentioned depends on certain presupposed 
common knowledge or the ability to infer from the previous context. There are also 
a number of typical structures used for inference. Some types of inference are linked 
to a number of phenomena studied primarily under the label of cognitive semantics. 
Such phenomena include metaphors (drawing an analogy between, for example, a 
strong man and a lion) (Lakoﬀ, 1987) and deixis and anaphora (both of which refer 
to something in the environment or in the previous text or conversation, for example, 
by using a pronoun).
Ways of analyzing meaning in cognitive semantics also include image schemas 
(which are thought to be mental visual-schematic representations of meaning) (Lang-
acker, 1989) and interpreting meaning in terms of the relations between diﬀerent 
mental spaces (Fauconnier, 1994). We can imagine schemas as spatial representations, 
especially of words like into and over. We can also transfer between mental spaces in 

Chapter 7. Communicative contributions in context from a neurolinguistic perspective
99
considering diﬀerent uses of the same word or phrase, as they are used in metaphors 
and other semantic ﬁgures. We can think of something in a concrete situation or in a 
more decontextualized or abstract sense; for instance, we might think of a particular 
dog or of dogs in general. We also have to consider human ﬂexibility and adaptation 
and the considerable role they play in the communicative use of language. Communi-
cation and language use are highly context-dependent and successful communication 
demands fast, continuous adaptation to changing circumstances (cf. Penn, 1999). For 
example, we have to adapt to who is present, what they know, what their attitudes are, 
where we are, who we are addressing, what happened before, what the topic is now, 
etc. Some of our communication is probably performed according to fairly holistic 
patterns.
This leads us to certain phenomena that spotlight real-world interaction even 
more. In order to communicate with others, we have to form a reasonable theory of 
mind (ToM) about them, that is, a theory about what they know and think that will 
aﬀect what you say to them and how you say it (cf. Frith, 1989). For example, you 
need to know how much explicit information you have to give them about a person 
in order for them to understand your reference. Is she, my friend, Andy’s sister, Tracy, 
Tracy Anderson, or Tracy Anderson who works at the library the best reference in a 
given situation? 
You also have to make your contributions ﬁt into the context of the interaction 
by interactive communication management, where certain types of utterances require 
certain other types to follow them (e.g., a question should be followed by an answer 
in a so-called adjacency pair), or at least certain kinds of utterances ﬁt into a speciﬁc 
context (are preferred) better than others. And you need to follow the turn-taking pat-
tern of the activity: you must accept, take, keep, or give away “the ﬂoor” at appropriate 
times (Sacks, Schegloﬀ, & Jeﬀerson, 1974). You also have to give feedback to show that 
you are maintaining contact; that you can perceive, understand, and react to what is 
said by others (Allwood, Nivre, & Ahlsén, 1992). In addition, you have to manage your 
own contributions by choice and change operations for planning (seen in hesitation, 
self-interruption, self-correction, etc.) (Allwood, Nivre & Ahlsén, 1990). 
We can also describe communication as the interpersonal alignment of diﬀerent 
processes in building up coordinated action (Pickering & Garrod, 2004). Participants 
have to understand and show emotions and attitudes. A considerable amount of hu-
man communication in face-to-face interaction consists of communicative gestures 
and other body communication and actions. Pictures, text, etc., are also used in com-
munication. Everyday communication is, thus, most often multimodal. Furthermore, 
it often makes use of artifacts (computers, phones, photos, microphones, etc.). All 
these factors have to be handled simultaneously; some of them are more directly lin-
guistic, while others relate to language use. Table 7.1 lists some types of phenomena 
that are studied in pragmatics or discourse semantics (Ahlsén, 1995; Allwood, 1995). 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
100
For each type, more speciﬁc labels for the study objects are provided in the right-hand 
column.
The above phenomena are aspects that need to be studied if one aims to get a 
complete picture of a person’s communicative ability, especially in everyday situations 
of diﬀerent types, that is, real-life communication. Most of them are usually studied 
by researchers in the areas of pragmatics or cognitive semantics.
Since neurolinguistics is intimately related to the diagnosis, treatment, and evalu-
ation of communication disorders caused by brain damage, it also has to address these 
phenomena. For most of them, well-established clinical methods are not generally 
available, but the area is a dynamic ﬁeld of research that is developing rapidly.
Table 7.1. Pragmatic and discourse phenomena (relevant objects of study)
Types of phenomena
Study object — labels
Whole utterances/contributions, especially 
sentences
Sentence semantics — logic, e.g., situation 
semantics 
Whole utterances/contributions in context
Speech acts → Communicative acts / actions, 
language games
Whole utterances — cooperation
Conversational principles and maxims plus ethics; 
relevance, manner, quality, quantity;
co-construction of meaning
Inferences, sequences of utterances 
— monological
Inferences, presuppositions, syllogisms, “logico-
grammatical structures”
Inferences “conventions of use”
Conversational principles and maxims
Cognitive semantics
Metaphors, etc. 
Deixis — anaphora
Image schemas, etc.
Mental spaces
Contextualization-decontextualization
Flexibility and adaptation
Holistic patterns
Interactional phenomena
Theory of mind
Interactive communication management:
–  Sequences, adjacency pairs, preference 
organization, etc.
–  Turn-taking
–  Feedback
Own communication management:
– Choice and change operations
Alignment in communication
Gestures, actions (body communication) in 
interaction and their relation to meaning
Gesture, body communication
Alignment of body communication and actions

Chapter 7. Communicative contributions in context from a neurolinguistic perspective
101
Sources of data
Interesting ﬁndings relating to the phenomena discussed above emerge from the 
symptoms of diﬀerent types of brain damage. It seems clear that a better understand-
ing and description of the phenomena per se, together with more extensive studies of 
their relation to brain damage will give us insights into human communication that 
we do not have today. It can also give us a better understanding of the communicative 
problems of diﬀerent groups of persons with brain damage and hopefully will lead to 
better ways of helping them to communicate more eﬀectively.
What, then, are the neurolinguistically interesting sources of data?
Aphasia: The scope of the term
The obvious group to study with respect to communication disorders might appear to 
be persons with aphasia. But we should stop to consider the delimitation and deﬁni-
tion of this group, which will be crucial in this chapter, considering the phenomena 
in question.
Aphasia is typically deﬁned as a language disorder caused by acquired brain dam-
age. This deﬁnition used to be more restrictive, requiring focal brain damage, or even 
focal left-hemisphere brain damage, but these deﬁnitions no longer apply today. In 
some countries, there is a convention that the person said to have aphasia must be an 
adult or at least older than a speciﬁc age (e.g., four years old); otherwise, a language 
disorder may be referred to by another term such as dysphasia. In other places, how-
ever, there is no such implicit age limit. The deﬁnition of acquired, the delimitation 
of the type of brain damage, and, not least, the deﬁnition of language all aﬀect what is 
counted as aphasia. Furthermore, aphasia is typically a symptom diagnosis. This means 
that the presence of symptoms, or in other words, the language disorder, is the main 
criterion for the diagnosis.
Linguistics has developed and changed in important ways in the last 20 to 30 
years. Most importantly, the areas of semantics and pragmatics covered in this chap-
ter are now included and studied in more detail, whereas the focus used to be almost 
exclusively on phonology and grammar. Since lexical-semantic symptoms are salient 
in aphasia, they were studied in traditional neurolinguistics, but “language in context” 
and communicative aspects, body communication, etc., have only recently come to be 
considered as suitable objects of study. Since pragmatics is a natural part of language 
and is studied in present-day linguistics, disorders aﬀecting pragmatics should also 
constitute aphasia, using an up-to-date deﬁnition of language (cf. Joanette & Ansaldo, 
1999). The end result is that the group of persons deﬁned as having aphasia is much 
broader than what had traditionally been included under this label. 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
102
In the following sections, we will consider diﬀerent sources of data regarding dis-
orders that could today be labeled aphasia, but which have traditionally been studied 
under separate labels, due to the more restricted earlier deﬁnitions and the greater 
focus on the etiology (cause) of the brain damage.
(The question of the age of acquisition of the brain damage and the relation to lan-
guage disorders caused by pre-, peri-, and postnatal brain damage will not be further 
discussed in this chapter. Chapter 10 contains a section on developmental language 
disorders from a neurolinguistic perspective.)
In studying the semantics and pragmatics of contributions in communicative 
interaction, not just language but also other cognitive and social factors become im-
portant. Cognitive factors that aﬀect the use of language in communication include 
attention, memory, sensitivity to and production of emotional expression (e.g., by fa-
cial expression or prosody), and the ability to grasp the situation as a whole, selectively 
attend to what is important, and adapt to changes, including reasonable treatment of 
the other participants. Problems in these areas can lead to social and communicative 
diﬃculties in a number of neurological disorders.
Another important aspect of pragmatic factors is, however, their role in compen-
sation for and rehabilitation from speciﬁc disorders of language and communication. 
A person with aphasia may, for example, be a skilled user of gestures and facial expres-
sions as well as interaction management, and thereby enhance his/her communicative 
and social possibilities.
Aphasia, especially after left-hemisphere lesions
Pragmatic factors are much less studied than other linguistic aspects of aphasia. Apha-
sia has not been seen as primarily a pragmatic disorder. But aphasia can involve im-
paired comprehension of longer utterances and connected texts; diﬃculties handling 
logico-grammatical structures; problems with metaphor interpretation, inference, 
abstraction in general, or decontextualization; and, in some cases, diﬃculties aﬀecting 
body communication. Thus, there are plenty of possible sources of semantic-pragmatic 
dysfunction. Aphasia aﬀecting other aspects of language, such as word ﬁnding, word 
mobilization, and comprehension of words and structures, can also result in more 
secondary pragmatic problems, such as the apparent violation of conversational prin-
ciples and conventional patterns of interaction.
The term high-level language (HLL) or subtle language disorders has been used in 
the description of very subtle language problems which are typically of the semantic-
pragmatic kind and aﬀect, for example, inferencing, metaphor comprehension, and 
logico-grammatical structures (Crosson, 1992). HLL problems occur in mild cases of 
aphasia and can also be found in traumatic brain injury, early dementia, and to some 
extent in normal aging.

Chapter 7. Communicative contributions in context from a neurolinguistic perspective
103
Right-hemisphere lesions
Right-hemisphere damage (RHD) can result in a number of deﬁcits, which are highly 
relevant for the use of language in context (see also Myers 1999).
Left neglect, or a reduced awareness of and responsivity toward the left side, most 
often visually, can interfere with reading, writing, spatial orientation, and the selective 
direction of attention to the most signiﬁcant stimuli. Hypo-arousal, that is, a generally 
reduced responsivity and a narrowed focus of attention, can also reduce general atten-
tion. This is, of course, especially true when the neglect is unconscious and accompa-
nied by denial of the deﬁcit. The impact on cognition and communication is relevant 
for most of the semantic-pragmatic phenomena listed above. Reduced alertness and 
ability to mobilize intentional attention as well as reduced awareness and selectivity 
of information can cause diﬃculties, especially in handling complex communicative 
situations.
Prosodic deﬁcits can occur, aﬀecting both comprehension and production. Both 
linguistic and emotional prosody can be disturbed, perhaps more so in the case of the 
latter. Since many pragmatic cues are prosodic, more monotonous speech production 
and problems interpreting and producing emotional prosody, can lead to communi-
cative problems. In addition, problems interpreting intonation contours (pitch) and 
stress in utterances, in particular, naturally lead to comprehension diﬃculties. A per-
son with RHD has to rely more on other semantic and contextual information.
Lexical-semantic deﬁcits, as discussed in Chapter 6, can cause communication 
problems, aﬀecting not only the comprehension and production of single words, but 
also the communication of longer units in interaction. The more “peripheral,” con-
notative, or infrequent meanings used to resolve ambiguities, understand inferences, 
metaphors, etc., and adapt ﬂexibly to the situation as a whole are vulnerable in RHD 
persons and this is directly relevant to their semantic-pragmatic ability. Word-ﬁnding 
and word-comprehension problems, of course, also aﬀect interaction patterns.
Emotional information is problematic for many RHD subjects and this can aﬀect 
both comprehension and production. It is not completely clear why this is so, since 
these problems seem to be general, aﬀecting not only emotional prosody and facial 
expression, but also verbal expression of emotions. It is, however, clear that it is not in-
ner emotions per se that are disturbed, just the ability to express and understand their 
expression. This is, of course, a social handicap in communication and can cause se-
mantic problems of understanding as well as problems aﬀecting interaction patterns.
Discourse deﬁcits have already been mentioned as resulting from the above prob-
lems. RHD persons may have problems managing complex communication situa-
tions and the diﬃculties can aﬀect practically all of the types of semantic-pragmatic 
phenomena discussed above. Problems understanding speaker intentions (e.g., ToM) 
and communicative acts, especially indirect ones, occur. Attention and integration 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
104
problems lead to lack of selective focus and integration of information. Alternative 
meanings, inferences, and metaphors can cause problems. This shows up as problems 
understanding humor, irony, etc. Social communicative problems often result from 
these symptoms (cf. Saldert, 2006).
Dementia, especially dementia of Alzheimer type 
Dementia is a chronic, progressive, and persistent decline in at least three of the follow-
ing functions: memory, language and communication, visuospatial skills, personality, 
and other cognitive abilities such as reasoning and judgment (Cummings, Darkins, 
Mendez, Hill, & Benson, 1988). Over 50% of all cases are dementia of Alzheimer type 
(DAT), which is also the type where semantics-pragmatics is most clearly aﬀected. 
Other types of dementia with more frontal and subcortical involvement, resulting 
in poor verbal ﬂuency and reduced speech together with motor speech disorders, are 
vascular dementia (which often co-occurs with anomia); frontotemporal dementias, 
such as Pick’s disease (characterized by stereotypy, perseveration, and echolalia); and 
a number of progressive neurological diseases, such as multiple sclerosis, Huntington’s 
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, progressive supranuclear palsy, Creutzfeldt-Ja-
kob disease, and HIV-associated dementia. For many of these diseases, the symptoms 
vary depending on the area where the damage is worst. A special case is primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA), in which other cognitive abilities are relatively spared 
(Cherrier, Mendez, Cummings, & Benson, 1998). This group of patients is also de-
scribed as having high-level language or subtle language disorders (see above).
Language and communication in DAT are usually described as going through 
three stages (cf. Bayles, 1992; Bayles, Tomoeda, & Trosset, 1990; Caramelli, Mansur, 
& Nitrini, 1998). At the earliest stages, we ﬁnd anomia and impairment of verbal 
ﬂuency. Somewhat later, there are also clear semantic-pragmatic problems aﬀecting 
discourse, which are probably secondary to the temporal lobe damage aﬀecting word 
retrieval. Typical semantic-pragmatic problems, in addition to anomia, are diﬃculties 
in comprehension of complex semantics and syntax, reduction of informational con-
tent, increased discourse tangentiality, and referential errors (Chapman & Ulatowska, 
1994). Late stages aﬀect language as a whole. In the early stages 30% to 40% of patients 
exhibit mild anomic aphasia in traditional tests, later they tend to have transcortical 
sensory aphasia (reduced comprehension but spared repetition), and in the late stages 
100% of patients have global aphasia (Faber-Langendoen et al., 1988). 
Initially, DAT typically aﬀects the left medial temporal lobe and neocortical 
areas of the temporal lobe, which is what leads to the problems with word retrieval 
(Damasio & Damasio, 1989) and the reduction in verbal ﬂuency. Later, we ﬁnd also 
damage of the left temporal-parietal-occipital junction area, leading to the symptoms 
of transcortical sensory aphasia; in the latest stages, the damage extends further into 

Chapter 7. Communicative contributions in context from a neurolinguistic perspective
105
the frontal regions, making the aphasia global. Other key factors behind the language 
and communication problems in persons with DAT are (a) visuospatial problems, af-
fecting confrontation naming (tactile stimulation and real objects give better results 
than picture stimuli) (Appel, Kertesz, & Fishman, 1982); and (b) memory problems, 
aﬀecting both short- and long-term memory.
Traumatic brain injury 
Traumatic brain injury (TBI) can be focal, most often aﬀecting the anterior and in-
ferior frontal and temporal lobes, or it may involve more diﬀuse injury of axons. The 
result may be reduced frontal lobe “executive control” and judgment, or reduced atten-
tion, concentration, memory, initiation, and goal direction. Exaggerated moods and 
abnormal loquaciousness are also common (McDonald, Togher, & Code, 1999).
All persons with TBI have a “cognitive-communication impairment” and up to 30% 
or 40% also have problems with a traditional aphasia test, where pragmatics is usually 
not included. Problems include anomia, seen in impaired confrontation naming, word 
ﬁnding, verbal association, and comprehension. Pragmatic diﬃculties can be studied 
using pragmatic analysis, discourse analysis, or conversation analysis. The problems 
aﬀecting discourse may be of diﬀerent types. One variant involves disorganized, wan-
dering discourse, often tangential and imprecise, and characterized by word-ﬁnding 
problems. At the same time, hyperverbosity, along with a certain disinhibition, and 
ineﬀectiveness in using social and contextual cues may also be found. Another variant 
consists of sparse speech with many pauses and lack of initiative, associated with diﬃ-
culties in following extended, rapid, and stressful communication. This group also has 
problems with abstraction, implicature (i.e., inferencing), and indirect communicative 
acts. The problems are probably due to cognitive deﬁcits, such as reduced attention 
and slowed information processing, and to the diﬃculties with executive functions. 
Three main types of communicative diﬃculties in these patients are (a) problems in 
maintaining coherence and adequate structure and sequencing, (b) comprehension 
problems caused by reduced sensitivity to inference, and (c) topic drift and problems 
with cooperation and formulating an adequate ToM of the conversation partner.
Links to therapy
The semantic-pragmatic inﬂuence is strong in therapeutic research today and it is being 
strengthened in everyday clinical work as well, where it does not have a long tradition. 
Some of the most relevant approaches will be brieﬂy mentioned. Conversational coach-
ing (Holland, 1991) prepares the person for interaction in conversation. Coaching can, 
for example, be based on an analysis of video-recorded interaction, using Conversation 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
106
Analysis to examine interaction patterns (e.g., Perkins, Whitworth, & Lesser, 1997; 
Whitworth, Perkins, & Lesser, 1997). It can also be based on Activity-based Communi-
cation Analysis (Ahlsén, 1995; Allwood, 1995), which analyzes interaction patterns, the 
use of linguistic means for communication, and critical background factors, such as 
goals, roles, and the physical circumstances of the activity as such, as well as individual 
features of the participants. A related approach is Environmental Needs Assessment 
(Hartley, 1992). This brings us to the more explicitly social approaches, as presented by 
Byng, Pound, and Parr (2000) and Simmons-Mackie (2000), which focus on changes 
in the environment and society to ensure increased participation. Group therapy is 
also very suitable for the application of pragmatics-based methods (cf. Marshall, 1999). 
One of the more structured pragmatic methods used in the group context is Language 
Game therapy (Pulvermüller & Roth, 1991). Supported Communication for Aphasics 
(SCA) (Kagan, 1998) is a method of providing support for participation in interaction. 
Finally, computer support for participation in communication can also be provided 
(e.g., Todman, Alm, & File, 1999).
Summary
This chapter is an important one, since it deals with fundamental questions of what should 
be counted as language and how language can be disturbed by brain damage. The chapter 
stresses the importance of contextual adaptation for successful linguistic communication. 
Relevant phenomena in aphasia as a symptom diagnosis and also applied to right-hemisphere 
lesions, dementia and traumatic brain injury are described and some of the many links to and 
consequences for therapy are discussed.

Chapter 7. Communicative contributions in context from a neurolinguistic perspective
107
Further reading
The literature given below covers most of the diﬀerent semantic-pragmatic theories and 
therapy methods discussed in this chapter and is important for understanding language use, 
communication in context, and the various ways in which brain damage can aﬀect proﬁciency 
in communication.
Ahlsén, E. (1995). Pragmatics and aphasia — an activity based approach. Gothenburg Papers on 
Theoretical Linguistics, 77. Göteborg University, Department of Linguistics.
Chantraine, Y., Joanette, Y., & Cardebat, D. (1998). Impairments of discourse-level representa-
tions and processes. In B. Stemmer & H. Whitaker (Eds.), Handbook of neurolinguistics (pp. 
261–274). New York: Academic Press. 
Joanette, Y., & Ansaldo, A. I. (1999). Clinical note: Acquired pragmatic impairments and aphasia. 
Brain and Language, 68, 529–534.
Levinson, S. (1983). Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDonald, S., Togher, L., & Code, C. (Eds.) (1999). Communication disorders following traumatic 
brain injury. Hove: Psychology Press.
Myers, P. (1999). Right hemisphere damage — Disorders of communication and cognition. Lon-
don: Singular Publishing Group.
Penn, C. (1999). Pragmatic assessment and therapy for persons with brain damage: What have 
clinicians gleaned in two decades? Brain and Language, 68, 535–552.
Stemmer, B., & Whitaker, H. (Eds.) (1998). Handbook of neurolinguistics. New York: Academic 
Press.
Worrall, L., & Frattali, C. (Eds.) (2000). Neurogenic communication disorders — A functional ap-
proach. New York: Thieme.
The following references speciﬁcally cover therapeutic approaches to the kinds of disorders 
discussed in this chapter.
Byng, S., Pound, C., & Parr, S. (2000). Living with aphasia: A framework for intervention. In I. 
Papathanasiou (Ed.), Acquired neurogenic communication disorders: A clinical perspective 
(pp. 49–75). London, Whurr. 
Hartley, L. (1992). Assessment of functional communication. Seminars in Speech and Language, 
13, 264–279.
Holland, A., (1991). Pragmatic aspects of intervention in aphasia. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 6, 
197–211.
Kagan, A. (1998). Supported conversation for adults with aphasia. Clinical Forum. Aphasiology, 
12, 816–830.
Perkins, L., Whitworth, A., & Lesser, R. (1997). Conversation analysis proﬁle for people with cogni-
tive impairments. London: Whurr.
Perkins, M. (2003). Clinical pragmatics. In J. Verschueren, J.-O. Östman, J. Blommaert, & C. 
Bulcaen (Eds.) Handbook of Pragmatics: 2001 Installment (pp. 1–29). Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
108
Pulvermüller, F., & Roth, V. M. (1991). Communicative aphasia treatment as a further develop-
ment of PACE therapy. Aphasiology, 5, 39–50.
Marshall, R. (1999). Introduction to group treatment for aphasia: Design and management. Wo-
burn, MA: Butterworth-Heineman.
Simmons-Mackie, N. (2000). Social approaches to the management of aphasia. In L. Worrall & 
C. Frattali (Eds.), Neurogenic communication disorders: A functional approach (pp. 162–187). 
New York: Thieme. 
Todman, J., Alm, N., & File, P. (1999). Modelling pragmatics in AAC. In F. Loncke, J. Clibbens, H. 
Arvidson, & L. Lloyd (Eds.), Augmentative and alternative communication: New directions in 
research and practice (pp. 84–91). London: Whurr.
Assignments
1. 
Discuss why a sentence, an utterance and, a contribution are not necessarily the same 
thing.
2. 
Two examples of speech acts or communicative acts are greeting and ordering. How could 
someone with severe word-ﬁnding problems manage these communicative acts? Give 
concrete examples.
3. 
Why might a person with semantic-pragmatic problems ﬁnd it hard to understand the 
utterance “don’t be a baby,” uttered by a mother to a child of ten?
4. 
Deixis is a phenomenon that links semantics and pragmatics. Discuss what the meaning of 
you is in the following three examples, and how it depends on the context:
 
a. 
You have to wear a safety-belt when you drive in Sweden.
 
b. 
Have you seen my shoes?
 
c. 
Have you all got your maps?
5. 
Choose the study objects from the list in Table 7.1 that you think items (a), (b), and (c) 
below are probably examples of.
 
a. 
 A patient starts to tell a story about a person called Eve and after a while her inter-
locutor says, “Who’s Eve?”
 
b. 
 A speech pathologist asks a patient, “Do you have children?” The patient ﬁrst answers 
“no” then “yes.”
 
c. 
 An elderly patient sits in his room in a wheelchair and says “I was just playing football 
with my father.”

Part III
Speciﬁc topics in neurolinguistics


Chapter 8
Reading and writing 
from a neurolinguistic perspective
In this chapter:
• 
The relationship between speech and writing
• 
Reading and writing processes 
• 
Acquired disturbances of reading and writing
• 
Developmental disorders of reading and writing
The relationship between speech and writing
Reading and writing are interesting in several ways. If we look at language and com-
munication from the evolutionary point of view, the use of written language is a 
learned ability, secondary to spoken language. The relationship between speech and 
writing diﬀers for ideographic, syllabic, and alphabetical writing systems. In ideo-
graphic systems, most written signs are of some kind of pictorial origin and tend to be 
associated with whole words. In syllabic writing, each syllable has its own written sign. 
Finally, in alphabetic writing, the speech sounds are represented more or less directly 
by letters. Another reason for our interest in the ability to read and write is the fact that 
many people have problems acquiring these skills. Dyslexia or more general reading 
and writing diﬃculties pose a major problem for education in a society that relies on 
written communication more and more. Understanding the relationship between the 
processes used for speech and writing and how reading and writing can be disturbed 
or favored is very important for neurolinguistics. 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
112
Reading and writing processes
Reading processes
The most widely used kind of model for reading alphabetical and syllabic writing sys-
tems is a dual-route model (e.g., Coltheart, Patterson, & Marshall, 1980; Ellis, 1984), 
which posits two main strategies for reading:
1. whole word reading,
2. grapheme–phoneme conversion.
Whole word reading means that visual representations of whole words are read, either 
from the visual word form directly or via the semantic representation of the word. 
Grapheme–phoneme conversion means moving from letters to phonological repre-
sentations. Most research on reading focuses on decoding a written word and reading 
it out aloud. 
We can specify the routes or strategies in more detail, with respect to decoding 
and reading aloud, as follows:
1a. whole word → semantic interpretation → phonological output representation
1b. whole word → phonological output representation
2. grapheme → phoneme
The possibility of reading the letter names aloud in a series also exists, and is some-
times the only possible strategy:
3. grapheme → grapheme naming (or letter-by-letter reading)
When reading comprehension is the focus, the semantic interpretation of the word is 
much more important. There is a need for more research on text reading.
Most of us are likely to use all of the above strategies and combine them accord-
ing to our needs for the optimal reading function in each situation. Here are some 
examples of how this is done:
1a. We apply the semantic interpretation of whole words when we really want or need 
to understand every word we read, for example, when we are reading something 
important or diﬃcult that we want to remember.
1b. We use whole word reading, without necessarily understanding everything, when 
we read stories aloud to children.
2. We use grapheme–phoneme conversion when we need to sound out words, such 
as when we are learning to read or when we encounter new words or foreign 
words.

Chapter 8. Reading and writing from a neurolinguistic perspective
113
3. We use letter naming when we read a series of letters and have to memorize it, for 
example, a code.
Writing processes
When we write words, we can have three types of starting points:
1. the semantic lexicon (i.e., when we start from our own thoughts and a speciﬁc 
meaning);
2. written words (when we copy writing);
3. spoken words (when we write from dictation or take notes from a speech or a 
lecture).
We then need to produce a series of graphemes. This can be done via a word–graph-
eme output lexicon which can be accessed:
1. directly from the semantic system,
2. from the visual input (possibly via the semantic system).
It can also be accessed:
3. from the visual input and semantic systems via the word pronunciation lexicon 
and the phoneme level and then phoneme–grapheme conversion.
Letter-by-
letter reading
Semantic
system
[word
comprehen-
sion]
Graph-
eme
output
lexicon
Graph-
eme
level
writing
written
word
input
Visual analysis
system
[abstract letter
identiﬁcation]
Visual input
lexicon
[word
recognition]
Word
pronun-
ciation
lexicon
Phoneme
level
speech
Non-lexical
grapheme →
phoneme
conversion
spoken
letter
names
Figure 8.1. Reading and writing processes (Main source: Ellis, 1984)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
114
Acquired disturbances of reading and writing
Acquired dyslexias (alexias)
How can the processes of reading and writing be disturbed? There are several possible 
disorders or disturbances that can aﬀect the processes, as we can see in the model in 
Figure 8.1. Diﬀerent types of disturbance can block diﬀerent routes in the model and 
lead to dependence on speciﬁc strategies.
For instance, there are patients who can only use letter-by-letter reading. In this 
case, both the whole word reading route and the grapheme–phoneme conversion route 
seem to be blocked.
 
Some patients depend on grapheme–phoneme conversion for reading: they 
read by sounding out the words and then listening to themselves. Such patients have 
problems reading very long words and words with irregular spelling, since these words 
are hard to sound out by grapheme–phoneme conversion alone. They do not have 
access to whole word reading. This type of acquired dyslexia is called surface dyslexia 
(Patterson, Marshall & Coltheart, 1985).
Other patients depend on using whole word reading, because they are unable to 
sound out words. They cannot read new, unfamiliar words or nonwords (i.e., phono-
logically regular but nonexistent sound combinations) and they also have problems 
reading short syncategorematic or function words, such as and, to, that. This type of 
acquired dyslexia is called phonological dyslexia.
Deep dyslexia is closely related to phonological dyslexia. Patients with this disorder 
also rely on whole word reading, and thus have impaired access to grapheme–pho-
neme conversion. However, deep dyslexia is a challenge to models of acquired dyslex-
ias, since whole word reading is also impaired. Persons with deep dyslexia make the 
following kinds of mistakes when they read, in addition to being unable to read new 
words and nonwords:
• 
visual errors (a visually similar word is substituted, e.g., cat becomes cap);
• 
semantic errors (a semantic substitution is made, e.g., cat becomes dog);
• 
visual plus semantic errors (e.g., pivot becomes pilot, then airplane);
• 
derivation errors (e.g., lovely becomes loving);
• 
exchanges of function words (e.g., and becomes on).
For these patients, concrete words with referents that are easy to visualize are easier to 
read than abstract words. This combination of features has led to two possible inter-
pretations of deep dyslexia: one sees it as a disturbance of more than one route in the 
model, such that parts of both the grapheme–phoneme conversion process and the 
whole word reading process are disturbed; another interpretation hypothesizes that 
the right hemisphere may be taking over reading, using a whole word strategy with 
some limitations (Coltheart et al., 1980, Coltheart, 2000).

Chapter 8. Reading and writing from a neurolinguistic perspective
115
All of these forms of dyslexias are acquired, that is, they occur after brain damage 
in adults. Acquired forms of dyslexia are sometimes divided into two categories:
Central acquired dyslexias: surface dyslexia, phonological dyslexia, deep dyslexia, and 
nonsemantic reading (i.e., reading without understanding);
Peripheral acquired dyslexias: letter-by-letter reading, attentional dyslexia (reading 
disorder caused by a disorder of attention), and neglect dyslexia (reading disorder 
caused by neglect of one of the visual half-ﬁelds, making the patient attend to only 
one half of the word).
A special case of acquired dyslexia, seen in some persons with aphasia, is the so-called 
“pure alexia” or “alexia without agraphia.” (In describing acquired dyslexia, the two 
terms alexia and dyslexia can be used more or less as synonyms, although some re-
searchers prefer to use dyslexia for developmental disorders that manifest themselves 
in early childhood and alexia for disorders acquired in adulthood.) Persons with pure 
alexia can write, but they cannot read, not even something they have just written 
themselves. They are sometimes able to read single letters and identify words from 
hearing them spelled aloud; in these cases, they can adopt a letter-by-letter reading 
strategy. Pure alexia is caused by a lesion which cuts oﬀ the input from visual cortex 
to the left angular gyrus.
Acquired dysgraphias
Acquired dysgraphias are generally described with the same terminology as the ac-
quired dyslexias:
Surface dysgraphia involves using only phoneme–grapheme conversion and the writ-
ing process, thus making use of the phonological route.
Phonological dysgraphia involves writing from visual or semantic whole word repre-
sentations that are transformed into grapheme patterns.
Deep dysgraphia resembles phonological dysgraphia in the same way that deep dys-
lexia resembles phonological dyslexia.
In most cases, a patient will have both dyslexia and dysgraphia of the same type; the 
two disorders rarely occur separately.
Acquired dysgraphias can also be divided into central and peripheral types:
Central acquired dysgraphias: surface dysgraphia, phonological dysgraphia, or deep 
dysgraphia;
Peripheral acquired dysgraphias: disturbances of choice of letter, choice of allograph 
(letter variant), or motor program.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
116
If the grapheme level is disturbed, this causes problems with spelling in all modalities, 
whereas if the disturbance is more peripheral, we may ﬁnd symptoms such as omis-
sions or repetitions of letters or parts of letters, but in this case oral spelling will be 
correct.
Developmental disorders of reading and writing 
Reading and writing disorders and the term “dyslexia”
The expression “developmental reading and writing disorders” is used here in order 
to include reading and writing problems that are not necessarily speciﬁc, in light of 
diﬀerent theories of dyslexia and reading and writing disorders.
The term dyslexia is used in a number of diﬀerent ways. One possibility is to deﬁne 
dyslexia according to the discrepancy criterion, which means that the level of reading 
and writing has to be considerably below the cognitive level or other more general 
abilities; in other words, there has to be a considerable discrepancy between otherwise 
“normal” abilities or a “normal” level of development and a much lower level of reading 
and writing. This is in accordance with the World Health Organization deﬁnition of 
dyslexia. Another way is to deﬁne dyslexia as the disturbance of a speciﬁc factor, which 
can occur regardless of the level of other abilities. The most commonly cited speciﬁc 
factor is “phonological ability” or “phonological awareness” (Lundberg, 1994). 
While both these possibilities are acknowledged here, our aim is to give an over-
view of the area of developmental reading and writing disorders in relation to the 
acquired dyslexias and dysgraphias, so the terms developmental dyslexia and develop-
mental dysgraphia are not necessarily limited to the two uses mentioned above in this 
chapter. Instead, they should be interpreted as referring to developmental reading and 
writing disorders in general.
A neurolinguistic perspective
Looking at developmental dyslexias from a neurolinguistic perspective means that the 
focus is on treating them in the same way as other neurolinguistic disorders. There is 
an interest in ﬁnding the areas of the brain that are involved in the reading and writing 
processes and localizing and understanding the functional systems and subprocesses 
involved. Reading and writing problems are seen as symptoms among other linguistic 
and nonlinguistic symptoms, rather than as a speciﬁc phenomenon. This means that 
they can be viewed in the light of a complex whole (heredity, environment, and de-
velopment). There is, however, a major diﬀerence between our knowledge of acquired 
and developmental dyslexias in that acquired dyslexias occur when there is a known 

Chapter 8. Reading and writing from a neurolinguistic perspective
117
neurological disorder, whereas the etiology (cause) of developmental dyslexias is less 
well known.
Various suggestions have been made concerning the causes of developmental 
dyslexia. It is known that there is a hereditary factor: developmental dyslexia tends 
to run in the family. Anatomically, for example, a lack of asymmetry between the left 
and right hemispheres in the area called the planum temporale, which is associated 
with Wernicke’s area and with auditory phonological processing, has been found in 
subjects with developmental dyslexia. It has also been suggested that the maturation of 
the brain has been arrested or delayed in certain critical areas, leading to abnormalities 
in the cell structures of certain layers.
From a neuropsychological point of view, some theories try to ﬁnd one cognitive 
factor underlying developmental dyslexia that is critical for reading in particular. 
Other theories suggest that there is a more general causal factor, which might also af-
fect other kinds of learning (e.g., visuospatial ability, eye movements, iconic memory, 
or general language disorder). We might hypothesize that there are many diﬀerent 
cognitive disorders, that is, several diﬀerent types of dyslexias, which may be distinct 
or variable depending on the relations between diﬀerent cognitive components. The 
latter alternative bears the diﬀerent reading strategies and ways of compensating for 
reading problems in mind. It is also reminiscent of the diﬀerent forms of acquired 
dyslexias.
It is possible that the cognitive basis for dyslexia cannot be speciﬁc, since reading is 
an acquired, rather than an “innate” behavior. But the question of whether there is one 
more general underlying factor or several diﬀerent ones is still important. There are 
diﬀerences between reading disorders in diﬀerent individuals. These diﬀerences can 
be explained with reference to their relation to other cognitive problems, such as pho-
neme discrimination, object naming, etc. Alternatively, they might also be explained 
with reference to diﬀerent subcomponents of the reading process (as with acquired 
dyslexias). It is claimed, however, that one should be cautious in applying models of 
acquired dyslexias in this context, since developmental dyslexias tend to be associated 
with broader cognitive disorders. Theories of the normal development of reading have 
to be considered and may be more relevant than models of word recognition.
Developmental dyslexias and dysgraphias
Despite what was said above, we ﬁnd forms of developmental dyslexia that seem to 
correspond to those of acquired dyslexia.
Developmental surface dyslexia is characterized by the use of grapheme–pho-
neme conversion, good reading of regular words, and regularization in the reading 
of irregular words. Persons with surface dyslexia seem to have problems establishing 
and keeping representations in their visual input lexicon. They can be compared to 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
118
younger children learning to read in the what has been called the “Phoenician” way, 
that is, sound-by-sound. Another term that has been used for the same phenomenon 
is dyseidetic or visual dyslexia.
Developmental phonological dyslexia is characterized by the use of whole word 
reading, which is not perfect, since visual errors occur. Grapheme–phoneme conver-
sion is not used and nonwords and new words cannot be read. Nonwords (as well as 
real words) are often read as similar-looking real words; for example, cheery becomes 
cherry. The term dysphonetic is sometimes used for this group. Their reading resembles 
that of younger children who learn to read by the so-called “Chinese” method, or 
whole word strategy.
Developmental deep dyslexia is perhaps not as common in children as the two 
main types described above, but it does occur, showing reading characteristics similar 
to those of developmental and acquired phonological dyslexia with added symptoms 
of acquired deep dyslexia.
In general, it can be said that there is a continuum between developmental pho-
nological and surface dyslexia and that most dyslexic children show mixed strategies 
and proﬁles, somewhere in between the two extremes. 
As with acquired dysgraphia, types of developmental dysgraphia that correspond 
to the above-mentioned types of developmental dyslexia also occur.
Yet another developmental reading disorder that should be mentioned is hyper-
lexia, a precocious ability to read words combined with an abnormal fascination with 
reading, which involves a disturbance of the semantic system (cf. acquired asemantic 
reading). Hyperlexic children are often developmentally handicapped. They read 
aloud but without any reading comprehension.
In discussions of developmental dyslexia, subjects have sometimes been divided 
into auditory and visual dyslexia groups, with the majority showing auditory-phono-
logical problems while a minority group has mainly visual problems. However, it has 
been claimed that these groups should be treated as one, which is characterized by 
internal variations in auditory and, to some extent, visual problems (Bryant & Bradley, 
1985).
Like acquired dyslexias, developmental dyslexias are also divided into classes af-
fecting more central versus more peripheral orthographic processes.

Chapter 8. Reading and writing from a neurolinguistic perspective
119
Summary
In summary, we can say that acquired dyslexias in adults and in children are among the topics 
traditionally studied in neurolinguistics, with a focus on reading and speciﬁcally on the process 
of single word reading and reading aloud. These studies have resulted in the classiﬁcation 
of the diﬀerent types of dyslexias and dysgraphias described in this chapter, mainly surface, 
phonological, and deep dyslexia, and their relationship to models of reading and writing. 
Similar types of dyslexia and dysgraphia seem to be found in children with developmental 
reading and writing disorders. The term developmental dyslexia, used either in the sense of a 
discrepancy between other cognitive abilities and reading and writing abilities or in the sense 
of a disturbance of phonological ability or awareness, was discussed. Diﬀerent distinctions 
made in classifying dyslexias are acquired versus developmental, central versus peripheral, and 
auditory versus visual.
Further reading
The book by Ellis gives a more extensive presentation of models and analysis of acquired dis-
orders of reading and writing and the book edited by Hulme and Snowling contains readings 
on developmental dyslexia. The two papers by Martin and Seymour provide shorter up-to-date 
overviews of acquired and developmental disorders.
Ellis, A. (1984). Reading, writing and dyslexia: A cognitive analysis. London: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates.
Hulme, C., & Snowling, M. (Eds.) (1994). Reading development and dyslexia. London: Whurr 
Publishers. 
Martin, N. (1998). Recovery and treatment of acquired reading and spelling disorders. In B. 
Stemmer & H. Whitaker (Eds.), Handbook of neurolinguistics (pp. 560–573). San Diego: 
Academic Press.
Seymour, P. (1998). Neurolinguistic issues in the treatment of childhood literacy disorders. In 
B. Stemmer & H. Whitaker (Eds.), Handbook of neurolinguistics (pp. 574–585). San Diego: 
Academic Press.
Assignments
1. 
Which type of acquired dyslexia would cause each of the following reading errors?
 
a. 
in read as if
 
b. 
dog read as cap
 
c. 
train read as bus

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
120
2. 
Trace the route of reading in deep dyslexia in the model given in this chapter. Where 
might the various kinds of problems be located, other than grapheme–phoneme conver-
sion?
3. 
Discuss how (a) phonological dyslexia and (b) surface dyslexia would aﬀect a child’s acqui-
sition of reading.
4. 
What strategies might you use in your everyday reading to overcome or compensate for 
your problems if you had (a) surface dyslexia or (b) phonological dyslexia?
5. 
Here are some examples of tasks that are used in measuring linguistic ability as a pre-
requisite for reading. What abilities do they test and why are these abilities important for 
reading?
 
a. 
Tell me a word that rhymes with hot?
 
b. 
If you take away the ﬁrst sound of the word cow, what is left of the word?
 
c. 
If you reverse the two parts of the word snowball, what do you get?
 
d. 
Tell me a word that begins with the same sound that the word cat ends with.
6. 
Return to question 4 about reading processes in the assignments for Chapter 1 and try to 
give a more speciﬁc answer than you did when you ﬁrst answered it.

Chapter 9
Neurolinguistic aspects of 
bilingualism
In this chapter:
• 
Bilingualism and neurolinguistic questions
• 
Recovery patterns in bilingual aphasia
• 
Neurolinguistic questions and hypotheses
Bilingualism and neurolinguistic questions
If a person knows more than one language, does this aﬀect the way language is pro-
cessed by that person’s brain? How are the diﬀerent languages kept apart? Do they in-
terfere with each other? These and related questions make bilingualism an interesting 
subject for neurolinguists to study.
Bilingualism
Bilingualism has given rise to many questions and hypotheses related to brain func-
tion. In this chapter, we will brieﬂy review the main questions and ﬁndings.
What does bilingual mean? We will adopt a simple deﬁnition: a bilingual person 
is someone who knows two languages and is able to keep them apart. This deﬁnition 
does not go further into the questions of what a language is and what it means to know 
a language. The answer to the ﬁrst question is, of course, mainly a political question, 
related to divisions into nations, regions, etc. The second question has attracted some 
attention and led to the suggestion that there are diﬀerent subtypes of bilingualism. 
Such divisions are based on factors such as: (a) age of acquisition of the second lan-
guage (L2): early L2, late L2, and adult L2; and (b) the ﬂuency or mastery of the two 
languages: balanced or dominant for one language.
Diﬀerent types of bilingualism have been proposed. Some of the best-known are 
the following:

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
122
1. Compound bilingualism
 
The ﬁrst language (L1) and L2 are learned concurrently before the age of six; often, 
each language is spoken by one of the person’s parents.
2. Coordinated bilingualism
 
L2 is learned before puberty in the home or some other environment.
3. Subordinated bilingualism
 
One language, L1, is dominant and L2 is used for mediation; that is, the bilingual 
person thinks in L1 and then translates into L2.
There is a wide range of possibilities when it comes to how proﬁcient a bilingual indi-
vidual is in the two diﬀerent languages and how he/she uses them. But it is probably 
true that most bilingual individuals are not exactly “balanced”; in other words, they 
do not know exactly the same things in both languages and they do not use them for 
exactly the same purposes. It is more common for the two languages to complement 
each other in the life of a bilingual person; for example, one language may be used at 
home and another at school or at work. In bilingual societies or situations where most 
or all of the participants are bilingual, it is also common to code-switch between the 
languages, that is, to combine both languages in a single utterance.
We will ﬁrst examine aphasia and bilingualism and then turn to some of the main 
neurolinguistic questions and hypotheses concerning this topic and the current state 
of the art.
Recovery patterns in bilingual aphasia
One source of information for neurolinguists interested in bilingualism is the recovery 
of the diﬀerent languages by bilingual persons with aphasia. Let us therefore take a 
closer look at the diﬀerent recovery patterns found in bilingual aphasia
Parallel recovery of the diﬀerent languages is by far the most common pattern 
(see Figure 9.1). Paradis (1977) found that parallel recovery was described in 40% of 
the case histories he reviewed and points out that the proportion is probably higher 
than this, since case histories tend to focus on unusual cases.
Language A 
Language B 
Figure 9.1. Parallel recovery

Chapter 9. Neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism
123
Dissociated recovery is, however, not uncommon and it can show diﬀerent patterns. 
There are a number of suggested explanations for dissociated recovery. Pitres ﬁrst 
described dissociated recovery in 1895 and Pitres’s law claims that the most familiar 
language is less impaired and recovers ﬁrst. Ribot’s law, on the other hand, claims that 
L1 is less impaired and recovers ﬁrst. Then there is Minkowski’s law, which claims that 
the language with the strongest emotional association is less impaired and recovers ﬁrst. 
Other suggested formulations are that the more automated or basic language recovers 
ﬁrst. Research has shown, however, that in about 30% of all cases, L2 recovers better 
than L1. 
It has also been hypothesized that diﬀerent languages are located in diﬀerent 
areas of the brain; for example, it has been claimed that the right hemisphere is more 
involved in the use of L2, as we will see later in this chapter.
Some patterns of dissociated recovery are described below.
Selective recovery is recovery of only one of the languages (Figure 9.2).
Language A 
Language B 
Figure 9.2. Selective recovery
Diﬀerential recovery means that the two languages are not recovered to the same 
extent (Figure 9.3).
Language A 
Language B 
Figure 9.3. Diﬀerential recovery (L1 and L2 not recovered to the same extent)
Successive recovery means that the two languages are not recovered at the same time, 
but the recovery of one follows that of the other (Figure 9.4).

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
124
Language A 
Language B 
Figure 9.4. Successive recovery (L1 and L2 not recovered at the same time)
Alternating antagonism is when only one language recovers or is available at a time, 
seemingly blocking the other language, and the language that is available for use 
changes from time to time (see Figure 9.5).
Language A 
Language B 
Figure 9.5. Alternating antagonism
Mixed recovery involves inappropriate and unrestricted blending of the languages.
The most common kind of dissociated recovery is when L1 recovers better than L2. 
However, it also seems to be true that the most used language recovers better than less 
used languages in most cases. Although parallel recovery is the most common situa-
tion, the patterns of dissociated recovery have attracted a lot of attention and are quite 
often found in clinical practice. 
Neurolinguistic questions and hypotheses
Neurolinguistic questions related to bilingualism concern which brain structures are 
involved in language processing by bilinguals and how they are involved. Similarities 
and diﬀerences in comparison with language processing by monolinguals are explored. 
L1 and L2 processing are compared. Speciﬁcally bilingual tasks such as translation are 

Chapter 9. Neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism
125
studied. Aphasia in bilinguals and in particular the recovery patterns of aphasic bilin-
guals have attracted considerable attention, as we have seen above, and attempts have 
been made to adapt models of language processing to bilingualism.
There have been many hypotheses about how diﬀerent languages are organized 
in the brain: 
1. One hypothesis claims that all languages are localized in the same areas (Freud, 
1891; Minkowski, 1963; Pitres, 1885/1983). 
2. The opposite hypothesis claims that diﬀerent languages are localized in separate 
areas (Scoresby-Jackson, 1867), for example, that L1 resides in Broca’s area and 
other languages spread forward from there.
3. A third hypothesis suggests that bilinguals develop centers for functions related 
to bilingualism, such as selection of a language, switching between languages, and 
translation (Pötzl, 1930). One suggested area for such functions is the supramar-
ginal gyrus in the left hemisphere. This view was criticized by Jakobson (1941) 
and by Paradis (2004), both of whom claim that these abilities are not really any 
diﬀerent from monolingual speakers’ ability to handle diﬀerent registers (variants 
of language used in diﬀerent situations).
4. A fourth hypothesis claims that all languages are localized in the same areas but 
have separate neural circuits involving separate nerve cells (e.g., Minkowski, 
1963). These nerve cells are located partly in the same area and partly in speciﬁc 
areas. Thus, this hypothesis is a mixture of the previous alternatives, involving a 
functional explanation of aphasia in bilingualism. It is related to factors such as the 
role of implicit and explicit memory for the diﬀerent languages (Fabbro, 2001a, b). 
This view ﬁnds some support in cortical activation studies using fMRI.
The question of the lateralization of language abilities and bilingualism has also at-
tracted some attention, since Albert and Obler wrote The bilingual brain in 1978. 
One hypothesis is that the right hemisphere is more involved in L2 processing than 
it is in L1 processing. Although L2 processing evokes greater activation of the right 
hemisphere in PET and fMRI studies (Dehaene et al., 1997), it is claimed that this is 
probably not the result of L2 having more RH “representation” than L1 (Paradis, 1998). 
Rather, it is the result of the greater role that pragmatic factors play in compensating 
for the speaker’s poorer proﬁciency in the use of L2.
Paradis’s claim is also in line with the complementary use of the two languages 
reported above. In a speciﬁc test or situation, one language would in many cases be 
more natural and the other one would require more eﬀort and pragmatic skills to 
compensate for weaknesses.
There are also diﬀerent psycho- and neurolinguistic models for interpreting ex-
perimental ﬁndings in studies of bilingual speakers. One such model is the Activation 
Threshold Hypothesis (Green, 1986, 1998), which claims that the diﬀerent languages 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
126
may be activated to diﬀerent degrees, thereby taking up or requiring more or less of 
the brain’s capacity for processing. A language can be active and ready for use, ac-
tive but suppressed, or dormant and inactive. Since both activation and suppression 
of a language require some eﬀort, the resources required for these purposes can be 
disturbed by neurological illness. This unsettles the balance between activated and 
suppressed languages. 
Another model is the Competition Model (formulated by McWhinney and Bates; 
see, for example, Bates & Wulfeck, 1989; Bates, Wulfeck, & McWhinney, 1991), which 
claims, in short, that the two languages compete for processing resources and the one 
that is most activated, for diﬀerent reasons, wins. (This is on top of the competition 
that is always present between diﬀerent alternatives in normal language processing.) 
When brain damage occurs, it can aﬀect the balance between the state of readiness for 
activation of each of the languages. It can also aﬀect what these researchers call cue 
validity and cue cost. This means how central a linguistic feature or cue, such as word 
order or noun and verb inﬂection, is in a language and how much processing capacity 
it requires. Cue validity and cue cost vary between languages and, for bilingual speak-
ers, also vary depending on their individual history of learning and present proﬁciency 
in and use of the two languages.
All this adds up to the realization that bilingualism is a complex phenomenon. In-
vestigating language proﬁciency in bilinguals with brain damage should be done with 
some caution and it is especially important to consider the following questions:
1. How comparable are the investigations of the two languages? 
2. Are the tests that are used comparable? 
3. Have typological considerations, such as potential processing load and diﬀerences 
in cue validity and cue cost, been considered in constructing the tasks? 
4. Have cultural, social, and individual factors that might aﬀect the use of the two 
languages been considered in interpreting the results?
Most of the phenomena reported in the literature, such as dissociated patterns of re-
covery, language mixing, etc., seem to be possible to explain in terms of disturbances 
of activation and inhibition patterns, as stated by Paradis, Green, and McWhinney 
and Bates, in combination with social, cultural, and individual factors aﬀecting 
activation.

Chapter 9. Neurolinguistic aspects of bilingualism
127
Further reading
Neurolinguistic aspects of bi or multilingualism have only been studied extensively by a few 
researchers. The references given below are the most important books in this area.
Fabbro, F. (1999). Neurolinguistics of bilingualism. Hove: Psychology Press.
Paradis, M. (2004). A neurolinguistic theory of bilingualism. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Assignments
Try to explain the following cases, using the theories and descriptions of recovery patterns 
presented in this chapter:
1. 
A is a 35-year-old Danish sailor, who has been working on ships traveling between many 
parts of the world. After a stroke, he ﬂuctuates between Danish, English, Spanish, and Ger-
man and mixes all four languages.
2. 
B is a retired German professor of Sanskrit. In the acute stage after a stroke, he is diag-
nosed as having Wernicke’s aphasia. When he is asked to read aloud, he utters only San-
skrit or Sanskrit-like words.
3. 
C was born in Italy and moved to the United States when he was 12 years old. At age 55, 
he suﬀers from a stroke and, at ﬁrst, speaks only Italian (which he has not used since he 
was a child). He receives language therapy in English and gradually recovers most of his 
English. Then, however, he can no longer speak Italian.


Chapter 10
On the evolution and development 
of the brain, communication, 
and language
In this chapter:
• 
Growing brains, other factors, and human 
language
• 
The biological hypothesis versus the social 
construct hypothesis
• 
Communication by other primates
• 
Evolution-based theories in neurolinguistics and 
acquired language disorders
• 
Neurolinguistic perspectives on developmental 
language disorders in children
Growing brains, other factors, and human language
What is human language and how did we come to develop it? How did our brains 
evolve and how did this evolution interact with the evolution of the rest of our bodies, 
our ways of using our arms and legs and our speech organs, our eating habits, and our 
ways of living? These are intriguing questions that have yet to be answered.
There are diﬀerent views of how human linguistic communication developed. We 
can look at the relation between the evolution of the brain and of language by studying 
the phylogenetic development of behavior (especially communication and cognition) 
and of brain size and structures and areas within the brain. This means looking at how 
these factors developed in diﬀerent species during evolution. We can also compare 
this process with the ontogenetic development of the same factors, that is, how they 
develop in children.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
130
Bigger brains (and bodies)? Brain size and encephalization quotient
The growth in the size of the human brain is one possible explanation of our increased 
cognitive and linguistic ability. The human brain is large, but some animals, notably 
elephants, dolphins, and whales, have even larger brains. But we also have to con-
sider the relation of brain size to body size. The measurement used to compare brain 
(cranial) size in diﬀerent species is the encephalization quotient (EQ) (Jerison, 1973), 
which is a relative measure, relating brain size to body size. Old-world monkeys and 
apes have an EQ of 2.3 to 2.7, leaf-eating colobus monkeys and gorillas have an EQ of 
around 1.6, and our hypothetical common ancestor is assumed to have had an EQ of 
2.5, which is the same as a modern chimpanzee. Modern humans have an EQ of 28.8, 
according to Stephan (1972). But neither absolute nor relative brain size is a reliable 
indicator of behavior.
Better speech organs?
Another factor that has been assumed to be critical for human speech is the move-
ment of the larynx further down the throat, which is only present in humans, not for 
example, in chimpanzees or even in small babies. The ability to speak is thus typically 
human and might have led to the progress of more advanced human linguistic and 
cognitive abilities. This theory has been promoted by Philip Lieberman, for example, 
in his book Eve spoke from 1998. Other researchers however, do not give this particular 
factor as much credit. For example, Noble and Davidson (1996) claim that although the 
upper airways are used for speech, just as the lower extremities are used for walking, 
speaking is primarily a way of acting with intention; thus, it is basically cognitive and 
cannot be separated from thinking. The so called “mother theory of speech perception” 
is, however, supported by ﬁndings related to mirror neurons (see Chapter 10).
Diﬀerent areas of the brain?
Researchers have been looking for areas of the human brain that diﬀer from those of, 
for example, the chimpanzee brain. One candidate for such a diﬀerence is the asym-
metry between the left and right hemispheres. Since the prevalent view is that the 
left hemisphere is the dominant locus of language in humans, asymmetries between 
the two hemispheres are interesting. This assumes that specialized structures develop 
before the actual functions that make use of them. Brain asymmetry is, however, quite 
widespread among other species as well; it is present in both chickens and frogs, for 
example. So the mere existence of asymmetry is not enough to explain human lan-
guage. Could it then be explained by the asymmetry of speciﬁc areas of the brain? 
In humans, the right hemisphere extends further forward, while the left hemisphere 

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
131
extends further back, but this is also true of chimpanzees and gorillas (not orangutans, 
however); possibly a common ancestor had this kind of asymmetry. Humans and other 
hominids (as evidenced by fossils) have a broader left posterior hemisphere and this 
could be linked to handedness. Both chimpanzees and gorillas have asymmetrical 
brains, but they do not seem to have handedness; they use their right and left hands 
(and feet) equally well. A candidate for a speciﬁc area that may be important for lan-
guage (especially speech comprehension) is the planum temporale (an area adjacent 
to the primary auditory center). As we have already seen, however, localization of 
language functions is far from simple.
Communication with symbols that stand for something else
If we concentrate on behavior, humans are unique in communicating with symbols 
(i.e., signs that are arbitrary and conventionalized and stand for things in the world, 
without resembling or being close to them). One possible critical factor for language is 
the discovery of supposition (in a speciﬁc, philosophical sense, i.e., that something can 
stand for something else). Not only most speech and writing but also symbolic body 
communication is linguistic in this sense (i.e., conventionalized (Kendon, 1993)), un-
like natural, symptom-based body language. Many researchers consider the discovery 
of symbolic supposition and its usefulness to be the most critical factor in the develop-
ment of human language.
The biological hypothesis versus the social construct hypothesis
How do individual humans discover supposition and come to use language? Accord-
ing to Noble and Davidson (1996), we learn to be “minded” in a linguistic society, 
through our interaction with tutors and as a result of a long and fairly continuous evo-
lutionary process. A radically diﬀerent view is that of Chomsky (1986), who claims that 
we have an innate mental language organ that matures according to its own program 
for development, and that this does require exposure to language. These two diﬀerent 
views, sometimes referred to as the “social construct story” and the “biological innate-
ness story” of the origins of human language and how it develops, are in competition 
today. But there are also several intermediate positions.
In the following sections, we will look at some of the theories and descriptions of 
how human brains and language developed.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
132
The innate linguistic competence hypothesis
The biological innateness view has been presented in diﬀerent forms, for example, in 
Steven Pinker’s writings such as The language instinct (1994). Another fairly recent 
contribution is Steve Mithen’s book The prehistory of mind (1996). Linguistic com-
petence is seen as an abstract system that is innate in the human mind. Linguistic 
competence is the main object of study and is seen as distinct from any given linguistic 
performance. Language is therefore seen as an abstract entity. According to propo-
nents of the social construct hypothesis, this is an almost mystical view of language 
as standing outside evolution; it also constitutes a reiﬁcation of a behavior, that is, 
making behavior into an abstract entity. Some researchers (Bickerton, 1990; Burling, 
1993) propose that a sudden mutation may explain the apparent “gap” between the call 
systems of primates and human language. Others (e.g., Pinker & Bloom, 1990) suggest 
that there is a structure only present in humans, which evolution has acted on.
Mithen’s description of how cognitive functions evolved in the human brain is 
a psychological model, which he calls “The mind as a cathedral”; in other words, he 
thinks of a central “nave” which extends out into surrounding “chapels.” The nave 
starts out containing only general intelligence in Phase 1. In Phase 2, multiple chapels 
are added around the nave, representing “technical,” “linguistic,” “social,” and “natural 
history” intelligence, all of which are specialized. In this phase, it is unclear how lan-
guage is related to other cognitive domains and also whether and how the diﬀerent 
domains are connected to each other or to general intelligence. Phase 3 represents 
increased “cognitive ﬂuidity,” which implies open connections between the “nave” and 
the diﬀerent “chapels.” An alternative view of Phase 3 posits a “superchapel” of meta-
representation connected to all of the types of intelligence. This model applies to our 
hunting and gathering ancestors; other types of intelligence can develop if needed.
Mithen describes a course of evolution, which starts out about 100 thousand years 
ago. Cognitive ﬂexibility and general and social intelligence increase until about 10 thou-
sand years ago. From apes and australopithecines, via Homo habilis and Homo erectus, 
we encounter an increase in modularization (compartmentalization) and the addition of 
technical and natural history intelligence. This leads us, for example, to the Neanderthals 
and to a new turn in the development process a few hundred thousand years ago. At this 
point, there is a move toward increasing ﬂuidity, which emerges in Homo sapiens sapiens, 
our own species, some 10 thousand years ago. (Homo sapiens sapiens is thought to have 
arrived on the scene around 100 or 150 thousand years ago.) Social history intelligence 
plays an important role in this development; it “invades” other “chapels” and language 
plays an important part in this process in the later stages of evolution.

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
133
The social construct view and evolutionary approaches
The social construct view focuses on linguistic communication as a form of behavior. 
According to this view, as represented by Noble and Davidson (1996), the brain grew 
gradually for 2.5 million years, while behavior did not really change very much. The 
cause of the growth was partly changes in body size, partly a reﬁnement of the function 
of and motor control over the frontal (or “upper”) extremities (i.e., the arms). An im-
portant change was bipedalism (walking on two legs), which started about 3.5 million 
years ago. This made it easier to transport objects and break stones, and this in turn 
led to improvements in throwing stones. Aiming and pointing intentionally seem to 
be unique to humans. There may have been a development from throwing to pointing 
to iconic gestures and then to language (cf. Burling, 1993).
An evolutionary approach to the origin of mind claims that “mindedness” in 
human terms cannot be separated from the use of language. According to this view, 
gestures and pictures have a central function in the type of behavior that today is called 
linguistic. Linguistic behavior is communication using “symbols” (something that rep-
resents something else by convention, in Noble and Davidson’s deﬁnition). Language 
and thought are not separate. To speak is to pursue an intention. This idea dates back 
to, for example, de Saussure, Sapir, Wittgenstein, Vygotsky, and Mead. Wittgenstein’s 
view, for example, was that mindedness can only be understood as it is observed in 
terms of behavior, that the mind is not “private” and that speaking and thinking are 
linked. This view implies that children learn to be minded through interaction in 
society; only the ability to learn to be minded is innate. We will return to the concept 
of “mindedness” and its link to language in discussing communication and language 
in other primates.
More recent studies of animal (especially bonobo) communication claim that 
the evolution of linguistic communication was probably fairly continuous and that 
there was no sudden “leap” to language; rather, it is our inability to understand the 
communication systems of other primates that led to the assumption of a leap (Sav-
age-Rumbaugh & Lewin, 1994).
Frontal lobe development and “displacement” in the brain
Terence Deacon, in his book The symbolic species (1997), compares the human cerebral 
cortical regional areas to those of a “typical” ape brain with a simulated brain size of 
a human. He ﬁnds that the most important diﬀerence is that the prefrontal areas are 
very much more dominant in the human. He has also traced the development of brain 
weight in relation to to body weight over the course of evolution and found that the 
increased human encephalization diverges from that of other mammals. (For example, 
it makes it necessary to give birth earlier in the development of our oﬀspring, so that 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
134
human babies are less autonomous than the young of many other species.) The pre-
frontal areas control the rest of the brain’s activity and this control is very extensive in 
humans, according to Deacon. Another related aspect of our brain evolution is that 
over time competing language-related functions have “displaced” each other so that 
they are now in the cortex of opposite hemispheres; for example, syntax is lateralized 
in the left hemisphere and prosody in the right.
Communication by other primates
Animals with large brains and supposedly well-developed intelligence, such as whales, 
dolphins, and above all the primates that are closest to humans in evolutionary terms, 
such as orangutans and chimpanzees and especially bonobos, are those that have at-
tracted most interest from researchers.
So what can we actually learn from studying communication and language-like 
behavior in other species? Two diﬀerent approaches have been used in studying chim-
panzees and bonobos in particular.
One is the study of the life and communication of primates in their natural setting. 
Questions about how they live — in trees or on the ground, in large or small groups, 
as nomads or in one area — are matched with questions about their communication 
(Goodall, 1986). These might concern how many and what types of distinct “calls” they 
make; whether these calls are discrete, continuous, or both; and whether there are dif-
ferences between male and female communication. We can see a development when 
we compare more primitive apes to more highly developed primates, for example, 
orangutans versus chimpanzees, where the lifestyle of the latter seems more human-
like in many ways and their communication is more diverse and complex.
The other approach is to raise, for example, bonobos in a human environment 
including linguistic communication in order to see how much linguistic communi-
cation they can pick up or be taught. This approach has been criticized because of 
its lower ecological validity, but it has also raised important questions about what 
constitutes language and linguistic communication. The results are much debated 
and are the focus of the clash between the biological and social construct views (i.e., 
those who see language as a biologically speciﬁc human phenomenon versus those 
who see it as a result of more gradual evolution). Much of the classical data came 
from chimpanzees using signed communication; for example, a chimpanzee called 
Washoe, who was raised by Alan and Beatrice Gardner as a child in their family and 
taught to sign (Gardner, Gardner, & van Cantfort, 1989) (see also Premack & Wood-
ruﬀ, 1978; Premack & Premack, 1983; Premack, 1986). The chimpanzees acquired a 
number of hand signs, which they used for communication. At the time, the discus-
sion of syntactic structure as a central criterion for language raised the question of 

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
135
whether the chimpanzees’ signs were simply being produced one after another or 
actually had syntactic structure, something that was hard to determine, since the 
chimps used mainly “content word” signs, that is, signs for persons, things, events, 
and properties. Another chimpanzee, called Lana (Rumbaugh, 1977), was subjected 
to a more strictly controlled experiment. She was kept in a cage and was able to com-
municate with her keeper by pressing buttons with signs painted on them. These 
signs were clearly arbitrary in relation to their meaning (i.e., they had no similarity 
to what they referred to). In other words, Lana had to press a series of symbols to 
communicate. Whether her symbol sequences were syntactic or not was, however, 
also a matter for debate.
The most extensive studies of this type are the ongoing bonobo studies by Sue 
Savage-Rumbaugh and her coworkers. The best-known bonobo is Kanzi, who has 
demonstrated many abilities that were generally thought to be speciﬁc to humans. 
Kanzi, his sister Panbanisha, and Panbanisha’s son Nyota are the most linguistically 
accomplished animals studied so far. So what are Kanzi, Panbanisha and Nyota able to 
do in terms of linguistic communication and the prerequisites for such communica-
tion? They seem to comprehend spoken English with some syntactic complexity. They 
communicate with humans using a keyboard with symbols. Panbanisha has also used 
drawings of symbols for communication. Kanzi has been reported to produce sounds 
with some similarity to words in order to communicate. The bonobos have also dem-
onstrated the ability to communicate about events taking place other than “here and 
now” and they have passed some tests of theory of mind (ToM). In other words, they 
have demonstrated some ability to understand that others have minds and that their 
knowledge is not necessarily the same as your own. This ability is critical for important 
pragmatic aspects of linguistic communication.
The debate about whether the evolution of language featured a sudden leap or con-
tinuous development, which is closely linked to the debate about the linguistic abilities 
of bonobos, remains extremely active. Some of the suggested “critical” factors in lan-
guage and linguistic communication include the discovery that one thing can “stand 
for” another in the ﬁrst place and knowing how this can change dynamically, syntax 
of a certain complexity, semantics and cognitive schemas, interpersonal construction 
of joint social perception, “theory of mind,” speech (especially tonal patterns), and 
writing. Bonobos have shown surprising abilities in most of these areas. However, 
whether there is one critical criterion or deciding factor and, if so, what it might be, 
are still questions for debate.
One thing, though, does seem to be undisputed: wild primates do not learn the 
same kind of things as those raised by humans and they do not seem to have moved 
from nonsymbolic to symbolic communication. Although they show aspects of a ca-
pacity for linguistic behavior, their interactive behavior (as we understand it at present) 
does not seem to require much linguistic or symbolic communication. 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
136
Evolution-based theories in neurolinguistics and acquired language 
disorders
As we have seen above, evolutionary theories emphasize similarities and continuity 
in development, rather than seeing language as a very speciﬁc, modular brain func-
tion that is radically diﬀerent from other cognitive abilities. The principle is that the 
evolution of abilities that enhance the chance of survival can be tracked and that 
language is one of these abilities. Communication and language-related abilities in 
animals such as birds, apes, primates, whales, and dolphins are of interest in studying 
the prerequisites for language and the similarities and diﬀerences between animal 
communication and human communication. These theories also explain language 
development in children and acquired language disorders in adults with reference to 
the parallel evolution and development of brain structures and brain functions and 
the inﬂuence of this development on how language and communication are organized 
in the human brain.
One of the frameworks for relating brain structures and language functions that 
developed in the 19th century is the notion of evolution-based or hierarchical theories, 
introduced by Jackson and von Monakow (see Chapter 2). Jackson described aphasia 
as a regression, in which automatic language was still available, while propositional 
language was disturbed. Von Monakow also emphasized the time dimension in lan-
guage processing and elaborated on its importance. This is a feature that still exists in 
present-day psycho- and neurolinguistic modeling of language disorders.
Some of the main tenets of this type of framework are:
• 
that brain structures and cognitive and linguistic functions evolved in parallel;
• 
that there are parallels between the (phylogenetic) evolution of the species and the 
(ontogenetic) development of children;
• 
that acquired language disorders reﬂect a regression, with increased dependence 
on evolutionarily older parts of the brain, which the more recently developed 
cortical structures can no longer inhibit as strongly as usual.
The best-developed present-day theory on this basis perhaps is Jason Brown’s micro-
genetic theory, which originated in the 1970s and has been further developed since 
then (Brown, 1977, 1980, 1988, 1991). Brown points out parallels not only between 
phylogenetic and ontogenetic development but also between both these processes 
and microgenetic development. Microgenesis is the process by which any action, for 
example, an utterance is produced. According to Brown, every action passes through 
all the stages of phylogenetic and ontogenetic development, “from the depth to the 
surface” of the brain. In line with earlier theories, Brown emphasizes the temporal 
aspect of action, explaining regression as positive and/or negative symptoms. The 
positive symptoms reﬂect the more basic level of function that breaks through, while 

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
137
the negative symptoms reﬂect the lack of control and inhibition on the part of the 
superimposed levels that are damaged. In Brown’s model, structural (neurological) 
levels are parallel to functional (psychological) levels.
Brown’s microgenetic theory is often illustrated with the image of a wave of activity 
from lower to higher levels of the brain. Another metaphor that is often used to visual-
ize this type of theory is “the brain as an onion” with diﬀerent superimposed layers.
Brown’s structural and functional model of the brain (from 1977) contains four 
evolutionary levels (Table 10.1): the subcortical sensorimotor, the limbic presentation, 
the neocortical representation, and the asymmetric neocortical symbolic levels.
Table 10.1. Levels in Brown’s evolution-based model of brain structure
Level
Sensorimotor
Presentation
Representation
Symbolic
Brain 
structure
subcortical
limbic
neocortical
asymmetric 
neocortical
Species
reptile
phylogenetic
“older” mammals
phylogenetic
“younger” mammals
phylogenetic
human
ontogenetic
For each level, Brown sets out the related aspects of feeling, thought, perception, and 
language. Although his terminology can be hard to understand in detail, the model 
gives a uniﬁed picture of language and its relationship to other functions. The model 
is therefore included in summarized form in Table 10.2, as “food for thought” and as 
an example of how an evolution-based theory can be described.
Table 10.2. Feeling, thought, perception, and language in Brown’s model
Level
Sensorimotor
Presentation
Representation
Symbolic
Feeling
instinct
worry, fear, defense
feelings
Self-awareness
Thought
Body-centered, 
reﬂex, instinct, 
automaticity
semantic operations, 
image-selection, more 
distal activity, certain 
S→R (stimulus-
response) delay, 
paralogic (pre-
categorical) thinking
separates object-
self, goal direction, 
certain abstraction, 
spatial and 
categorical thinking, 
generalization, 
exteriorization
language, 
voluntariness, 
“inner space” 
(introspection, 
awareness)
Perception
vague pre-object image
image presentation
symbol, language-
related
Language
semantic category
nominal category
phonemic category
Brown also describes disturbances that arise from damage to the diﬀerent levels 
(Table 10.3). 
There is an anterior and a posterior progression of levels. The anterior progression 
of levels of speech act diﬀerentiation is: 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
138
 
motor envelope → diﬀerentiation of the speech act (transcortical motor aphasia) 
→ diﬀerentiation of global syntactic units (agrammatism) → phonological realiza-
tion (Broca’s aphasia).
The posterior progression of levels of paraphasias is the following:
 
asemantic (Wernicke’s aphasia/semantic jargon) → associative/categorical/evoca-
tive (nominal or anomic aphasia) → phonological (conduction aphasia).
This type of model emphasizes the activating role of the brain stem and subcortical 
systems, such as the limbic system, which have to do with basic instincts and emotions, 
versus the more reﬁning, controlling, and inhibiting role of the cortex.
A model like Brown’s can be used for many purposes in psycho- and neurolin-
guistics. In the study of language breakdown, a symptom is deﬁned as the level of 
disorganization that breaks through. The cognitive structure is “degraded” and the 
syndrome that is observed is the level of performance that is achieved; in other words, 
the sum of the loss of functions and pressure from lower levels of the brain is one active 
level. This is thus a regression hypothesis of language disorders, where the regression 
is microgenetic: it relates to the unfolding of each instance of an action or a process. 
Brown stated that his four levels are closed stages of development in the encephaliza-
tion process; he does not make the transition between levels gradual and continuous.
Brown’s view on the diﬀerentiation of cortical areas is that it proceeds from the 
more general functions of the cortex to the speciﬁcation of structure and function in 
Table 10.3. Disorders in Brown’s model
Level
Sensorimotor
Presentation
Representation
Symbolic
Disorder of 
thought
psychotic thinking 
(aﬀect, illusion)
dementia 
(disorientation, 
amnesia)
linguistic 
syndromes
Disorder of 
perception
disintegration 
of visuospatial 
ability and 
mobility
hallucinations
agnosia 
agnosia for 
complex stimuli
Posterior 
aphasia
semantic aphasia, 
semantic paraphasia, 
semantic jargon
“paralogia” 
(neologistic 
paraphasia)
Wernicke’s aphasia
anomia. 
circumlocution, 
verbal paraphasia 
(correct category)
anomic aphasia
conduction aphasia 
(phonematic), 
phonematic 
paraphasia
Anterior 
aphasia
akinetic mutism → 
transcortical motor 
aphasia
agrammatism
Broca’s aphasia, 
phonematic-
articulatory
(anarthria)

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
139
modality-speciﬁc association areas and then further speciﬁcation in the sensory and 
motor cortex.
There are many more reﬁnements of Brown’s microgenetic theory that we will not 
present in this introductory summary. The interested reader is encouraged to study 
Brown’s more recent books, such as The life of the mind from 1988 and Self and process. 
Brain states and the conscious present from 1991.
We can see that Brown uses some of the same terminology for diﬀerent aphasia 
types as the classical-neoclassical school, but that his main idea is the progression from 
more basic to more recent and complex levels of the brain in microgenesis. Current 
ﬁndings on the evolution of communication cannot easily be explained by a purely 
hierarchical model, at present.
Pragmatics, emotion, and language in context
Proponents of the “innateness” and “social construct” hypotheses concerning the evo-
lution of language have radically diﬀerent views of pragmatics. The main diﬀerence is 
whether pragmatics is seen as a crucial internal aspect of linguistic communication 
or as something external and nonlinguistic, not to be included in linguistic analysis. 
From a social construct or evolutionary point of view, the development of language 
is intertwined with that of other aspects of cognition. Emotional communication and 
language use are central driving forces, which determine the meanings and forms of 
language and communication. This implies a broad view of language with pragmatics 
as a central component. From a biological innateness perspective, language develops 
as a separate, modularized ability comprising mainly grammar, and possibly also pho-
nology, whereas other aspects of cognition, emotional communication, and language 
use are external to this module. Consequently, we have a much more restricted view 
of what language is, since it excludes pragmatics. We can see that although various 
aspects of the broader view are included in Brown’s model, he still restricts his use of 
the term “language” to what is also compatible with the biological innateness view. In 
fact, many researchers are not strong proponents of either one or the other side in this 
debate, but are looking for some middle way or combination of aspects from both.
Neurolinguistic perspectives on developmental language disorders 
in children
Developmental language disorders in children have not usually been described in rela-
tion to the same frameworks as acquired language disorders in children and adults. 
It is, however, of considerable interest and importance to try to capture both types of 
phenomena with the same types of theories. This is especially important if one applies 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
140
an evolutionary perspective to brain and language. It has traditionally been considered 
to be “easier” to try to relate brain and language functions in adult brains than in young 
people’s developing brains. Since young brains have considerable plasticity — that is, 
functions can be transferred from one brain area to another if necessary — and are 
still developing, one has to be very cautious in ascribing localization of functions to 
speciﬁc brain areas.
For some years, however, explanations in terms of brain dysfunction have been 
popular in the study of disorders such as speciﬁc (developmental) language impair-
ment (SLI), dyslexia, and autism. This has also led to an increased interest in acquired 
language disorders in children. A few examples can be mentioned: Luria’s neuropsy-
chological investigation has been adapted to developmental disorders. Brown’s theory 
and Luria’s investigation have also been used for the description of developmental 
disorders (Sahlén, 1991).
The relationship between acquired and developmental language disorders has 
been explored in a number of studies. One good example is a paper by Snow and 
Swisher from 1996, which presents neurobehavioral analogies between syndromes 
of acquired and developmental language impairments. This study uses traditional ac-
counts of acquired language disorders to construct hypotheses about speciﬁc language 
impairment. By using an analogy, Snow and Swisher assume that there are two main 
types of SLI with diﬀerent neuroanatomical bases. Earlier investigations had proposed 
a bilateral brain substrate for SLI in general, but Snow and Swisher propose a bilateral 
impairment only for the hypothetical semantic-pragmatic type of SLI, while they posit 
a unilateral left-hemisphere impairment for the hypothetical phonological-syntactic 
type of SLI. By using a number of parameters to describe aphasia in adults, aphasia in 
children, and SLI, they make a comparison that is summarized in Table 10.4 below. 
The factors mild versus severe, ﬂuent versus nonﬂuent, persistent versus transient, 
bilateral versus unilateral, anterior versus posterior, and phonological-syntactic versus 
semantic-pragmatic have all been used in describing similarities and diﬀerences be-
tween these disorders. Snow and Swisher combine these factors in making the hypoth-
esis summarized in Table 10.4. The developmental and acquired child-onset language 
disorders are described in the same way, in terms of brain substrates, bilateral for the 
ﬂuent and unilateral for the nonﬂuent syndromes. The adult-onset language disorders, 
on the other hand, are related to another division of substrates, posterior for the ﬂuent 
and anterior for the nonﬂuent syndromes. The age and stage of development, rather 
than the type of etiology (developmental versus acquired) is therefore hypothesized 
to be the most important factor.

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
141
Table 10.4. A uniﬁed theory of child-onset language disorders
Child-onset language disorders
Adult-onset language disorders
Syndrome
Nonﬂuent
Fluent
Nonﬂuent
Fluent
Substrate
Unilateral
Bilateral
Anterior
Posterior
(Source: Snow & Swisher 1996, p. 465)
Embodiment in communication: The possible role of mirror neurons 
and alignment
The role of embodiment in communication and its importance for fylogenetic, as well 
as ontogenetic development and possibly also for microgenesis (i.e. the unfolding of 
a communicative contribution) and macrogenesis (i.e. conventionalization of com-
munication in society) is attracting increased interest. This interest is, to some extent, 
caused by hypotheses and ﬁndings concerning mirror neurons (cf Arbib, 2005; Gallese 
& Lakoﬀ, 2005), i.e. neurons that are activated by production as well as perception of, 
for example, a certain movement of action. Mirror neuron functioning in area F4 for 
grasping in monkeys (macaques) is well established (Rizzolatti & Arbib, 2005), mir-
ror neurons in humans responding to perceived movements have also been localized 
(Decety et al. 1997) and auditory mirror neurons have been described (Kohler et al. 
2002). Mirror neurons seem to provide a fairly simple mechanism for acting, perceiv-
ing, imitating and pantomime, which could be crucial to the development of human 
communication and language. Mirror neurons in area F4 (and F5) have attracted most 
attention so far and claims have been made about their role in apraxia and Broca’s 
aphasia, including agrammatism. 
Another theory that stresses the role of automatic alignment between two persons 
as a basis for the evolution, acquisition and processing of language has been proposed 
by Pickering and Garrod (2004).

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
142
Summary
In this chapter we have studied diﬀerent aspects of the evolution of brain and of language and 
communication. We have looked at brain size and other anatomical factors in relation to lan-
guage and we have seen how diﬀerent hypotheses stress biological innateness or social con-
struction of language. We have also exempliﬁed evolution-based theories in neurolinguistics 
dealing with acquired as well as developmental language disorders and we have mentioned 
the possible role of embodiment, mirror neurons and alignment in communication.
Further reading
Arbib, M. A. (2005). From monkey-like action recognition to human language: An evolutionary 
framework for neurolinguistics. Brain and Behavioral Sciences 28(2)( in press).
Brown, J. (1977). Mind, brain and consciousness. New York: Academic Press.
Brown, J. (1980). Language, brain, and the problem of localization. In D. Caplan (Ed.), Biological 
studies of mental processes (pp. 287–300). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Deacon, T. (1997). The symbolic species: The coevolution of language and brain. London: Penguin.
Decety, J., Grèzes, J., Costes, D., Perani, E., Procyk, F., Grassi, M., Jeannerod, F., & Fazio, F. (1997). 
Brain activity during observation of actions. Inﬂuence of action content and subject’s strat-
egy. Brain 120, 763–1777.
Gallese, V. & Lakoﬀ, G. (2005). The brain’s concepts: The role of the sensory-motor system in 
conceptual knowledge. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 22 (3/4), 455–479.
Kendon, A. (1993). Human gesture. In K. Gibson & T. Ingold (Eds.), Tools, language and 
 
cognition in human evolution (pp. 43–62). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kohler, E., Keysers, C., Umiltà, M. A., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V. & Rizzolatti, G. (2002). Hearing sounds, 
understanding action: action representation in mirror neurons. Science 297, 846–848.
Lieberman, P. (1998). Eve spoke. London: W. W. Norton & Company.
Mithen, S. (1996). The prehistoric mind. London: Thames & Hudson.
Noble, W., & Davidson, I. (1996). Human evolution, language and mind. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Pickering, M., & Garrod, S. (2004). Toward a mechanistic psychology of dialogue. Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 27,169–226. 
Pinker, S. (1994). The language instinct: How the mind creates language. New York: William 
Morrow.
Rizzolatti, G., & Arbib, M. A. (2005). Language within our grasp. Trends in Neurosciences 21, 
188–194.
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., Fields, W., & Tagliatela, J. (2001). Language, speech, tools and writing. 
Journal of Consciousness Studies, 8, 273–292.

Chapter 10. On the evolution and development of the brain, communication, and language
143
Savage-Rumbaugh, S., & Lewin, R. (1994). Kanzi: The ape at the brink of the human mind. New 
York: John Wiley.
Assignments
1. 
Try to design and put into operation a reasonable criterion or set of criteria for ascribing 
the use of “language” to chimpanzees. What would they have to be able to do and how 
would you go about ﬁnding out if they could do it?
2. 
Compare the descriptions given of diﬀerent aphasia types in Brown’s model to the cor-
responding aphasia types in the classical-neoclassical model presented in Chapter 3:
 
With respect to
 
a. 
Wernicke’s aphasia, anomic aphasia, and conduction aphasia;
 
b. 
Transcortical motor aphasia, agrammatism, and Broca’s aphasia;
 
1. 
 Do you ﬁnd the descriptions compatible? If there are any problems, what are they?
 
2. 
 Does Brown’s model add or change something in the classical description? If so, 
what?
 
3. 
 What would be the consequence of Snow and Swisher’s (1996) hypothesis about ﬂu-
ent and nonﬂuent disorders in children and adults for the ontogenetic development 
of the localization of language functions in the brain?


Chapter 11
Multimodality in neurolinguistics
In this chapter:
• 
Why is multimodality, including body 
communication, other gestures, and picture-based 
communication, important to neurolinguistics?
• 
Overview of multimodality
• 
Multimodal communication: Examples of persons 
who have aphasia or complex communication 
needs caused by cerebral palsy
• 
What makes a successful communicator?
• 
What is multimodal about ordinary face-to-face 
interaction?
• 
Restrictions and possibilities including 
multimodality and communication disorders
• 
Optimizing multimodal communication for 
persons with communication disorders and 
the role of communication aids
Why is multimodality, including body communication, other gestures and 
picture-based communication, important to neurolinguistics?
For many persons with language and communication disorders, body communication 
(BC) seems to play an especially important role in interaction. This chapter discusses 
some gestures and other body communication in interactions involving persons whose 
language is severely restricted language due to brain damage. The examples are used 
as the basis for discussion of what is said, what is shown by body communication and 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
146
what can be shown by picture-based communication aids in face-to-face interaction. 
How does multimodality aﬀect, for example, the identiﬁcation of speech acts, turn-
taking, feedback, and sequencing in spoken interaction?
The content and function of communicative contributions in the form of 
1. spoken words, 
2. spoken words plus gestures and other BC, and
3. simulated “translations” into what can be rendered by a picture-based communi-
cation aid 
are compared. 
The comparisons are then discussed in terms of how to optimize communicative 
possibilities in diﬀerent situations, including the use of augmentative and alternative 
communication (AAC).
Another topic for discussion is how information and communication technology 
(ICT) tools, such as dialogue systems, can be used by persons with neurolinguistic 
disorders. In other words, what is the role of multimodality in “accessibility for all”?
Overview of multimodality
Multimodality is important in face-to-face communication for many persons with 
language and communication disorders. When words fail, gestures, sounds, facial 
expressions, “acting,” etc., can play an important role in managing communication. 
This leads us to three questions: 
1. How much of ordinary face-to-face communication is managed multimodally and 
how much is in fact dependent on multimodality. 
2. How does the situation regarding multimodal communication diﬀer for persons 
with communication disorders? We can look at this question from two perspec-
tives: (a) the potential disturbance of certain modalities (speech, gesturing, writ-
ing, etc.), and (b) the potential compensatory use of certain modalities, because of 
a disturbance of others. This means that we can study how the “multimodal space” 
is distributed between modalities and how changes in this distribution occur and 
are managed, possibly for purposes of adaptation.
3. How can communication aids for AAC and dialogue systems, which are being 
used more and more frequently by various public services, best be applied?
If persons with communication disorders are dependent on multimodality in face-to-
face communication, how can communication aids best be adapted to this fact and 
how does this aﬀect the use of communication technologies in society, for example, 
dialogue systems. The answers to such questions are important in considering the 

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
147
“usability for all” policy, which many public services espouse and which is meant to 
ensure maximal participation in society by persons with communication disorders. 
We will start by considering some examples of persons with aphasia and commu-
nication disorders caused by cerebral palsy. We will then turn to the question of what 
makes a successful communicator and discuss it in relation to diﬀerent dimensions of 
communication. These dimensions are then related to the examples of communication 
disorders, in discussing restrictions on and possibilities for the use of multimodality 
in communication. The role of multimodality in ordinary face-to-face interaction 
will be discussed brieﬂy, before we turn to the question of communication aids and 
dialogue systems. 
Multimodal communication: Examples of persons who have aphasia or 
complex communication needs caused by cerebral palsy
Many persons with aphasia, who have severely restricted speech output and sometimes 
also apraxia aﬀecting the intentional movement of their arms and hands, are never-
theless intuitively judged to be good communicators because of their spontaneous 
compensatory use of multimodal communication (Ahlsén, 1985, 1991, 2002, 2003; 
Feiereysen, 1987, 1991; Lott, 1999; see also Chapter 7 of this book).
Consider the following examples. 
Example 1
A person with aphasia is asked what her previous job was. Because of her word-ﬁnd-
ing problems (severe anomia), she is unable to produce nouns, proper names, and 
most verbs. In this situation, she points in the direction of her previous workplace, 
she smiles and utters phrases such as oh, it was fun, she looks around the room for 
a newspaper, when she ﬁnds one she points to it, she gets it and opens it to ﬁnd an 
advertisement for the shop where she used to be employed.
Example 2
Another person with aphasia is asked by her interlocutor where she was going the 
other day when they met at the corner of the street. She has fairly severe dysarthria, 
making her speech hard to understand. In this situation, she “draws” a corner on the 
table and points into it, thereby providing gestural support for her speech, indicating 
that she went back inside the house on the corner. 
Example 3
A third person with aphasia is asked about his son’s occupation. He tries to pronounce 
the word theater, but is unable to say it clearly, because of his literal paraphasias, that 
is, substitutions of speech sounds. The interlocutor looks slightly puzzled, which leads 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
148
the aphasic speaker to say now I him and then he gets up and moves around making 
very expressive facial expressions and gestures, impersonating an actor.
The interlocutor of a person with aphasia often also uses multimodal communica-
tion, more or less spontaneously, in order to be understood by the aphasic subject, as 
in example 4.
Example 4
A speech and language therapist asks a person with aphasia about the age of her chil-
dren by saying are they older than ten, then clariﬁes, when asked what she said, by 
changing the word older to bigger, emphasizing it heavily, and showing the height of a 
ten-year-old with her hand (Ahlsén, 1993).
Severe speech and motor impairment may prevent children with cerebral palsy 
both from pronouncing words clearly and from pointing and making other gestures or 
movements. Adding diﬀerent channels of communication may be necessary in order 
to express a wish, as in example 5.
Example 5
A six-year-old girl with severe cerebral palsy is having a meal. She is spoon-fed by her 
caregiver and the interaction is focused on eating. Still, she manages to initiate another 
topic (a ﬁlm) by directing her caregiver’s attention to a videotape on a table nearby. 
She does this by making sounds while directing her eye gaze with a certain intensity 
(Ferm, Ahlsén, & Björck-Åkesson, 2005).
All these examples tell us about the use of channels other than speech as compensa-
tory support when speech and/or arm and hand movements are not enough to allow 
the conversational partner share a certain content. All the examples tend to involve 
speciﬁc factual content such as names, entities, places, assertions, questions, and topics 
of discussion. Iconic gestures, pantomime, pointing, eye gaze, drawing, and pointing 
to pictures are especially important in this respect.
But other aspects of face-to-face interaction are probably just as important. Apart 
from conveying speciﬁc factual information, it involves the communication of feel-
ings and attitudes and also communication regulating the interaction itself. There is 
good reason to believe that these aspects are crucial for spoken interaction. They also 
involve multimodality to a high degree, usually being in large part conveyed by other 
means than just words. Facial expression, gestures and other body communication, 
and prosody, or the intonation of words and phrases, play an important part here.
If we return to interactions involving persons with aphasia, we can, for example, 
observe multimodality being used in:
1. the frequent use of smiling, facial expressions, head movements, movements of 
arms, hands, and legs (such as clenching one’s ﬁst or stamping one’s foot), changes 

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
149
of body posture and gaze, prosodic markers, and sounds such as sighing, laughing, 
and smacking, all of which convey emotions and attitudes
2. enhanced use of body posture, leaning forward to indicate interested participation 
and leaning backward to indicate that a topic (or an interaction as a whole) should 
be ﬁnished or that communication is being left up to the interlocutor
3. increased use of head nods and head shakes, as well as hand gestures and gaze, to 
regulate communication, that is, provide feedback concerning contact, perception, 
comprehension, and attitudes and regulate who has the turn (right to contribute), 
as well as to indicate one’s own production problems.
We can also use the term aphasia in accordance with present-day conceptions of 
“language,” which means that we include persons with disorders that do not really 
primarily aﬀect words and grammar, but rather the use of facial expressions, gestures, 
etc., as in the case of persons with acquired right-hemisphere lesions. Thus, we must 
deal with not only the disturbance of speech and the compensatory nature of multi-
modality, but also with the disturbance of other modalities. An example could be a 
lack of the contextually appropriate emotional prosody and facial expression to go with 
an utterance expressing sympathy or happiness. Another example would be problems 
understanding a joke or an ironic comment. In these cases, maybe more emotional or 
attitudinal information could be expressed by words, in order to compensate for the 
lack of nonverbal modalities.
What makes a successful communicator?
Expression
As we have seen from the examples above, we have a wide range of means of expres-
sion at our disposal and these can normally be used freely in face-to-face interaction, 
supplementing each other in sequence or, more commonly, in simultaneous use.
The successful combination of diﬀerent means of communication, to optimize 
the interactive ﬂow of information and co-construct meaning by using multimodal-
ity in a given situation makes a good communicator. The situation includes the social 
activity being undertaken, the goals, the participants and their roles, the physical cir-
cumstances, and the use of artifacts, such as diﬀerent media (phone, speech synthesis, 
etc.). All of these factors interact in determining the optimal way of communicating 
(Ahlsén, 1995, 2005; Allwood, 1976, 1995, 2000, 2001). 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
150
Content
What must be communicated? As we have seen above, three main types of communi-
cation have to take place: factual information has to be conveyed or co-constructed, 
interaction has to be regulated, and feelings and attitudes have to be communicated 
(Allwood, 2002).
Degrees of conscious control and intentionality
Modalities. While most of our words are produced with a fairly high degree of con-
scious control, gestures, facial expressions, and body movements are generally pro-
duced more automatically. 
Types of information. Factual information is more likely to be communicated with 
greater control and intentionality than communication regulation (of one’s own com-
munication and interaction) and emotions or attitudes.
Degree of intentionality: Indicate, display, and signal. A useful way of describing 
degrees of intentionality in communication is to distinguish between indicating, which 
is done without intentionality (e.g., indicating that one is embarrassed by blushing); 
displaying, where one shows something intentionally (e.g., by pointing); and signal-
ing, where one shows that one is showing something (e.g., most language use) (cf. 
Allwood, 2002).
Type of sign: Icon, index, and symbol. Another useful trichotomy is Peirce’s semiotic 
distinction between three types of signs. An icon refers to something by a similarity 
relation; for example, a picture is similar to what it represents. An index refers to 
something by a contiguity relation, either in space or in time, such as an arrow point-
ing to a place. Finally, a symbol refers to something in an arbitrary way; for example, 
most words have no natural relationship to what they stand for (which is why diﬀerent 
languages usually have completely diﬀerent words for the same category of objects.) 
(Peirce, 1931). In this trichotomy, symbolic communication is considered to require a 
high degree of conscious control.
What is multimodal in ordinary face-to-face interaction?
If we look at ordinary face-to-face interaction, much of what goes on is not expressed 
in words but is handled by other modalities. This is especially true of interaction-regu-
lating information, which depends on body communication, such as body posture, 
gesture, and gaze, as well as on intonation and voice quality. It also applies to commu-
nication of emotions and attitudes, where facial expression, sounds, tone of voice, and 

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
151
body communication in general are important. Indicated and exposed information 
are often dependent on multimodality, where body communication and prosody play 
an important role.
If we look at Table 11.1 (cf. Allwood, 2002), we can see how the type of informa-
tion is often related to the degree of intentionality.
Finally, indexical and iconic signs are mixed with symbolic expression in ordinary 
face-to-face interaction.
To sum up, we know that multimodality is the usual situation, but how necessary 
is it? We may have the feeling that we communicate more eﬃciently in face-to-face in-
teraction and that the risk of misunderstanding is smaller than in long-distance com-
munication. This is probably at least partly due to the multimodality of face-to-face 
communication, which makes us able to express more ﬁnely tuned nuances, including 
information that we do not necessarily want to express in words; by the same token, we 
can take in such information from our conversation partner. The sensation of greater 
ease and pleasure in communicating face-to-face and the widespread feeling that some 
types of important discussions should preferably take place face-to-face point to the 
importance of multimodality. On the other hand, other factors also aﬀect which types 
of communication we prefer for diﬀerent purposes; sometimes communication by 
phone or in writing is preferred. In this way, multimodality may sometimes be avoided 
in order enhance control of primarily factual communication.
In most cases, then, we are probably not truly dependent on multimodality, even 
though it has advantages for many purposes and can enhance the eﬃciency of com-
munication. 
Restrictions and possibilities concerning multimodality and 
communication disorders
As we have seen, full-ﬂedged multimodality in face-to-face interaction involves many 
dimensions and possibilities. Diﬀerent activity factors can restrict or increase the use 
of multimodality in diﬀerent ways. We will consider two types of restrictions and 
Table 11.1. Types of information and degrees of intentionality and control in ordinary face-
to-face interaction
Factual
Communication-
regulating
Emotional/Attitudinal
Indicate
x
X
X
Display
x
X
X
Signal
X
x
x
X = is used most often
x = can be used

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
152
possibilities: those imposed by communication disorders and those imposed by com-
munication aid devices.
Factual information
Many communication disorders involve problems in producing the words, phrases and 
sentences needed in order to convey factual information, as we saw in the examples 
above. In some cases, the ability to use symbolic communication as a whole seems to 
be aﬀected, thus making it necessary to compensate by using iconic or indexical com-
munication. In other cases, it is mainly the words and grammar per se that are aﬀected 
and it should be possible to express similar factual content by using other modalities, 
for example, iconic gestures or pointing to objects or pictures of objects, actions, and 
qualities. In both cases, body communication of indexical and iconic information is 
important, as is indicated and exposed information. Both these conditions require 
visual communication, even though communication aids where pointing is used may 
generate synthetic speech to reduce this dependence somewhat.
This means that face-to-face communication is the best condition for people with 
such communication disorders and that communication aids have to be used so that 
they are adapted to the total communication situation by (a) allowing face-to-face 
interaction, and (b) being used in a way that combines diﬀerent modes of communica-
tion. A relevant question here is how much of the various dimensions of communica-
tion can be put into the communication aid. So far, it is mainly factual information at 
the iconic and sometimes the indexical and symbolic levels that is included, and this 
type of information seems best suited for the purpose. The use of communication aids 
is largely dependent on a high degree of control and intentionality, and consequently 
signals are used most. Pictures, words (and texts), and intermediate sign systems such 
as Bliss are among the tools used.
For many people with, for example, cerebral palsy, some aspects of what is usually 
communicated by gestures, facial expressions, and prosody are aﬀected by the disorder 
and thus have to be communicated in a more “signaling” way, for example, by using 
pictorial representations of feelings, etc. Usually, however, spontaneous indicating and 
indexical communication is also available and must be closely attended to by these 
subjects’ interlocutors.
Interaction-regulating information
In informal interaction, communication is most often regulated by indicating or 
displaying, rather than signaling. It is also regulated almost exclusively by body com-
munication, prosody, etc., and not by words and sentences. This means that interaction 
regulating can best be done in a natural way using multimodal communication; the 

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
153
same is true of persons with communication disorders. There are, however, complicat-
ing factors. One is timing. Many persons with communication disorders are slow com-
municators, who make long pauses. Others speak too fast or with an irregular speech 
rhythm. And the use of communication aids aﬀects the pacing of communication pro-
foundly, potentially making it hard for users to claim and keep a turn (i.e., the right to 
speak), give feedback of the right type at the right time, and participate in ﬁnely tuned 
sequences of communication. The use of a communication aid by one party changes 
the pacing and interaction regulation of the whole interaction, if this person is a full 
participant. There is reason to believe that interaction regulation is extremely depen-
dent on multimodality in face-to-face interaction. In a phone conversation or Internet 
chat, the modalities available to all participants are reduced. Interaction regulation is 
therefore facilitated in one sense; on the other hand, it is also made harder by the lack 
of face-to-face contact.
Emotion/Attitudes
Emotions and attitudes are mostly conveyed and shared by means of body communi-
cation such as posture, facial expressions, smiles, diﬀerent sounds such as sighs, etc. 
Thus, they tend to be mainly indicated and exposed, rather than signaled. The result 
is that multimodality is crucial for this purpose. 
Since interaction-regulating and emotional/attitudinal communication is, to a 
great extent, used spontaneously to compensate for problems and make it easier to 
“navigate through” the interchange of factual information, we can conclude that mul-
timodality and face-to-face interaction will be particularly important for persons with 
communication disorders.
Multimodality makes it possible to use diﬀerent modalities to strengthen the 
communication of speciﬁc content. It also makes it possible to use the modalities that 
one has better mastery of, instead of those that are more aﬀected, in communicating 
a message.
Intermodal relations
One aspect of multimodality that is especially relevant from a neurolinguistic perspec-
tive is the interrelation between diﬀerent modalities in the acquisition, retention, and 
processing of language. Much remains to be found out about these relations. Some of 
the relevant phenomena are:
• 
that the learning/encoding and processing of words of diﬀerent types seem to be 
related to diﬀerent features which rely more on one or another modality; for ex-
ample, many words for objects seem to rely mostly on visual-perceptual features, 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
154
whereas words for physical actions, handling tools, etc., seem to rely more on 
motor or functional features;
• 
that similar relations seem to exist for gestures;
• 
that category-speciﬁc anomias exist, which seem to provide more clues about these 
types of relations; 
• 
that diﬀerent areas of the brain are more active in relation to diﬀerent types of 
words, for example, the parietal-temporal-occipital area for objects and the frontal 
lobes for motion verbs (Pulvermüller, Shtyrov & Ilmoniemi, 2005);
• 
that disturbances of language and gesture seem to show parallels in that word-
ﬁnding problems in children with semantic problems may be accompanied by a 
lack of speciﬁcity and complexity in gestures (Månsson, 2004);
• 
that a diﬀerence between spontaneous and controlled production can aﬀect ges-
tures and speech in a similar way (Ahlsén, 1985).
Intermodal relations, thus, relate semantic content, structural complexity, and local-
ization of brain activity for words and gestures and possibly also for other modalities 
(Ahlsén, 1985; Caramazza & Shelton, 1998; Månsson, 2004; Pulvermüller, Shtyrov, & 
Ilmoniemi, 2005; Warrington & Shallice, 1984,).
Optimizing Multimodal Communication for Persons with Communication 
Disorders and the Role of Communication Aids
Although there have been great hopes for ICT aids for persons with communication 
disorders, some lingering drawbacks have also been noted (cf. Ahlsén, 1994). Com-
munication aids have not proven as easy to use, as useful for communication, or as 
widely available as one might have expected. There are many diﬀerent reasons for this 
situation. One of the main ones was the unavailability of small, attractive, portable 
computers with AAC systems including, for example, pictures and synthetic speech, 
until quite recently. Another reason was that, again until recently, most people were 
not used to handling computers in their everyday life. Obviously, most of these ob-
stacles have gradually been removed, although they still have to be considered in many 
individual cases. For the ﬁrst time, we have the technical and social possibility of trying 
out small and ﬂexible communication aids in everyday life.
The most serious challenge, however, to the use of ICT aids is gaining a better un-
derstanding of how multimodality works naturally and spontaneously in face-to-face 
interaction and how this knowledge can be applied to improve communication aids for 
everyday communicative interactions. There is good reason to believe that the failure 
to make ICT aids attractive to users is directly related to a gap in the naturalness and 
immediacy of communication in face-to-face communication with and without the 

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
155
aids. There is a long-standing focus on factual information in AAC systems. However, 
some attempts have been made to include more types of information and to work on 
total communication (e.g., Todman & Alm, 1998). There is also an increased interest 
in studying pragmatics and nonverbal communication in relation to communication 
disorders, and although this is not usually linked to a direct interest in ICT aids, it is 
possible to combine these eﬀorts (e.g., Todman & Alm, 1998). 
But we still have a long way to go. Consideration of all the dimensions of com-
munication mentioned above is important for this purpose. A certain ingenuity in 
inventing multimodal communication methods that are complex but at the same 
time natural is also needed. The two main problems of timing –not being too slow for 
the ﬂow of normal conversation — and search strategies –eﬃcient ways to ﬁnd what 
you want to express in the system — which are, of course, related, still remain largely 
unsolved. 
Dialogue systems
As we saw above, dialogue systems — that is, computer programs that can hear and 
understand what users say and respond to them — are mainly intended for commu-
nicating factual information, communication regulation, and emotional/attitudinal 
information are increasingly taken into consideration. We also saw that our society is 
becoming more and more dependent on dialogue systems and that persons with com-
munication disorders, who often also have motor disorders, are a group that could be 
especially dependent on using dialogue systems to handle diﬀerent devices, such as 
cars and robots.
What, then, needs to be considered in the development of dialogue systems? There 
are certainly many aspects to consider. The questions below represent an attempt to 
summarize some of these aspects and provide food for thought and discussion.
• 
What modality or modalities can be used? Are there alternatives?
• 
What are the time restrictions?
• 
How hard to understand are the contributions of the system? How long are they?
• 
What types of contributions are accepted from the user? How set or ﬂexible are 
the requirements? 
• 
Is the system robust to phenomena such as hesitation, self-interruption and self-
repetition, and articulation problems? What are the repair possibilities?
• 
Is there an option involving a human instead of the system?
• 
Is it possible to add more multimodality in order to simplify and provide more 
options?

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
156
• 
Is it possible to prepare and pre-store one’s contributions (e.g., by using one’s own 
computer and then simply outputting the right contribution at the right time, 
when talking to the dialogue system)?
One of the purposes of introducing speech-based dialogue systems is to make inter-
action with the system simpler and more natural for ordinary users. It is important 
to consider whether we are also making the interaction simpler and more natural for 
users with communication disorders and, if we suspect that we are not, whether and 
how we can enhance the accessibility of the systems for these users.
Two ways in which we can ﬁnd out more about how to design and adapt dialogue 
systems for persons with communication disorders are (a) to conduct studies involving 
these kinds of users in contact with dialogue systems and have user reference groups 
to try out new designs; (b) to work on the design of dialogue interfaces to speciﬁc aids, 
such as robots, for persons with communication and motor disorders, thereby learning 
more about speciﬁc cases, which can be generalized in further design.

Chapter 11. Multimodality in neurolinguistics
157
Summary
This chapter addressed the topic of multimodality in face-to-face communication, especially in 
the case of persons with language and communication disorders caused by aphasia or cerebral 
palsy. It has been claimed that ordinary face-to-face interaction involves multimodality to a 
great extent, and that persons with communication disorders are often even more dependent 
on multimodality in order to compensate for problems in ﬁnding or producing speciﬁc words. 
Diﬀerent dimensions of communication, such as modality of expression, type of information, 
and type of sign were introduced and related to communication disorders. Multimodality was 
then considered in relation to information and communication technologies, especially com-
munication aids. Potential problems and possibilities were discussed with respect to optimiz-
ing communication involving ICT.
Further reading
There are many aspects of multimodality and neurolinguistics, some of them related to the ori-
gin of speech and gestures, some to the use of drawing, picture communication, and gestures 
by persons with brain damage and language and communication disorders. The recommend-
ed literature has its main focus on the third aspect,
Ahlsén, E. (2003). Communicative contributions and multimodality — Reﬂections on body 
communication, communication aids for persons with language disorders and dialogue 
systems. In P. Paggio, K. Jokinen, & A. Jönsson (Eds.), Proceedings of the 1st Nordic Sympo-
sium on Multimodal Communication. CST Working Papers, Report No. 6, pp. 129–140.
Allwood, J. (2002). Bodily communication — Dimensions of expression and content. In B. 
Granström, D. House, & I. Karlsson (Eds.), Multimodality in language and speech systems (pp. 
7–26). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Feyereisen, P. (1991). Communicative behaviour in aphasia. Aphasiology, 5, 323–333.
Lott, P. (1999). Gesture and aphasia. Bern: Peter Lang.
Todman, J., & Alm, N. (1998). Talk boards: Social conversation for text users without speech. 
Closing the Gap, 17, 16.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
158
Assignments
1. 
Imagine (a) a shopping scene
 
 
 
(b) a family dinner
 
For each of these scenarios, try to identify actions that are usually carried out by spoken 
communication.
 
If you had a severe speech disorder, how would you try to perform the same actions with 
the help of multimodal communication? (Think of other modalities, iconic and indexical 
communication.)
2. 
How could a dialogue system for train schedules be designed in order to rely less on spo-
ken and written language, including numbers, and more on other modalities?

Part VI
Resource chapters


Chapter 12
Methods of investigating the brain
In this chapter:
• 
Methods that were used extensively in the past
• 
Methods that are often used in neurolinguistic 
studies today 
– Static recording: Brain imaging 
– Dynamic recording: Electrical activity 
– Dynamic recording: Brain imaging
Introduction
This chapter presents a short overview of diﬀerent techniques that have been used to 
investigate the brain. Questions such as which area in the brain has been damaged by 
a particular lesion (related to speciﬁc behavioral symptoms), what would happen to a 
speciﬁc type of behavior if a certain part of the brain was lesioned (e.g., by an opera-
tion), what has happened to the vascular system of the brain, which areas of the brain 
are active in responding to a certain type of stimulus or performing a speciﬁc type of 
action, and how this activation pattern is changed when there is a lesion of a particular 
area, can all be addressed by various techniques. Most of them involve more or less 
direct registration or imaging of brain structures or of dynamic activation patterns in 
the brain. Techniques such as radiography, measurements of electrical currents, blood 
ﬂow, and metabolic changes, and magnetic resonance imaging related to the synaptic 
activity of brain cells are used.
Most of these methods involve fairly complex and indirect measurements and 
calculations, which will not be described in any detail here. The aim is mainly to give 
a general overview of the various types of methods and the main principles involved 
in each. 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
162
Methods that were used extensively in the past
Autopsy of brains for lesion analysis
The classical studies of Broca, Wernicke, and others in the late 19th century were based 
on the observation of linguistic symptoms in patients and post-mortem autopsies of 
their brains to identify characteristics of diﬀerent areas of the brain. This method was 
used extensively for a long time. Nowadays, as we shall see, lesion analysis (i.e., com-
paring lesioned brain structures to characteristics of a patient’s behavior) is most often 
based on imaging techniques.
Wada test (intracarotid sodium amytal test) 
The intracarotid sodium amytal (amobarbital) test (ISA) has been used since the 
1940s, when it was described by Wada (1949). It is used to study inter- and intra-
hemispheric diﬀerences, for example in handling language functions. If one injects 
amobarbital into one of the carotid arteries, the brain areas supplied by that artery are 
temporarily anesthetized. This makes it possible to study how each of the hemispheres 
handles language functions separately. This is important, since it mimics the eﬀects 
that a lesion or a surgical procedure might induce. The technique has been used es-
pecially for checking hemispheric functions before major surgery to one hemisphere, 
for example, in cases of epilepsy.
Cerebral angiography (radiography)
This method has been in use for a long time. It is a radiological technique for evaluat-
ing the cerebral vascular structure and can thus be used for diagnosing malformations, 
aneurysms, etc., aﬀecting the blood vessels. A contrast substance is injected through a 
catheter into the carotid artery and the blood vessels become visible in the angiogram. 
A certain risk of stroke is involved in this procedure.
Methods that are often used in neurolinguistic studies today
Static recording: Brain imaging
Computed tomography (CT). Computed tomography is a radiographic method 
in which a narrow beam of X-rays examines the brain in very thin slices. The X-ray 
beam rotates around the head, passes through it, and is recorded by detectors on the 
other side that measure the quality and quantity of the beam. From these detectors, we 
obtain images with shades of white, gray, and black for the various areas, depending 

Chapter 12. Methods of investigating the brain
163
on the X-ray attenuation (reduction in intensity). Data regarding absorbed photons 
from the X-ray are processed into a two-dimensional image of the slice of the brain. 
This is a complex mathematical procedure that makes it possible to study density, 
which provides information about lesions, etc. Hemorrhages and aneurysms can be 
seen as high-density lesions and cerebral infarctions, edemas, and cysts can be seen as 
low-density lesions. Tumors can be either high- or low-density. Contrast is sometimes 
enhanced by injecting contrast-enhancing agents into the intravascular space. The CT 
of a lesion tends to change over time, reﬂecting the diﬀerent stages in its life. CT has 
been used in many neurolinguistic studies since the 1970s.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). MRI measures the magnetic activity of 
the atomic nuclei of hydrogen (in water molecules). This is done by placing the brain 
in an external magnetic ﬁeld. This makes the hydrogen atoms align themselves in a 
single plane. By transmitting signals from an external radio frequency transmitter, 
extra energy is provided to the atoms and makes them rearrange themselves in diﬀer-
ent patterns. After the signal, they return to their earlier position, but ﬁrst discharge 
electromagnetic signals. These signals are recorded and the computer converts them 
into images in shades of white, gray, and black, representing diﬀerent strengths of the 
signals. This is a non-invasive method that does not even use X-rays. It also gives very 
clear images, with a somewhat better quality than CT images. 
Dynamic–recording: Electrical activity
Electroencephalography (EEG). EEG depicts electrical activity generated by brain 
cells. It represents the potential diﬀerences between two points on the scalp surface 
caused by the brain waves (electrical potentials) from the cortex below them. A num-
ber of metal electrodes (8 to 16) are placed on the scalp. In this way, brain waves can 
be recorded from areas in the diﬀerent lobes of the two hemispheres. The patterns are 
graphically represented and can then be compared for diﬀerent areas.
Spontaneous cortical activity is generated by the synaptic activity of the axons on 
the dendrites and thus there is more activity in areas where there are many dendrites, 
especially from pyramidal cells. The diﬀerent frequency ranges of electrical activity 
are represented by the Greek letters alpha, beta, gamma, theta, and delta. The waves 
can be between 25 and 200 microvolts with a frequency of 0.5 to 35 cycles per second. 
During an epileptic seizure, however, amplitudes as high as 1,000 microvolts may oc-
cur. Abnormal patterns may be irregular, with high spikes or reversed waves. Altered 
levels of consciousness can easily be detected and EEG has proven to be a very useful 
diagnostic tool.
Evoked or event-related potentials (ERP). When the central nervous system re-
acts to sensory stimulation, the electrical activity is referred to as evoked potentials. 
These potentials can be fairly small in amplitude (1 to 5 microvolts). They are recorded 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
164
by electrodes in the same way as for EEG. But since EEG is very sensitive to factors 
such as blinking, moving the head, etc., the small response speciﬁc to a stimulus might 
not be detected on its own. Consequently, an averaging technique is used in ERP mea-
surement, that is, the EEG is averaged over many events with the same stimulus, which 
eliminates disturbances, and reveals the actual response. The ERP is a typical series 
of positive and negative peaks, representing earlier and later stages of information 
processing. Negative peaks are named with an “N” plus the number of milliseconds 
from the stimulus onset, for example, N280. Positive peaks are named with a “P” plus 
the number of milliseconds from the stimulus onset, for example, P600. Peaks can also 
have sequence numbers, such as N1 or P3. The advantages of using ERPs for neurolin-
guistic (and other) research are that the technique is inexpensive and noninvasive, and 
that it allows ﬁne temporal measurements of cognitive processing.
Dynamic recording: Brain imaging
Regional cerebral blood ﬂow measurement (rCBF). This was the ﬁrst technique to give 
computerized pictures or maps of areas of activity during dynamic language use, such 
as when a subject is naming objects, reading aloud, etc. The technique measures how 
fast the blood passes through the diﬀerent areas of the brain. When a speciﬁc area of 
the brain is active, blood ﬂows through this area faster — in other words, the blood ﬂow 
is increased — since the blood is needed to provide the additional metabolic energy 
that is required. A short-lived radioactive isotope is dissolved in a solution and injected 
into an artery or inhaled. It can then be tracked with a gamma-ray camera with mul-
tiple scintillation detectors, which measures attenuated radiation around the head. A 
computer then maps the surface of the brain, with diﬀerent colors for diﬀerent levels of 
activity. Important ﬁndings from rCBF studies from the 1960s to 1980s include the fact 
that there is prefrontal activity during rest and bilateral activity in speech activities.
Positron emission tomography (PET). PET is another isotope technique, which 
registers physiological changes in brain cells by tagging radioactive positron isotopes 
with water molecules or glucose and injecting them into the body. Then the spatial 
distribution of positron (radiation) emitting radioisotopes and their dissipated energy 
can be measured. When an injected positron collides with an electron, they are both 
annihilated and two photons (gamma rays) are emitted, which travel in opposite di-
rections. These photons are detected by detectors circling the brain. Computer images 
are generated, where oxygen or glucose metabolism reﬂects the physiological changes 
in brain cells in patterns of neural activity representing cognitive activity. The spatial 
and temporal resolution is not optimal, but the technique is constantly being improved 
and has proven very valuable. One important ﬁnding made with this method was that 
focal brain damage causing aphasia also results in changes in the functioning of other, 
more distant areas.

Chapter 12. Methods of investigating the brain
165
Single photon emission tomography (SPECT). SPECT measures rCBF by using a 
technology similar to of the one used in PET. A radiotracer substance tagged with a ra-
diopharmaceutical is injected and the distribution of the radiopharmaceutical is mea-
sured. This is done with gamma-ray detecting cameras and tomographic techniques 
and the signal in this case is a single gamma ray. SPECT uses the point of gamma-ray 
emission and its trajectory. It provides three-dimensional rCBF images.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Functional MRI is a dynamic 
imaging technique, which can detect changes in regional blood oxygen levels as-
sociated with cortical neuronal activity, by using magnetic resonance imaging. For 
example, the so-called BOLD (Blood Oxygenation Level — Dependent) eﬀect results 
in increased fMRI signals when activation (synaptic ﬁring) increases in a particular 
region. Dynamic activation patterns can thus be studied when a subject is perform-
ing a linguistic task. Like MRI, this technique creates images with relatively high 
resolution. fMRI is faster than PET, which means that it can register a large number 
of separate measurements of functionally signiﬁcant signals during a short time span, 
but it is still slower than electrophysiological techniques. Rather complex calculations 
involving the correlation of so-called “voxels” (elementary volume units of the image 
matrix) which, it is assumed, reﬂect neural responses to stimuli, have to be done. This 
helps to overcome the strong background noise involved and the high sensitivity to 
factors such as heart rate, head motion, etc. In other dynamic methods (e.g., ERP), 
these kinds of factors, but not the background noise, are otherwise usually dealt with 
through subtraction, that is, statistical comparison of the stimulation condition and 
the resting state, to identify the actual eﬀects of the stimuli. 
Magnetoencephalography (MEG). MEG has high temporal resolution (like ERPs) 
and high spatial resolution as well, that is, it can localize neurophysiological events in 
small cerebral regions with some precision (better than ERPs). It is completely non-
invasive (involving no radioactive tracers) and measures electrical activity related to 
neural transmission more directly than metabolism or blood ﬂow data. It is also more 
suited for single-subject measurements and the study of individual variation, since it 
does not require group averaging (which is often used in PET and fMRI studies).
The neuromagnetometer used for MEG records very small changes in the mag-
netic ﬁelds which are generated in the brain (cortex) in response to a particular stimu-
lus (localized precisely in time). A SQUID (Superconducting Quantum Interference 
Device) is connected to the magnetometer (both are in liquid helium at a temperature 
close to absolute zero). Diﬀerent conﬁgurations of magnetic coils are used in order to 
reduce the inﬂuence of environmental magnetic sources, enhancing the spatial pre-
cision. Averaging over repeated stimulus presentations is also used and recorded as 
EMFs (evoked magnetic ﬁelds). The number of detector arrays can be as high as 24 to 
72 simultaneously; the detectors record EMFs from the whole surface of the head.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
166
Further reading
Bhatnagar, S. (2002). Neuroscience for the study of communicative disorders. Second Edition. 
Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Stemmer, B., & Whitaker, H. (Eds.) (1998). Handbook of neurolinguistics. San Diego: Academic 
Press.

Chapter 13
Modeling the brain
In this chapter:
• 
Basic ideas: Symbol processing and neural network 
models
• 
Making an ANN model
• 
Representations in ANN models
• 
Learning in ANN models
• 
Connectionist models of language production
Introduction
This chapter introduces some basic information about modeling language processing 
in artiﬁcial neural networks. It presents some basic ideas behind symbol processing 
models of the types that we can see in other chapters of the book (Chapters 3, 6 and 8) 
and neural network models. It takes a simple ANN model as example and then turns 
to an account of how representations can be treated in ANN models. On the basis of 
this information, we then take a look at learning in ANN models and, speciﬁcally, at 
examples of connectionist models of language production. Since ANN modeling is 
becoming increasingly popular in neurolinguistics, this basic information can hope-
fully be of some help in understanding studies using ANN techniques.
Basic ideas: Symbol processing and neural network models
Models of language processing are important and useful for neurolinguists. By means 
of simulation, or constructing a “suitably analogous apparatus on a computer,” a neu-
rolinguistic model can be evaluated. Thus, empirical evidence leads to the construc-
tion of a model, which is then simulated on the computer, providing more empirical 
evidence, and the process continues (Eikmeyer & Schade, 1991).

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
168
There are two main types of modeling: symbol processing and neural network 
modeling. For a long time, symbolic mechanisms were assumed in neurolinguistic 
modeling and most models were symbolic. But now, as an alternative, artiﬁcial neural 
(ANN) network models — also called connectionist, PDP (parallel distributed pro-
cessing), or subsymbolic models — can be used to model cognitive functions below 
the symbol level as well. 
How, then, can we describe the main diﬀerences between the two types of model-
ing? In conceptualizing the brain and its functions, they diﬀer in terms of their levels 
of conceptual abstraction and formal realization. 
1. While symbol processing models view the brain as a physical symbol system, 
ANNs see it as a network of (formal) interlinked neurons. 
2. Representation in symbol processing is done according to the computer metaphor, 
in a yes-no fashion. The dynamic ﬂow of activation is, however, emphasized in 
ANN, using a brain metaphor, which, although coarse, is closer to neuroanatomi-
cal/ neurophysiological reality, and working with representations of degree. 
3. Yet another important diﬀerence is that symbol processing models assume a cen-
tral processor that performs the symbol manipulations, while ANNs have many 
processors which interact through the ﬂow of activation. This approach assumes 
that cognition or intelligence emerges and can be modeled from the simultane-
ous interaction of many small, interconnected units with many connections (like 
neurons). ANNs are, thus, “brainlike” (Chapman, 1991, pp. 35–40) in that they are 
made up of a great many components. 
So-called hybrid models, combining features of symbolic and ANN modeling, also 
exist, as do suggestions for the combination of diﬀerent symbolic and ANN models to 
handle diﬀerent components of language processing (e.g., Pinker, 1996).
The main reason for developing ANN models was that traditional symbolic mod-
els did not perform well on certain tasks that the brain seems to handle easily, such as 
speech comprehension and face recognition. The collective, parallel, and interactive 
workings of many simple elements seem to be able to perform the complex computa-
tions needed for these functions. Other reasons are that learning is possible through 
diﬀering wiring of the connections between the simple units (perhaps the most im-
portant feature of ANNs), that networks are more noise-resistant, and that they can 
be self-organizing. 
Some of the aspects of how the brain works are certainly relevant for modeling 
and especially for ANN models: 
1. There are many simple processing elements (nodes), capable of transferring a one-
dimensional type of information, called activation. 

Chapter 13. Modeling the brain
169
2. Each of the nodes is connected to many others. The structure of the connecting 
network and the eﬃciency of individual connections (weights) determine the 
network’s functioning. 
3. The connections are the most important aspect of the model. The structure of the 
network is mostly ﬁxed, but the eﬃciency of connections can often be modiﬁed 
by learning rules, which enable the network to learn new tasks.
Making an ANN model
Models exist at diﬀerent levels of abstraction; neurobiological models keep the closest 
to biological reality, while application-oriented models, on the other hand, are very 
much abstracted from biology. The models that we are concerned with here, functional 
models (or Interactive Activation Models, IAM), are intermediate in abstraction; they 
resemble biological processes but are also structured on the basis psychological as-
sumptions.
Some of the relevant facts about neurons are the following:
• 
that neurons collect electrochemical pulses and, if the sum of pulses is strong 
enough, generate an action potential;
• 
that the brain is assumed to contain about 1011 neurons, each of which is con-
nected to many other components (about 104) and performs some relatively 
simple computation, mainly on the basis of information it receives from its local 
connections; 20% of these neurons are in the neocortex;
• 
that cortical neurons have an average of 4,000 connections to other neurons;
• 
that this gives 3.2 × 1013 connections in the neocortex alone;
• 
that roughly 2.8 × 1013 connections are modiﬁable.
 
(Murre & Sturdy, 1995)
What processes, then, are relevant to model in a functional model of this type? The 
general feature of having a large number of simple processing elements (nodes) which 
can transfer activation is important, as are rich network interconnections between the 
nodes. How the network structure looks is of great importance and how the weights 
are assigned to individual connections is a key feature. An important question is how 
the network can learn to perform tasks based on the change of weights.
Modeling a neuron
What do neurons in the brain and nodes in artiﬁcial neural networks have in common 
and how do they diﬀer? 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
170
ANN models are based, in a rough and simpliﬁed way, on the local structure of 
nervous systems. This means that they do not aim to be direct models of real nervous 
systems and that not all aspects of such systems are modeled. The main similarity of 
nodes in these mathematical-computational models to the neurons in the central ner-
vous system is that excitatory and inhibitory activation signals from connections with 
other cells or nodes are summed up to decide whether or not a cell or node should be 
activated and pass on activation to the next cell. A threshold activation value has to be 
passed in order for activation to take place.
In a neuron, activation is collected by the dendrites and sent on as voltages to the 
soma. If the activation threshold is exceeded, the axon passes the output current to the 
synapse, where a chemical connection to dendrites of other cells takes place.
A formal or modeled neuron (or node) has an activation strength and receives 
input activations which are added up; if the threshold value of 1 is exceeded, an acti-
vation or inhibition of 1 is passed on to the next node. The synapse is simulated as a 
weight, that is, a number.
Input 1 
Input 2 
Output (1 if total input sum exceeds threshold,
otherwise 0)
…
Input 3 
weights
node (neuron)
with activation threshold
Figure 13.1. Formal neuron
Input 1   1
Input 2
              1
OR-gate
1
Output = 
Input 1 OR 
Input 2 
Figure 13.2. OR network
Input 1   1
Input 2
              1
AND-gate
2
Output = 
Input 1 AND  
Input 2 
Figure 13.3. AND network
            -1
Input 1
NOT-gate
0
Output = 
NOT Input 1 
Figure 13.4. NOT network

Chapter 13. Modeling the brain
171
There are, however, several diﬀerences between real neurons and formal neurons; 
for example, there are diﬀerent neurotransmitters in the brain, which have diﬀerent 
eﬀects, whereas the artiﬁcial networks only activate or inhibit the subsequent neuron, 
and they simulate the magnitude of the output instead of the ﬁring rate.
A very basic kind of ANN is the XOR network in Figure 13.5 above, which illus-
trates how a network can function.
What are the dynamics of how an ANN system functions? According to Murre 
and Goebel (1996), single nodes operate by:
• 
Propagation: they calculate net input (sum from other nodes);
• 
Activation: they transform net input into current activation value;
• 
Output: they transform their current activation value into the current output value 
of the node.
There are diﬀerent possible activation functions, such as linear or threshold functions; 
if so-called backpropagation is used, there is often a logistic function (an S-shaped 
activation curve). Most networks have recurrent connections, resulting in interactive 
stimulation. This means that node A activates node B, which in turn activates node A 
again. A decay parameter can be used to regulate how fast activation will recede. The 
output function is often a simple linear function.
Activations can be updated according to three main activation schedules:
1. Asynchronous random (at each iteration, a single node is selected randomly and 
only its activation is updated);
2. Synchronously (activations of all nodes are updated simultaneously);
3. Sequentially, or feedforward (all nodes within a given layer are updated synchro-
nously, but layers themselves are updated in a strict order from input layer to 
output layer — there cannot be recurrent connections).
In addition, there are other patterns such as “winner takes all” activation.
We can illustrate this by means of a simple network for word recognition, which 
is able to distinguish between three diﬀerent words. If we imagine a network for word 
Hidden units
                        1
                                                    1
           a           -1                              c
Input
Output
Units 
 
                                                e unit
                      -1
           b                                             d       1
                        1
Exclusive-or (XOR) network
1
1
1
Figure 13.5. XOR network
(Figures 13.2 to 13.5 adapted from Franklin, 1999)

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
172
recognition, with nodes at the letter level and the word level, it might work as follows. 
We have three possible words — HIT, BIT, and BIG — represented by nodes at the 
word level. There are nodes at the letter level for H and B in word-initial position, I in 
word-medial position, and T and G in word-ﬁnal position. The input letters presented 
to the network are B, I, and T. The ﬁrst thing that happens is that the letter nodes for 
initial B, medial I, and ﬁnal T are activated. They send activation to the word nodes, 
which compete for enough activation to pass their threshold level. Finally, the word 
node for BIT wins by receiving the most activation and the word BIT is the output of 
the network.
The network works according to the Hebbian learning rule:
When an axon of cell A is near enough to excite a cell B and repeatedly or persistently 
takes part in ﬁring it, some growth process or metabolic change takes place in one or 
both cells such that A’s eﬃciency, as one of the cells ﬁring B, is increased. (Hebb, 1949, 
p. 62 (traced back to William James))
This can explain the formation of cell assemblies, or attractor-like conﬁgurations of 
densely connected nodes. Cell assemblies are important aspects of how activation of 
brain cells works, how memory and learning can take place, and how language can be 
handled by the brain.
Representations in ANN models
Representations are handled in diﬀerent ways in diﬀerent types of networks. The ba-
sic types are local or distributed representations, while an intermediate alternative is 
feature representation.
1. In a local representation, one unit represents one object, one concept, or one 
hypothesis. We have a one-to-one correspondence between units and items to 
be represented. This is easy to understand and modeling can be done at the fully 
cognitive level. For example, if we want to model the dynamics of thoughts, we 
can use one unit for each “concept.” (There is no symbol manipulation via rules 
and no stored program, as we would have in a symbolic computer model.) 
2. Networks can have distributed representation. This means that each unit (node) 
may participate in the representation of several items and conversely each item 
is represented by a pattern of activity over several diﬀerent units. Distributed 
representation is much more computationally compact than local representation. 
This type of model represents at the subcognitive level, since individual units are 
not interpreted. Cognition emerges only at the whole system level. An advantage 
of this method is that all nodes carry some of the burden in representing an item. 
An item can only be found less directly; since it is more dynamically coded, it 

Chapter 13. Modeling the brain
173
can more elegantly engage in dynamic processes and it does not have to be coded 
manually, but is the result of learning (Eikmeyer & Schade, 1991).
3. Featural representation can be seen as something between local and distributed 
representation. Individual items are represented distributively by patterns of activ-
ity over sets of units and the individual units also locally represent features of the 
given item. Features can either be programmed into the system or arise during 
the training process. This can lead to spontaneous generalization. The model can 
be said to represent at the microcognitive level. At the conceptual level, patterns 
of activation interact in complex ways. Thoughts are activation vectors. Units can, 
however, still be interpreted and inferences can sometimes be discerned. The cog-
nitive level is emergent.
Some of the useful features of ANN models in general are the following:
• 
They do not need a central executive, but work with distributed control and all 
decisions are made based on local information. (Thus, no eﬀort is spent on gather-
ing global information and arriving at global decisions.)
• 
Default assignments are automatic: an input gives an output, that is, the network 
always does something.
• 
They give complete patterns, which allows content addressability. Databases can 
be small.
• 
They have graceful degradation (i.e., if a system degrades, it continues to operate 
at a lower level instead of failing completely), and this makes them less brittle.
• 
They model spontaneous generalization. They induce global behaviors beyond the 
scope of any of their individual units, that is, emergent behaviors.
• 
Learning is possible.
Learning in ANN models
We will now consider how learning can be achieved in ANN models. The output of 
a unit (node) is its activation. The pattern of activation at time t is the network’s con-
ﬁguration at t. (This corresponds to short-term memory, or what is represented at t, 
where t is a speciﬁc point in time.) The pattern of weights (like long-term memory) 
represents what the network knows and determines how it responds to a given input. 
Learning takes place via the changing of weights.
An ANN is built on a directed graph (or digraph), which is called the architec-
ture of the network. The units of the network are the nodes of the digraph, while the 
weighted links are the arcs of the digraph. The set of all its possible weight matrices 
comprises its weight space. For example, the XOR network in Figure 13.5 has the 
weight space speciﬁed in Figure 13.6 below.

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
174
Learning involves a search problem in the weight space, where the network tries 
to ﬁnd the matrix that will do what is required in the best way. (This can be compared 
to the search for a path through state space in symbolic artiﬁcial intelligence).
There are diﬀerent ways to make networks learn. Learning can be supervised or 
unsupervised. Supervised learning uses hard-wired weights and connections speciﬁed 
by a human designer and can be used when there is a carefully thought-out model 
that works. Unsupervised learning can, for example, use self-organizing networks 
(see below).
Error correction (supervised practice) means that responses are compared to tar-
get output and the weights are adjusted to give an output that approaches the target 
output. An example of this is backpropagation, where a layered, feedforward network 
(i.e., a network of layers of units where each unit sends output only to units in the 
subsequent layer) is trained on a corpus of input-output exemplars. Each output is 
compared with the desired output of the exemplar and the error is calculated. The 
error is then propagated back through network and used to modify the weights so as 
to reduce the error.
Reinforcement (graded learning) calculates a numerical score over a sequence 
of trials, which is the value of a cost function; the weights are then adjusted to lower 
the cost. (The cost function comes from the designer; in human brains, it might be 
assumed to have evolved.) This type of learning works rather like the “getting hot, 
getting cold” game.
Stochastic learning means that random or Hebbian weight change is accepted if the 
cost decreases or by some probability distribution. It uses trial and error, trying out 
random weight changes and checking the cost to see if it has decreased. If it has, the 
network accepts the change; otherwise, it goes back again. It can also apply a Hebbian 
weight change. (Hebb’s (1949) rule: increase the synaptic strength between any two 
connected neurons that ﬁre almost simultaneously.)
Self-organization involves weights being modiﬁed in response to the input. For 
example, the network can see which output was the strongest for a particular input and 
strengthen these connections even more while weakening neighboring connections a 
little. Repetition then takes place and the process recurs. Self-organizing maps, devel-
oped by Kohonen (1989), are an important approach to learning in neural networks. 
They are similar to modularity in that they translate delimiting constraints into neural 
a
b
c
d
e
a
0
0
1
-1
0
b
0
0
-1
1
0
c
0
0
0
0
1
d
0
0
0
0
1
e
0
0
0
0
0
Figure 13.6. A weight matrix representing the weight space for an XOR network

Chapter 13. Modeling the brain
175
network architectures. They are based on local inhibition but also involve topological 
organization of the inhibitory connections. When networks are trained with stimuli 
that have spatial relations, these tend to be reproduced by the maps. They also have 
some similarity to primary visual areas. Another example is speech recognition, where 
the network produces a phonotopic map, in which similar speech sounds are grouped 
together. The spoken word becomes a trajectory activating areas on the map (Murre 
& Goebel, 1996).
Connectionist models of language production
We now turn to some other examples of how language production can be modeled in 
ANN, building largely on the work of Eikmeyer and Schade (1991). Some studies that 
exemplify this method are those by Dell and Reich (1981) and Dell (1986). (See also 
the section on simulation in Chapter 6 of this book.)
In a local network, linguistic items can be represented by single nodes. The nodes 
can be organized in layers representing linguistic levels; in other words, they contain 
linguistic items of the same size and type, such as words, syllables, syllable types, or 
phonemes. The network has excitatory links connecting nodes from diﬀerent levels 
in part-whole relations, which can be bidirectional (i.e., provide feedback). Inhibitory 
connections within levels can be used and competition can be modeled in this way 
by lateral inhibition between items on the same level. The decay rate of activation for 
nodes can also be used to model, for example, features of aphasia, such as anomia 
and agrammatism. At certain points in time, a node with the highest activation on all 
levels is selected for production and these choices model linguistic sequentialization 
(Eikmeyer & Schade, 1991; Murre & Goebel, 1996).
In artiﬁcial intelligence models using interactive activation networks with local 
symbol representations, nodes can be identiﬁed with linguistic units in the input to the 
network. The input causes a ﬂow of interacting activations until the network stabilizes. 
The end conﬁguration is then the basis for a solution, recognition, or response. This 
type of model does not include learning algorithms; the process is only studied after 
learning is completed.
PDP (Parallel Distributed Processing) models were pioneering network models 
developed by Rumelhart and McClelland in the 1980s, which focused on the learning 
process itself and learning algorithms, for example, in studies of visual letter percep-
tion and the simulation of children’s acquisition of verb tense inﬂection (Rumelhart 
& McClelland, 1986).

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
176
Modeling lesions
In neurolinguistics, it is of some interest to build or use models of some part of lan-
guage processing and then to model lesions in the network in order to examine speciﬁc 
features of neurolinguistic disorders. There are two basic ways of doing this:
1. some nodes can be removed (if it is a distributed network);
2. the interchange or ﬂow of activation among the nodes can be distorted or even 
interrupted.
There are a number of ways to impede the ﬂow of activation:
• 
the activation interchange within the semantic layer can be manipulated; 
• 
the excitatory links between semantic layer and the word layer can be reduced in 
strength;
• 
phonological encoding can be obstructed by manipulating the connections among 
the word layer, the syllable layer, the phoneme layer, and the layer of phonological 
features.
Lesions in the semantic layer result in the selection of non-intended concepts (which 
can be spelled out correctly). Lesions aﬀecting the connection between semantics and 
words on a general level reduce the strengths of all connections, which leads to word-
ﬁnding problems. Slower activation and more noise interference increase the risk 
that the wrong word will be activated. Phonological cues can also aﬀect this. Lesions 
aﬀecting the connection between semantics and words on a speciﬁc level reduce the 
strengths of some connections, which produce sound associates as output. Lesions 
below the word layer lead to phonological problems. Slower activation means that not 
all the sounds of words are activated; some come out right, some wrong, and some not 
at all. The result is neologistic jargon. In distributed networks, there are more degrees 
of freedom.
Some examples of how lesions aﬀecting language functions can be simulated can 
be found in Eikmeyer and Schade (1991, pp. 163–167). According to Eikmeyer and 
Schade, the proper procedure in simulating language processes in neural networks is 
to relate the simulation to a program, which is then related to empirical evidence; this 
is necessary in order to evaluate the model. Modeling is thus a “circular” procedure, 
based on a theory and/or empirical observations, and evaluated against data and 
theoretical claims. (See also Chapter 6, where lesion/symptom simulations by Dell 
and colleagues are reported.)

Chapter 13. Modeling the brain
177
Further reading
Arbib, M. (Ed.) (1998). The handbook of brain theory and neural networks. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Franklin, S. (1999). Artiﬁcial minds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Murre, J., & Goebel, R. (1996). Connectionist modeling. In T. Dijkstra & K. de Smedt (Eds.), Com-
putational psycholinguistics (pp. 49–81). London: Taylor & Francis.


Chapter 14
Some basic concepts in neuroscience
In this chapter:
• 
Gross neuroanatomy
• 
Neurophysiology
• 
Cellular organization (cytoarchitecture): 
Brodmann areas
Introduction
This chapter is intended to be a guide to some of the basics of the anatomy and physiol-
ogy of the brain that the reader needs to understand the subject matter of this book.
The focus is on both general information and information that is speciﬁcally im-
portant for language functions, mostly higher mental functions relevant for language 
and cognition in communication. The most important brain structures in this regard 
are presented in a very selective summary.
Gross neuroanatomy
The central nervous system (CNS) consists of the brain and spinal cord, while the 
peripheral nervous system (PNS) comprises the peripheral nerves between the CNS 
and other body parts
Cerebrum
If we look at the surface of the brain, we basically see the cerebrum, which is cov-
ered by the cortex; the cortex consists of a layer of gray matter, that is, nerve cells or 
neurons, about one centimeter thick. Underneath the cortex, we ﬁnd white matter, 
or ﬁbers connecting diﬀerent parts of the brain. There are also many subcortical 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
180
structures, such as the cingulate, various nuclei, and the brain stem. At the back of 
the brain, we ﬁnd the cerebellum.
Corpus callosum 
Cingulate gyrus 
Ventral pons 
Tegmentum
Anterior 
commissure 
Cerebellum 
Primary 
visual cortex 
Parieto-occipital 
sulcus
Figure 14.1. Sagittal view: Cortex, brain stem, cerebellum, cingulate, corpus callosum, ante-
rior commissure
Lateral
ventricle
Third
ventricle
Hypothalamus
Deep
nuclei
Thalamus
Figure 14.2. Schematic cross-section of the cerebrum and the diencephalon 

Chapter 14. Some basic concepts in neuroscience
181
The brain is divided into two halves or hemispheres, the left and the right. They 
look quite similar, but there are many diﬀerences in function; speciﬁc functions may 
be lateralized more to one hemisphere or the other, and there are also some diﬀerences 
in the two hemispheres’ anatomy.
The two hemispheres are connected by ﬁbers of white matter, most importantly 
the corpus callosum, but also the anterior commissure.
Each of the hemispheres can be divided into four major lobes: the frontal lobe, 
the temporal lobe, the parietal lobe, and the occipital lobe.
The cortex of the lobes is “folded” into convolutions or gyri and in between the 
gyri there are sulci or ﬁssures. Two ﬁssures are particularly noticeable: the Rolandic 
(or central) ﬁssure divides the frontal lobe from the parietal lobe, while the Sylvian 
(or lateral) ﬁssure separates the frontal lobe from the temporal lobe. The gyri form a 
speciﬁc pattern, which makes it possible to use them for gross orientation. For exam-
ple, you can refer to the ﬁrst temporal gyrus or the third frontal gyrus, the prerolandic 
or motor gyrus, the postrolandic or somatosensory gyrus, the angular, or the supra-
marginal gyrus. All of these terms are often used in neurolinguistic descriptions.
A major division can also be made between the anterior (or frontal) and the 
posterior (parietal-temporal-occipital) parts of the brain. Furthermore, deep or sub-
cortical structures, which are more ancient in development and more “basic,” can be 
separated from surface or cortical structures.
In neurolinguistics, the distinctions among the lobes and the divisions between 
anterior and posterior, left and right, and subcortical and cortical are often used for 
reference, as are the areas deﬁned by the gyri and ﬁssures.
Some of the major functional features of these brain areas are:
Frontal
lobe
Parietal
lobe
Occipital
lobe
Temporal
lobe
Cerebellum
Brain
stem
Lateral sulcus
/Sylvian ﬁssure
Central
sulcus
/Rolandic
ﬁssure
Figure 14.3. Lateral view: lobes and sulci (ﬁssures) 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
182
• 
Frontal lobes: planning, decision-making, initiative, motor functions;
• 
Parietal lobes: somatosensory perception;
• 
Occipital lobes: visual perception;
• 
Temporal lobes: auditory perception;
• 
Anterior parts: more active, productive;
• 
Posterior parts: more receptive, analytical;
In the anterior parts of the brain, the motor cortex has been fairly well described; it is 
often diagrammed in the form of a “homunculus” (a miniature human), that is, with 
the diﬀerent areas of function (i.e., body parts) projected with the size of each one 
proportional to how ﬁne-grained its function is. Other areas have less anatomically 
speciﬁed functions.
In the posterior parts, the cortical sensory centers (auditory, visual, and somato-
sensory) have also been more clearly localized and described (the somatosensory area 
is also presented as a homunculus based on the tactile sensation related to the diﬀerent 
body parts). The association areas between the primary sensory centers have functions 
that are less clearly localized.
Some of the functions that are suggested to be localized to one hemisphere or the 
other are related to the less speciﬁed areas of the anterior and posterior parts of the 
brain. For example, many aspects of language and speech, especially grammar and 
phonology, seem to be more lateralized to the left hemisphere, while, for example, 
tonal patterns and visuospatial orientation seem to be more lateralized to the right 
hemisphere.
The earlier developed, subcortical structures of the brain are essential for con-
sciousness and attention (the reticular formation of the brain stem), as well as basic 
instincts and emotions (the limbic system), which activate the brain. The cortex con-
tains more controlled and speciﬁed higher cognitive functions, which partly inhibit 
the more “primitive” functions.
Blood supply
The most important blood vessel supplying the brain from the point of view of lan-
guage, is the cerebral medial artery, which is in turn supplied by the carotid artery. It 
spreads out like a tree over most of the more important cortical areas for language and 
speech (around the Sylvian ﬁssure). Other important blood vessels are the posterior 
and superior cerebral arteries, which meet the “tree” of the cerebral medial artery 
in the so-called “watershed areas,” where the thinnest vessels at the periphery of the 
“tree” are very vulnerable to brain damage, since small coagulated blood clots can eas-
ily deprive them of blood supply. Lesions aﬀecting language functions are very often 
caused by stroke, most often by infarction: coagulated blood seals oﬀ part of the blood 

Chapter 14. Some basic concepts in neuroscience
183
supply and thereby deprives an area supplied by the blood vessel of oxygen, causing 
cell death after a while. An embolism involves a small piece of coagulated blood com-
ing loose from a bigger clot and getting stuck in a narrow blood vessel. A hemorrhage, 
whereby the wall of a blood vessel bursts and blood is pumped out of the blood vessel, 
is another type of lesion aﬀecting the blood supply.
Cerebellum
The cerebellum (see Figure 14.1) handles the coordination of movements. A lesion 
aﬀecting the cerebellum can lead to ataxia, that is, a lack of coordination of move-
ment, for example when the patient tries to change directions while walking. Such 
coordination problems can also aﬀect articulation. Imaging studies of brain activation 
show that other speech and language functions also require participation from the 
cerebellum.
Deep and subcortical structures
The role of subcortical structures for language and speech is less mapped out than that 
of the cortical structures, but several such structures do seem to play important roles. 
The limbic area, which comprises the cingulate gyrus (a deep medial cortical area), 
handles basic instincts and emotions. It is therefore vital for motivation, aﬀect, etc., in 
language and communication, as in other areas of activity. (See Figure 14.1.)
The brain stem regulates consciousness and cortical tone, and is therefore essen-
tial for being awake and aroused enough to communicate.
The thalamus acts as a “switchboard” between nerve ﬁbers from the brain and 
diﬀerent areas of the body. It consists of a variety of nuclei with diﬀerent functions, 
some of which are important for language and speech functions.
Neurophysiology
The nerve cells or neurons constitute the gray matter of the cortex. There are also so-
called glia cells, which fulﬁll more supportive functions. Neuronal activity consists of 
neurons being activated in patterns for diﬀerent functions.
The nerve cell (neuron)
Each neuron has a body or soma, which contains the core of the cell. Dendrites 
branch out from the soma. The dendrites and the soma can receive activation from 
other cells. The cell also has one major “outgoing” process, called the axon, through 

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
184
which activation can be transmitted to another cell. The axon is surrounded by a 
sheath of myelin in sections. The electrical nerve signal can be speeded up by the 
conducting features of the myelin.
The bodies and dendrites of neurons can be grouped together into a nucleus. They 
also form layers which make up the surface of the brain, the cortex or gray matter. 
Nerve ﬁbers run in tracts of so-called white matter (because of the white myelin).
The synapse
A synapse is the actual transmission of activation between neurons. At the end of 
each axon there is an end plate (terminal bouton). The end plate adjacent to another 
cell can, when it is activated through the axon, release a neurotransmitter substance 
and activate or inhibit activation from the end plate over the synaptic cleft to the next 
cell. There are a number of diﬀerent transmitter substances, such as acetylcholine. 
Activation is therefore a chemical process as well as an electrical one. As a transmitter 
substance is emitted from the end plate, the body or dendrite of the next cell reacts by 
becoming receptive for activation (its membrane becomes permeable to the transmit-
ter substance). 
A neuron can receive activation from a number of axons from diﬀerent neurons. 
Each cell has a certain threshold that determines the level of activation which is 
needed for the cell to actually be activated. The incoming activation (and inhibition) 
from diﬀerent axons is constantly being summed up; when activation reaches the 
threshold level, the cell is activated and ﬁres activation through its own neuron on to 
another cell.
Dendrites 
Nucleus
Myelin sheath 
Axon 
Cell body
Synapse 
Figure 14.4. Neuron

Chapter 14. Some basic concepts in neuroscience
185
In this way, patterns of activation arise for diﬀerent activities of the brain. Acti-
vation is also sent through nerve ﬁbers to the muscles in the rest of the body, while 
incoming signals received from diﬀerent parts of the body via nerve ﬁbers activate 
nerve cells in the brain. Signals from the diﬀerent sensory channels are projected onto 
speciﬁc areas of the cortex.
Cellular organization (cytoarchitecture): Brodmann areas
Based on the organization of the cortex in six cellular layers with diﬀerent architec-
tures, as seen under the microscope, Brodmann (1909) identiﬁed 50 diﬀerent regions. 
The Brodmann area numbers are used to refer to speciﬁc areas.
Important Brodmann areas for language and communication:
Primary sensory cortex (postcentral gyrus): 1, 2, 3
Primary motor cortex (precentral gyrus): 4
Primary visual cortex (medial occipital lobe): 17
Primary auditory cortex (Heschl’s gyrus): 41, 42
Sensory association cortex (superior parietal lobe): 5, 7
Association language cortex, Wernicke’s area (superior temporal gyrus): 22
Motor speech cortex, Broca’s area (lower third frontal convolution): 44, 45
Supramarginal gyrus: 40
Angular gyrus: 39
Occipitial-temporal lobe border: 37
Dendrite of 
receiving neuron 
Terminal 
bouton 
Synaptic versicles 
Mitochondrion 
Postsynaptic membrane
Synaptic cleft 
Figure 14.5. Synapse

Introduction to Neurolinguistics
186
Hearing
The central auditory area is situated in the ﬁrst temporal gyrus. Adjacent to this area 
is a larger area that further analyzes the content of what is perceived auditorily, for 
instance, speech. 
Figure 14.6. Brodmann map

Chapter 14. Some basic concepts in neuroscience
187
Vision
The central area for vision lies at the back of the occipital lobe. Adjacent to the visual 
cortex is an area that further analyzes what is perceived visually, such as pictures or 
printed letters.
Sensation
Sensations from diﬀerent parts of the body are projected onto the somatosensory 
cortex in the postrolandic gyrus of the parietal lobe. This area also has adjacent areas 
for further analysis, for example, an area next to the area for sensations from the ar-
ticulatory organs of the mouth (the lips, tongue, etc.) can evaluate speech movements 
of the mouth.
Motor system
The nerve signals for the activation of muscles in diﬀerent parts of the body are sent 
out from the motor cortex in the prerolandic gyrus of the frontal lobe. Immediately 
anterior to this area are areas for the control and “programming” of movements. Large 
areas of the frontal lobes also monitor activity more holistically and control the work 
of the rest of the brain.
