
Language and the Brain


Language
and the Brain
A SLIM GUIDE TO
NEUROLINGUISTICS
Jonathan R. Brennan
1

3
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford, OX2 6DP,
United Kingdom
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship,
and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of
Oxford University Press in the UK and in certain other countries.
© Jonathan R. Brennan 2022
The moral rights of the author have been asserted
Impression: 1
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by licence, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reprographics
rights organization. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Data available
Library of Congress Control Number: 2021947523
ISBN 978–0–19–881475–7 (Hbk)
ISBN 978–0–19–881476–4 (Pbk)
DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.001.0001
Printed and bound by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
Links to third-party websites are provided by Oxford in good faith and
for information only. Oxford disclaims any responsibility for the materials
contained in any third-party website referenced in this work.

For Lisa


Contents
Acknowledgments
viii
List of figures
x
1. Introduction
1
2. The toolbox
18
3. Sounds in the brain
44
4. A neural code for speech
62
5. Activating words
82
6. Representing meaning
100
7. Structure and prediction
116
8. Composing sentences
139
9. Building dependencies
156
10. Wrapping up
166
Abbreviations
174
Glossary of terms
175
International Phonetic Alphabet for English
178
Notes
179
Figure acknowledgments
186
References
191
Index
204

Acknowledgments
This book is only possible due to the insight, generosity, and support of a
great many people. To begin, I owe an indescribable debt to my mentors
for their time, energy, and wisdom which goes far beyond teaching me
“how to be a cognitive scientist” (they did that too): Liina Pylkka¨nen,
Robin Queen, and Rick Lewis.
As an actual document, rather than some vague idea in the back of my
mind, I am grateful for and in awe of the hard work and editorial insights
of Julia Steer and her team at OUP.
A wonderful aspect of my little corner of science is the amazing group
of people who are working on all things relating to language, cogni-
tion, and the brain. I am very lucky to be able to call these people “my
colleagues.” Special thanks goes to Doug Bemis, Julie Boland, Suzanne
Dikker, Dave Embick, John Hale, Matt Husband, Ioulia Kovelman,
Ellen Lau, Lisa Levinson, Alec Marantz, Andrea Martin, Lars Meyer,
Chistophe Pallier, Colin Phillips, David Poeppel, Hugh Rabagliati, Tim
Roberts, Ed Stabler, Jon Sprouse, Sarah Van Wagenen, Ming Xiang, and
Eytan Zweig. (Many morenames couldbe added tothis already long list.)
My friend and office neighbor Sam Epstein in particular had a tremen-
dous influence on my understanding of how (and how not) to link brains
and language; I only wish he were here to read the result.
The book developed out of disorganized notes and slides that first sur-
faced in the classroom. I’m lucky to have been joined there by many
spectacular students. If they are a reflection of the future of our field,
we’re in pretty great shape. Almost every page bears some impression of
the conversations from those classes, and from walking down the hall,
in the lab, or on the way to get a cup of coffee. In particular, I must
acknowledge Jeonghwa Cho, Lauretta Cheng, Justin Craft, Tamarae
Hildebrandt, Chiawen Lo, Emily Sabo, Tzu-yun Tung, Neelima Wagley,

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ix
Rachel Weissler, and also students at the 2013 and 2017 Linguistic So-
ciety of America Summer Schools, and the 2018 Linguistic Society of
Korea Winter School.
Finally, there is no way – no way at all – this book would ever have
happened without the intellectual and emotional support of my part-
ner, Lisa Levinson, and the truly boundless energy of our three children.
Thank you.

List of ﬁgures
1. Auditory localization in the barn owl.
6
2. Two strategies for building structure.
7
3. Over 150 years of language in the brain.
11
4. Three views of the author’s brain.
19
5. The central nervous system.
20
6. The neuron.
23
7. The deficit/lesion method.
28
8. The fMRI method.
32
9. Electrophysiological methods.
36
10. Auditory pathway.
45
11. Speech information unfolds on multiple time-scales.
46
12. The neurogram.
50
13. Analysis by synthesis.
60
14. A dual-stream model for speech perception.
63
15. The neural representation of phonemes.
65
16. Voxel-based lesion symptom mapping (VLSM).
84
17. The time-course and localization of lexical activation.
88
18. Stages of spoken-word recognition.
93
19. The semantic system.
103
20. Semantic dementia.
105
21. Components of sentence structure.
117
22. The N400 event-related potential.
121
23. Predictability and the N400.
125
24. How semantic predictions might unfold.
130
25. The P600 ERP.
132
26. How syntactic predictions might unfold.
135
27. Prediction dynamics.
137
28. A combinatoric brain network.
141

LIST OF FIGURES
xi
29. Simple composition and the anterior temporal lobe.
145
30. Syntax in the posterior temporal lobe.
151
31. Dependency processing in the LIFG.
159


1
Introduction
Humans use language. Other animals don’t. Let’s go ahead and start
there. If you ask someone “why?” they might give the perfectly rea-
sonable answer that humans have human brains, and human brains
are equipped to use human language. That’s not all so different from
observing that I’m never going to be able to find pollen like a honey-
bee or learn to sing the song of a starling because I’m neither a bee nor a
songbird. Seriously, when it comes to birdsong, I’m no good. I lack what
the ethologist Peter Marler (1991) called the “instinct to learn” that par-
ticular skill. So, what is it about the human brain that make it able to use
language?
The pursuit of this question is the focus of intense research across
a whole range of scientific disciplines, including language scientists
interested in uncovering the mental computations and representations
that make language possible, and neuroscientists whose focus is on how
brains are wired in order to learn and use information. I’m sorry to say
that scientists don’t yet have a comprehensive answer to how this all
works (well, not too sorry. If we did, I’d be out of a job). What we do
have is a firm foundation of careful observations and compelling theo-
ries, along with a whole host of avenues of active research. This book
introduces you to this exciting field: neurolinguistics.
We’ll discuss how the brain transforms waves of sound pressure into
meaningful words, how meaning itself is represented by large networks
of neurons, and how brain regions work together to make sense of the
never-heard-before phrases and sentences that you encounter, and make
yourself, every day. These topics, and a whole host of others discussed
ahead, are all pieces in the very large puzzle facing neurolinguistics.
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0001

2
INTRODUCTION
I want you to learn how these pieces are starting to fit together. But, if
you are like me, you don’t work on a puzzle just to see the picture at
the end. It’s the act of solving the puzzle – even finding how to place
one particularly tricky piece – that is satisfying. So along with facts and
figures, I’m going to spend quite a bit of time talking about questions.
What are the questions that have helped to establish some of the founda-
tions for neurolinguistics? What questions are guiding current research,
and where might they be leading us even if we’re not there yet?
Here’s the thing: Observations, facts, results, or findings – the typical
“stuff ” of science – are really only as good as the question they try to
answer. Ask a bad question and no amount of sophisticated equipment
and careful observation will lead to truly deep understanding. Let’s, then,
consider together what makes a “good question.”
Linking neurons to noun phrases
A good question has a recognizable answer. In other words, I think the
most useful scientific questions are those for which you can work out
what a possible answer looks like. For example, consider a question like:
How does the brain represent nouns?
What would an answer to this question look like? Is it a map of
brain regions involved in understanding and producing nouns? Is it a
definition of what counts as a well-formed noun phrase in a particular
language, or perhaps a computer algorithm that recognizes nouns and
puts them into sentences? Let’s say I point you to a linguistics textbook
and say something like “See here, nouns are defined like so, and over
here are the grammatical rules for how they work in English…”. Have I
answered your question? I suspect you might not be sure that I have, and
you might not be sure what a satisfying answer would even look like.
To help make questions more precise, cognitive scientists tend to
distinguish three different types answers, or levels of description, that we
might be looking for.1 The first level of description is to define the prob-
lem that the brain is trying to solve. In vision, the brain must convert a

LINKING NEURONS TO NOUN PHRASES
3
two-dimensional pattern of light and dark from the retina of your eye
into a three-dimensional map of your dining room populated by a table,
chairs, your cat, and so forth. In speech, the brain converts continuous
sound waves to discrete speech sounds, phonemes like /k/, /æ/, and /t/.
Then, these speech sounds activate words and their meanings, such as
the noun that refers to a small furry animal in my house. Answers of this
sort, that indicate the problem that the brain is solving – its inputs and
outputs – is called a computational description of the brain.
Another level of description targets the steps a system goes through
in order to solve a particular computational problem. For example,
you might wonder if the brain recognizes speech sounds by keeping
a kind of table, one which matches up sound waves with appropriate
speech sounds. Then, whenever it hears a sound, it could look up which
speech sound “matched” the acoustic waveform. This sort of answer
is an algorithmic description of the brain – it specifies the steps the
brain would need to carry out to solve some particular computational
problem.
Lastly, you might consider how neurons carry out the algorithm that
solves a problem. How could neurons represent a table of information?
How do they interact to “look up” items in the table? This last sort of
answer is an implementational description of the brain.
Each level of description captures a different kind of question about
how the brain works. There is a name for the possible answers we
can start to consider when we have a nice precise question: hypotheses.
Separating hypotheses into levels of description has proven incredibly
Table 1. Levels of description. Understanding a cognitive system like
language requires formulating questions (and answers) on at least three
different levels of description.
Computational
The problem a cognitive system is solving, including the inputs
and outputs.
Algorithmic
The steps by which a cognitive system solves the problem, yield-
ing the correct outputs for the provided inputs.
Implementational
How a physical system (such as a neural circuit) carries out a
particular algorithm.

4
INTRODUCTION
useful in asking, and answering, more precise questions. We can see, for
example, that each of the answers given above to the question “How does
the brain represent nouns?” serves as a different kind of answer – each
answer addresses a different level of description.
One consequence of looking at language through the lens of these
levels of description is that it separates different kinds of research. So, a
syntactician may carry on studying the nature of grammatical structures
found in human languages (a computational-level question) without
worrying much about how neural circuits might interact to support
those structures. This is moreorless the same as how a zoologist can un-
cover the intricate communication system of the honey-bee without ever
measuring neuronal firing rates.2 Moreover, this perspective makes it
clear that we can’t learn, for example, how the brain represents nouns
by simply measuring brain activity and seeing what happens. To answer
this kind of question, we would need first to develop some ideas of
what a “noun” is (a computational-level description), add to that a hy-
pothesis of how the brain recognizes such objects (algorithm), and then
turn our attention to how neurons might work together to implement
those ideas.3
Let me give a few examples to make these ideas more concrete. The
first example considers what happens if we focus just on one level: the
implementation. It’s about video games. The key idea is to see how
well a neuroscientist could make sense of a video game system by only
paying attention to electrical circuits. Instead of measuring properties
of neurons, these neuroscientists recorded the connections and electri-
cal discharges of a computer microprocessor (Jonas and Kording, 2017).
In fact, the researchers approach this challenge in several ways, drawing
inspiration from many of the different tools and techniques deployed
in the neurosciences (these tools will be the main focus of Chapter 2).
For example, one strategy is to disrupt the actions of individual transis-
tors and see how that affects the operation of the whole system. This is
somewhat similar to studying the brain through the lens of neurological
disorders; we will in fact start to do something similar in the very next
section. Another strategy is to record electrical discharges from different
parts of the microprocessor and try to correlate those with states of the
video game being played.

LINKING NEURONS TO NOUN PHRASES
5
None of these strategies, nor any of the several others pursued in
this study, worked to make sense of the microprocessor. We know this
because the operation of that particular microprocessor is, of course,
completely understood. It was engineered, after all. So, the researchers
could examine the truth of any of the many statistical generaliza-
tions that emerged after disrupting transistors, correlating electrical
discharges, mapping electrical connections, etc. As they put it: “in the
case of the processor we know its function and structure and our re-
sults stayed well short of what we would call a satisfying understanding”
(Jonas and Kording, 2017, p. 14). The warning message is clear: Scien-
tists will struggle to get a deep understanding of language in the brain
by focusing only on its implementation. Research must draw on insights
from all of the levels of description.
The second example shows how answers at these different levels can
be productively combined. It is about owls. Barn owls use sound to find
(and catch) their prey. Research into how the owl does this offers a
wonderful illustration of the payoff when care is taken to distinguish
different levels of description.4 The research begins with a computa-
tional description of the problem that the owl’s brain must solve: Sound
waves reaching each ear must be converted into a location representing
where the sound comes from. For simplicity, let’s just consider the direc-
tion of the sound relative to the owl’s head. Owls have available to them
two symmetrical sound detectors (a.k.a. “ears”). These allow for one of
several algorithms that can solve this computation by calculating the
difference in timing and loudness of a sound that is detected at each ear.
One way to calculate such differences uses two engineering building
blocks: delay lines and coincidence detectors. Imagine two parallel path-
ways, one beginning at the left ear and one at the right. Each path has
forks at fixed intervals. When a signal reaches each ear, it passes down
that pathway, and reaches each fork one after another at a fixed rate;
this is a delay line. At some point, these two signals, moving in opposite
directions, will meet. The forks from each line are connected to a row
of detectors. These coincidence detection circuits “light up” if and only
if both of their inputs are receiving a signal at the same time. The point
along these rows where the coincidence detector lights up – that is, where
the signals from both delay lines intersect – is directly proportional to

6
INTRODUCTION
where in space the sound originally came from. If the sound comes from
the right side of the owl, then it will reach the right ear and beginning
traveling down that delay line first. Because the signal reached the right
ear first, it travels furtheralong therightdelay lineascompared totheleft.
So, the point at which the signals intersect, and the coincidence detector
lights up, is further from the right ear (and closer to the left). This kind
of circuit is illustrated in Fig. 1. Sets of neurons in a small part of the owl’s
brain stem called the nucleus laminaris appear to operate precisely in the
way just described. This neural circuit serves to implement the algorithm
of coincidence detection, which in turn carries out the computation of
mapping from sound to a location in space.
Remarkably, and this is really important, other brains convert sounds
to locations quite differently. The field mouse, which may very well be
the owl’s prey in the situation above, also uses sound to estimate where
something (such as a swooping owl) might be. But mice use different
algorithms and different neuronal implementations, for example based
on differences in sound intensity and frequency rather than timing, to
solve the same computational challenge of converting sound to location
(Grothe et al., 2010).
delay line
coincidence
detector
Figure 1. Auditory localization in the barn owl. To find prey, barn owls
must convert the sounds heard to locations. One algorithm to achieve this
computation combines a pair of delay lines, one from each ear, with
coincidence detectors. Activation at an ear passes down the delay line at a
fixed rate beginning when the sound impacts the ear; in the illustration,
this happens first for the right, then for the left ear. The coincidence
detectors identify when the signals cross. The location of the sound is
encoded by which coincidence detector is activated, as shown by the
shaded gray circle. A neural circuit that implements this particular
algorithm has been identified in the barn owl’s brain stem.

LINKING NEURONS TO NOUN PHRASES
7
Here we see how productive it can be when a system is studied
simultaneously from multiple perspectives: computation, algorithm,
and implementation. As is found in the barn owl, answers at each sep-
arate level can be linked together to form a coherent explanation of the
whole system. You can see also, though, that such linkages are far from
simple; differences between the field mouse and the owl show that an-
swers at one level of description do not necessarily determine how the
system operates at another level.
My third, and last, example is about language. Finally. Specifically,
I want to give us a hint of how complex these linkings between com-
putation, algorithm, and implementation can be in the case of language.
Consider the simple sentence “Ada loves Winston.” The gray box in panel
A of Fig. 2 illustrates the grammatical structure of this sentence: It has a
verb phrase (“VP”) containing the verb “loves” and a noun “Winston”
B.
Ada
A.
DP
DP
V
loves
1
1
Ada
Ada
DP
DP
V
loves
Winston
Ada
DP
VP
S
DP
VP
3
Ada
V
DP
DP
V
loves Winston
loves Winston
Ada
loves
Winston
Ada
S
DP VP
S
DP
Ada
VP
S
3
1
1
DP
Ada V DP
VP
S
S
DP
DP
Ada
Ada
loves
loves Winston
V
V
DP
DP
VP
VP
loves
Winston
Figure 2. Two strategies for building structure. Two different
algorithmic strategies are illustrated for how the brain might compute the
grammatical structure for the sentence “Ada loves Winston.” (A) illustrates
a non-predictive “bottom-up” strategy that only builds structure after all
words in the sentence are encountered. Circled numbers measure the
amount of grammatical structure that is “built” at each step. (B) illustrates
a more eager “top-down” strategy that builds structure in anticipation of
upcoming words. Boxes delineate the syntactic structure that is built after
each word in the sentence is encountered. Note that the final grammatical
structure, shaded gray, is identical for both strategies.

8
INTRODUCTION
(marked “DP” – don’t worry if this abbreviation is unfamiliar to you).
The verb phrase is combined with the subject of the sentence, “Ada”.
The question is this: When you encounter such a sentence one word
at a time, how does your brain build this structure? Let me be clear,
this is a big question which will occupy three chapters later in this book.
But for now let’s just consider a small piece of the puzzle. One strategy
for how to build this structure is illustrated in the rest of panel A. Here,
the structure is built after all the words that belong to the sentence have
been encountered. You can see this by examining the individual boxes
from left to right; the lines indicating the presence of a verb phrase (VP)
or full sentence (S) are created only after the last word of the sentence
is encountered. But this is not the only possible strategy for building
this structure. Indeed, do you typically wait until someone has finished
speaking before starting to make sense of what they are saying? I suspect
not! Panel B of Fig. 2 illustrates an alternative strategy which is more ea-
ger in how it builds structure. You can see here how the very first word,
“Ada”, may fit into a larger sentence structure even before the rest of the
words in the sentence have been encountered. The intuition captured in
panel B is that you can make a reasonable guess that this first name is the
grammatical subject of the upcoming sentence.
The point of this exercise in grammar is as follows. The outputs for
these two strategies are exactly the same (compare the structures in
the light gray boxes) and, of course, the inputs are also the same three
words in the same order. In other words, these strategies perform the
same computation. But they represent different algorithms, or steps by
which the computation might be carried out. These differences in al-
gorithm have consequences for implementation in the brain. Consider
a simple (and common) implementation hypothesis that there is more
brain activity (say, more neurons firing) when the brain is building
more syntactic structure. As you can see, you can’t test this hypothe-
sis without also making a commitment about whether structure is built
late in the sentence (as in panel A) or early (as in panel B). Moreover,
the implementation hypothesis will also depend on just how syntactic
structure works; in fact there are debates between linguists concerning,
for example, the proper structure of a verb phrase in English.5

LINKING NEURONS TO NOUN PHRASES
9
There are a few lessons to learn from these three examples. One
takeaway is that research in neurolinguistics requires deep thinking
about language at all of these levels: the computational problem be-
ing solved, the algorithm that might solve it, and the implementation
of that algorithm. Another takeaway is that answers at one level of
description do not necessarily depend on answers at another. David
Marr (1982, p. 28) puts it this way:
[F]inding algorithms by which [a computational theory] may be
implemented is a completely different endeavor from formulating the
theory itself. In our terms, it is a study at a different level, and both tasks
have to be done.
A third key takeaway is that answers at these separate levels can and
must be brought together into a more comprehensive account of a full
cognitive system. Of course, bringing these together requires not just
hypotheses at each separate level but also hypotheses about how the lev-
els connect to each other. How, for example, does a particular algorithm
for echolocation relate to banks of neurons? Or, how does the brain’s
implementation of a particular grammatical structure influence amount
of brain activity when a certain word is encountered? These are linking
hypotheses.
Neurolinguistics is, at its heart, a discipline concerned with these
linking hypotheses. It’s reasonble to say that a good bit of the rest of this
book is an expansion on this one point. To make that point, you’ll also be
introduced to the tools of neurolinguistics and to a whole host of state-
of-the-art results that have emerged from their use.6 It’s my hope that this
will offer a foundation for you to discover, read, and engage with more
of this research yourself.
With these aims we’ve set ourselves a tall challenge, but we aren’t
starting from scratch. The search for linking hypotheses between lan-
guage and the brain builds on a tradition of research that goes back over
150 years.

10
INTRODUCTION
A brief history
Nina Dronkers, a scientist at the University of California at Berkeley,
offers a wonderful take on the very beginnings of the cognitive
neuroscience of language. In a 2007 paper she and her colleagues revisit
two case studies that were first presented by the neurologist Pierre Paul
Broca in 1861 to the Anatomical Society of Paris.7 In brief, the story goes
like this. Broca was called on to examine a patient named Leborgne who
had suffered a severe stroke many years earlier. As a result of the stroke
the patient could no longer speak and retained only the ability to utter
single syllables. Leborgne died shortly after this examination; this af-
forded a unique scientific opportunity, as Broca was able to study the
damage to Leborgne’s brain very close in time to the careful observation
of Leborgne’s linguistic behavior. At that time, autopsies were the only
scientific tool available to directly study the human brain. The examina-
tion revealed damage that appeared to affect just one area of Leborgne’s
brain: a portion of the frontal lobe of the left hemisphere of the cortex.
Shortly after, Broca examined a second patient with a similarly severe
deficit in producing speech. And an autopsy of the second patient re-
vealed a startlingly similar pattern of brain damage. The same area of
the left hemisphere’s frontal lobe appeared to be damaged in both pa-
tients with severe difficulty in speaking. The story deserves a much
longer telling, as the autopsied brains were set aside for preservation,
lost when part of a building collapsed, found, lost, and found again
in the cellars of the Paris School of Medicine in 1979.8 As a result,
these brains have now been subject to careful study by all the tools
made available to modern neuroscientists. A picture of Leborgne’s brain
can be seen in Fig. 3A. The image shows clearly the frontal lesion in
what is now often called Broca’s area in honor of those revolutionary
observations.
Why were Broca’s observations revolutionary? A major debate in the
medical sciences of the 19th century was whether, and in what way,
the brain might be divided into parts that perform different functions.
The localizationist view held that, yes, different parts of the brain sup-
port qualitatively different functions. This particular viewpoint had been
most strongly argued by an earlier neurologist named Franz Josef Gall

A BRIEF HISTORY
11
B
A
A.
C.
D.
B.
O
F
a
b
W
Figure 3. Over 150 years of language in the brain. (A) A case study
published in 1861 provided Paul Broca with evidence that specific areas
of the brain, such as the left frontal lobe, are connected to specific
cognitive capacities, such as speech. (B) In the 1870s Carl Wernicke and
students hypothesized that language relies on crucial links between the
frontal and temporal lobes. (C) The neurologist Norman Geschwind
popularized this “classical model” of how frontal and temporal areas of
the brain work together to support language comprehension and
production. (D) This diagram adapted from a 2012 review paper shows
just how much modern accounts maintain the foundations of the classical
model, with important novel insights.
Sources: A: Dronkers et al. (2007, fig. 3); B: Wernicke (1874, fig. 3); C: Geschwind (1970,
p. 941); D: Adapted from Friederici (2012, fig. 1).
who, in the early 1800s, had published influential work that linked
specific behaviors and personalities with specific brain regions. Gall’s
theory was based on measurements of the shapes and bumps of the
skull. That particular way of measuring brains, called phrenology, is
nonsense.9,10 Still, the assumption that specific functions were localized

12
INTRODUCTION
to specific brain regions had some staying power and it was consid-
ered a viable, yet unproven, idea in 1861. Unproven, that is, until Broca
presented to the Anatomical Society of Paris those two case studies show-
ing that language itself could be severely disrupted following damage to
just one small portion of the brain’s left frontal lobe.
As in most retellings, my version simplifies things considerably and
many other physicians and scientists contributed to that great debate
over whether brain functions might or might not be localized. Nonethe-
less Broca’s case studies stand as a marker where the scientific consensus
shifted towards the localizationist view; this view still dominates the
study of human cognition and the brain today.11
The Viennese physician Carl Wernicke ([ˈvεɹnәki]) built on Broca’s
observations by conducting a survey of languagedisordersacross Europe
in the latter decades of the 1800s. Two outcomes from this work con-
tinue to have a major impact on how we understand the brain bases
of language today. First, Wernicke documented a second kind of lan-
guage disorder that was quite different from the speech production
difficulty described by Broca. This second kind of deficit most promi-
nently affected speech comprehension. Whereas Broca’s patients could
comprehend instructions and answer simple questions, Wernicke stud-
ied brain-damaged patients who had great difficulty making sense of
what was being said to them. In further contrast, these patients faced no
obvious difficulty producing speech; they produced words and sentences
with apparent ease and great fluency. But that speech was not, on the
whole, sensible. That is, while fluent, the speech these patients produced
seemed to be lack any coherent meaning. Like Broca, Wernicke used
autopsies to link this behavioral difficulty with language comprehen-
sion and meaning to a particular pattern of brain damage; such patients
typically suffered brain damage to the rear of the temporal lobe of the left
hemisphere. This region, sometimes called Wernicke’s area, is marked
“W” on the diagram in Fig. 3C.
The second impactful outcome is that Wernicke’s survey led to what
has come to be called the “classical model” of language in the brain. One
of Wernicke’s diagrams for this model is shown in Fig. 3B. (Inexplica-
bly, the diagram shows the brain’s right hemisphere, but the model most
certainly focuses on the left hemisphere for language.) I want to highlight

A BRIEF HISTORY
13
three important pieces of this account. The first is a basic division of
labor between two “language centers”: an area in the temporal lobe that
is necessary for comprehending speech and an area in the frontal lobe
that is necessary for producing speech (marked A and B, respectively,
in Fig. 3B). The second point is that these regions are necessarily con-
nected. The language we produce is (absent neurological damage) also
a language we understand. Third, these centers are closely connected
to other brain areas whose functioning is also crucial for full use of
language; these include motor areas for articulating words, memory ar-
eas for storing conceptual knowledge, and others. Even as scientists were
first localizing distinct language-related brain areas, they also recognized
that such areas are not isolated; their functioning depends crucially on
deep interconnections with each other and with other areas of the brain.
Language disorders of the type documented by Broca and Wernicke
that are due to brain damage are called aphasias. Table 2 summarizes the
two such aphasias discussed thus far. There are many other fascinating
syndromes that will be discussed in later chapters, as well as impor-
tant complications and nuances to this kind of research (if you just
can’t wait, then skip ahead to page 27 in Chapter 2). Still, for over
100 years our understanding of the brain bases of language relied almost
exclusively on this sort of research. The classical model first articulated
by Wernicke was popularized and expanded upon by the neurologist
Norman Geschwind (1970; 1972) in the middle of the 20th century.
Table 2. Aphasia and the classical model. Aphasias, or language deficits
caused by brain damage, formed the key source of evidence for the
“classical model” of language in the brain.
Behavioral symptoms
Typical site of brain
damage
Non-fluent
(“Broca’s”) Aphasia
Slow, laborious, non-fluent speech
• Short utterances
• Comprehension relatively intact
Left
inferior
frontal
gyrus (“Broca’s Area”)
Fluent
(“Wernicke’s”)
Aphasia
Fluent well-articulated speech
• Familiar intonation patterns
• Word meanings are disordered or
inappropriate
Left posterior middle
temporal gyrus
(“Wernicke’s Area”)

14
INTRODUCTION
Drawing on many decades of aphasia research, Geschwind argues that
Wernicke’s insights about localization largely stand the test of time,
and moreover receive further support from patterns of aphasia docu-
mented since the 19th century that follow when the connections between
relevant language regions are damaged. One such connection is the ar-
cuate fasciculus, which is a bundle of neural fibers that connects the
posterior temporal and inferior frontal lobes (see Fig. 3C). (By the way,
please don’t worry if some of these anatomical terms seem opaque to
you. Getting oriented to the brain’s “geography” is one of the main goals
for the next chapter.)
The tools of modern neuroscience that are discussed in the next
chapter go far beyond what was available to the pioneering neurolo-
gists of the 19th century, or even the scientists of the mid-20th. It is
no surprise, then, that our understanding of the brain bases of language
has changed significantly as scientists have confronted different kinds
and ever-greater amounts of data not only on language disorders, but
on the dynamic changes of brain activity that can now be recorded in
real time while people use language. But it is difficult to overstate just
how important that “classical model” is as a foundation for making sense
of even the most modern accounts of language in the brain. One such
moden example is given in panel D of Fig. 1. This illustration reflects
one influential perspective developed by the cognitive neuroscientist
Angela Friederici (2012). There are important components and nuances
in this diagram that are absent from earlier models (panels B and C), but
I hope you can also see that the underlying structure is largely the same:
The brain bases of language are understood to involve key areas of the
left hemisphere of the brain, specifically regions within, and connections
between, the frontal lobe and the temporal lobe which are shaded in gray.
There is one way, though, that modern neurolinguistic models, which
will occupy our attention for the rest of this book, differ quite radically
from that “classical model.” If you think back over the last few para-
graphs you may well notice that “language” was discussed from two
perspectives: that of language production, which was associated with
Broca’s aphasia, and that of language comprehension, linked to Wernicke’s
aphasia. There is a fundamental division, on this view, based on the
whether the brain is making sense of some input or producing some sort

THE REST OF THIS BOOK
15
of output. But since the time of Broca and Wernicke there has been a
revolution in linguistics and the other sciences of the mind that centers
on the mental stuff that stands between inputs and outputs: the stuff of
cognition itself.12 This cognitive view recognizes that the ability to use
language reflects a kind of knowledge; it is what you know when you
“know a language.” Moreover, language is not just one kind of knowl-
edge, but rather is made up of a whole range of mental entries, from
knowledge of how to articulate the sounds or signs of a particular lan-
guage, to the meanings and connotations of words, to the often implicit
rules of grammar, and more.
The cognitive perspective asks us to look at how the brain represents
and uses these different kinds of knowledge. We’ve come, you might
have noticed, full circle in this chapter. Distinguishing the different
kinds of knowledge that make up language from how that knowledge
is represented and used by the brain lines up neatly with the distinct
levels of description described in Table 1.13 Indeed, even the very pre-
liminary data we’ve seen so far resonates with this view. The language
disorder documented by Carl Wernicke is, fundamentally, a disruption
of meaning; patients show impaired language comprehension, but also
the utterances they produce, despite being quite fluent, lack coherent
meaning. The fundamental issue is not one of comprehension or pro-
duction, inputs or outputs, but rather concerns something about that
aspect of language that allows the brain to represent and make use of
meaning.
The rest of this book
The rest of the book is concerned with trying to connect insights from
linguistics regarding “what language is” with insights from cognitive
neuroscience concerning “how the brain uses language.” This linking
between different levels of a complex cognitive system is exactly what
makes neurolinguistics an especially challenging area of study and, in
my view at least, a very rewarding area as well. Here’s how we’ll (try to)
tackle it.

16
INTRODUCTION
Chapter 2 offers a quick overview of the tools and methodologies from
neuroscience that will be so crucial on our journey. Be warned that this
chapter is heavy on the terminology, but “cheat sheets” are offered in
the form of diagrams and, especially, Table 3 on page 41. Chapters 3
and 4 focus on sound: How does the brain create meaning out of sound
waves in the air? How the brain accesses and represents those meanings
is the focus of Chapters 5 and 6. We don’t (typically) communicate with
just single words. Language is remarkable, and remarkably unique, in
how words are combined together to create say and think things that,
quite literally, no one has ever said before. Chapters 7–9 turn to this
area. The ideas that we discuss across these chapters are inter-related.
While I have written them with a particular ordering in mind, I have
also tried to sprinkle breadcrumbs liberally so that connected ideas are
cross-referenced with each other; in this way those of you who want to
skip around can do so without too much trouble.
Chapter summary
This chapter has laid out the groundwork for what this book is about.
We were introduced to a particular way of thinking about brain systems
in terms of three different levels of description, the linkages between
each level, and a little bit of the history for how scientists have studied
“language in the brain.”
• To ask good questions of a cognitive system like language, we must
distinguish between different levels of description: the computa-
tional goals of a system, the algorithmic steps needed to meet those
goals, and the implementation in a physical system to carry out
those steps.
• Linking hypotheses capture how possible answers at each of these
levels connect to each other.
• Efforts to specify these links go back over 150 years, starting with
research on aphasia, or language disorders caused by brain damage.
• Non-fluent aphasia describes a difficulty producing fluent speech
associated with damage to the brain’s left frontal lobe. Fluent

CHAPTER SUMMARY
17
aphasia is a difficulty with understanding and producing sensible
language; it is associated with damage to the brain’s left temporal
lobe.
• Early aphasia research led to the classical model for language in
the left frontal and temporal lobes which still influences modern
theories.
To tackle the challenges laid out in this introduction, we need to get a
handle on the tools and techniques of neurolinguistics. These are the
focus of the next chapter.

2
The toolbox
To get started we’ll need to become familiar with the terminology and
tools used to investigate brain function in people. The goal here is to get
just enough technical details under our belt that we can make sense of
why a researcher might choose to use a certain tool to answer a question
they have in mind. There is obviously a lot of fascinating nuance that we
won’t have time for here – notes sprinkled through the chapter are there
to point you towards resources to help you dig deeper into the wonderful
world of brain-measuring tools.
Brain geography
The first thing to discuss is the brain’s anatomical “geography.” Like
stepping off the train in a new city, it pays off to take a moment to orient
yourself before striking out. Scientists approach anatomical orientation
from three points of view; you can think of these as if you were look-
ing at a brain from three different directions. The sagittal view presents
the brain as seen from the side; the axial view presents the brain as seen
from the bottom, and the coronal view presents the brain as seen from
the back. Each of these views are shown in Fig. 4.1
Now, in each view we can talk about whether something is higher
or lower, towards the front or back, etc. On thevertical dimension,higher
areas are superior, also called dorsal, while lower areas are inferior or ven-
tral. Areas towards the front are anterior while areas towards the back of
the brain are posterior (less frequently, you may also see anterior and
posterior areas described as rostral or caudal respectively). Finally, one
can draw attention towards the left and right sides of the brain, or lateral
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0002

BRAIN GEOGRAPHY
19
superior
anterior
posterior
inferior
posterior
anterior
superior
lateral
medial
inferior
lateral
S
A
A.
B.
C.
P
L
R
L
R
Figure 4. Three views of the author’s brain. (A) sagittal, (B) axial,
and (C) coronal.
areas, in contrast to medial (or “mesial”) areas towards the middle. All
of these orientation terms are illustrated in Fig. 4.
With these terms in hand, we can turn our attention to some major
anatomical features and landmarks of the human brain. The central
nervous system is divided into three components: the brain-stem, the
cerebellum, and the cerebrum. The latter is the site of much of the
complex perceptual, cognitive, and motor-related processing done by
the brain and it’s where we’ll focus our attention in this overview. The
cerebrum is divided into a left and right hemisphere, and comprises an
outer shell, or cortex, which surrounds a number of sub-cortical struc-
tures. A sagittal image of the medial aspect of the human cortex is shown
in Fig. 5A.
Perhaps most striking on first looking at the human cortex is just how
convoluted, or folded, it is (Fig. 5B). The peaks of these convolutions
are called gyri (singular: “gyrus”) while the valleys – these are the parts

20
THE TOOLBOX
Cerebrum
A.
D.
E.
B.
C.
Gray matter
Central sulcus
Parietal lobe
Temporal lobe
Occipital
lobe
Lateral sulcus
(Sylvian fissure)
Frontal lobe
Sulcus
Gyrus
White matter
Cerebellum
superior
inferior
temporal
pole
superior temporal gyrus
pre-central
superior frontal
gyrus
post central
gyrus
gyrus
middle temporal gyrus
fusiform
gyrus
gyrus
pre-central gyrus
gyrus
frontal
frontal
gyrus
marginal
supra-
Brain stem
Corpus
callosum
Figure 5. The central nervous system. (A) Major parts of the central
nervous system; the corpus callosum is a bundle of fibers that connects the
left and right cortical hemispheres. (B) Coronal cross-section of the cortex
highlights its convolutions and the distinction between gray and white
matter. (C) The major lobes of the cortex. (D–E) Some major
macro-anatomical features of the cortex.
that you can’t see without spreading the folds apart – are called sulci
(singular: “sulcus”). These gyri and sulci help to define some of the
principal large-scale, or macro-anatomical, landmarks of the human
cortex.
The first such anatomical landmarks are the four lobes of the cortex.
About mid-way between the anterior and posterior poles of the cortex
is a deep sulcus that starts at the top of the brain and extends down-
ward and laterally. This is the central sulcus and it serves to divide the
frontal lobe, which is anterior to the sulcus, from the parietal lobe, which
is posterior. Make sure you can find each of these features in Fig. 5C.

BRAIN GEOGRAPHY
21
At its bottom, the central sulcus intersects with another major dividing
element: the lateral sulcus, which is also called the sylvian fissure. This
sulcus runs perpendicular to the central sulcus, and extends anteriorly.
The lateral sulcus divides the more superior frontal lobe (which you’ve
already found) from the temporal lobe, which lies inferior to both the
frontal lobe and the parietal lobe. (Notice how we are practicing with
the orientation terms, like “superior” and “inferior.”) Lastly, at the pos-
terior edge of the cortex lies the occipital lobe. Unlike the other three, no
major sulci divide this lobe from either the temporal lobe, which is more
anterior, or the parietal lobe, which is more superior. You can see the
approximate divisions between these regions in Fig. 5C.2
The two gyri on either side of the central sulcus merit special mention.
On the anterior side is the primary motor cortex, while on the posterior
side is the primary somatosensory cortex. These two gyri are complemen-
tary: The motor cortex sends signals to the peripheral nervous system to
control muscles, and the somatosensory cortex receives signals related
to touch. The neurons within these gyri are organized into two maps
of the body. So, for example, neuronal populations controlling the feet
are clustered in a location that is separate from neurons controlling the
hands, neck, or face. In the motor cortex, the tongue, being unique both
in its flexibility and its sensitivity, is separately represented from other
neurons controlling other aspects of the face and vocal tract. This spatial
separation between regions involved in different areas of the body and,
indeed, vocal tract will prove a source of insight in later chapters.
Still with me? The last few paragraphs have been very heavy on
terminology, and I’m afraid we are not done yet. The figures are pro-
vided to keep you grounded: Try to use the terminology so far to label
a few arbitrary points on Figs 4 and 5. For example, can you put your
finger on the anterior edge of the frontal lobe of the cortex? How about
a medial-superior point on the right parietal lobe? Take a moment to
check your understanding before moving on.
In fact, the common labels for many cortical landmarks are based on
almost exactly the scheme you’ve just practiced with. For example the
“superior temporal gyrus” simply refers to the most superior gyrus on
the temporal lobe of the cortex. There are two other gyri on the temporal
lobe, which are sensibly called the “middle temporal gyrus” and “inferior

22
THE TOOLBOX
temporal gyrus.” The same logic applies to sulci (can you point to the
“superior temporal sulcus”?) and it also works for the frontal lobe. So,
the “inferior frontal gyrus“ is the most inferior of the three gyri on the
frontal lobe (try to trace this gyrus with your finger on Fig. 5 moving
from anterior to posterior).
But, matters aren’t quite this simple. First, researchers typically
abbreviate anatomical regions, so “superior temporal gyrus” is short-
ened just to “STG”; “IFG” by the same logic means “inferior frontal
gyrus.” Abbreviations may include more information as well, so “PITG”
or “pITG” (you see both conventions) means “posterior inferior tempo-
ral gyrus” and so on. Second, there are many anatomical regions that
retain less conventional, more idiosyncratic names. For example, the
“supramarginal gyrus” (“SMG”) spans the meeting-point of the tempo-
ral, frontal, and parietal lobes and curves along the edge (or margin)
of the lateral sulcus. Just posterior to the SMG in the parietal lobe is the
“angular gyrus” (“AG”), named for its shape. A third example is the gyrus
that lies on the inferior side across the temporal and occipital lobes: It
is called the “fusiform gyrus” – again, a reference to the shape of this
particular structure.
I recommend three things for students facing the great variety of
terms introduced in this section: (1) Memorize a few of the locations
that are most common in the particular domain of study (you’ll see just
what these might be in the following chapters for speech, words, and
sentence-processing). (2) Get comfortable using the more general and
“compositional” terms like “anterior superior frontal gyrus”; you can
use these even when a piece of anatomy may have a different name. For
example, say you forget the name “supramarginal gyrus”, try “gyrus that
curves around the posterior end of the sylvian fissure” instead. (3) Lastly,
the internet is your friend: look up unfamiliar terms (I do!)
All of the terminology so far captures the brain’s macro-anatomy –
those features that you could see with your own eyes. Of course, what
really makes the brain, well, a brain is the micro-scopic neuron. There
are about 100 million of these basic building blocks in the human cen-
tral nervous system. Each of these cells has a cell body, or soma, an axon
which, like a long arm, reaches out (sometimes quite far) to connect with
other neurons, and a large set of dendrites, which are smaller appendages

BRAIN GEOGRAPHY
23
cell body
(soma)
A.
B.
C.
synapse
9
46
10
11
47
45 44
43
38
21
37
19
39
18
17
20
40
41 42 22
8
6
4
1,2,3
5
7
dendrites
axon
Figure 6. The neuron. (A) The parts of the neuron. (B) Neurons are
organized into cytoarchitectural layers in the cortex. (C) Cytoarchitecture
can be used to define regions, as in Brodmann’s atlas.
Sources: A: Image modified from original by Looxix via Wikimedia Commons under the
CC-BY-SA 3.0 license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/); B,C: Public
domain, via Wikimedia Commons
on the receiving end of some other neuron’s axon. The meeting place of
one neuron’s axon and another neuron’s dendrite is a small gap called
the synapse. An illustration of a neuron is given in Fig. 6A.3
There are a few features of neurons that will be important for our pur-
poses, including the electrical discharges that serve to pass information
from one neuron to another, and the way that whole groups of neurons
are organized into layers in the cortex. But there are many fundamental
aspects of neurons that we will, generally, not be addressing here, such
as neurotransmitters and the biochemical interactions at the synapse,
neuronal cell types, and more. Why don’t we discuss such fundamentals
of the nervous system? Well, frankly, our current understanding of how
the brain carries out language is just too coarse-grained to get much out
of that level of detail. Current research doesn’t yet have a whole lot to
say about how these fine-grained neuronal properties relate to how we
represent and use linguistic knowledge.

24
THE TOOLBOX
Neurons pass signals to each other by means of an electrical current,
an action potential, that flows along the “sending” neuron’s axon. This
discharge evokes a chemical interaction at the synapse that in turn
changes the electrical potential at the “receiving” neuron’s dendrite. The
effects of that discharge are summed together across the many dendrites
of a particular neuron. Certain connections may be excititory, which in-
creases the probability that the receiving neuron will itself fire off an
action potential. Or connections might be inhibitory and lower the prob-
ability that the neuron fires. Microscopic electrodes that measure the
electrical discharges at individual neurons show that these cycles of elec-
trical discharge and rest occur anywhere from once to over 250 times
per second. (For reference, the microchip in the computer I’m using to
write this paragraph carries out about 2.3 billion calculations per sec-
ond.) These electrical interactions will become important shortly, when
we introduce tools that measure the electrical activity of neurons during
language use.
A second property of neurons that merits discussion is their organi-
zation in the cortex. Neuronal cell bodies are clustered at the surface of
the cortex; this is the “gray matter” that gives the brain its characteris-
tic hue. Underneath this sheet is the “white matter” – tissue made up of
axons that connects neurons together: The whiteish color comes from
myelin, which is an electrically insulating substance that coats many ax-
ons, thereby making electrical transmission more efficient. When put
under a microscope, the cell bodies at the surface of the cortex are not
uniformly or evenly distributed; rather, the cells are organized into six
distinct layers. The layers differ from one another in terms of the prin-
cipal cell types and their spatial arrangement. A drawing of these layers,
from the pioneering 19th-century neurologist Santiago Ramo´n y Cajal,
is shown in Fig. 6B. The systematic organization of neurons into cortical
layers is called cytoarchitectonics.
Neuroscientists studying the cytoarchitecture of the brain have
mapped a remarkable pattern of organization that complements the
macro-anatomical features of sulci and gyri that were introduced above.
These maps group areas of cortex together when they have similar
neuronal organization. The leading idea here is that populations of
neurons with a similar organization may be involved in similar func-
tions; so such a map might provide interesting clues as to what areas of

IMAGING BRAIN STRUCTURE WITH MRI
25
the brain form coherent regions that carry out a common function. One
such map is shown in Fig. 6C. This comes from work by Korbinian Brod-
mann that was published in 1909 based on meticulous study of a single
individual. For better or worse, this particular mapping, which divides
the cortex into 52 distinct areas, has become commonly used by cog-
nitive neuroscientists. So, just as a researcher might refer to the “aSTG”
(see above), based on macro-anatomy, they may also refer to “Brodmann
area 38”, or just “BA38.” Likewise, a researcher may refer to “BA45” or
“BA4” which span, respectively, a small portion of the inferior frontal
gyrus (IFG) and the gyrus immediately anterior to the central sulcus.
Summary so far
We have come to the end of the brief (and dense) overview of brain
anatomy. Remember, your goal is to become comfortable navigating
around images like the those shown in Figs 4 and 5. As part of this, I
encourage you also to make use of the resources that were mentioned in
the notes to the pages above.
Now that we know a bit of our way around the brain, we are ready
to introduce the main tools that the neurolinguist uses to study how the
brain carries out language.
Imaging brain structure with MRI
You may already be familiar with one of the principal technologies used
to take images of the brain: Magnetic Resonance Imaging, or MRI. This
same technology is used to make high-resolution images of broken bones
and to map the location of tumors. When used to image brain tissue, MRI
creates 3D images with high spatial resolution. And, as we’ll see in a mo-
ment, MRI is a very flexible technology, allowing researchers not only to
take images of brain structure but also to see how different regions con-
nect to each other and even to measure how much oxygen different areas
are using up as they function. What makes MRI so flexible, in part, is
that it takes advantage of something that your body has plenty of: water.

26
THE TOOLBOX
Each water molecule in the tissues of your brain has two hydrogen atoms.
Under normal conditions, the nuclei of those hydrogen atoms are ori-
ented more or less randomly. MRI uses a series of very strong magnets,
first, to align the nuclei of those atoms along a common axis and then to
perturb those nuclei, knocking them out of alignment. This perturbation
introduces energy into the system, and so as the nuclei relax back to their
(aligned) resting state, that energy is released. This release of energy, or
“resonance”, is measured in two dimensions by tracking how this energy
interferes with yet another magnetic field. A three-dimensional stack of
these 2D images is then made by moving the magnetic field slightly and
repeating the process.
The spatial unit of analysis in these images is the voxel, or “volumet-
ric pixel”: brain images are composed out of these basic elements, which
typically measure 1–3 mm. To get a sense of scale here, note that a voxel
of 1 mm3 contains about 50,000 neurons. The distribution of hydrogen
across bodily tissues allows this technique to distinguish, for example,
the cortical gray matter which houses neuronal cell bodies, from white
matter, which is made up of the axons that convey electrical signals from
one neuron to another. Indeed, if you go back to Fig. 4, you can see
clearly the contrast between the outer gray tissue and the whiter tissue it
surrounds.
A wonderful example of the flexiblility of MRI comes from something
called diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI. DTI is used to measure the
structural connectivity between different regions of the cortex. These
connections are instantiated by axons that project from one region of
the brain to another; large groups of axons form bundles that seem
like highways that connect distant cities. As you can see for yourself
– look again at the white matter in Fig. 4 – standard MRI does not
have the resolution to reveal the directions traveled by bundles of ax-
ons. But there is an ingenious solution based on MRI’s sensitivity to the
distribution of water. By orienting the magnetic fields in different ways,
MRI can measure how well water diffuses in different directions. Well,
water is more likely to diffuse along an axon rather than to cross cell
boundaries between axons. Thus, by following the direction that water is
diffusing, researchers can estimate the direction that axons are traveling.

OF DEFICITS AND LESIONS
27
By analogy, cars drive along roads, not between them. You could there-
fore reasonbly estimate a map of roadways by tracking the movements
of cars.
Another example of the wonderful flexiblity of MRI is how it can be
tuned to measure properties of blood flow. Before we get to that, I’d like
to discuss how MRI brings a new perspective to the study of language
deficits and brain lesions that was introduced in Chapter 1. These ap-
proaches, and other tools, are techniques that probe brain function, and
this is where we now turn our attention.
Of deﬁcits and lesions
The deficit/lesion method relies on a clinical evaluation to determine
how someone’s language might be impaired, and connects those deficits
with the location of brain damage, or lesion. We’ve already seen ex-
amples of this method in action with the work of Broca and Wernicke
discussed in Chapter 1. As in those historical examples, modern clin-
ical practice identifies aphasia (remember: a language disorder due to
brain damage) using a clinical evaluation. This evaluation might, for
example, uncover a pattern of symptoms consistent with non-fluent
aphasia (a.k.a “Broca’s aphasia”) such that patient produces only slow,
short utterances. The diagnosis is always based on behavioral symptoms
alone.
Unlike in Broca’s day, scientists no longer have to wait for an autopsy
to uncover what kinds of brain damage might be correlated with those
symptoms. MRI is used to take an image of the damaged tissues in vivo;
just such an image is shown in Fig. 7A where damaged neural tissue ap-
pears darker than surrounding gray and white matter (can you describe
the location of the lesion using the anatomical terminology from earlier
in this chapter?)
There are a number of different kinds of aphasias and related deficits.
Rather than list them here to be memorized, I will be discussing specific
examples in the chapters that follow.

28
THE TOOLBOX
L
R
JH
JC
B
A.
B.
C.
B
W
W
MC
OB
Figure 7. The deficit/lesion method. (A) MRI of Leborgne’s brain;
notice how the frontal lobe lesion, shown on the top left, penetrates quite
far beneath the cortical surface. (B) On the left are two patients with
non-fluent aphasia; only the top one has a lesion in the traditional “Broca’s
area”; the two right-hand patients have Wernicke’s aphasia; B and W
indicate traditional Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas respectively. (C)
Illustration of overlapping lesions from two Wernicke’s aphasia patients;
medium and light gray shows non-overlap; dark indicates overlap.
Sources: A: Dronkers et al. (2007); B: Dronkers et al. (1999); C: Adapted from Rogalsky et al.
(2011).
One reason deficit/lesion research is so valuable is that it can be used
to build a causal argument. What this means is that a researcher can
infer, under certain circumstances, that a particular brain region (say,
the inferior frontal gyrus) is necessary for the brain to carry out a partic-
ular function (say, fluent speech). This kind of inference contrasts with
correlational reasoning, which we’ll see examples of below. The strongest
way to build such a causal argument relies on what is called a double
dissociation; here’s what that means:

OF DEFICITS AND LESIONS
29
Patient A
Patient B
Capacity X
Impaired
Not impaired
Capacity Y
Not impaired
Impaired
Let’s consider a concrete example.4 Patient VER had a stroke at the
age of 68 that reduced blood-flow to frontal and parietal lobes in her
left hemisphere. This stroke led to severe language deficits affecting both
comprehension and production. Despite these limitations, she remained
able to follow simple instructions. She was able, for example, to point
to a picture that matched a spoken word (“point to the car”). Interest-
ingly, she could match certain kinds of words more easily than others:
she was particular good at matching words for kinds of food, but worse at
words for common house hold objects. Now consider patient SBY, who
was diagnosed with Herpes Simplex Encephalitus at the age of 48. This
degenerative disease damages brain tissue in the temporal lobes. SBY
retained fluent speech but showed difficulty with speech comprehen-
sion. In a picture-naming task, SBY showed difficulty with kinds of food
but, fascinatingly, was much better at identifying pictures of household
objects. (By the way, a neural deficit that affects one’s ability to recognize
things like food or household objects is a kind of agnosia. We’ll discuss
these sorts of deficits in more depth in Chapter 6.)
Here is a diagram comparing these two case studies:
VER
SBY
Object words
Impaired
Not impaired
Food words
Not impaired
Impaired
This is a double dissociation! A pattern like this allows you to infer that
at least some brain systems necessary for reasoning about household
objects are distinct from those that are necessary for reasoning about
food concepts (and vice versa). To understand the value of this, con-
sider the single dissociation present in the case of patient VER alone.
Having experienced serious neural trauma, it is possible that the patient
has difficulty with more complex tasks or concepts, compared to simpler

30
THE TOOLBOX
tasks or concepts – indeed, there are lots of reasons why objects might
be more difficult sorts of concepts than food; perhaps household ob-
jects are used in morevaried ways (forwriting, cutting, cooking, stapling,
switching…) than foods (eating). A double dissociation allows more pre-
cise reasoning. Both patients have experienced trauma, so the difference
in performance must be due to the different areas affected by their brain
damage.
You may already be thinking of some of the challenges facing the
deficit/lesion method. For example, the damage experienced by the pa-
tients I’ve described is relatively broad. It spans the frontal, parietal,
and/or temporal lobes (though, is it that unreasonable for food, of all
things, to take up a large part of our brains?) Relatedly, the nature of the
damage is different between each patient; in this example, one patient
had a stroke while the other a neuro-degenerative disease. Even if two
patients have the same source of damage (say, stroke), the nature of the
neural trauma and the presentation of language difficulties would never
be exactly identical between any two different people. When can two or
more individuals be treated as “comparable”? Yet another challenge is
that this method relies on brain damage that is subject to chance and to
the idiosyncrasies of our (fragile!) bodies: Stroke damage predominantly
falls along certain vasculature in the brain, and neuro-degenerative dis-
eases target certain parts of the central nervous system. What this means
is that there is no guarantee that the patterns of damage most often seen
in the clinic will neatly isolate relevant parts of language processing.
These challenges are partially illustrated in Fig. 7B. Here, two patients
with a clinical diagnosis of non-fluent (“Broca’s”) aphasia are shown on
the left, and two patients with fluent (“Wernicke’s”) aphasia are shown
on the right. First, notice the broad extent of the lesions. You can also
see how different these lesions are from each other, even for patients
with similar clinical diagnoses. Indeed, the patients in the bottom row
do not have any damage to the brain regions that were historically linked
with these two deficits under the classical model discussed in Chapter 1
(see Fig. 3 on page 11).
In some ways, these limits are addressed by complementing
deficit/lesion-based research with the other tools in the toolbox that
will be discussed below. But there are also some strategies for analyzing

BLOOD FLOW AND FUNCTION
31
lesion data that can help with at least a few of these downsides. One
such strategy is the lesion overlap method which is illustrated in Fig. 7C.
The lesion overlap method takes advantage of MRI’s spatial resolution
to tackle the challenge that patients differ both in the location of brain
damage and in their clinical symtoms. For example, researchers may
identify a group of patients who, like patient SBY, have difficulty with
food-related words. Now, these patients may also differ in other respects
(e.g. the precise location of their lesion, whether they have other co-
morbid deficits in language, memory, etc.). Keeping these differences
in mind, researchers can use high-resolution MRIs of each patient to
identify the location of each lesion, and then look for which specific
areas overlap between all of the individuals who, despite differing in
many ways, share an impairment with food-related words. If researchers
find a region where damage is shared between all individuals who show
difficulty with food words, and that region is also preserved in control
participants who don’t have difficulty with food words (but have other
aphasia symptoms), then such a result provides compelling support for
linking food concepts (in this example) with a specific sub-part of the
brain which generalizes across a group of patients.
Blood ﬂow and function
There are a growing number of tools that let scientists measure brain
function in vivo – while those brains are using language in some way.
I’ll first talk about functional imaging, which means taking pictures of
where brain regions are activated, usually by tracking patterns of blood
flow. Then, I’ll talk about electrophysiology, which measures the rapid
changes in electrical currents that are generated by neurons.
By far the most widely used tool in all of neurolinguistics is functional
MRI (fMRI).
Remember, MRI is super-flexible, and that flexibility
extends to measuring properties of blood flow. Here’s how that works:
When the brain is at rest there is a certain balance of oxygen in the
brain’s vasculature – in your bloodstream. When neurons become more
active they demand more oxygen, removing it from the bloodstream.5
Technically, the balance of oxygenated hemoglobin (oxygen-carrying

32
THE TOOLBOX
0.0
Sequence of stimuli
from two conditions
Coinvolve with
hemodynamic response
function
Expected
BOLD signal
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
min
0.0
0
0.0
0.5
Block design
Event-related design
1.0
1.5
2.0
min
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
10
20
sec
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
Condition A
Condition B
0.5
1.0
Measured
BOLD signal
A.
B.
1.5
2.0
⊛
⊛
Figure 8. The fMRI method. (A) Example of the fMRI BOLD response
from one voxel. (B) A schematic of stimuli for block and event-related
experimental designs (left); the stimulus events are coinvolved with the
hemodynamic response function (middle) which yields an expected
BOLD signal for each condition (right).
blood cells) goes down and de-oxygenated hemoglobin goes up. Your
metabolic system responds to this dip by flooding the blood vessels
surrounding the active neurons with more oxygen (in the form of
oxygenated hemoglobin). All together, the dips and peaks in blood
oxygenation follow the pattern shown in the middle of Fig. 8B. This is
the hemodynamic response function and it is not very speedy! Indeed,
the influx of oxygenated blood can take over six seconds to respond after
brain activity has begun.
So, why this business about neural metabolics? MRI, by virtue of mea-
suring properties of hydrogen atoms, is sensitive to changes in blood
oxygenation. This dynamic change in blood oxygenation creates an MRI

BLOOD FLOW AND FUNCTION
33
signal called the blood oxygenation-level dependent, or BOLD, signal,
illustrated in Fig. 8A. You’ll recall that MRI has good spatial resolution,
and that’s true for the BOLD signal as well. So, fMRI offers a way to
measure, within just a few millimeters, the location of brain activity. It
does so at the cost of being slow; the hemodynamic response unfolds
over several seconds; fMRI has low temporal resolution. This sluggish-
ness is quite different from the millisecond speed of neural activity itself,
and also slower than the speed of language; you might hear anywhere
from two to six words a second in everyday speech.6 A second limi-
tation of fMRI is that it is quite loud, and this is especially important
for speech studies. But there is a clever solution that comes from em-
bracing these two limitations. The idea is that the participant listens to
a speech stimulus in relative silence, and the MRI is only turned on
afterwards. This works because the BOLD signal associated with pro-
cessing the speech stimulus peaks several seconds after the stimulus has
begun.7
Despite this sluggishness, the BOLD signal changes in proportion to
the amount of underlying neural activity (Boynton et al., 2012). This
means you can still tap into neural activity associated with speedier
processes, like language, provided you do so thoughtfully. This relation-
ship is schematized in Fig. 8B for two different experimental setups.
One setup is a block design experiment. Here, the individual stimuli
from each condition are presented all together, one after another. The
right side of Fig. 8B takes into account the sluggish BOLD response –
this is simply what you would expect the fMRI signal to look like if
it precisely followed your experimental design. The researcher then
statistically tests how well the measured BOLD signal from a partic-
ular voxel (8A, right) matches up with your BOLD signal predictions
(8B, right).
As you can see on the top row of Fig. 8B, a block design makes it easy to
tell apart the BOLD signals associated with each condition, despite the
fact that hemodynamic changes are pretty slow. The bottom of Fig. 8B
shows an event-related design. Here, the stimuli from each condition are
interleaved. Still, when they are carefully spaced, the BOLD signals cor-
responding to the two conditions can be teased apart (Fig. 8B, right-hand
side, bottom).

34
THE TOOLBOX
There are a number of other tools that take images of brain function
using properties of blood flow. Together, these are called hemody-
namic techniques. These include functional near-infrared spectroscopy
(fNIRS), which measures the BOLD signal – just like fMRI – but does
so using light (it turns out that oxygenated and deoxygenated blood
scatter light differently). Unlike fMRI, fNIRS just involves a small cap
containing the light emitters and receivers; it is quiet and more com-
fortable than fMRI, making it especially appropriate for studies with
children (Rossi et al., 2012). Another tool that you may see mentioned
is Positron Emission Tomography (PET). PET used to be quite common
but has mostly been supplanted by fMRI. Rather than tracking blood
oxygenation, PET measures glucose uptake. Just like oxygen, neurons
that are active demand more glucose from the blood stream. The glucose
is tracked using a radioactive marker that is injected into patients before
each block of experimental trials. Among the downsides to this approach
is the fact that it takes over one minute for the most commonly used ra-
dioactive marker to decay, meaning PET is an even slower technique
than fMRI – you must use a block design for PET experiments.
The electric brain
Another strategy for measuring brain function is to record the elec-
trical activity of neurons themselves. Together, these are electrophysio-
logical techniques. The most common strategies are non-invasive (no
brain surgery) and involve using sensors placed on or near the scalp
to measure electrical and magnetic fields that are generated by tens of
thousands of neurons acting together. These techniques together have
high temporal resolution because they measure neural activity as quickly
as it occurs. But because they measure that activity from outside the
scalp, they only have moderate to limited spatial resolution when it
comes to determining where in the brain the activity comes from. In
certain circumstances, doctors implant electrodes directly onto neu-
ral tissue (this is done, for instance, to help guide surgery to resolve

THE ELECTRIC BRAIN
35
certain kinds of epilepsy). These (thankfully) uncommon instances are
incredibly valuable for researchers, as they pair high temporal resolution
with very precise spatial resolution.
You may have heard of electroencephalography, or EEG. This is a very
common electrophysiological tool. It works by using electrodes placed
on the scalp. The current generated by a single neuron is so tiny as to be
unmeasurable from outside the head. But, if neurons fire together – in
synchrony – and they are oriented so that they all generate currents that
face in the same direction, then those currents sum together, making
a signal that can be measured by something as simple as a conduct-
ing metal placed onto the scalp.8 More precisely, the signals measured
by EEG (and also MEG, to be introduced below) reflect not the action
potentials themselves, but post-synaptic electrical discharges from suit-
ably aligned populations of neurons. It turns out that a great many of the
neurons in your cortex are aligned in this way.
The raw EEG signal combines many different electrical signals, in-
cluding the activity of cortical neurons that are doing something of
interest to you (say, reading this paragraph), but also signals from other
brain activity (like the part of your brain that’s thinking about what you’ll
eat for lunch) and even the often much stronger signals generated by
moving your neck muscles, blinking your eyes, the buzzing of overhead
lights, or even the elevator in the room down the hall. The most common
technique for separating out the EEG signal that is relevant for an ex-
periment from all these sources of noise is to average together the EEG
signal from many repetitions of the same kind of experimental event.
This averaging technique is so common that it gets a special name: the
Event-Related Potential (ERP).
Fig. 9A–B illustrates how an ERP is created from raw EEG data for an
experiment with two conditions. When the data from each condition are
averaged together relative to a common event – here, the onset of a new
written word – certain systematic patterns that were hidden in the raw
signal become apparent. These systematic voltage fluctuations, shown in
Fig. 9B, are ERP components. Components have four properties:

36
THE TOOLBOX
cat
**
A.
fork
bird
cup
chair
frog
bee
15 sec
D.
MEG
EEG
B.
C.
polarity
amplitude
latency
0
1 sec
topography
condition 2
condition 1
Figure 9. Electrophysiological methods. (A) The signal from a single
recording channel can be divided into epochs based on stimulus events.
(B) Averaging the data for events from the same condition shows yields the
Event-Related Potential. This components of this potential can be
described in terms of their amplitude, latency, polarity, and (C) their
distribution in space, or topography. (D) Electroencephalography (EEG)
and magnetoencephalography (MEG) measure complementary signals
generated by neuronal currents; MEG signals are easier to localize in space
because they are less distorted by the scalp.

THE ELECTRIC BRAIN
37
• amplitude – how much the voltage changes (shown on the y-axis in
the plot),
• polarity – the direction of change,
• latency – when the voltage changes (shown on the x-axis),
• and topography – where on the scalp the voltage was recorded.
I need to say a few things about how ERPs are shown graphically. First,
there is an old tradition of plotting negative voltages up, and postive volt-
ages down, on the y-axis of an ERP plot. But this tradition is not always
followed. My advice: Read the axis labels carefully. Second, a line-plot
usually shows an ERP from one single electrode (or maybe the average of
a few neighboring sites). This view is good for illustrating amplitude, po-
larity, and latency, but is not so useful for topography. A topographical
plot, shown in Fig. 9C, offers a view of an ERP topography at a particular
point in time.9
While the ERP is the most common way to analyze EEG data, it is
far from the only strategy. We’ll come across a variety of other analysis
techniques later in the book when we look at specific examples.10 EEG
is a very widely used technique because it is both relatively inexpensive
(unlike, say, MRI) and it can also be used with a wide range of people,
including even very young infants. However, beause the technique relies
on sensors that are placed directly on the scalps of research participants,
standard methods for EEG data collection can be more difficult from
participants with thick and/or coarse hair (Etienne et al., 2020).
The electrical currents which make up the EEG signal also generate
magnetic fields. Magnetoencephalography (MEG) measures these fields,
though doing so is technically trickier (and more expensive) than EEG.
Briefly, MEG involves a helmet filled with liquid helium to super-cool
electrical coils. These coils pick up the tiny changes in magnetic flux gen-
erated by neuronal activity. Those changes in magnetic flux are truly tiny,
being roughly 100,000 times smaller than the field generated by a car
across the street, 1,000 times smaller than a heartbeat, and over 10 times
smaller than the current generated by your cellphone when measured
from the other side of the table. Why go to this trouble if MEG measures
the same electrical activity as EEG? The primary reason is that mag-
netic fields, unlike electrical currents themselves, are easier to localize

38
THE TOOLBOX
in space. This means that MEG has higher spatial resolution than EEG
while keeping the same (high) temporal resolution.11
A comparison of the signals generated by MEG and EEG is shown
in Fig. 9D. Here, the underlying neural current is shown by an thick
line. The topography of voltage that is measured by EEG is shown on
the left, while the topography magnetic flux measured by MEG is shown
on the right. One thing you’ll notice is that the EEG voltage is very spread
out. This spreading occurs because the electrical current passes through
many different tissues as it travels from the cortex out to the scalp. These
tissues have different conductivities which distort and spread the signal.
In contrast, magnetic flux travels through the tissues of the head with
very little distortion. And, because the shape of a magnetic field is law-
fully related to the current which generates it, the location of that current
can be reconstructed, or spatially localized, with reasonable accuracy
based on the topography of magnetic fields recorded outside the head.
Aside from spatial localization, many other aspects of the MEG signal
are analyzed in a similar manner to EEG. For example, MEG signals are
typically averaged together to remove noise sources, creating the Event-
Related Field (ERF).
Under rare circumstances, medical patients are implanted with
electrodes in a procedure called electrocorticography, or ECoG. This
can occur, for example, when surgeons are monitoring for epileptic
activity prior to surgery. Sometimes, this monitoring lasts for several
days, and in these cases, researchers may gain a patient’s consent to per-
form an experiment. Depending on medical necessity, electrodes are
either placed on the surface of the cortex or may be inserted into deeper
layers of the cortex or into sub-cortical structures (sometimes called in-
tracranial electrodes, ICE, or stereoencephalography, sEEG). The data
recorded from this procedure is valuable medically and scientifically.
The electrical signals are recorded directly from adjacent neuronal pop-
ulations (within 1 millimeter), meaning that ECoG has very high spatial
and temporal resolution. Further, because only local electrical potentials
are recorded, the data has a much higher ratio of signal to interfering
noise than other electrophysiological techniques. Finally, the ECoG sig-
nal can record neural signals with much higher frequencies than those
recorded by M/EEG (higher-frequency signals have much lower power

STIMULATING AND INHIBITING BRAIN FUNCTION
39
than low-frequency signals; only signals below 80 Hz or so are strong
enough to record outside of the head). As you can see, these sorts of
measurements can be quite exciting to researchers. But keep in mind
that ECoG shares with the deficit/lesion method the limitation of relying
on a patient population that is not randomly selected, and whose neural
activity is (by definition) atypical. These limitations should be kept in
mind when seeking to draw generalizations from ECoG data.
Stimulating and inhibiting brain function
Let’s talk about one last set of tools for probing brain function before
wrapping up this tour of the neurolinguist’s toolbox. Rather than pas-
sively recording brain activity, these tools alter brain activity, either by
stimulating it or by inhibiting it. This allows researchers to examine how
such effects change language processing.
One such tool is Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation, or TMS. Briefly,
TMS uses a strong and focused magnetic field to induce or inhibit electri-
cal currents in the cortex. TMS can be targeted fairly precisely, affecting
a few millimeters of cortical tissue. Different applications of TMS yield
different kinds of results. For example, if TMS is applied in a single pulse,
this can induce an action potential (when applied over the hand part of
the motor cortex, this pulse can make your finger move). When applied
repeatedly (so-called “rTMS”) at a relatively low frequency, say once per
second, this pattern tends to inhibit neural activity in the targeted region,
creating a so-called (temporary) “virtual lesion”; faster rates are thought
to enhance neuronal excitability.12
Another stimulation tool is Direct Cortical Stimulation (DCS). DCS
involves a current, not a magnetic field, and is applied directly to the
cortex of a surgery patient. This is an invasive technique, and it is com-
monly used in tandem with ECoG (described above) as a way to monitor
patients undergoing brain surgery. For example, patients will be asked
to name pictures while the surgeon stimulates parts of the temporal
lobe; the surgeon will then note sites that affected fluent speech. While
invasive, DCS is incredibly powerful, as it allows the surgeon to infer

40
THE TOOLBOX
with incredible spatial precision whether a part of the cortex is necessary
for a certain behavior.13 A non-invasive variant of this technique called
transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) has also been developed
with applications as a clinical tool in the treatment of aphasia or other
neurological syndromes.14
The great advantage of stimulation techniques is that, like
deficit/lesion methods, they allow inferences about whether one
region is causally related to a particular language outcome. Because
these techniques don’t rely on particular patient populations, TMS is
much more flexible and, potentially, can lead to more generalizable
results. Stimulation tools also have great temporal resolution, as pulses
can be applied at different time-points during an experimental trial.
Still, as with deficit/lesion methods again, our limited understand-
ing of neural plasticity is a barrier to more fully understanding the
outcome of stimulation methods, especially those that interfere with
processing.
Chapter summary
We’ve now opened the toolbox and seen what’s available for probing the
neural bases of language. We have learned the terms we need to navigate
around the brain and to make sense of someone who says “I applied TMS
to the anterior portion of the left inferior frontal gyrus.”
Each of the techniques that we’ve reviewed has both advantages and
disadvantages for making sense of brain structure and function. Becom-
ing familiar with these trade-offs is perhaps the most important lesson
from this chapter; it’s these features that link up particular methods to
specific research questions. For example, if you have a research question
concerning the timing of linguistic events (“Are semantic or syntatic rep-
resentations accessed first during comprehension?”), then you’d better
use a technique with the right temporal resolution (quick: Which ones
might work?). On the other hand, if you have a research question about
whether linguistic stimuli might involve the same representation (“Are
two allophones encoded as a single phoneme?”) perhaps you might con-
sider a technique with high enough spatial resolution to test for similar

Table 3. Methods cheat-sheet. Summary of the main pros and cons for each of the techniques for measuring brain function
reviewed in this chapter
Technique
Summary
Pros
Cons
deficit/lesion
Links patterns of brain damage
with language impairments
Earliest technique for mapping brain function
• Double dissociations allows causal inferences
Relies on specific patient populations • Difficult
to generalize; no two lesions or patient
symptoms are alike • Brain plasticity/recovery
poorly understood
fMRI
Measures
blood
oxygenation
changes
that
correlate
with
neuronal activity
High spatial resolution • Non-invasive
• Commonly available
Low temporal resolution • Loud
fNIRS
Measures blood oxygenation
using scattered light
Moderate spatial resolution • Non-invasive
• Cheaper than fMRI • Quiet • Good for
pediatric studies
Low temporal resolution • Lower spatial
resolution than fMRI
PET
Measures changes in blood
glucose
High spatial resolution • Developed prior to
fMRI • Not subject to some magnetic interfer-
ence that affects MRI
Very low temporal resolution • Involves radia-
tion • Generally supplanted by fMRI
EEG
Scalp electrodes measure elec-
trical currents from cortical
neurons
High temporal resolution • Relatively inexpen-
sive • Non-invasive • Quiet • Good for a variety
of populations
Very low spatial resolution
Continued

Table 3. Continued
Technique
Summary
Pros
Cons
MEG
Measures magnetic fields gener-
ated by cortical neurons
High temporal resolution • Moderate spatial
resolution • Non-invasive • Quiet
Expensive • Less common than EEG or fMRI
ECoG
Measures neuronal activity with
electrodes implanted in the
cortex
Exceptional spatial and temporal resolution
• High signal-to-noise ratio
Highly invasive procedure • Only used when
medically indicated • Recording site based on
medical need • Relies on specific patient
populations
TMS
Uses a magnetic field to excite or
inhibit cortical activity
High temporal resolution • Moderate spatial
resolution • Allows causal inferences
Brain plasticity poorly understood
DCS
Uses electrical current to
directly stimulate neuronal ac-
tivity
High temporal and spatial resolution • Allows
causal inferences
Highly invasive procedure

CHAPTER SUMMARY
43
or different activation patterns (such as…?). To help you, Table 3 aims to
bring together the main pros and cons for each of the techniques we’ve
discussed.
Of course, to really get to grips with all of these new concepts, we need
to use them. So, we now turn to how this whole suite of tools has been
used to understand how the brain comprehends speech.

3
Sounds in the brain
How does sound traveling through the air become brain activity
associated with a word’s meaning? We’ll tackle this question in this
chapter and the next in terms of three separate transformations. Each
takes us one step forward on the pathway from sound to meaning:
acoustic
signal
neuro-auditory
representation
(neurogram)
neuro-phonologcal
representation
(phonological sketch)
lexical
item
1
2
3
Spatial and temporal codes for sound
Before we get going, be sure not to confuse speech comprehension, the
main topic of this chapter, with language comprehension. Speech is
just one of several modalities that language may use. The study of sign
language comprehension provides deep insight into neural principles of
language that are shared across modalities.1
At the beginning of its journey, the spoken word is all but unrecog-
nizable. Speech comes to the listener as vibrations in the air impacting
your eardrum. Those vibrations have already been shaped by the outer
ear and ear canal to emphasize some frequencies over others. On the
other side of the eardrum is a viscous fluid that bathes a most remark-
able feat of evolutionary engineering: the cochlea. Coiled like a snail, the
cochlea contains the perceptual organ responsible for converting sound
waves into electrical impulses for the brain (see Fig. 10). This conversion
is carried out by thousands of tiny hair cells. They move when the sur-
rounding fluid vibrates, triggering a cascade of neuro-chemical processes
that sends action potentials along to the central nervous system.
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0003

SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CODES FOR SOUND
45
base
A.
B.
expanded
cochlea
high
frequency
20,000 Hz
frequency
1,500 Hz
frequency
20 Hz
auditory
cortex
mid
apex
low
Figure 10. Auditory pathway. (A) Schematic of the human ear and
cochlea; different sites along this structure respond to different sound
frequencies. (B) The location of the primary auditory cortex.
Source: (A) Adapted from an image by OpenStax, via Wikimedia Commons, under the CC
BY 4.0 International license (https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
The cochlea is exquisitely structured as it tapers from a large base
towards a narrow apex. This shape means that different frequencies are
emphasized at different points along the spiraled organ: high frequencies
at the base, and low frequencies at the apex. Thus, hair cells at differ-
ent locations of the cochlea are moved by different frequencies. This is a
spatial code – different information is represented by different neurons.
Spatial coding is the first of several principles underlyng how the brain
represents sound.
If you were to plot out the action potentials generated by hair cells
moving at different locations of the cochlea, you would see something
that is remarkably familiar from Introductory Linguistics: a spectro-
gram showing changes in sound energy at different frequencies over
time (a spectrogram is shown at the bottom of Fig. 11). The shape of
the cochlea’s spectrogram is specially tuned to the kinds of sounds hu-
mans have evolved to hear, from about 20 Hz, or twenty vibrations
per second, up to 20,000 Hz (depending on your age and propensity for
loud music). We can call the neural responses that represent sound at
the brain’s periphery the cochleagram.
Brain signals generated at the cochlea pass through a series of sub-
cortical structures before arriving at a bit of cortical tissue that projects
up from the superior temporal gyrus. This is Heschl’s gyrus or the pri-
mary auditory cortex (sometimes abbreviated “A1”). Like the visual
system in mammals, the auditory pathway mostly goes to the opposite,

46
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
cats
k
t
s
ɑ
ɑ
r
n d
f
i
ɝ
s
f
t
ε
are
soft
and
furry
spectral information
fine structure (>50 Hz)
temporal information
speech envelope (<20 Hz)
Sound
amplitude (dB)
0
Frequency (Hz)
1
Time (s)
2
æ
Figure 11. Speech information unfolds on multiple time-scales. The
speech waveform (top) shows relatively slow changes in loudness following
the speech intensity envelope (gray line) that reflects syllabic information.
Spectral information (bottom) carries fine structure detail that
distinguishes phonemic features, like the rapid change from [f ] to [t]
(black box).
Source: Modeled after Giraud and Poeppel (2012b, fig. 9.1)
or contra-lateral, hemisphere of the brain; sounds going in your left ear
are mostly processed by the auditory cortex in your right hemisphere.
All together, it takes about 50 milliseconds for electrical signals from the
cochlea to register in the auditory cortex.
How is sound represented in the auditory cortex? The first thing to
look for is whether the spatial code created at the cochlea is preserved
in the auditory cortex. Indeed, studies in animals and in humans have
shown that different parts of the auditory cortex respond selectively to
different frequencies. This cortical spatial code for sound is called tono-
topy. In one elegant study, researchers played simple tones as they were
swept from low to high and high to low frequencies over 60 seconds
(Talavage et al., 2004). Using fMRI, they monitored for peaks in the
BOLD signal in the auditory cortex. These peaks traveled as the

SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CODES FOR SOUND
47
frequency swept from high to low, revealing multiple regions within the
auditory cortex that show a gradient “map” for tonotopy.
The connection between a certain stimulus, like a tone at 1000 Hz,
and the response of a given neuron is called the receptive field of that
neuron. So, another way to talk about tonotopy is to say that neurons
in the primary auditory cortex have receptive fields that are tuned to
different frequencies, and neurons with similar tuning are adjacent to
each other. This notion of a receptive field has proven to be very fruit-
ful in other domains, like vision, to understand how neurons process
information.2
Before we continue with the intricacies of the brain’s auditory system,
we need to turn our attention to the speech signal itself. How, indeed,
could we make sense of the brain bases of speech comprehension if we
don’t consider just what makes something, well, speech? Familiar con-
cepts from phonetics, such as phonemes and distinctive features, will
be introduced shortly. First, let’s consider just how remarkably flexi-
ble humans are when it comes to recognizing speech. It turns out that
frequency information – our main focus so far – is not always that impor-
tant for understanding. Speech scientists break down an acoustic signal
into two parts, shown in Fig. 11. This familiar waveform has peaks and
troughs – points in time where the sound is louder or softer. Tracing
these peaks and trouphs is the speech envelope; it’s what gives speech its
rhythmic patterns of syllables and stress contours. Zooming in shows
the rapid sound vibrations that make up the speech energy at different
frequencies; this fine structure includes narrow bands of energy, like the
formants that distinguish vowels, but also broad-band noise associated
with sibilants and fricatives. Quite interestingly, speech comprehension
is actually fairly good even when there is very little fine structure, and
only the speech envelope.
One way to test for the relative importance of fine structure is to use
a technique called noise vocoding. In vocoding, the speech envelope is
extracted from an utterance, and the fine structure is replaced with white
noise (equal sound energy at all frequencies). When this procedure is
done in a very coarse way, say using the envelope from just ten bands
ranging from the lowest to highest frequency (a range from 20 to over
10,000 Hz), the speech is still remarkably understandable.3

48
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
So, the brain needs not only to represent frequency information, the
spectral signature of speech, but also to capture temporal information, or
the changes in loudness over time.
There is some really neat evidence that the brain tracks temporal
information – the speech envelope – in exquisite detail. In one represen-
tative study, researchers used ECoG recordings from the left temporal
lobe, including auditory cortex, while participants simply listened to nat-
ural speech utterances (Kubanek et al., 2013). When they examined the
signal coming specifically from electrodes in the auditory cortex, they
found a remarkable match between the rapid fluctuations of brain ac-
tivity and the equally rapid fluctuations of the temporal envelope. This
match between brain activity and perceptual input is called entrain-
ment, and may be a key method the brain uses to “lock on” to important
elements of the sensory system for further processing.
The word “entrainment” almost implies a kind of mind control in
that the brain automatically locks on to percetual inputs. But envelope
entrainment, in fact, is subject to control by your attention. This is pretty
important, because the speech that we comprehend is only a fraction of
the babble that we hear. I’m writing this paragraph right now from an
airport lounge where I can hear 3–4 conversations, two different radios,
and a whole range of other noises like fans, motors, etc. How do we follow
speech amidst all this noise? A familiar example of our resilience to com-
plex noisy environments is the cocktail party effect: This is the experience
of being in a crowded room and noticing when we hear our name spoken
somewhere on the other side of the room. It’s as if our name just “leaps
out” of the babble of the busy room.
There are at least two ways we could navigate the chaos of real-
life acoustic inputs: We might “hear” all of it at early stages, including
the overlapping acoustic input from multiple sources, and then rely
on higher-level linguistic processing to sort out which words to attend
to. Or, alternatively, even early perceptual processing might be more
selective, such that we only hear just that part of the acoustic input
that we consider important. The data are consistent with the second
of these two views. One piece of supporting data comes from a study
by Nai Ding and Jonathan Simon at the University of Maryland 2013.

SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL CODES FOR SOUND
49
They had participants listen to segments of speech from an audiobook
that were mixed in with different amounts of noise during MEG record-
ing. The noise was crafted to have a similar spectrum to the speech
stimulus – kind of like people talking over each other in a busy room.
At the loudest levels, the noise made it so the participants could not un-
derstand the audiobook at all. At moderate levels the noise still strongly
distorted the acoustic input itself, but participants could understand the
speech robustly. Moreover, the researchers could use patterns of audi-
tory cortex neural activity to reconstruct the “true” speech envelope,
even when noise distorted that envelope in the stimulus that participants
heard. So, temporal processing in the auditory cortex can be selectively
tuned to separate out specific speech sounds from other acoustic inputs.
It’s as if we can turn up the volume on just the most relevant parts of the
bubbling noise in our environment.
How might the temporal information from the speech envelope be
encoded in the auditory cortex? Brian Barton, Alyssa Brewer, and col-
leagues (2012) devised an fMRI experiment that built on the use of
frequency-swept tones for tonotopy, already mentioned above. The ex-
periment had two kinds of acoustic stimuli (see Fig. 12B). First were
simple bursts of noise that were restricted to a range of small frequency
bands (350–450 Hz, 750–850 Hz, 1550–1650 Hz, etc.; think very artificial
formants); this tested for tonotopy much like the study above. Second
were stimuli with white noise that changes in loudness periodically (it
is amplitude modulated); the sounds get louder and softer at a specific
rhythm, like two, four, or eight times a second. You’ll remember from
Chapter 2 that fMRI is loud (see page 33). To help the participants hear
these stimuli, the researchers used a technique called sparse sampling:
What that means is that the fMRI is only turned on after the stimuli
have already been presented. This works because the BOLD signal repre-
senting the brain’s response to those stimuli takes six or more seconds to
reach its maximum (for a reminder, take a look back at Fig. 8 on page 32).
Using these stimuli, the experimenters first mapped how different
parts of the auditory cortex responded to sounds at different frequen-
cies. As expected, this showed the now-familiar tonotopic pattern; an
example of their tonotopy results is shown on the top panel of Fig. 12C.

50
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
speech envelope
A.
B.
C.
0
10
60
Broadband Noise (AM rate)
Narrowband Noise (CF)
8000
6000
4000
2000
Frequency (Hz)
Frequency (Hz)
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0.1 0.2
Time (s)
0.3 0.4
–40
db
–60
–80
–100
–120
–140
8000
6000
4000
2000
0
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0.1 0.2
Time (s)
0.3 0.4
1 cm
Subject 4, Right
Tonotopy
Periodotopy
Subject 2, Left
Subject 1, Left
2
400
800
1600
3200
6400
STG
STG
STG
STG
STG
STG
HG-2
HG-1
HG-1
HG-2
HG
HG
HG
hA1
hA1
hA1
hA1
hA1
HG
hA1
4
8
16
32
64 128 256
70
80
Time (s)
90
100
20
30
40
SF
TTS
STS
50
neural activity
ρ = 0.53
Figure 12. The neurogram. (A) Neurons in the primary auditory cortex
track speech envelope information. (B) Stimuli used to map temporal (top)
and spectral (bottom) spatial codes in the primary auditory cortex.
(C) Primary auditory cortex from three subjects shows gradient spatial
maps for spectral (top) and temporal (bottom) information.
Sources: A: Kubanek et al. (2013); B and C: Barton et al. (2012).
They then mapped out the auditory cortex response to the periodic stim-
uli. Just as with tonotopy, different parts of the auditory cortex respond to
different kinds of periodic stimuli, and it does so in a gradient: Neurons

NEUROGRAMS AND THE PHONOLOGICAL SKETCH
51
that respond to a 2 Hz stimuli are adjacent to those that respond at 4 Hz,
which are next to the 8 Hz neurons, etc. This is shown in the bottom
panel of 12C. You can call this new spatial code periodotopy. Moreover,
the spatial arrangment of this response was remarkable: The neurons
that responded to changes in periodicity were almost exactly 90 degrees
offset from the neurons that responded to changes in frequency. It looks
as if the auditory cortex contains a tiny little x- and y-axis (actually,
several sets of axes) that encode both the spectral and temporal details
of incoming stimuli.
We’ve begun to get a picture of something we can call a neurogram.
This is the “brain’s-eye-view” of sound. Sound is characterized by spec-
tral patterns – sound energy at different frequencies – and also by
temporal patterns of loudness varying over time. These patterns are en-
coded with a fine degree of detail in the auditory cortex. We’ve now
reached the first stop on the pathway from sound to meaning.
But (there’s always a “but”), just because the brain can represent
the acoustic details of speech doesn’t yet tell us how it can discover
the words that are carried by those sounds. Words are built up of
phonemes – speech sounds. And phonemes themselves are built up from
distinctive features. The striking thing about phonemes and features is
that they are categorical: A phoneme is either a /t/ or a /d/ (“mat”
or “mad”); there is no in-between! But, what we’ve seen so far about
the neurogram is not categorical, it is continuous: Neurons respond to
changes in spectral or temporal information in gradient patterns, from
low to high or fast to slow. How does the brain turn the continuous
acoustic information encoded in the neurogram into discrete speech
information?
Neurograms and the phonological sketch
To find our way from the continuous world of acoustics to the cate-
gorical world of speech and language, we need a clearer grasp of the
puzzle facing the brain. First, we will see concrete evidence that the
neurogram alone isn’t sufficient for understanding words. Then we’ll
see that the early auditory responses in the brain indeed do represent

52
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
categorical information, right alongside continuous information. Once
we are firmly puzzled by these fascinating findings, we’ll then turn to
some clues for how the brain carries out the remarkable transformation
from neurograms to phonemes.
I’ll start with two classic pieces of evidence that speech perception
can’t be understood in terms of continuous information alone. Both
pieces of evidence have to do with the great variation in speech sig-
nals and how listeners seem to handle this variation with ease. The first
piece of evidence is, straightforwardly enough, the phenomenon of cat-
egorical perception. Briefly: You start with speech sounds that have been
artificially altered, say starting with the syllable [ѕa] and changing the
acoustics incrementally until you reach a [∫a] syllable. While such stim-
uli form a smooth continuum, listeners don’t perceive a smooth change.
Rather, they typically report hearing a sequence of [ѕa] sounds followed
by a sequence of [∫a]s.4
Now, you might think that all the /ѕ/ tokens that you hear – despite
their differences from each other – form a nice neat acoustic cluster that
is different from related sounds (/∫/, /z/…). But that is definitively not
so; this is one of the real striking puzzles confronting the brain’s abil-
ity to understand speech. For example, if listeners hear a word with a
sound artificially altered so as to be amibiguous between, say, [ѕ] and
[∫], they will report hearing whichever sound makes a sensible word.
So, [WI_] is typically heard as “wish”, but [lε_] is heard as “less” (the
underline “_” indicates the acoustically altered in-between sound). This
phenomenon is called the Ganong effect (Ganong, 1980). A similar effect
is found when listening to different speakers. If listeners are cued to think
they are listening to an adult male speaker of American English, they are
more likely to hear [ѕ] sounds for words that begin with an ambiguous
[ѕ]-or-[∫] sound (“said” vs. “shed”), and the reverse is true when a listener
thinks the speaker is female.5 Somehow, listeners are able to navigate the
great variability in speech with apparent ease – even to the point that one
speaker’s [ѕ] is another’s [∫]!
These pieces of evidence indicate that continuous acoustic informa-
tion – what we saw encoded in the brain’s neurogram in Fig. 12 above
– isn’t enough to explain how the brain recognizes phonemes and,
ultimately, words. Corroborating insights come from brain data. One

NEUROGRAMS AND THE PHONOLOGICAL SKETCH
53
particularly fascinating example is an ECoG study by Nima Mesgarani,
Edward Chang, and colleagues (2014) at the University of California,
San Francisco. In this study, patients with electrodes implanted in their
superior temporal lobe – including the primary auditory cortex – lis-
tened to sentences that were selected to include a wide range of English
phonemes. By gathering signals from different sites along the cortex,
the researchers identified locations that responsed specifically to cer-
tain phonemes. The first thing they found was that, indeed, electrodes
at different sites were selective to specific phonemes. So, for example,
one electrode only responded to stop consonants ([d] [ɡ] [b] [p] [k]…),
another to sibilant fricatives ([ѕ] [z] [∫]), and another to nasals ([n] [m]
[ŋ]). You can see some examples of their data in Fig. 15C on page 65.
These sort of data indicate that populations of neurons in the superior
temporal gyrus have phonemic receptive fields.
This is cool, and it gets cooler. First, these brain responses were fast –
starting just 100 milliseconds after the beginning of a phoneme (remem-
ber, it takes about 50 milliseconds for auditory information just to get to
the cortex). Second, these brain responses weren’t organized in terms
of phonemes themselves, but actually in terms of the distinctive features
that phonemes are built from. We already see this in the examples above:
An electrode might be sensitive to the class of stop consonants, not just
to specific phones like [d] or [k].
So, early neural responses in the temporal lobe reflect phonological
features. Are these responses really categorical? “Hold it right there!” says
the skeptical reader. “Stops and fricatives have very different acoustics.
Of course their neurograms won’t be the same, and because neurograms
are a spatial code we’d expect ECoG electrodes at different locations to
respond to different phonemes.”
The best evidence that these brain responses are indeed categorical
comes from electrodes that show the classical non-linear response as-
sociated with categorical perception. While individual consonants vary
in the acoustics of voicing, Mesgarani and colleages see a specific elec-
trode that responds in an “all or nothing” way when the consonant is
voiced, another that is “all or nothing” when the consonant is unvoiced,
and yet a third that responds to stops regardless of whether they are
voiced or not.

54
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
These data show how even early auditory responses capture cat-
egorical, not continuous, features. In addition, other data show that
high-fidelity continuous acoustic information in the auditory cortex
isn’t enough to guarantee speech comprehension. Nourski and Brugge
(2011) measured how well the brain tracks speech envelope informa-
tion using ECoG data gathered from patients with electrodes planted
directly into their auditory cortex. Their measurements show that the
speech envelope is accurately tracked in the auditory cortex, even as the
stimuli were sped up to about three times their original rate. Recall from
page 47 that speech perception itself remains fairly high even when par-
ticipants mostly only recieve envelope information. Despite the fidelity
to the speech signal found in the auditory cortex, the participants them-
selves began to have great difficulty understanding the speech when it
was sped up by a factor of about 2.5 (you can try this yourself next time
you listen to an audiobook). So, despite the auditory cortex following
even very rapid speech envelope changes, this doesn’t mean that listeners
can perceive that speech.
The data that we’ve seen over the last few pages deepens the speech
perception puzzle facing the brain in a few specific ways. Speech
perception is categorical, not continuous (see categorical perception,
Ganong effect, categorical responses from temporal lobe electrodes).
These categories can’t fully be understood as summaries of acoustic dif-
ferences (see the Ganong effect) and also, even when the auditory cortex
can capture acoustic details, this doesn’t guarantee speech comprehen-
sion (see sped-up speech). Our guiding question is then: How does the
brain transform a continuous neurogram to a categorical representation
of speech sounds?
Let’s take stock of the ingredients we have for finding an answer:
(i) the input we have to work with is the neurogram, (ii) the outputs we
need are phonemic features, (iii) the transformation occurs relatively rel-
atively rapidly (by 100–200 ms after speech begins), and (iv) it is carried
out in the superior temporal lobe, in the vicinity of the primary auditory
cortex. The next ingedient comes from one of my very favorite studies.
Listeners can make sense out of a great deal of speech variability,
but we’re stumped when speech is played backwards – it sounds totally
alien! Even backwards speech, though, can become comprehensible in
the right circumstances, and these circumstances put us on the path

NEUROGRAMS AND THE PHONOLOGICAL SKETCH
55
towards one answer for the puzzle at hand. In a paper just five para-
graphs long, Kourosh Saberi and David Perrott (1999) describe a study
in which participants listened to reversed speech. The stimuli were mod-
ified so that the reversals spanned larger or smaller windows of time. To
do this, the sound waveforms were divided into segments of, say 300, 200,
100, 50, or 20 milliseconds each. Then, each segment was reversed, and
the segments were put back together in the original order. In all cases
the participants heard reversed speech. But the segments, or “grains”
of speech, that were being reversed were either large or small. Listen-
ers couldn’t make sense of the words when the reversals spanned large
segments of 300 or 200 milliseconds. When segments were smaller than
200 ms, participants started to make some sense of what they heard.
Remarkably, the listeners reached 100% accuracy when the reversed seg-
ments were still about 30–50 milliseconds long. To put this result in
perspective, the difference between voiced and voiceless stops – [ta] ver-
sus [da] – hinges on acoustic differences that last just 20–30 milliseconds.
So, reversed speech is almost perfectly comprehensible if the grains of
sound that are being reversed are small enough, where “enough” is about
1/20th of a second.
These data point to the leading that the brain has a sampling rate for
speech sounds. What that means is that the brain takes a “snapshot”
of acoustic information at fixed windows; everything that unfolds dur-
ing that snapshot is integrated into one chunk of information; and that
information is used to pick out phonemes. Researchers have proposed
a few variants of this general idea, which I’ll call temporal windows of
integration.6 We’ll focus on two such theorized windows. The first spans
roughly 25–40 milliseconds, which is about the window size identified
in the speech reversal experiment above. This window is about the right
length to distinguish the fine structure spectral properties of different
phonemes. A second window is longer, spanning 200–300 milliseconds.
This latter window is about the right length to sample the properties
of syllables and other structures that make up the temporal envelope of
speech.
Is there evidence that the auditory cortex can sample, or integrate,
auditory information in these time-scales? Much of the relevant data
comes from the study of neural oscillations – these are brain waves, or

56
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
periodic patterns of brain activity that occur at specific rhythms (you’ve
probably heard of one of these, alpha waves, which are associated with a
relaxed awake state). Brain waves emerge when groups of neurons syn-
chronize their activity such that they become excited and/or inhibited
together. Such synchronization is important for processing information;
it aligns whole populations together in terms of when they optimally
receive input and send output on for further processing.
In a 2007 study, Anne-Lise Giraud and colleagues measured
neural oscillations at different rates using EEG, and combined these
data with spatially precise fMRI data.7 They focused on endogenous os-
cillations – these are the brain wave patterns present when you are at
rest; they aren’t associated with any particular external (exogenous) stim-
ulus. From the EEG data, the researchers extracted changes in signal
power in a band of frequencies, including from 28–40 Hz (a 40 Hz sig-
nal completes one cycle every 25 milliseconds) and also from 3–6 Hz
(166–333 milliseconds per cycle). Then they examine fMRI data col-
lected simultaneously for changes in the BOLD signal that correspond
to changes in these oscillations. They find that increased oscillations
in just this band of frequencies correspond to changes in the BOLD
signal right in the auditory cortex. And the auditory cortex response
is asymmetrical: The left hemisphere shows a relatively stronger re-
sponse to the shorter “phonemic-feature-sized” oscillations, and the
right hemisphere shows a stronger response to the longer “syllable-sized”
oscillations.
The data suggest that the auditory cortex has intrinsic rhythms, and
these rhythms are matched in time to linguistic features of speech on two
levels. The shorter window is appropriate for integrating spectral infor-
mation that is used to identify phonemic features. The longer window
appears to be well-suited to identify temporal properties of carried by
syllables, including stress and intonation patterns.
If these two rhythms are crucially involved, in some way, in sampling
the continuous acoustic input, then the asymmetry we just saw should
mean that listeners prefer different kinds of speech information in each
hemisphere: Auditory input to the left hemisphere should show higher
performance – better speech comprehension – when fine structure is
preserved, and the right hemisphere should show higher performance

NEUROGRAMS AND THE PHONOLOGICAL SKETCH
57
when the speech envelope is preserved. Houda Saoud, Anne-Lise Gi-
raud, and colleagues (2012) test just this prediction using an experimen-
tal method called dichotic listening. In this sort of experiment, isolating
earphones are used to present different auditory stimuli to the left and
right ears (recall that the left ear ⇝right hemisphere, and right ear ⇝
left hemisphere). With this setup, researchers present spoken words that
are artificially manipulated to remove either the speech envelope or fine
structure detail for either ear. First, the study reports some now-familiar
facts: Words that have been modified to reduce their fine structure de-
tail are still relatively well understood, but words that are modified to
remove their envelope are almost impossible to understand (see page
47). When fine structure and envelope information is presented to dif-
ferent ears, comprehension is improved but, crucially, comprehension
is best when there is a match between the underlying oscillations and
the kind of information being presented at each ear. That is, listeners
show better performance when fine structure information is going to the
left hemisphere (faster “phonemic-feature-length” oscillations), and en-
velope information going to the right hemisphere (dominated by slower
“syllable-length” oscillations).
We’ve skipped over a crucial piece of data in our discussion so far.
What is the evidence that the brain integrates information in that larger
200–300 millisecond window? I’ve connected this time-window to syl-
lables and to the temporal envelope of speech. But what is the evidence
that the brain takes samples – snapshots – at this larger time-window? A
striking piece of evidence comes from the McGurk effect. (I suspect this
will be at least a little familiar to many readers.) We’ve mostly been fo-
cused on the processing of speech alone. The McGurk effect arises when
auditory and visual information is combined together. Classically, lis-
teners watch a video of someone while they speak a single syllable; the
stimulus is edited so that the audio and visual signals don’t match, for in-
stance, by combining audio of someone saying [ba] with a video of that
same person saying the syllable [ɡa]. Confronted with this sort of stim-
uli, listeners typically report hearing [ɡa] or, sometimes [da]. It is very
rare for a listener to “hear” a [ba] – even though it is indeed a [ba] sound
that was presented (McGurk and MacDonald, 1976).

58
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
Virginie van Wassenhove and colleagues (2007) examine what hap-
pens when the auditory and visual information aren’t presented at
exactly the same time. They present mismatched acoustic-visual stim-
uli with different time-delays, or lags, between the two stimulus parts.
For example, the acoustic stimuli might be presented 200 or 100 mil-
liseconds before the visual, or 100, 200, 300… after the beginning of the
visual stimulus. They then record which stimuli were “McGurked” by the
presence of mismatching visual information – that is, when did partici-
pants “hear” something other than the actual auditory stimulus? When
plotted out as a function of time, van Wassenhove et al. observe that the
McGurk effect is quite robust to mismatches in time; participants experi-
enced the illusion even when the auditory stimuli occurred up to 200 or
so milliseconds after the beginning of the visual stimulus! This pattern
of data suggests that the brain does indeed integrate speech informa-
tion that is spread over 200 milliseconds apart; here, audio and visual
information is integrated into a single syllable percept.
The puzzle the brain faces is how to map continuous input to cate-
gorical phonological information. The answer we’re considering is that
it does so by taking samples, or snapshots, of the input at different
temporal windows – integrating information at time-scales tuned to
phonological and syllabic information. There are many questions we can
ask about the this account. One chief question is how the system handles
variable and degraded input. Indeed, we already saw on page 52 that
speech perception seems to involve more than the straight mapping of
acoustic to phonological information from the “bottom up”. How does
non-acoustic information facilitate speech perception?
There is a good deal of information about speech that is not carried
in the acoustic signal we’ve been discussing so far. The visual infor-
mation causing the McGurk effect, discussed just above, is one such
source. Another source of information are the expectations of the lis-
tener. Listeners make predictions about what a speaker might say next;
just think about all the times you’ve jumped in and finished someone
else’s sentence. You take advantage of many kinds of information when
you do this, such as what you already know about your language (pos-
sible words, possible speech sounds), what you know about the speaker

NEUROGRAMS AND THE PHONOLOGICAL SKETCH
59
herself (what she might be likely to say), and what you know about the
immediate linguistic context (what you are talking about).
Another way to put this idea is that listeners have the knowledge
to internally synthesize upcoming speech. Generating such an internal
representation of what they expect to hear can help in the subse-
quent analysis of the speech signal when it comes. Such an account
of speech perception is called, appropriately enough, analysis by syn-
thesis. A good example of how the brain uses predictions for speech
perception is found in a study by Ediz Sohoglu, Matthew Davis, and
colleagues at the University of Cambridge in 2012. They presented par-
ticipants with single words that were distorted to a greater or lesser
degree (they used noise-vocoded stimuli, which we already encountered
above on page 47). This distortion made it moderately to extremely diffi-
cult to identify phonemes from acoustic information alone. Participants
also saw a written word briefly flashed on the screen prior to the au-
ditory stimulus; the word either matched or didn’t match what they
heard.
A matched written word presented before a distorted spoken word
helped participants accurately identify what they heard. Did this
improvement actually affect the mapping from acoustic to phonological
information itself? (It’s possible that the written word helped partici-
pants make a decision about what they heard without actually affecting
the perceptual process.) The evidence suggests that predictions help re-
fine phonological processing; when the word and audio matched, there
was a very early brain response in the left frontal lobe, within the inferior
frontal gyrus, and this brain response was followed by reduced activation
in the superior temporal gyrus. It’s as if predictions that were generated
in the frontal lobe eased the burden on the temporal lobe when it was
confronted with a distorted acoustic input.
We see here that existing linguistic knowledge plays an important –
perhaps central – role in speech perception. The way this knowledge
is combined with the input to help with recognizing words is illustra-
teed in Fig. 13. This observation connects to a much larger issue of
whether understanding speech requires a kind of perception that is dif-
ferent from how we perceive other sensory stimuli. I think evidence from

60
SOUNDS IN THE BRAIN
neurogram
phonological
sketch
analysis by
synthesis
lexical
access
top-down
predictions
Figure 13. Analysis by synthesis. Acoustic information is mapped to
neural representations of sound – the neurogram – and then to
phonological representations. This analysis is aided by synthesis of speech
input based on top-down knowledge.
neurolinguistics offers new insight into the old and contentious debate
as to whether “speech is special.” We’ll circle back to this debate in the
next chapter.
Chapter Summary
Take a breath. We’ve come a long way in this chapter – from sound waves
moving hair cells in the cochlea all the way to phonological analysis.
• Acoustic information is represented with a spatial code both at the
cochlea, and in the primary auditory cortex. That means that differ-
ent neurons encode different acoustic features of speech. Tonotopy
is the spatial code for frequency information, where neurons that
are adjacent to each other respond to sounds with similar frequen-
cies. The brain may also represent temporal acoustic information
in a similar way, called periodotopy.
• The brain maps from these continuous neural representations of
sound, or neurograms, to categorical linguistic units like phonemes
to create a phonological sketch within about 100–150 milliseconds
in the superior temporal gyrus surrounding the auditory cortex.
• This mapping is carried out by integrating acoustic information
within at least two temporal windows: A shorter window for the

CHAPTER SUMMARY
61
fine structure of speech that captures spectral detail, and a longer
window that captures changes across time, such as the speech
envelope.
• The phonological sketch is refined by a series of feedback loops
between acoustic input and linguistic knowledge called analy-
sis by synthesis. The outcome of these interlocking processes is a
representation suitable for identifying words.
We’ve completed the transformations that map from acoustic input to
brain representation of sound, and then to phonemes. The next chapter
turns to the neural representation of phonemes themselves.

4
A neural code for speech
This chapter zooms in on the neural representation of phonemes. But,
we have one thing to discuss before we get started. Consider: What is the
“point” of speech perception? My answer may sound like a bit of a cheat,
but it turns out that from the “brain’s-eye-view” the point really depends
on what the listener has been asked to do – their task.
My main focus for the rest of the chapter and, indeed, book will be just
on one kind of task: finding meaning. On this view, the point of speech
perception is to identify words, phrases, sentences, and so forth, in or-
der to understand the speaker’s message. “What else could you do?” you
might ask. Well, rather than comprehending, you might be repeating, or
shadowing, what you’ve just heard (think about relaying a phone con-
versation to someone standing next to you). Another task comes up in
a laboratory settings, where a researcher might ask you to listen to in-
put and press a button if you hear a certain phoneme (this is a phoneme
monitoring task).
I mention these alternatives because they have a large effect on what
happens to speech information once it’s passed through the early stages
of perception that we’ve seen so far. Fig. 14 sketches a dual-stream model
of this larger speech-processing system developed by Gregory Hickok
and David Poeppel (2007). On this view, there are two pathways. One
is for understanding; this ventral stream travels along the temporal lobe
and then the frontal lobe, carrying out transformations from acoustics
through to phonemes, then lexical items, and ultimately the meaning of
sentences. The ventral stream is shown in dark gray in Fig. 14. If you are
engaged in a non-understanding task like speech repetition, however,
then this theory suggests an alternative dorsal stream for processing.
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0004

A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
63
Articulation
Combinatoric
network
Lexical
interface
ventral stream
Phonological
analysis
Acoustic analysis,
neurogram
Sensory-motor
interface
dorsal stream
Figure 14. A dual-stream model for speech perception. Acoustic
information in the primary auditory cortex interacts with phonological
representations in the posterior superior temporal gyrus. Then, speech
input is hypothesized to travel along two paths depending on the listener’s
task. For tasks involving comprehension, processing moves anterior along
the temporal lobe and to the inferior frontal lobe; this is the ventral stream.
For tasks involving repetition, speech information is mapped along a
dorsal stream from the posterior temporal lobe to the inferior frontal lobe.
Source: Adapted from Hickok and Poeppel (2007).
This second pathway travels from the temporal lobe through superior
regions of the frontal lobe associated with the motor system in order to
more directly map acoustic input to representations of articulation. This
dorsal stream is shown in light gray in Fig. 14.
We’ll mostly stick to the ventral path as we move forward to get a han-
dle on how people make meaning out of speech. But as we do this, it will
be important to keep in mind two things. The first is that the brain areas
we discuss are all parts of a larger multi-faceted network that spans on a
great many areas of the cortex. The second point is that the nodes in this
network, and hence the observations we make about any specific pattern
of brain activity, really depend on what task we’ve asked the brain to do
in a particular experiment.

64
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
A neural code for phonemes
The sketch shown at the end of the previous chapter (Fig. 13 on page 60)
includes a box labeled phonological sketch. What do we know about the
neural code for phonological information? The current state of knowl-
edge doesn’t have all the answers, and in fact some intriguing clues are
not all consistent with each other. I’m going to talk about some of these
debates. I also want to show that, despite our somewhat limited knowl-
edge, these neural models are starting to have an impact on our linguistic
understanding of phonemes themselves.
A natural starting point is to consider whether the neural code for
phonemes, like the neurogram itself, is built on a spatial code. That is,
are different phonemes and phonemic features represented by activa-
tion of different populations of neurons? Matthias Scharinger and Bill
Idsardi (2011) test this proposition by combining the fine spatial and
temporal resolution of MEG with the somewhat unique phonological
properties of Turkish. The Turkish vowel system is balanced in that
it shows a full set of distinctive features spanning front/back articula-
tion, high/low, and lip-roundedness.1 This linguistic property of Turkish
allows the reserchers to test if there is a “neural vowel space” that approx-
imates the acoustic/articulatory vowel space, which is shown in Fig. 15A.
They presented Turkish-speaking participants with hundreds of isolated
vowels; the participants were asked to press a button whenever they
hear a certain consonant among these sounds. These stimuli evoked a
brain response in the auditory cortex that peaks about 100 ms after the
vowel begins. This is called the “M100” brain response.2 Because they
used MEG, the researchers could estimate the location, or source, of this
M100 response fairly accurately. They reasoned that if there were a spa-
tial code for phonemes – just as with neurograms – the location of the
M100 peak would differ systematically for different Turkish vowels.
Indeed, Scharinger and colleagues find different source locations for
different vowels all along the left superior temporal gyrus, in the vicinity
of the auditory cortex. Remarkably, these source locations appear to fall
along systematic axes: Front vowels all fall along an inferior-to-superior
plane, while back vowels fall along an anterior-to-posterior plane. These
axes are shown in Fig. 15B.

A NEURAL CODE FOR PHONEMES
65
L
Voicing
Place
Manner
11
9
8
8
9
4
3
5
3 4
5
2
R
D.
ε
æ
0
0.2 0.4
0
0.2 0.4
0
0.2 0.4
C.
120
0
t-value
d
e1
e2
e3
b
g
p
k
t
z
s
f
u
w
r
l
ɔ
aI
a
eI
j
v
n
m
ŋ
I
i
ð
ʉ
aʊ
oʊ
ə
θ
∫
Phonemes
52
–10
–9
–8
–7
–6
–5
–4
–3
–2
–1
0
superior-inferior [mm]
posterior-anterior [mm]
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
38
40
42
44
46
medial-lateral [mm]
unrounded
[ε]
[i]
[y]
[œ]
rounded
48
50
52
54
38
40
42
44
46
medial-lateral [mm]
48
50
52
54
B.
Front vowels
high
low
Back vowels
low
high
rounded
unrounded
[ɯ]
[u]
[ɔ]
[ɑ]
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
2400
1900
F1 [Hz]
F1 [Hz]
Front vowels
A.
Back vowels
high
low
rounded
unrounded
rounded
low
high
unrounded
[i]
[ɯ]
[u]
[ɔ]
[ɑ]
[y]
1400
900
400
F2 [Hz]
F2 [Hz]
200
300
400
500
600
700
800 2400
1900
1400
900
400
[æ]
[ε]
Figure 15. The neural representation of phonemes. (A) Vowels span an
acoustic space defined by the first and second formants. (B) Vowels span a
neural space in two orthogonal planes around the superior temporal gyrus.
(C) Cortical electrodes implanted along the temporal lobe show sensitivity
to specific phonological features. (D) The spatial code for phonemic
features spans the temporal lobe but not in a clearly defined gradient;
non-adjacent regions appear to encode similar information.
Sources: A and B: Scharinger et al. (2011); C: Mesgarani et al. (2014); D: Arsenault and
Buchsbaum (2015).
Of course, the vowels do have different acoustics. To test whether
these spatial maps follow from the already-familiar spatial code for a
neurogram, the researchers considered two statistical models of the spa-
tial location of the vowel. On one model, the spatial distances between

66
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
vowels should depend on their acoustic differences. On a second model,
vowel location was treated as a simple binary difference in vowel features
(e.g. back vowel or not? rounded lips or not?). To get the intuition here,
consider two specific vowel pairs: the front vowels [i]–[ε] and the back
vowels [ɯ]–[ɑ]. The acoustic vowel spaces in Fig. 15A show that, within
each pair, the vowels differ in height (vowel height information is carried
on the first formant). When the acoustics of their stimuli are measured,
the back pair differs quite a lot in terms of the first formant (over 300 Hz),
but the front pair doesn’t differ nearly as much (about 200 Hz). So, if the
MEG source data reflects acoustic information, than distance between
the pair of back vowels should be greater than the distance between the
pair of front vowels. But, if the MEG source data reflect phonemic fea-
ture information, not acoustics, then the pairs of vowels should be about
equidistant because each pair only differs by one phonemic feature. The
statistical models show evidence for features, not acoustics: The spatial
locations are about equidistant when vowels differ in just one feature;
their distances do not appear to be directly proportional to the acoustic
differences. Together, these data appear to indicate that there is a vowel
map in the superior temporal gyrus, where distinctive features map to
separate axes in space.
Data from other methods support the conclusion that there is a spa-
tial code for phonemic features in the superior temporal gyrus. Should
we call this phonotopy? In tonotopy, an acoustic dimension (frequency)
is mapped to a spatial gradient in the brain; sounds with adjacent fre-
quencies activate neurons that are adjacent to each other. By analogy, the
data above seems to suggest that phonemes with similar features activate
nearby neuronal populations.
When we expand our view to other kinds of data, however, we do not
see strong support for this kind of phonotopy. One such kind consists of
ECoG recordings taken directly from the superior temporal cortex while
patients listen to naturally spoken sentences (Mesgarani et al., 2014).3 In
fact, we discussed these data on page 53. We observed that parts of the
superior temporal gyrus respond selectively to different phonemes, and
also that some of those response patterns are categorical, not continuous
(we called these phonemic receptive fields). But, in contrast to the idea of
phonotopy, the researchers did not observe a clear pattern in terms of

A NEURAL CODE FOR PHONEMES
67
which recording sites – which populations of neurons – responded to
different phonemes. There was no simple “map” on the superior tempo-
ral gyrus such that phonemes with similar features showed activation in
adjacent recording sites.4
A similar, and similarly complex, result has also been observed, using
fMRI by Jessica Arsenault and Bradley Buchsbaum (2015). In this study,
adults listened to a series of syllables that begin with different conso-
nants. The consonants were chosen specifically to be more or less similar
to each other. They measured similarity in terms of phoneme confusabil-
ity: which phonemes are more likely to be mis-heard as each other (so,
[t] might be mis-heard as another stop, like [d] or [k], more often than as
a fricative like [s]). To identify which brain regions are sensitive to dif-
ferent phonemic features, the researchers used a method for analyzing
fMRI data called multi-voxel pattern analysis, or MVPA. We haven’t seen
this before, so I’ll take a moment to describe it. MVPA is a useful tool to
understand the neural representations that “matter” to a particular set
of voxels in the brain. This is a way to ask, now with fMRI, about what
the receptive field of a population of neurons might be (but remember
that fMRI voxels include tens of thousands of neurons). With MVPA, re-
searchers ask how well voxels in a specific area, called the “searchlight,”
can distinguish, or classify, different types of stimuli.5 The basic logic of
MVPA is illustrated in the diagram below:
Stimulus Type
100
100
50
A
AA
B
B
B
Voxel 2
Voxel 1
Voxel 1
Voxel 2
50
0
0
A
B A
A B
B
In this diagram the searchlight includes just two voxels. The response
pattern for each voxel to two types of stimuli is shown on the left. The
plot on the right shows these same activations, now plotted against each
other. You can see plainly that the stimuli lead to quite distinct patterns
of activation; in other words, these voxels discriminate between these
kind of stimuli. Equivalently, one can say that the neuronal population
in these voxels have receptive fields for whatever feature(s) separate the
two stimulus types.

68
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
When confronted with different phonemes, regions in the left and
right temporal lobe can discriminate them based on phonemic features
in a similar way. But, just as with the receptive fields discussed above,
the fMRI results did not show clean “phonotopic” maps: Parts of the
temporal lobes that are sensitive to the same features are not necessar-
ily next to each other. This is illustrated in Fig. 15D, which shows, for
example, that both anterior and posterior parts of the superior temporal
gyrus discriminate the voicing feature (in green), but these are separated
by regions that also distinguish other features, like the place or manner
of articulation.
So, the superior temporal cortex represents phonological detail in a
spatial code (phonemic receptive fields), but the code does not appear
to be organized into a “phonotopic” gradient with similar phonemes
activating adjacent neuronal populations.
Neural insight into phonological
representations?
What we’ve learned about the neural code for phonemes may also offer
insight into mental representions of phonemes themselves. I’m going to
talk about two examples; one is based on data we’ve seen above and the
other gives us a chance to introduce a new, and very useful, experimental
tool.
The first example concerns a key question in phonological theory: the
nature, and structure, of phonological featues. Linguists have proposed
various organizing principles for these features. Some propose that fea-
tures are primarily organized in terms of acoustic properties of speech
(e.g. how sonorous different speech sounds might be). Others propose
that features are primarily organized in terms of articulation (such as the
manner or place of articulation).6 The ECoG data showing phonemic re-
ceptive fields that we discussed on page 53 may shed some light on this
debate.
Recall that different electrodes, implanted directly into the cortex,
showed responses to specific phonemes. In fact, a close look at the data,

NEURAL INSIGHT INTO PHONOLOGICAL REPRESENTATIONS?
69
illustrated in Fig. 15C, shows that the responses pattern with phonemic
features, not phonemes themselves; electrodes responded to clusters of
phonemes that shared specific features. For example, electrode “e1” in
Fig. 15C responds to stops, and electrode “e3” to non-high vowels. The
researchers grouped together all the electrodes that showed similar re-
sponse patterns. This clustering revealed a hierarchical organization of
phonemic receptive fields such that one electrode might respond to a
subset of the phonemes found for another one. Here’s the bit that gets
back to mental representations: The highest levels of the hierarchy were
split along acoustic features, while articulatory features were only ap-
parent at lower levels of this organization. That is, the hierarchy in the
neural code for phonemes seems to be organized primarily by acoustic
properties, and secondarily by articulatory properties.
This is an exciting way to use neural data to address questions about
mental representations. But using brain data in this way is still a very new
idea; the results I just discussed, for example, have only been observed
in a just a few datasets from patients undergoing the invasive ECoG
procedure. The second example of neural insight into phonological rep-
resentations is based on an experimental method for studying neural
representations that has been used extensively for over thirty years.
People – and their brains – respond quite strongly when they en-
counter something they see or hear that doesn’t match what they expect.
But, what counts as a match? For example, if two people with different-
sounding voices make the speech sound [ba], does this activate “the
same” or “different” mental representations in a listener? Researchers
have used the brain’s mismatch response, or MMR, to probe whether
different stimuli match or not to test questions like this. The MMR is
observed with electrophysiological techniques like EEG and MEG us-
ing an experimental protocol called the oddball design. In an oddball
experiment, certain stimuli are presented quite frequently – say 80% of
the time. These are standards. Some stimuli are presented rarely – the
remaining 20%. These are deviants. The MMR is a signal that emerges
around 200 milliseconds after hearing a deviant item, relative to hear-
ing the same stimulus when it is presented as a standard.7 The diagram
below illustrates the oddball experiment:

70
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
A as standard:
A
A
A
B
A
B
A
A
A
A as deviant:
B
A
B
B
B
B
A
B
B
You’d expect to see an MMR if you subtract the brain response to the “B”
deviant items on the top row from the “B” standard items on the bottom
row. By switching out different kind of speech stimuli, we can use this
protocol to test questions about phonemic features.
The MMR is sensitive to phonemic differences, not just acoustic dif-
ferences.8 That’s expected given the evidence we’ve already seen for the
brain’s rapid sensitivity (< 200 milliseconds) to phonemic features. Pho-
nologists disagree about the proper structuring of these features, and also
about the format used to specify them. For example, is there such a thing
as a “default” feature? The intuition behind this relates to efficiency; if
phonemes include defaults, then you don’t need to store every featural
detail separately. Your mental representation only needs to track when a
phoneme differs from the default. (The technical term used here is that
features may be underspecified; Lahiri and Marslen-Wilson, 1991.) One
feature that has been proposed to be underspecified is the CORONAL fea-
ture that captures the articulation of consonants wth the tongue tip, as
with [t], [d], and [s]. This contrasts with sounds like [k] or [ɡ] that are ar-
ticulated with the base of the tongue, captured with the DORSAL feature.
Under this approach, while a [k] is specified with a DORSAL feature, the
mental representation of [t] simply lacks any place feature; the system
“fills in” CORONAL as the default.
This theory makes a specific prediction about the MMR. Imagine [ka]
is used as a standard; this sets up an expectation for more sounds like it.
That expectation is mentally represented in terms of features (not just
acoustics), so the brain is expecting the next sound to be DORSAL. If the
next sound is the CORONAL stop [ta], though, there is a strong mismatch
and, consequently, a strong MMR:
Stimuli:
[ka]
[ka]
[ka]
[ta]
expect↓
get↓
[DORSAL]
[CORONAL]
↓
Larger mismatch

IS SPEECH SPECIAL? THE MOTOR SYSTEM AND PERCEPTION
71
Now consider if [ta] is the standard. If you cash out the expectations this
generates in terms of underspecified features, well, there is no explicit
expectation for CORONAL (it’s the default!). If this is right, then a [ka]
deviant will not show as strong a mismatch (remember that the acoustics
are different, so there will be at least some mismatch):
Stimuli:
[ta]
[ta]
[ta]
[ka]
expect↓
get↓
[ ]
[DORSAL]
↓
Smaller mismatch
The important point is that this idea of feature underspecification pre-
dicts that the MMR is asymmetric: [ta] will be a large mismatch against
a standard [ka], but [ka] will be a smaller mismatch against a standard
[ta]. Alternatively, if all phonological features are represented equally –
no underspecification – then the MMR will be the same regardless of
which stimulus is the standard and which is the deviant.
An asymmetry in the MMR is exactly what was observed by Matthias
Scharinger, Jonas Obleser, and their colleagues in a study published in
2012.9 A large MMR was observed in their ERP study for a deviant [ta],
while a smaller MMR was observed for deviant [ka]. This result points
towards a theory of the mental representation of features that allows
some values to be underspecified; there are “default” features.
To summarize this brief section, we’ve seen two examples of how a
better understanding of the brain bases of speech and phonological pro-
cessing may productively feed back into linguistic efforts to study the
mental representations that make up your knowledge of language.
Is speech special? The motor system
and perception
We’ve seen at many levels so far that the brain shows a highly efficient
mapping from acoustics to speech. This efficiency is seen already even

72
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
with classical behavioral findings, such as categorical perception and the
McGurk effect. These findings have led to a prominent school of thought
which holds that speech perception is “special” in very important ways.
This special-ness arises, perhaps, because speech holds a unique role in
the acoustic environment of spoken language users.
I want to consider two variants of the “Speech is special” hypothesis.
One strong version of this view is that speech perception involves per-
ceptual mechanisms that are different than the perceptual mechanisms
used elsewhere in auditory perception, such as those used to identify a
train in the distance, a tea-kettle boiling, or a phone ringing. Such mech-
anisms could include the unique neural oscillations that serve to sample
speech input, or the feedback loops based on higher-level knowledge.
A second, perhaps weaker variant of this hypothesis is that the brain’s
neural code is tuned for speech, but this tuning is built on the same
primitive perceptual machinery that is used for other kinds of auditory
perception.
I believe that the current evidence best supports the second view, but
this debate is far from over, so consider the evidence carefully.
One long-standing piece of evidence pointing towards the “speech
is special” idea comes from a peculiar kind of language deficit: pure
word deafness. In pure word deafness, a patient cannot recognize words,
even though they otherwise appear to have normal hearing. Consider
the case of patient FO, published in 2017 by Chiara Maffei and col-
leagues. FO had no difficulty speaking, and her hearing appeared to be
intact. For example, she had no difficulty discriminating different vowel
sounds based on their acoustics. But she was largely unable to discrimi-
nate consontants that were presented as minimal pairs. Remarkably, her
performance improved if the consonants were given in writing. More-
over, FO had difficulty discriminating words with similar phonemes in
a picture-naming task. In this task, the patient might be asked to “point
to the bat” while viewing a set of pictures that include a bat and also
pictures of phonologically similar words, such as a mat. In contrast, FO
had no difficulty when distinguishing words that had similar meanings
(“Point to the table” alongside pictures of a table and a chair), nor did
she have such difficulty when working with written words.

IS SPEECH SPECIAL? THE MOTOR SYSTEM AND PERCEPTION
73
The pure word deafness apparent in patients like FO contrasts with
another deficit, auditory agnosia. Agnosia is a general term for a deficit
associated with recognizing objects. So, auditory agnosia is a more spe-
cific deficit associated with recognizing objects based on their sound.
A patient with auditory agnosia will, for example, have difficulty rec-
ognizing the roar of a lion or the notes of a piano. Such a pattern was
observed in a case study of patient LD published in 1989 by Jany Lam-
bert and colleagues. In addition to being unable to name familiar sounds,
LD was unable to recognize well-known folk songs, and mistakenly
identified music or environmental sounds as speech. LD was somewhat
impaired in recognizing phonemes and words, but this impairment was
notably milder than the profound deficit they had in recognizing sounds,
easily recognizing vowels and scoring near perfectly when confronted
with phonological neighboring words.
Pure word deafness and auditory agnosia, together, present a remark-
able double dissociation:
FO
LD
Recognizing speech
Impaired
Not impaired
(pure word deafness)
Recognizing non-speech sounds
Not impaired
Impaired
(auditory agnosia)
This double dissociation indicates that, at some important level, the cor-
tical processing of speech is separate from the cortical processing for
other sounds.10
What sets speech apart from other kinds of auditory input? One no-
table fact is that we are generally expert producers of speech in addition
to beingexpert comprehenders. If our speech production expertise aidsin
speech perception, this could explain what sets speech apart from other
kinds of audition. The idea here is that brain systems involved in artic-
ulation, including our motor system, may be central to the specialness
of speech.
In fact, we’ve already seen a clue that points towards a role for the
speech production. Look back at Fig. 13 on page 60. This figure sketched

74
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
the mapping of acoustic input, via a neurogram, to phonemes. It in-
cludes a box called “analysis-by-synthesis.” This box aims to capture
how we form predictions about speech input that help to guide our
perception. Page 59 introduced the idea that predictions come from
the listener’s ability to internally produce speech sounds, to synthesize
speech—that internal synthesis can be compared from the “top-down”
against auditory input from the “bottom-up”.
There is some intriguing neural evidence for such a motor pathway
in speech perception. In one study, Friedemann Pulvermu¨ller and col-
leagues (2006) engaged participants in several speech tasks during fMRI
scanning. In the first task, participants produced [pa] and [ta] syllables.
Recall from Chapter 2 (page 21) that the primary motor cortex is spa-
tially organized so that the region that controls the tongue is separated
from regions that control other parts of the face, such as the lips. Accord-
ingly, Pulvermu¨ller et al. observe separate patterns of activation along the
motor cortex when participants produce a bilabial [pa] syllable (closure
of the lips) compared to an alveolar [ta] syllable where closure is made by
thetonguetip (goahead:make these soundsyourself!) Next, participants
simply listened to those same two types of sounds. In addition to activa-
tion in the auditory cortex, researchers also saw activation in the motor
cortex when participants simply listened. And, this activation appeared
to be spatially separated according to articulators: The tongue region ac-
tivated positively for [ta] but not [pa], while the lip region activated for
[pa] but not [ta].
Moreover, there is evidence that this motor cortex activation is
causally connected to successful speech perception. Riikka Mo¨tto¨nen
and Kate Watkins tested this in a 2009 study by temporarilly inhibit-
ing motor cortex activation using the rTMS technique (see page 39 in
Chapter 2). Mo¨tto¨nen and Watkins reasoned that if the motor cortex
is actively involved in speech perception, than discriminating between
phonemes that differ in one feature (say, place of articulation) will be
more difficult if activation in the motor cortex region associated with
articulating those phonemes is inhibited.
Indeed, when the rTMS inhibition targeted the lip region, partici-
pants showed a reliable decline in their ability to distinguish bilabial
[pa] or [ba] segments from alveolar [ta] or [da] segments. Careful control

IS SPEECH SPECIAL? THE MOTOR SYSTEM AND PERCEPTION
75
conditions demonstrated that this decline in perceptual acuity was spe-
cific to inhibition of the lip motor cortex itself: rTMS did not impact
their ability to discriminate phonemic pairs that didn’t involve the lip
articulators (e.g. [ka] vs [ɡa]). Further, when rTMS was applied to other
parts of the motor cortex, like the hand region, there was no measurable
effect on speech perception.
It appears, then, that brain regions involved in controlling articulation
may also play an active role when simply listening to speech.
How crucial is this motor system connection for successful speech
perception? Some researchers have proposed that the motor system is
absolutely central for comprehension and, perhaps, for other aspects
of language processing as well.11 However, there is quite a bit of evi-
dence that speech perception – though it may make use of the motor
system – does not depend on that system for success. One such piece
of evidence comes from aphasia patients with preserved speech per-
ception despite severe deficits in speech production. This is, in fact,
the classical characterization of “Broca’s” aphasia; see Table 2 on page
13. Corianne Rogalsky and Gregory Hickok (2011) described five com-
pelling case studies showing that successful speech perception does not
depend on intact speech production abilities. All of the patients suf-
fered from left hemisphere lesions that severely impacted speech fluency.
Two of the patients had lesions that extended across the motor cortex
and to more anterior regions of the frontal cortex also associated with
controlling actions like articulation. Despite severe disfluency, all par-
ticipants performed well on a series of speech comprehension tasks. All
of the patients showed high accuracy when discriminating words or syl-
lables that formed minimal pairs. For example, in a picture-naming task
(see page 72), the participants with frontal damage only – including
the motor cortex – performed perfectly in identifying the correct word
when there was a phonemically related distractor (e.g. “point to the coat”
alongside a picture of a goat).
One possible critique against lesion-based evidence like this, though,
is that the brain may reorganize to compensate for neural trauma. Neural
plasticity remains poorly understood, and this uncertainty encourages
us to look for possible corroborating evidence. A striking source of fur-
ther support comes from an invasive “brain anesthesia” procedure used

76
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
in some neurosurgeries. In the Wada procedure, an anesthetic agent
(usually sodium amobarbital) is injected into a major artery serving
one hemisphere of the brain. This, essentially, puts that side of the
brain to sleep. The patient is then engaged in a series of language tasks.
If the patient is unable to produce speech during the procedure, the
affected hemisphere is said to be “dominant” for language.12 What hap-
pens to speech comprehension in this procedure when production is
completely impaired? The patients made very few phonological com-
prehension errors, assessed using a picture-naming task similar to the
one just described; their average accuracy was greater than 90% (Hickok
et al., 2008). These data indicate that motor systems involved in speech
production aren’t necessary for successful comprehension.
The picture emerging from the data so far is that the motor system is
engaged during speech perception but is not necessary for success. One
way to look at it is that the expert knowledge we possess as producers
of speech offers a helpful boost when faced with particularly difficult
input. Such a supporting role is consistent with the idea from Fig. 13
that top-down knowledge refines our analysis of the speech signal.
Let’s take a very brief look at a second possible specialization for
speech: temporal windows of integration. As discussed around page 55,
it seems as if auditory regions of the superior temporal gyrus sample
speech in a precise way that seems tuned to the specific properties of
speech. For example, the more rapid 25–40 ms sampling rate is suitable
for analyzing the fine structure of speech, while the longer 200–300 ms
rate is suitable for syllabic information. Is this tuning special to speech?
Well, first, it’s not actually quite clear whether these neural oscillations
are tuned for speech, or whether speech itself is tuned to fit in with
intrinsic properties of our auditory system. Setting aside this “chicken-
and-egg” challenge, there is good evidence that other sensory inputs are
sampled in the way we’ve suggested for speech.
In a groundbreaking 1993 study, Stanislas Dehaene observed that be-
havioral reaction times, the speed at which a participant is able to press a
button in response to a stimulus, follow a periodic pattern; participants
responded at certain regular intervals. This observation came from over
1,500 reaction times collected from participants who performed a set of
both auditory and visual detection tasks (for example, “Did the letter
T or L appear on the screen?” Or, “Did you hear a high note or low

INSIGHT INTO SPEECH PERCEPTION DISORDERS?
77
note?”.) Across tasks and participants, the reaction times were periodic.
The exact timing of these periodicities differed across tasks. For more
difficult tasks this periodicity was at a rate of about 33 Hz or, equiva-
lently, reaction times were at intervals of about 30 milliseconds. (Shorter
intervals, as fast as 10 milliseconds, were observed for easier tasks.) On
the basis of these data, Dehaene suggested that perceptual systems in
the brain pass on information to higher-level processing at fixed inter-
vals, or windows. There is evidence, then, from non-linguistic tasks using
both visual and auditory stimuli, that perception more generally might
operate according to fixed temporal windows of integration.
In this section we’ve touched on the fundamental question of whether
“speech is special”. We’ve seen evidence that, indeed, speech compre-
hension relies on neural systems that are distinct from those used for
non-speech perception (e.g. pure word deafness), and such systems may
include the motor/articulatory system used for speech production (e.g.
inhibiting motor cortex with rTMS). But those special speech produc-
tion systems do not seem to be necessary for speech comprehension
(shown, for example, by patients undergoing the Wada procedure). And
the apparent tuning of auditory processing to speech sounds seems to
be an instantiation of more general sensory processing systems that op-
erate over fixed temporal windows. Speech perception is special in how
finely tuned it is, but this tuning is built on top of general purpose neu-
ral mechanisms for perception. Summarizing their own research on this
topic, Han Gyol Yi, Matthew Leonard, and Edward Chang put the point
this way (2019, p. 1099):
the cortical infrastructure for auditory processing [is not] entirely spe-
cific nor selective to speech [...] but is nevertheless heavily specialized
and causal for speech perception.
Insight into speech perception disorders?
What we’ve learned so far about how the brain processes speech can
provide insight into speech disorders. I won’t review speech compre-
hension disorders thoroughly here, though recall we’ve been introduced
to some already in this chapter, like pure word deafness. What I want

78
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
to do instead is show one example of how our growing understanding
of the brain bases of speech may translate into more concrete clinical
applications.
Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) are a complex multi-faceted devel-
opmental syndrome affecting about about 1 in 54 children in the United
States (Maenner, 2020). Impaired communication, including language
abilities, is one of several core symptomologies in ASD. Outcomes
span a very broad range from children who are non-verbal to high-
functioning individuals with few if any language-related difficulties.13
Alongside language-related deficits are differences in sensory percep-
tions.14 A major open question in ASD research is whether, and in what
way, lower-level sensory differences connect with higher-level issues af-
fecting communication and other social behaviors. I’m going to discuss a
few intriguing lines of research probing the neural link between auditory
processing and speech perception in ASD.
One piece of neural evidence for sensory differences in ASD comes
from the auditory M100 brain response that is measured with MEG.
Recall that the M100 is a MEG signal from the auditory cortex that peaks
about 100 milliseconds after the presentation of a sound; it reflects a rel-
atively early stage of auditory integration (see page 64). This response
appears to be delayed in children with ASD. For example, a 2010 study by
Timothy Roberts and colleagues at the Children’s Hospital of Philadel-
phia studied a sample of children around 10 years old with and without
an ASD diagnosis. They observed that the M100 MEG response was 10
or so milliseconds later, on average, in children with an ASD diagnosis
compared to their peers. In follow-up work, this delayed brain response
to auditory stimuli was linked to differences in neural oscillations, specif-
ically oscillations between about 20–50 Hz. Differences in the strength
of these oscillations prior to a simple acoustic stimulus correlate with
delayed M100 latencies in a sample of 105 school-aged children with an
ASD diagnosis (Edgar et al., 2015). This is the same neural oscillation
pattern that has been linked to the mapping from continuous acoustic
input to categorical phonological representations (see page 55).
Could altered neural oscillations associated with mapping from
acoustic to phonological representations contribute to language-related
deficits in ASD? The jury is definitely still out on this question, but there

INSIGHT INTO SPEECH PERCEPTION DISORDERS?
79
is a growing body of evidence suggesting that such a link is plausible.15
In the study of 105 children mentioned above, for example, the strength
of neural oscillations correlated with a behavioral assessment of lan-
guage abilities. A 2015 study by Delphine Jochaut, Anne-Lise Giraud,
and colleagues makes the case for an even tighter link between language
deficits and atypical auditory-to-phonology mapping. They combined
spatially precise fMRI with EEG data to assess how neural oscillations
from the auditory cortex support speech comprehension in ASD. They
make three key observations. First, auditory cortex activity in children
with ASD shows reduced sensitivity to the speech envelope, compared
to activity from age-matched peers (recall Fig. 11). Second, this reduced
envelope-tracking is linked with neural oscillations, as children with an
ASD diagnosis show atypical low-frequency oscillations in a band of
4–7 Hz – this is the same band discussed on page 55 that is associated
with tracking temporal properties of speech, like the envelope. Altered
4–7 Hz oscillations are further linked with altered higher-frequency
oscillations, from 30–40 Hz (associated with fine structure and phone-
mic analysis). These researchers suggest that atypical speech envelope-
tracking may affect the brain’s ability to “lock on” to the speech signal to
efficiently extract phonemic details. Indeed, these atypical oscillations
correlate with, for example, verbal communication scores in that sample
of children.
There are a number of important questions to be asked of this line of
research. Some intriguing findings, like the link between low- and high-
frequency oscillations in ASD, are based on a relatively small number of
individuals. Even for results from larger samples, the degree of hetero-
geneity in language and other communication abilities in ASD can make
it difficult to draw broad generalizations. One specific challenge comes
from observations that there may be multiple different kinds of language
impairment sub-types that co-occur with ASD (Rapin et al., 2009). Keep-
ing these questions in mind, the key take-away here is the hypothesis
that temporal sampling of speech, and therefore phonological process-
ing, may be impaired in ASD. Importantly, this research has been guided
by our growing understanding, from linguistics and neuroscience, of
the neural mechanisms that map from continuous acoustic input to
categorical linguistic mental representations.

80
A NEURAL CODE FOR SPEECH
Chapter summary
Let’s summarize what we’ve seen both in this chapter and in the previous
one by revisiting the three transformations that the brain carries out to
convert acoustic input into linguistic representations:
acoustic
signal
neuro-auditory
representation
(neurogram)
neuro-phonologcal
representation
(phonological sketch)
lexical
item
1
2
3
We’ve learned some key facts about the brain bases of each of these
transformations:
→1 Acoustic information is converted to a neural representation of
sound, a neurogram in the primary auditory cortex within about
100 milliseconds.
These representations encode both the fine structure spectral
information that distinguishes different phonemes, and also the
temporal envelope information that encodes syllabic information.
These details are represented with a spatial code: Different neurons
respond to distinct spectral and temporal information.
→2 Neurograms are used to activate neural representations of phono-
logical features. Populations of neurons adjacent to the audi-
tory cortex show categorical responses to features within 100–200
milliseconds after speech is heard.
This mapping may be carried out in at least two separate tempo-
ral windows that serve to take “snap shots” of the speech input: a
shorter window, around 25 milliseconds, tuned to phonemic fea-
tures, and a longer window, around 200 milliseconds, tuned to
syllabic features.
This mapping follows a feedback loop: Linguistic knowledge
helps to synthesize, or predict, upcoming speech input which serves
to guide and refine the analysis of that input. While this process
is helped by specialized linguistic knowledge, it seems to rely on
the same basic neural architecture used for other kinds of auditory
input.

CHAPTER SUMMARY
81
→3 The neural representation of speech provides clues to the mental
representation of phonological information in the mental lexicon.
We saw how data like the spatial organization of phonemic recep-
tive fields, the M100 evoked response, and the mismatch response
can be used to test specific theories about phonemic features. While
preliminary, neural evidence points towards a priority for acoustic
features, and these features may be underspecified.
These neural signals indicate that speech perception is built on
general auditory processing systems that are highly tuned to the
specific properties of speech. Ongoing work is probing how aspects
of this tuning play a role in developmental disorders such as Autism
Spectrum Disorder.
How the brain uses this information to access and understand words is
the main topic of the next chapter.

5
Activating words
The next two chapters address the neural representation of words and
concepts. What is a word? Perhaps surprisingly, it has proven difficult to
find a satisfying scientific definition for this term. The working definition
I’ll use for this chapter is that a word is a pairing of linguistic form with
meaning and structure. When we talk about this pairing as a mental
representation, something you hold in your mental dictionary, I’ll call
it a lexical item. The form is made up of phonological sequences. Those
phonological representations may come from speech, as we studied in
the previous chapter, or sign languages. The form may also include writ-
ten (orthographic) components. The meaning, or semantics, includes
the concept that the word refers to as well as other semantic features.
The structure indicates how the word fits together with others into a
grammatical sentence. The pieces of this definition fit together like so:
phonology, orthography...
word := lexical item
:=   < FORM, MEANING, STRUCTURE>
concept, semantic features…
So, we can write out a lexical item for, say, the word “cat” roughly like
this: </kæt/,
, NOUN>.
This definition is a bit of a departure from what you might call a
“word” in day-to-day usage. For example, a morpheme, like the plural
suffix “–s” at the end of “cats,” expresses phonological form, meaning,
and structure, and so it meets this definition. Morphemes are, indeed,
lexical items that cannot be divided into smaller meaningful units. But,
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0005

WORDS AND WERNICKE
83
our definition of lexical items allows for them be made up of multiple
morphemes; “classroom” could be a single lexical item, for example. In-
deed, one of our tasks in this chapter will be to examine the “grain size”
of lexical items: are they stored in the brain as single morphemes, or
can they be chunked together into complex combinatoric units? Along-
side this question, we’ll examine the brain systems involved in accessing
these units. The next chapter then dives into a series of debates involv-
ing the mental representation of concepts; we’ll see here how brain
data offer new insights into some old philosophical questions about
meaning.
Words and Wernicke
The evidence suggests that linguistic form and meaning are combined
together – made into lexical items – in the posterior middle temporal
gyrus, or pMTG. This node forms a kind of interface between linguistic
features, like phonology, and more general aspects of conceptual seman-
tics. I like to think of the lexical items in this node as a sort of contact card,
a mental entry that links the non-linguistic concept, such as my memory
of the soft, purring, attention-demanding pet I have, with a linguistic
name: /kæt/.
Posterior areas of the left temporal lobe, especially the middle tempo-
ral gyrus, have long been linked to lexical processing and semantics. This
connection goes all the way back to the 1870s and Carl Wernicke who, as
we saw in Chapter 1, documented how damage to posterior parts of the
temporal lobe led to patients showing a distorted kind of semantics; they
produce semantically inappropriate words and also show great difficulty
with understanding.
Modern deficit/lesion studies support the link first documented by
Wernicke. A particular striking example comes from a large-scale study
of 101 aphasia patients. To take advantage of this unusually large dataset,
Elizabeth Bates, Nina Dronkers, and colleagues (2003) used a variant of
the lesion overlap method discussed in Chapter 2 on page 30. With all

84
ACTIVATING WORDS
the datasets in their sample, they formed two groups based on whether
or not each patient had a lesion in a particular brain voxel (Fig. 16, top).
Then, they tested whether or not the two groups differed on a clincial
measure, such as semantic comprehension or speech fluency. They re-
peated this procedure for many different voxels across the brain. This
procedure is called voxel-based lesion symptom mapping, or VLSM.
Voxel
lesioned
Patient 1
Patient 2
Patient 3
... Patient n
Voxel
lesioned
Behavioral score = 8
Group behavioral scores of
patients with voxel lesioned
L
R
Voxel
lesioned
compare
groups
Group behavioral scores of
patients with voxel intact
Voxel
intact
Behavioral score = 12
Behavioral score = 20
Behavioral score = 24
Voxel
intact
Voxel
intact
Figure 16. Voxel-based lesion symptom mapping (VLSM). Patients are
grouped by whether or not they have a lesion at a particular voxel, and their
clinical performance is compared (top). This yields a map that is shaded to
indicate which locations are most associated with a particular performance
deficit. The bottom shows such a map for semantic comprehension, as
assessed via a picture-naming task. Shades of red indicate voxels in the left
posterior temporal lobe that are strongly associated with deficits in this
task, while shades of green and blue indicate left hemisphere voxels where
damage is not strongly associated with task performance.
Sources: Top: Adapted from Baldo et al. (2012); Bottom: Adapted from Bates et al. (2003).

WORDS AND WERNICKE
85
The results of the VLSM procedure is a map showing which voxels are
systematically linked with a particular behavioral deficit. One such map
is shown on the bottom of Fig. 16.
They observed, like Wernicke almost 130 years prior, that patients
with damage in the posterior area of the left temporal lobe, especially
the pMTG, showed the most reliable difficulties with language under-
standing, such as picture-naming tasks where the patient follows an
instruction like “point to the table.” These patients had relatively fluent
speech production, indicating that any difficulties with comprehension
were not based on lower-level phonological deficits. In other words, the
form part of their mental representations for words was intact. The dif-
ficulty with word-understanding documented here could be due to two
different kinds of semantic deficits. They could have a deficit in relation
to lexical items themselves, or, alternatively, there could be deeper deficit
in relation to conceptual processing.
Evidence points to the first hypothesis: Patients with pMTG damage
have relatively intact conceptual networks, but the link between those
concepts and lingusitic form – the lexical item – has been impaired. One
piece of supporting evidence is that patients with comprehension deficits
like these demonstrate implicit conceptual knowledge (so-called “Wer-
nicke’s aphasia”; Table 2 on page 13). Semantic priming is one tool to
measure implicit conceptual relationships. The basic idea is that people
are quicker and more accurate in accessing a conceptual representation
if they’ve just processed something that is semantically similar. A com-
mon way to test this is to present people with word pairs and ask them to
judge if all the items are real words (“doctor”, “glove”…) or not (“soam”,
“flipo”…). People are faster at this lexical decision task if the word pairs
are related (“doctor”, “nurse”) than if they are not (“bread”, “nurse”).1
This speed-up reflects the fact that the concepts which the words refer to
are related; when you mentally access one concept, it’s easier to activate
other concepts that are “in the same neighborhood.”
Patients with fluent aphasia seem to show this same semantic priming
speed-up (Milberg and Blumstein, 1981). These patients are generally
much slower than non-aphasic individuals in performing the lexical de-
cision task, but they nevertheless show a speed-up, measuring about
1/5th of a second, when words are conceptually related to each other,

86
ACTIVATING WORDS
compared to when they are not. This result provides evidence that these
patients still have intact conceptual representations, representations that
capture the relationships between similar concepts like “tree” and “leaf.”
Accordingly, the semantic deficit in these patients appears to be in link-
ing up phonological form with the correct conceptual meaning – a deficit
with the lexical item itself.
Measurements of brain activity in response to real words and non-
words also highlight the role of the pMTG. Matthew Davis and Ingrid
Johnsrude (2003) offer one example of this in an fMRI study where
participants listened to sentences that were distorted in different ways
so as to make them more difficult to understand. These distortions in-
cluded adding noise to the stimuli, replacing small segments of stimuli
with bursts of noise, or using vocoding to remove the speech fine struc-
ture (see page 47 in Chapter 3). They reasoned that the intelligibility of
the stimuli would affect brain areas associated with lower-level auditory
and phonological processing as well as higher-level lexical processing.
Among these brain areas, lower-level regions will be particularly sen-
sitive to the specific form of distortion used, while areas associated with
higher-level comprehension processes will not be sensitive to the specific
kind of distortion used. They observe “form-dependent” brain activa-
tion around the auditory cortex and adjecent regions on the superior
temporal gyrus. In contrast, they see “form-independent” activations
across the pMTG and also more anterior areas of the temporal lobe.
We’ll come back shortly to what those anterior regions might be in-
volved in. But here, we see further evidence linking the posterior middle
temporal gyrus with a stage connecting speech form with more abstract
meaning.
Studies like this one point towards a hierarchy of processing in the
brain, as information flows from core areas that capture sensory details
onwards to higher-level, more abstract representations, first phonemes
and then lexical items and concepts. We saw in the last chapter how
the early stages of this flow feed into different pathways, processing
streams, for high-level processing; check out, for example, Fig. 14 on
page 63. In the next section, we’ll see how tools like MEG, with their
high temporal resolution, let us follow this cascade of information in real
time.

THE TIME-COURSE OF WORD RECOGNITION
87
The time-course of word recognition
In 2003, Ksenija Marinkovic and her colleagues at Massachussetts Gen-
eral Hospital offered a simple, yet stunning, view of the cascade of brain
activity that goes into recognizing words. Using MEG, they recorded
brain responses from participants who either listened to, or read, sin-
gle words. To ensure participants considered the meaning of the words,
they had to judge whether they referred to things that were large or small.
Because the magnetic fields measured by MEG are relatively undistorted
as they pass through the skull, the source of brain activity can be recon-
structed with reasonable accuracy. When these reconstructions apply to
the entire cortex, they form a kind of “brain movie” that shows the dy-
namic ebb and flow of brain activity over space and time. Still images
from the brain movies created by Marinkovic and colleagues are shown
in Fig. 17A.
The top row of Fig. 17A shows the response for spoken words. Just
50 milliseconds after a spoken word is presented, activity begins to
emerge in the primary auditory cortex. Just 120 milliseconds later, less
than 1/5th of a second, that activity has spread to adjacent areas of the
superior temporal gyrus. This is the time-window in which acoustic in-
formation is being mapping to phonological representations. 250–300
milliseconds after the word began, activation has spread outwards along
the temporal lobe, including posterior areas of the middle temporal
gyrus associated with lexical processing, and also anterior areas that
we have yet to discuss. Simultaneously, activity emerges in the inferior
frontal gyrus. This is another key node in the network of regions pro-
cessing higher-level aspects of language processing; we saw it already in
our discussion of Paul Broca on page 10 in Chapter 1 and also in Fig. 14
on page 63. The functions carried out in these frontal regions is the sub-
ject of a major debate, but we’re going to hold off on engaging with it
now, and keep our focus on the cascade of processing going on in the
temporal lobe.
The bottom row of Fig. 17A shows the brain activity that is observed
for written words. This cascade begins not in primary auditory regions,
but rather in primary visual cortex located in the occipital lobe. As with

88
ACTIVATING WORDS
A. Spoken Words
Written Words
B. Signed words in native deaf listeners
Congruent–incongruent semantics
300–350 ms
Average at
80–120 ms
55 ms
100 ms
170 ms
250 ms
320 ms
420 ms
170 ms
250 ms
320 ms
420 ms
Figure 17. The time-course and localization of lexical activation.
(A) Activation of left-hemisphere brain activity in response to spoken (top)
and written (bottom) words. Activity starts in sensory cortices (auditory or
visual) and then moves to shared higher-level regions by about
250 milliseconds after word onset. (B) The time-course of brain activity for
signed word recognition begins in the primary visual cortex (left) but
rapidly spreads to the same higher-level temporal and frontal brain regions
within about 300 milliseconds.
Sources: A: Adapted from Marinkovic et al. (2003, fig. 1); B: Adapted from Leonard et al.
(2012, fig. 2).
spoken words, activity spreads from core sensory areas to higher-level
areas; for visual information, this spreads along the so-called “ventral
pathway” that is involved in recognizing objects.2 170 milliseconds af-
ter appearing on the screen, the word is activating a ventral region at
the border of the temporal and occipital lobes; in the left hemisphere
this brain region seems to be involved specifically in recognizing let-
ters, earning the nickname of the visual word-form area. Up to this
point, the pathway for spoken words and written words has been very
distinct. Keep in mind also that written words are presented to the
visual system all at once, in contrast to spoken (and signed) words,
which unfold over time. Despite these striking differences, their paths

THE TIME-COURSE OF WORD RECOGNITION
89
begin to merge within just 200 milliseconds in the posterior tempo-
ral lobe, especially the pMTG. After about 300 milliseconds, activation
continues to spread to anterior temporal and inferior frontal regions;
these temporal and frontal regions are involved in high-level aspects
of word processing regardless of whether the input was written or
spoken.
A very similar picture of the time-course, and relevant brain re-
gions, emerges from studies of word recognition in signed languages. An
example is shown in Fig. 17B. As with written-word recognition, signs
first evoke visual activity in the occipital lobe, which moves to the same
higher-level frontal and temporal lobe sites seen for spoken language
within about 300 milliseconds.3
The cognitive processes that contribute to this complex pattern of
brain activity are just beginning to be understood. One open question
concerns the degree of back-and-forth interactive processing between
higher-level frontal and temporal regions and lower-level regions asso-
ciated with sensory processing like the auditory cortex. While the picture
presented in Fig. 17 appears to show mostly “feed-forward” activations,
this may reflect a limitation of studies that use isolated words, as opposed
to linguistic input that comes from a richer and more natural context. We
saw this issue already come up when examining how predictions help
in speech perception (see around page 59), but the core idea is really
quite general; indeed, one leading idea is that the brain ought to be fun-
damentally understood, at a much more general scale, as a “prediction
engine.”4
A great deal of research aims to unpack the different stages of pro-
cessing implicated in this cascade, and how these processing stages
might interact. But there are some fundamental properties of language
that have made these efforts challenging. Chief among them is the fact
that linguistic computations and representations are, themselves, inter-
related in complex ways. To give one example of these challenges, I’d
like to talk about a study that seems to contradict some of the con-
clusions about the neural time-course of word recognition that we’ve
reached so far. In this study, led by Lucy MacGregor of Cambridge Uni-
versity (2012), participants listened to real English words and fake words
while MEG was being recorded. The fake words were very carefully

90
ACTIVATING WORDS
constructed so that they sounded as similar to real words as possible
(pronounceable fake words are called pseudowords). For example, real
words in their study included “beak” ([bik]), “moat” ([mot]), and “ripe”
([raIp]), while pseudowords included “bik” ([bIk]), “mort” ([mɔrt]), and
“roop” ([rup]). Not only were the pseudowords carefully matched in pro-
nounceability, but they were constructed so that the uniqueness point –
the moment that the stimulus becomes recognizable as not real – was
timed precisely. In analyzing the MEG data, the researchers tested
when differences in the neural response emerged after this unique-
ness point. Remarkably, they found differences in the brain response
as early as 50 milliseconds after this uniqueness point. As we dis-
cussed in Chapter 3 (see page 45), this is about the amount of time it
takes for information to pass from the cochlea to the cortex. It seems
from these data that lexical access – distinguishing real words from
pseudowords – happens as soon as auditory information arrives in the
cortex.
Should we reconsider our models of speech perception to allow for
lexical access in 50 milliseconds? There may be another explanation for
those results, and this explanation speaks to how inter-related linguistic
representations make it difficult to tease apart different stages of pro-
cessing in the brain. One such difficulty is that phonological sequences
which belong to lexical items are more frequent, and therefore more
predictable, than phonological sequences which don’t belong to a lex-
ical item. Indeed, there must be some correlation between phonological
sequence frequency and lexical frequency, because we (typically) only
come across phonological sequences when they make up words. With
this in mind, we can see at least one other interpretation of the extremely
fast brain response to pseudowords discussed above: The response at
50 milliseconds could reflect a neural “error signal” when encountering
unexpected sensory input. For example, given a word beginning [bI], the
brain might then expect [t], [n], or [b], which come from words like “bit”,
“bin”, or “bib”.5 Indeed, we saw evidence that predictions like this play an
important role in the brain’s capacity to comprehend variable and noisy
input back in Chapter 3 (see page 58 and also Fig. 13). If the next sound is
instead [k], then there is a sensory mismatch between your phonological
predictions and the actual input:

THE TIME-COURSE OF WORD RECOGNITION
91
Hear stimulus:
[b]...
[I]...
[k]
actual
next
phoneme
“bik” [bIk]
(‘‘bin’’,‘‘bib’’,‘‘bill’’...)
mismatch!
([n],[b],[l]...)
activate words
predict next phoneme
A mismatch like this, between your expectations and the form-properties
of the input, could lead to a relatively rapid brain response that correlates
with whether the input is or is not a real word.
Is there evidence that early brain responses associated with sensory
input can be shaped by phonological predictions? Some interesting data
come from experiments using visually presented words, rather than au-
ditory speech. Written words are useful in this case because early sensory
responses to visual input in the occipital lobe can be easily distinguished
from higher-level phonological and lexical regions in the temporal lobe.
In 2009 and 2010, Suzanne Dikker, Hugh Rabagliati, and colleagues
at New York University designed a series of studies in which partici-
pants read words that did or did not fit with the sentence they appeared
in while recording with MEG.6 Words that did not fit had the wrong
syntactic category (e.g. noun, verb, adjective…):
match:
The tasteless soda…
mismatch:
The tastelessly soda…
In these examples, the noun “soda” is expected after an adjective like
“tasteless”, but a noun is not grammatical if it appears after the adverb
“tastelessly”. And indeed, the researchers see an increase in early activity
in the occipital visual cortex for the unexpected noun. This visual re-
sponse indicates that expectations for the form of a particular word may
influence the earliest stages of sensory processing in the cortex. Form-
based expectations like this may also explain the apparent extremely
rapid response for pseudowords, mentioned above.
The broader take-home message is that linguistic form properties, like
whether phonological sequences are more or less predictable, can be
very difficult to fully separate from lexical properties.

92
ACTIVATING WORDS
Although different levels of linguistic representation are inter-related,
they can be teased apart under certain carefully constructed circum-
stances. While frequent words will generally have more predictable
phonological sequences, the exact values of these two measures aren’t
identical; common sequences may also appear in rare words. The quan-
titative differences between form properties and lexical properties are
lost when words are grouped into categories – experimental conditions –
but they can be separated when the data are analyzed at the level of the
individual experimental stimulus. This is called a single-trial analysis.
Gwyneth Lewis and David Poeppel use this approach in a 2014 study
designed to tease apart early form-processing stages from later lexical
processing stages.7
In this study, participants listened to hundreds of monosyllabic words
during MEG scanning. The words were chosen to span a range of form-
based and lexical variables. The researchers then analyzed the data by
looking for neural activity that correlated uniquely with each of the vari-
ables. Phoneme predictability, measured by the frequency of phoneme
pairs (called bigrams), correlated with activity 100–200 milliseconds af-
ter word onset in the left superior temporal gyrus right around the
auditory cortex. Following this form-based response, brain activity cor-
related with lexical measures. One such lexical measure is the size of the
lexical cohort; this is the number of words in your mental dictionary
that begin with the same set of phonemes (so, the cohort of /pi/ includes
“pea”, “peach”, “peanut”, “peak”…). Notice that the brain needs to start
accessing the mental lexicon in order to take stock of a word’s cohort size;
activity consistent with the initial activation of a lexical item emerged
around 250 millseconds in the superior temporal sulcus, posterior to
the auditory cortex. The frequency of a word itself, independent of these
other factors, correlated with brain activity in a later window, 300–400
milliseconds. By this stage, representing access of the target lexical item,
activity had moved to the posterior middle temporal gyrus. Lexical ac-
tivity in the middle temporal gyrus in this study nicely parallels the
evidence from deficit/lesion studies, discussed around page 84 above,
that damage to this same region impairs access to lexical items.

THE TIME-COURSE OF WORD RECOGNITION
93
Acoustic analysis
50–150
milliseconds
Phonological
processing
150–250
milliseconds
Lexical access
250–400
milliseconds
Figure 18. Stages of spoken-word recognition. Spoken-word
recognition unfolds in at least three stages, all within less than half a
second. Acoustic analysis starts in the primary auditory cortex, followed by
phonological processing in adjacent parts of the superior temporal gyrus,
and finally lexical access in the pMTG. Dashed lines indicate that
higher-level information feeds back to facilitate lower-level processing in a
dynamic process that is not yet well understood.
Source: Adapted from Lewis and Poeppel (2014).
The illustration in Fig. 18 summarizes the sequence of neural pro-
cessing stages that is beginning to emerge from this research on the
time-course of spoken word recognition. Acoustic and phonological
analysis takes place in and adjacent to the auditory cortex within the
first 150 to 200 milliseconds after a word is presented. This information
is then passed to posterior middle temporal regions where to activate
lexical items, completing the mapping from linguistic form to meaning.
There is a whole host of open questions we can ask at this point. We’ve
seen that lexical information can influence earlier sensory processes –
how are these feed back loops neurally implemented? What about feed-
back from higher levels of linguistic processing (sentences, discourse,
etc.)? We’ll come back to some of the complex interactions between feed-
back and feed-forward processing in Chapter 7. For now, let’s turn to
another central question for the neurolinguistics of words: What is the
unit of lexical representation?

94
ACTIVATING WORDS
Lexical grains
What we’ve learned thus far about the time-course of word recognition
has been used to shed light on the nature of lexical representations them-
selves. At the begining of this chapter we defined the term lexical item
to mean a mental representation that maps between phonological form
and meaning. Let’s use mental lexicon to refer to the part of our memory
that stores these representations. A lexical item that cannot be broken up
into smaller parts that are also form–meaning mappings is a morpheme:
a minimal mapping between linguistic form and meaning. The brain’s
lexical items could correspond to a morpheme in a one-to-one way, or
maybe the brain has lexical items that correspond to words made up of
multiple morphemes. The word “cat” has one morpheme (it is monomor-
phemic). It seems intuitive to say that “cat” is also a lexical item. The word
“cats,” with the plural “-s” suffix, has two morphemes. Is “cats” a single
lexical item in the lexicon, or do we recognize this word by accessing two
different mental representations: “cat” and “-s”?
The question becomes perhaps more interesting when we consider a
broader range of words (and a broader range of languages, of course,
although I’m going to stick with English for my examples here). What
about an irregular plural word, like “geese”? Like “cats” it has two pieces
of meaning (an animal piece and a plural piece); but do we say that the
change in vowel (“oo” →“ee”) is, itself, a lexical item? Similar compli-
cations arise from other types of words; take the word “natural,” which
has two morphemes, the noun “nature” and the suffix “-al,” which makes
the word an adjective.8 Do we have one word “natural” in our mental
lexicon, or do we store “nature” and then, separately, store a lexical item
for “-al”? Does “naturalize” activate three separate lexical items?
All of these questions come down to the unit, or “grain size”, of the
lexical items that are stored in the brain. Do we represent lexical items
as minimal units – as morphemes? The theory that we do so is called
the full decomposition theory of lexical access. As such, this theory re-
quires the brain to decompose an input like “cats” or “natural” into
constituent parts, access each lexical item separately, and then recom-
bine the pieces into larger units according to the rules of grammar.

LEXICAL GRAINS
95
Table 4. Two theories for how lexical items are represented
Word and
Lexical items according to…
morphemes
the full decomposition or…
the partial decomposition theory
“cats”
</kæt/,
>
</kæt/,
>
cat+s
</s/, PLURAL >
</s/, PLURAL >
“geese”
</ɡus/,
>
</ɡis/,
>
goose+[plural]
<ø, PLURAL>
“natural”
</næʧɹ/,
>
</næʧɹʌ l/, ADJECTIVE-OF-
>
nature+al
</ʌ l/, ADJECTIVE>
An alternative theory holds that we sometimes store lexical items built
from multiple morphemes: irregular words like “geese” or words like
“natural” correspond to a single whole lexical item. This second view
is called partial decomposition. Table 4 summarizes these two theories.
Neurolinguists have approached these questions using a variety of
methods. Interestingly, and puzzlingly, different tools seem to yield
results that support different conclusions. On the one hand are
deficit/lesion studies showing a double dissociation between regular and
irregular morphology. Stephen Pinker and Michael Ullman (2002) point
to series of case studies defending the partial decomposition view.9 One
patient, JLU, had anomia. This is a kind of aphasia that leads to diffi-
culty finding the right words – think of words being forever “on the tip of
your tongue.” JLU had special difficulty with irregular words, like using
“held” as the past tense of the verb “hold.” In contrast to JLU, patient FCL
had a kind of aphasia called agrammaticism. This is a variant of non-
fluent aphasia (see page 13) where patients have special difficulty with
function words, words that carry syntactic information, as opposed to
content words. Patient FCL performed poorly when generating regular
past-tense words like “walked” or “jumped,” and in fact they performed
relatively better in producing irregular verbs like “held” or “ate.” Here is
the familiar pattern of a double dissociation.

96
ACTIVATING WORDS
FCL
JLU
Regular verbs
Impaired
Less impaired
(“walked,” “jumped”)
Irregular verbs
Less impaired
Impaired
(“held,” “ate”)
The researchers suggested that double dissociations like this one sup-
port the partial decomposition viewpoint. Regular words like “walked”
(and “cats” etc.) are composed following grammatical rules; when these
rules are impared in patients with agrammaticism, so the theory goes,
patients will have specific trouble with the regular words that follow
these rules. On the other hand are irregular words like “held” (also
“geese” etc.). On the partial decomposition view, these words are stored
as whole units, not made up of pieces that combine together. These
whole units are not impaired in agrammaticism, but they may be im-
paired in patients with anomia, who have difficulty specifically with
accessing words.
A different picture has begun to emerge, however, from experiments
that look at the time-course of word recognition for complex words. In
one such study in 2015, Laura Gwilliams and Alec Marantz of New York
University probe Arabic word recognition using MEG.10 This is a good
reason they chose to study Arabic in this study. Whereas complex words
in English are built up by adding suffixes or prefixes, Arabic, like other
Semitic languages, forms certain complex words by inserting different
vowel patterns between consonants that form the word root. Here is a
simplified example:
root
root
root
root
English:
book
books
Arabic:
[kitaab]
[kutub]
suffix
pattern
pattern
So, morphemes in Arabic can be interwoven with each other; they are
“non-linear.” This property of Arabic allowed the researchers to tease
apart two aspects of accessing morphemes that are otherwise highly

LEXICAL GRAINS
97
correlated: the probability of the morpheme you might next encounter,
and the probability of the phoneme you might next encounter. In a lan-
guage with linear morphology, like English, these two probabilities tend
to go hand in hand. If you’re thinking that this reminds you of something,
it should. The correlation between morphology and phonology is cousin
to the correlation between lexical properties and form properties that
we discussed earlier in the chapter (see page 91). Just as we saw above,
morphological factors can be teased apart from phonological factors by
examining how they vary across individual words – individual trials –
in the experiment. Specifically, the researchers quantify the probability
of encountering the last consonant in each Arabic word in two differ-
ent ways. A phonological probability is conditioned on just the previous
phonemes that have been encountered. A morphological probability is
conditioned on the separation of the word into distinct morphemes.
How does this relate to lexical grain size and full or partial decompo-
sition? Well, the full-decomposition theory asserts that the input word
must be decomposed into minimal morphemes before it can be accessed.
So, morphological structure should affect relatively early stages of pro-
cessing, prior to 250 millisecondswhen lexicalaccessbegins (see Fig. 18).
In contrast, the partial-decomposition theory asserts that words can be
accessed as whole units, so there is no expectation that internal morpho-
logical structure should guide early stages of word recognition. Indeed,
morphological structure appears to guide processing of spoken Arabic
words even in early stages, between 100 and 200 milliseconds. In fact,
the researchers did not see in their data any reliable effects of the lin-
ear phonological factor at early or later processing stages. The results
suggest that spoken-word recognition, which involves using predictions
as a word unfolds, relies on decomposing the input into component
morphemes prior to accessing the meaning of the word.
What are we to make of the apparently conflicting findings about the
grain size of lexical items? On the one hand are double dissociations in
aphasia which seem to indicate that complex words can be stored and
accessed as whole units, but on the other hand, evidence from MEG
suggests that words are decomposed into their constituent morphemes
at early stages of processing, even when the morphemes are non-linear.

98
ACTIVATING WORDS
When you confront apparent contradictions like this, there are two gen-
eral strategies for moving forward. You can think carefully about the
evidence: Does it mean what you really think it means? You can also think
carefully about the theories at issue: Are there aspects of the theories that,
when they are drawn out and made more clear, can start to help sort out
different kinds of data?
I think it’s illustrative to briefly consider both strategies when we think
about lexical grain sizes. (This is far from the last unsettled debate we’ll
see in the book. We’ll certainly revisit this exercise again.) From the per-
spective of the evidence, we can see that the data that I’ve presented here
actually look like a comparison of apples to oranges. I mean something
deeper than observing just that deficit/lesion correlations and MEG data
are different. Rather, the way they differ, and the kind of brain function
they can reveal, can give us important clues as to how to reconcile these
findings. For example, the deficit/lesion data provide no window into
the time-course of word recognition. So, if irregular words like “geese”
or “held” involve different kinds of processing at any stage – early or
late – then this could lead to the double dissociation that we saw above
on page 95. This leads to a question we might ask of the theories we have
been considering: If lexical items are fully decomposed in the way illus-
trated in Table 4, then the brain still must have some process to handle
irregularities in order to, for example, change the vowel from “goose”
to “geese.” If we consider those processes carefully, could they perhaps
help explain how an account of full decomposition can also capture the
double dissociation observed in aphasia?
There are a number of other threads we might pull on to help rec-
oncile these two competing accounts (Data: Have double dissociations
like those found with English words also been found with Arabic words?
Theory: For partial decomposition, what determines when words are
stored as wholes or in parts; could Arabic non-linear morphology ac-
tually be the latter? And so on…). What I want to leave you with here
is that our growing understanding of how the brain recognizes words,
the brain areas involved, and their time-course, is opening up new win-
dows into fundamental questions like what is the mental representation
of a “word”? Progress on answering these questions comes both from
looking at a broader range of evidence and from sharpening our theories
of what an adequate answer might be.

CHAPTER SUMMARY
99
Chapter summary
This chapter has tackled how the brain recognizes words.
• Words, or more accurately lexical items, are made up of phonolog-
ical, semantic, and structural features. Word recognition requires
mapping a phonological represention to a mental representation
of meaning.
• This mapping happens rapidly in the left temporal lobe of the brain,
as phonological representations in the superior temporal gyrus are
used to activate lexical items in the posterior middle temporal gyrus.
• Evidence from MEG outlines an extremely rapid sequence of pro-
cessing stages, from acoustic analysis at 50–100 milliseconds to
phonological processing at around 100–150 milliseconds, and on-
wards to lexical access in the posterior middle temporal gyrus after
just 250 milliseconds, or 1/4th of a second.
• Ongoing work is trying to uncover the lexical units that form
the bases for recognition; at least some data support the full-
decomposition theory that lexical items are recognized after first
breaking them into their component morphemes. Of particular
interest here are apparent conflicts between data from different
methodologies; several possible strategies are available for recon-
ciling these findings.
If lexicalitems map from form tomeaning, then thenaturalnext question
is this: How does the brain represent meaning?

6
Representing meaning
The striking thing about words – or, more precisely, lexical items – is
that they mean something. Indeed, the nature of this meaning has been
an enduring puzzle facing generations of philosophers, linguistics, psy-
chologists, and now neuroscientists. This chapter introduces some of the
insights into this challenging question that have emerged from studies of
the human brain.
Distributed and non-distributed conceptual
representations
From the earliest accounts to the current state of the art, neurosci-
entists have agreed that “meaning” only emerges when vast parts of
the brain work together. Here is Carl Wernicke, writing on the topic
in 1874:1
thememory images of a bell […] are deposited in thecortex andlocated
according to the sensory organs. These would then include the acoustic
imagery aroused by the sound of the bell, visual imagery established by
means of form and color, tactile imagery acquired by cutaneous sensa-
tion, and finally, motor imagery gained by exploratory movements of
the fingers and eyes[.]
The leading idea here is that the concept “bell” is made of many different
kinds of knowledge, including memories of how bells sound, look, feel,
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0006

CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
101
and how you use them. The different kinds of knowledge that go into a
concept become even more complex for feelings like “happy” or abstract
ideas, like “fair” or “enough.” The discipline that focuses on word mean-
ings is lexical semantics; this is not a book about that very rich topic. I’m
going to focus on just two aspects of conceptual meaning that connect
with our understanding of the brain. Both of these are already hinted
at in the quotation from Wernicke. The first is the idea that conceptual
meaning is distributed throughout the brain. In particular, we’ll exam-
ine whether such distributed representations are sufficent for capturing
how the brain represents concepts. The second idea, which we take up
in the next section, is the degree to which conceptual meaning is em-
bodied in our perceptual and action systems (are concepts “deposited
[…] according to the sensory organs”?), or whether meaning is more
abstract.
There is a rich body of evidence supporting the idea that concep-
tual meaning is, indeed, distributed across different cortical systems.
One kind of evidence comes from a remarkable pattern of deficits called
category-specific agnosia. I introduced agnosia first in Chapter 2 (page
29; also page 72) as a deficit in recognizing objects or concepts. Patients
with category-specific agnosia have this difficulty with certain specific
classes of objects. Many such cases have been carefully documented by
Elizabeth Warrington and her colleagues at University College London.2
A picture-naming task is one useful tool to test for category-specific
deficits (see page 72). One patient, named SBY, performed pretty well
identifying pictures of household objects and other inanimate items,
both when the item names were spoken and when they were written
down. But, when presented with pictures of living things, like animals,
SBY could not correctly identify a single one. Strikingly, SBY’s difficulty
didn’t seem to relate to the complexity or abstractness of the concepts
being tested. When asked to give definitions for words, SBY did quite
well with a variety of objects or even quite abstract ideas, as shown in
the examples on the left below, in contrast to the living things shown on
the right:

102
REPRESENTING MEANING
submarine “ship that goes under-
neath sea”
wasp “bird that flies”
wheelbarrow “object used […] to
take material about”
duck “an animal”
malice “to show bad will between
people”
frog “an animal, not trained”
caution “to be careful how you do
something”
tobacco “one of the foods you
can eat”
Deficits like that of SBY have been documented in many patients. Some
show an even more remarkable degree of specificity. For example, one
case study identified a person with difficulty recognizing fruits and
vegetables, but not animals, tools, or vehicles (Samson and Pillon, 2003)!
Which brain regions are involved in representing these different kinds
of concepts? In 2009, Jeffrey Binder of the Medical College of Wis-
conson and colleagues conducted a meta-analysis of 120 fMRI studies
addressing where conceptual meaning is stored in the brain. A meta-
analysis pools together the quantitative results from multiple studies
to ask which patterns generalize across different experiments. A chal-
lenge for any meta-analysis is determining when different studies are
addressing “the same thing” in the brain. In this analysis, three differ-
ent kinds of experiments were pooled together: Experiments comparing
real words with pseudowords, experiments where participants focused
on meaning or focused on phonological form, and experiments com-
paring semantic meaningfulness (e.g. whether words are semantically
related to each other or not). Their results are summarized in Fig. 19A.
This summary makes clear that, as Wernicke originally surmised, brain
areas across the temporal, frontal, and parietal lobes are involved in
processing conceptual meaning. Binder and colleagues further exam-
ine studies that probed specific aspects of semantics, such as those
that probe for “action” meanings, or for the meanings of man-made
objects (10 studies each). These more specific comparisons reveal sub-
parts of this broader network, including posterior parts of the temporal
lobe that border on the parietal lobe (specifically, the angular gyrus).
The activation patterns for different types of meaning are distinct,
consistent with the occurrence of category-specific agnosia, discussed
above.

CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
103
A.
B.
Figure 19. The semantic system. (A) Regions associated with the brain’s
distributed “semantic system” are found in the temporal, frontal, and
parietal lobes in a meta-analysis of 120 studies. (B) A semantic atlas for a
single-subject implicates a wide range of regions; even words with similar
meanings, like the “social” words in red, activate a broadly distributed
network.
Sources: A: Binder et al. (2009); B: Adapted from Huth et al. (2016).
A stunning example of how rich semantic representations are dis-
tributed across the cortex comes from a study by Alexander Huth,
Jack Gallant, and colleagues at the University of California, Berkeley
(2016). What sets this study apart from prior research, including the
meta-analysis just mentioned, is that they were able to map seman-
tic networks for many different kinds of meanings simultaneously. To
do this, they had participants listen to spoken stories during fMRI
scanning. These naturalistic stimuli had richer semantic content than
typically found in highly controlled experiments. To determine how
the brain responds to this rich semantic content, the researchers cre-
ated a mathematical representation of the meaning of each word. Such
a representation, called a word embedding, places each word in a “se-
mantic space” whose dimensions reflect different kinds of meanings.
The following diagram, for example, includes three dimensions: “food,”
“movement,” and “space”:
apple
dance
in
school
dinner
fly
food
fly
dance
dinner
school
apple
space
in
food
space
movement
movement

104
REPRESENTING MEANING
Each word gets a value based on its relationship to that dimension (say,
by counting how often the word “apple” co-occurs with a word repre-
senting each of the dimensions in a large corpus of text). Semantic spaces
like the one schematized in the above diagram seem to capture aspects of
how people represent meaning. Among other things, for example, words
that are close together in such a space are more likely to cause seman-
tic priming, compared to words that are far apart (e.g. Günther et al.,
2016). Having creating such a semantic space, the researchers then use
statistical models to estimate which voxels in the fMRI images respond
selectively to certain dimensions of meaning in this space.3 This pro-
cedure reveals a quite stunning “semantic atlas” showing how different
kinds of meanings activate different areas of the brain. An example of this
atlas for a single participant is shown in Fig. 19B. The colors in this figure
represent different dimensions in the semantic space. For example, vox-
els shown in red are more sensitive to words that have a social meaning
(“family,” “parents,” “met”), while areas colored in green relate to words
with more visual meaning (“yellow,” “stripes,” “shaped”).
There is a lot of detail in this analysis and in the results that we don’t
have space for here. I want to highlight just two takeaways. First, we
see again that different brain regions respond more to certain kinds of
meanings than others. This matches what we already saw in the studies
discussed above. Second, and adding new complexity, we see that simi-
lar types of meaning are themselves distributed across brain regions; for
example, you can see brain areas responding to social aspects of mean-
ing in the temporal lobe and frontal lobe in both hemispheres (red areas
on Fig. 19B).
Mapping out where different sorts of meanings are represented in the
brain can offer a window into questions about the mental representation
of meaning itself.
One approach builds on the computational models of lexical seman-
tics used by Alexander Huth and colleagues in the study just described.
Rather than build just one model, or word embedding, of semantics,
they actually created models using several different techniques. To un-
derstand this, imagine taking the diagram on page 103 and changing
the labels on the plot. Different models correspond to different choices

CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
105
about what the dimensions – the axes on the plot – ought to be. They
find that a model whose dimensions are based on a vocabulary of basic
words provides a better match of brain activity than a model based on
more abstract word-to-word co-occurrences. This line of research is just
beginning, and there remain many unanswered questions about what
sorts of semantic spaces best represent human conceptual knowledge,
and how those semantic spaces are physically instantiated by distributed
neural networks.
Another question about semantic representations concerns whether
the distributed networks we’ve discussed so far are sufficient for cap-
turing how the brain represents conceptual knowledge. The distributed-
only theory holds that concepts emerge solely from this distributed
network. This theory is schematized at the top of Fig. 20A. An alterna-
tive theory is that the distributed aspects of conceptual meaning must be
bound together in some way to form a coherent concept that is abstracted
away from particular experiences. This alternative distributed-plus-hub
theory is illustrated at the bottom of Fig 20A.
Distributed-only theory
A.
B.
C.
Distributed-plus-hub theory
Action
Sound
Motion
Color
Shape
Words
Figure 20. Semantic dementia. (A) Illustration of the distributed-only
and distributed-plus-hub hypotheses for the neural representation of
meaning. (B) Examples from a delayed-copy task indicate that the loss of
conceptual specificity in semantic dementia is not unique to
language. (C) The anterior temporal lobes are the main site of neural
degeneration in semantic dementia.
Source: Patterson et al. (2007).

106
REPRESENTING MEANING
The hub in Fig 20A covers the anterior temporal lobe. You may
recall the anterior temporal lobe from the previous chapter, around
page 88, where we saw that this region shows a systematic response to a
semantically meaningful stimulus around the same time as the posterior
middle temporal gyrus that houses lexical items. Researchers have pro-
posed that the anterior temporal lobe may be a crucial “semantic hub”
that binds together the distributed aspects of conceptual meaning.
One central piece of data pointing towards an anterior temporal hub
for semantics is a remarkable language deficit called semantic demen-
tia.4 Semantic dementia is a kind of primary progressive aphasia, or
PPA. That means it is a language deficit that follows from a progres-
sive neurodegenerative disorder. This contrasts with the aphasia that
we have seen previously, where neural damage is caused by external
factors like a stroke or traumatic brain injury. Like the more familiar
neurodegenerative disorder Alzheimer’s Disease, semantic demen-
tia affects memory with progressively severe consequences. Whereas
Alzheimer’s affects episodic memory – the memory of specific events,
people, and places – semantic dementia affects semantic knowledge, or
memory relating to concepts.
The disorder in semantic dementia can be illustrated with a picture-
naming task (see page 72). Examples of responses from a single patient
are shown below (‘+’ indicates a correct response):
Responses from
Sept. 1991
Mar. 1992
Sept. 1992
Mar. 1993
Bird
+
+
+
Animal
Chicken
+
+
Bird
Animal
Duck
+
Bird
Bird
Dog
Swan
+
Bird
Bird
Animal
Notice here that the responses appear to get more vague or generic as
time passes. A picture of a chicken is first recognized correctly, then is
only recognized as a “bird”, and finally only as an “animal.”
Other tests show that semantic dementia really affects the concepts
that are connected to words, not to the lexical item itself. One task that
shows this non-linguistic aspect of the deficit is called the delayed-copy
task. This task is illustrated in Fig. 20B. Patients are shown a picture

CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
107
(left-hand column of the figure). The picture is then taken away and the
patient is asked to draw the picture from memory. Examples of drawings
from a semantic dementia patient are shown on the right-hand side of
Fig. 20B. You can see that the drawings are not perfect reproductions
of the original picture. Interestingly, the drawings seem to be lacking
the unique and specific features that set each animal apart: The camel
lacks a hump, the seal has gained legs and a tail, and the duck has four
legs instead of two. The drawings seem to resemble what you might get
if you asked someone to draw “an animal”; just like their language, the
drawings are more generic. Evidence from tasks like these indicate that
semantic dementia impacts conceptual knowledge in a general way as
patients lose the ability to recognize or reason with the features that
distinguish different concepts from each other.
While the illustrations I’ve given here relate to animal concepts, the
effects of semantic dementia are seen across many different conceptual
categories. But, despite the category-general nature of this deficit, seman-
tic dementia does not affect a broad, distributed, neural network. Rather,
semantic dementia is associated with the progressive degeneration of
neurons in a rather focused location: the anterior temporal lobes in both
hemispheres. Fig. 20C illustrates the anterior temporal brain areas that
show reduced functioning in semantic dementia.
The fact that damage to a relatively focal region of the cortex leads
to a general semantic deficit is not predicted under the distributed-only
theory that was introduced above. Under that view, damage to a focal
part of the semantic system should only affect certain kinds of knowl-
edge. Rather, the deficit observed in semantic dementia supports the
distributed-plus-hub theory; the anterior temporal lobes are, under this
view, the hub in which different kinds of conceptual knowledge are
bound together.5
Evidence from other methods also supports the distributed-plus-hub
view. Repetitive TMS, or rTMS, can be used to selectively disrupt
different parts of the semantic network (see page 39 in Chapter 2 for
a refresher). When rTMS is applied to the anterior temporal lobe, it
seems to induce a brief category-general deficit, but when it is applied
to another node in the semantic network, a category-specific deficit is
found. To show this, Gorana Pobric, Elizabeth Jeffries, and Matthew
Lambon-Ralph (2007) used rTMS to disrupt three specific nodes: the

108
REPRESENTING MEANING
left anterior temporal lobe, the inferior parietal lobe adjacent to the
motor cortex, and a control region in the occipital lobe that is not
expected to disrupt any semantic processing. Participants were then
asked to make semantic judgments about several kinds of stimuli: high-
and low- action pictures that were expected to be associated with the
motor cortex, and pictures of living and non-living objects. Number
words were included as a control condition, as they are not expected to
engage the conceptual system. Indeed, when rTMS was applied to the
inferior parietal lobe, participants were slower to make decisions about
which words were related to actions, but were not affected in making
decisions about whether a word named a living or non-living thing.
This is a kind of category-specific effect. But when rTMS was applied to
the anterior temporal lobe, participants were slower making both kinds
of semantic judgments in a more category-general way. The overall
pattern of results can be summarized:
rTMS applied to
Anterior temporal Inferior parietal
Occipital
hub region
motor region
control region
High/low action
slower
slower
–
Living/non-living
slower
–
–
Number words
–
–
–
↓
↓
category-general category-specific
These data from healthy participants appear to line up with the category-
general pattern of deficits in semantic dementia patients, consistent with
the theory that the anterior temporal lobe is a kind of semantic hub.
One last bit of data supporting the distributed-plus-hub view comes
from fMRI. Jenny Crinion, Cathy Price, and their colleagues at Uni-
versity College London (2006), studied the brain bases of semantic
processing in bilingual participants. They were especially interested in
what sorts of brain areas support semantic processing that is common
across languages, versus what sorts of brain regions might support dif-
ferent languages. They use a variant of semantic priming (see page 85)
called fMRI adaptation. The idea here is that stimuli that engage the

CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS
109
same neuronal populations – say, two words that activate the same se-
mantic representations – will lead to reduced activation after repeated
exposure. Accordingly, stimulus items could be semantically related or
not, and they could be drawn from the same language or from different
languages. Here is a schematic of the experimental setup for partici-
pants who spoke English and German (“forelle” is the German word for
“trout”):
Prime word
Target word
related
same language
trout
SALMON
unrelated
same language
trout
HORSE
related
different languages
forelle
SALMON
unrelated
different languages
forelle
HORSE
Words that were semantically related led to faster responses – seman-
tic priming – and this was true even if the words came from different
languages. Moreover, just one brain region showed this priming pat-
tern for semantic relatedness across languages: the anterior temporal
lobe in the left hemisphere. Other experiments probing bilingual se-
mantic representations also point to the anterior temporal lobe. For
example, the pattern of activation in the left anterior temporal lobe
observed for words in one language can be used with the MVPA tech-
nique (page 67) to predict when participants were presented with a
word with the same meaning, but in a different language (Correia et al.,
2013). It appears that lexical items from different languages point to
a shared neural representations of meaning in the anterior temporal
lobe.
These bilingual data, like the rTMS and semantic dementia data
discussed above, are consistent with the theory that the anterior tem-
poral lobe is a semantic hub. This area serves to represent conceptual
information that is abstracted away from specific sensory or motoric
modalities. This hub is shared across different languages, and is used for
semantic processing in linguistic and in non-linguistic tasks.

110
REPRESENTING MEANING
Are conceptual representations embodied?
By this point, we’ve seen quite a bit of evidence that the brain represents
concepts through a complex network of brain regions distributed
around the cortex, and it seems that these representations are bound
together in a semantic hub housed in the anterior temporal lobe. Given
the evidence for a semantic hub, let’s revisit the role that distributed
activations play in instatiating conceptual knowledge. We’ll consider
two possible hypotheses:
Grounded symbolic concepts are built from sensory and action ex-
periences and are bound into abstract units in the anterior temporal
lobe. Distributed activation in sensory or motor systems is not
necessary for the representation of the concept once it is formed.
Embodied concepts are built from sensory and action experi-
ences, and those same systems are necessary for the representation
and processing of those concepts. For example, understanding an
action-word like walk requires activating the same motor represen-
tations used when performing that action.
The debate between these two hypotheses is not yet settled, and we will
see data supporting both sides in this section. The balance of the evi-
dence at this point seems to me to favor the grounded symbolic concepts
perspective, but this again is another opportunity to consider how to
reconcile apparently conflicting findings in neurolinguistics.
Carl Wernicke, if you remember from the evocative quotation on
page 100, suggested that conceptual knowledge relies on brain regions
involved in sensory perception and even “motor imagery gained by ex-
ploratory movements of the fingers and eyes.” The embodied concepts
theory predicts that the motor system is necessary to understand words
related to performing actions. Indeed, the involvement of motor systems
in representing concepts seems to receive striking support from a num-
ber of studies using fMRI and TMS.
In one such study, Friedemann Pulvermu¨ller and colleagues had
participants perform a series of simple actions while undergoing fMRI

ARE CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS EMBODIED?
111
scanning, like wiggling their fingers, moving their feet, or puckeringtheir
lips. You might recall from Chapter 2 that the motor cortex of the frontal
lobe is organized such that different cortical areas control different parts
of the body (page 21). Indeed, when participants moved an arm, leg, or
their face, the researchers saw activation in the corresponding areas of
the motor cortex. Then, the researchers simply had the participants read
words that were projected onto a screen. Among the items that were pre-
sented were action words, like “kick,” which involved moving the legs,
or “throw,” which involved moving the arm, or “kiss,” which involves the
face. According to the embodied concepts theory, a concept like “kick”
involves, in part, memories based in the motor/action system itself. And
indeed, the researchers in this study saw activation in the motor cortex
as participants simply viewed action words on the screen. Moreover, the
activation pattern, while not identical to the pattern that was observed
when they had performed related actions, showed a similar spatial
distribution: Leg-related actions like “kick” activated a region similar to
actually moving the foot, arm-related words activated a region similar
to actually moving the arm, and so forth. Data like this support the idea
that conceptual representations involve brain regions that are engaged
when we interact with and perceive things related to that concept.
Under the embodied view, our ability to comprehend action words
should be impaired if the relevant parts of the motor system are dis-
rupted. Indeed, we already saw above some evidence suggesting that this
might be the case. In the study by Gorana Pobric and colleagues (2007)
discussed on page 107, participants showed a category-specific slow-
down when making judgments about pictures of action-related items
when rTMS was applied to the inferior parietal lobe, adjacent to the
somatosensory and motor cortices.
Another study that indicates a possible causal connection between
motor cortex activation and action semantics used TMS to stimulate, not
disrupt, motor cortex processing (Pulvermüller et al., 2005). Whereas
repeated pulses of magnetic stimulation from rTMS briefly inhibit neu-
ral activation, a single magnetic pulse can enhance neuronal excitability
within a small area of the cortex. In this study, such single pulses were
applied selectively to the arm-area or the leg-area of the motor cortex.

112
REPRESENTING MEANING
Control conditions involved TMS pulses to the right hemisphere. Par-
ticipants made lexical decision judgments about a series of words with
meanings related to actions involving the arms (“fold,” “grasp”) or legs
(“kick,” “hike”).
The results showed that participants were faster at making lexical
decisions when the semantics of a word matched the brain site that
was stimulated. So, when stimulation was applied to the arm-region
of the motor cortex, participants were about 15 milliseconds faster in
making a decision about arm-related words like “grasp.” But, when stim-
ulation was applied to the leg-related region, participants were instead
faster to make judgments about leg-related words like “hike” by about
30 milliseconds.
These TMS studies indicate that the comprehension of action words
can be briefly impaired or enhanced by stimulating specific areas of
the motor cortex. It’s important to keep in mind what we mean by
“impaired” and “enhanced” here – the impact of TMS on participants
is being measured in milliseconds, such that a participant might be a
few tens of milliseconds slower or faster in making a judgment about
a word than they otherwise would be. Evidence like this seems to
suggest that a more severe disruption to the motor system ought to
lead to a more severe impairment with processing action-related mean-
ings. However, severe disruptions to the motor system of the brain
do not, it appears, have equally severe consequences for the compre-
hension of action-related concepts; this is at odds with the embodied
concepts view, but it is consistent with the grounded symbolic concepts
theory.
Parkinson’s disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that is specific to
neurons in the motor system. As a consequence of this neurodegener-
ation, patients with Parkinson’s disease lose aspects of motor control,
leading to tremors and to becoming slower with controlled actions
like walking. The embodied concepts theory suggests that patients with
severely disrupted motor systems will also have difficulty with lan-
guage comprehension involving action-related words. David Kemmerer
of Purdue University and colleagues tested this prediction in a study
2013. They probed semantic comprehension in a sample of patients
with Parkinson’s disease as well as control participants of the same age.

ARE CONCEPTUAL REPRESENTATIONS EMBODIED?
113
None of the participants showed evidence of dementia. Semantic com-
prehension was tested by having participants make a semantic similarity
judgment:
“Which word is most similar to TRUDGE?”
LIMP
STROLL
You can see that this kind of judgment requires relatively subtle se-
mantic knowledge. Participants made judgments like this about various
kinds of action words as well as non-action words that describe men-
tal states (“happy,” “afraid,” etc.) Although the semantic judgments were
subtle, participants with Parkinson’s disease performed very well regard-
less of whether the judgments involved different kinds of action words or
non-action words. There were no observable differenes in the semantic
performance between participants with and without Parkinson’s disease.
This result is not consistent with the embodied concepts theory.
More evidence that difficulty performing actions doesn’t correlate
with difficulty comprehending action concepts comes from case studies
of apraxia. Apraxia is a deficit involving performing actions due to brain
damage. Rafaella Rumiati, TimShallice, andcolleagues (2001) document
a series of case studies that show a double dissociation between apraxia
affecting certain types of actions and understanding of those actions.6
Patient DR and patient FG both experienced strokes that damaged sig-
nificant portions of their left hemisphere, including the motor cortex.
Both of them showed evidence of apraxia: They had difficuly imitating
actions that were demonstrated to them, and also had difficulty demon-
strating how objects might be used (“Show me how you use a phone”).
These patients were then given an assessment designed to test whether
they understood the actions that they could not perform. They were
asked to arrange into the proper order sets of pictures corresponding
to the steps of some action. Both patients performed well at this picture-
sequencing task, even though neither one could perform even half of
the actions that were pictured. Moreover, the same sequencing task was
given to another stroke patient, WH2, who showed no difficulty with
action performance – no apraxia – but rather showed executive func-
tioning difficulty. While WH2 could perform the depicted actions, they

114
REPRESENTING MEANING
had relatively greater difficulty putting the action pictures in the correct
sequence:
DR & FG
WH2
Performing pictured actions
Impaired
Less impaired
Sequencing pictures of actions
Less impaired
Impaired
These case studies demonstrate a double dissociation between being
able to perform an action, affected in apraxia, and the semantic com-
prehension of the action. This double dissociation is not consistent by
the embodied concepts theory.
Let’s take a moment to consider how these different pieces of data fit
together to shed light on theories of conceptual representation.7 On the
one hand is evidence showing that distributed parts of the brain, like the
motor cortex, become activated even when participants simply compre-
hend lexical items. Moreover, there is some sort of causal link between
motor activation and semantics, as individuals are measurably faster or
slower to recognize action words, specifically, depending on whether the
motor cortex is stimulated or inhibited. The data appear to support the
claim that the motor cortex is involved in aspects of semantic process-
ing, but they are not alone sufficient to support the stronger claim of
the embodied concepts theory that the motor/action system is necessary
for semantic comprehension. Instead, evidence from damage to the mo-
tor system indicates that the ability to perform an action can dissociate
from the capacity to understand that action and words related to actions.
The balance of the evidence seems to point to the grounded symbolic
concepts theory of an action system that is connected to conceptual rep-
resentations, but is not necessary for semantic comprehension of actions
themselves.
Chapter summary
This chapter has tackled how the brain represents word meaning itself.
• A broadly distributed network of cortical regions in the temporal,
frontal, and parietal lobes are activated when a person performs
the incredibly complex task of semantic processing. State-of-the-art

CHAPTER SUMMARY
115
methods are beginning to uncover the atlas of semantic information
that is encoded across these distributed semantic networks.
• Distributed semantic information appears to be bound together to
form coherent concepts in a semantic hub brain region: the anterior
temporal lobes. Key evidence for this hub comes from semantic
dementia, which is a variant of primary progressive aphasia (PPA).
• While semantic representations are distributed in the brain, it is
not as clear that those representations are embodied in sensory
and action systems, following the embodied concepts hypothesis.
For example, there appears to be a dissociation between the ability
to perform actions and the capacity to understand action-related se-
mantics. This dissociation supports the grounded symbolic concepts
hypothesis.
Aside from the specific findings and theories discussed in this chapter,
we also spent some time thinking carefully about what to do with exper-
imental results that appear to conflict with each other. The discussions
in the last few chapters of the time-course of word recognition (page 87),
lexical grains (page 94), distributed concepts (page 100), and embodied
concepts (page 110) all asked us to confront evidence from studies that
didn’t seem to line up. I hope you see in each of these sections that such
conflicts are scientifically good! They require us to think carefully and
skeptically about what the data at hand really mean, and to make our
theoretical questions and hypotheses sharper and more effective.
While these last two chapters have covered quite a lot of ground, you
won’t be surprised to learn that we’ve just touched the surface of the
many rich lines of research that are delving deeper into how the brain
represents words and meanings. I encourage you to explore the notes
sprinkled through the chapters! Or, if you’re ready, you can turn to the
next chapter, where we try to make sense of how the brain puts words
together to make meaningful phrases and sentences.

7
Structure and prediction
Everyone creates brand new sentences every day. I’m not talking about
poetry or word play here, though there is that too, but just your
everyday bit of communication, like “Don’t step on that bear!” or “The
fox that was under the bed is now in the kitchen.” Now I suspect that you
might not have come across these particular sentences before. My point
is that you had no problem, no problem at all, understanding what each
of these mean. Having reached that understanding, you may have even
done some further reasoning (“Hmmm, it seems pretty implausible to
step on a bear. Maybe the word bear refers not to a large carnivorous
mammal, but rather to a soft plush toy”). To do this, you took the words
that you know, and put their meanings together in a rule-governed and
systematic way to come to an understanding of the meaning of the whole
sentence. The next three chapters are about how the brain carries out this
remarkable feat of composition.
Sentence structure
Though it seems effortless to us, there is a lot that goes into making
meaningful sentences out of strings of words. Fig. 21 shows a phrase-
structure diagram that aims to capture just some of the pieces that we
need to keep in mind when we think about what the brain must be do-
ing. There are quite a few things going on this diagram, but I want you
to focus on just three key aspects of sentence structure:
Constituency Words combine together in a particular order. This is
indicated by the hierarchical groupings, called the constituency or
phrase structure of the sentence. So, the word red combines with
apple, and that pair of words together combine with the. Together,
these make a phrase: [the [red apple]]. Similarly the phrase [this
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0007

SENTENCE STRUCTURE
117
The red apple that I cut is on this table.
N
table
D
this
P
on
V
is
V
cut
Pro
I
C
that
the (
)
N
apple
A
red
D
the
Figure 21. Components of sentence structure. Words are organized into
hierarchical phrases, or constituents, governed in part by their syntactic
category. Dependencies between words may span long distances, as
indicated by the curved lines. This structure, together with the words
themselves, compositionally determine the meaning of the whole sentence.
Source: Apple image by Marco Verch, used under the CC BY 2.0 license
(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0/
table] combines with the preposition on to make the phrase [on
[this table]]. Constituency plays an important role in indicating, for
instance that I is the subject, and agent, of the verb cut. This infor-
mation about “who did what to whom” is the argument structure of
the sentence.
The rules for constituency are based on each word’s syntactic cat-
egory (or part of speech). These are the “P”, “N”, or “V” labels in the
figure that indicate whether a word is a preposition, noun, verb, etc.
There are some labels that may be unfamiliar (“C”? “Pro”?). Don’t
worry about these. Any abbreviations will be defined as needed
through the chapter.
Dependencies Sometimes words combine with elements that aren’t
right next to them. These are called long-distance dependencies. This
is indicated by the dashed arrow connecting the phrase [the red
apple] with the verb cut: this line captures the fact that it’s the apple
that is being cut.
Another kind of dependency is when words must show agreement
in their form. This is indicated in the dotted line in the diagram,
which shows how the demonstrative word this agrees with the
noun table. If the noun was plural (tables), the demonstrative would
instead be these.

118
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
Compositionality Finally, these phrases and dependencies, to-
gether with the words themselves, derive the meaning of an ex-
pression. That meaning is indicated, very roughly, by the pic-
ture on the right-hand side of Fig. 21 Importantly, this mean-
ing is built compositionally from the pieces of the sentence.
This compositional process is schematized by the small pic-
tures corresponding to red (
), apple (
), and phrases like
[red apple] (
). Some words don’t have meanings that are eas-
ily shown with an icon or picture, such as the word the; I’ll
use the convention of putting words like this in double brackets
(⟦•⟧) when referring to that word’s meaning.
Where do these structures come from? Well, one thing that any lan-
guage user knows (though not necessarily consciously) are what sorts
of phrasal constituents and dependencies follow the rules of their lan-
guage. We call this knowledge the grammar of a language. Of course,
whether we are signing, speaking, or reading, we don’t come across a
fully-formed sentence all at once. Rather, we perceive a sentence one
word at a time. The brain’s job is to dynamically make use of this
grammatical knowledge to “figure out” the sentence’s structure – its
constituency, dependencies, and ultimately the meaning – from a se-
quence of words. (You may recall that we first brushed up against this
way back on page 7 in Chapter 1.) So, the task faced by the brain is how
to “figure out” which grammar rules match some sequence of words so
that it can compose word-meanings together in the correct way to reach
some intended meaning. In comprehension, this figuring-out of sen-
tence structure is called parsing. When we measure brain signals, then,
we’re not measuring the brain basis of a grammar directly, but rather we
measure the reflexes of this parsing process:
word
parsing
,→
mind/brain state of
,→
measured
sequence
sentence understanding
brain signal
■
■
■
■
■
reflects grammar
The relationship between the grammar and the brain signals we mea-
sure is thus not direct; it depends on several linking functions. These are
the arrows in the diagram just above. They describe how some linguistic

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
119
input maps to mental representations, how those mental representations
rely on your grammatical knowledge, and how our measuring tools tap
into those mental states.
We’ll have to do some work in this chapter to understand these linking
functions. For a start, it’s helpful to think about this parsing process, this
“figuring-out” of sentence structure, as a kind of memory game. That
grammatical knowledge you need is stowed away in your memory. The
game is to dig into your memory to find and apply just the bits and pieces
needed to make sense how the words you encounter fit together. You win
the game when you understand some linguistic input, and you get points
for doing this very quickly (remember, natural speech unfolds at two to
six words per second!). To do this effectively, the brain makes predictions
about what sorts of grammar rules – what sorts of structures – might best
fit a sentence as it unfolds.
The Ns and the Ps of sentence predictions
In previous chapters, we saw how predictions help to guide speech per-
ception of variable input (page 58), and aid in extremely rapid word
recognition(page 89). The structuraldependenciesbetween wordsmake
predictive processing an especially important tool for rapidly and effi-
ciently processing sentence meaning. We’ll see, in fact, that predictions
play a role in almost every aspect of how the brain makes sense of
sentences.
To begin, we’ll discuss one of the best-studied brain signals associated
with sentences, a signal called the “N400.” The N400 is an event-related
potential, or ERP, component, that is measured with EEG (need a quick
ERP refresher? See page 35 in Chapter 2). What this means is that it
is a systematic voltage fluctuation that occurs every time the brain en-
counters a certain type of stimulus. In this case, the N400 is evoked in
response to semantically meaningful stimuli. It is measured as a negative
voltage fluctuation around the center of the scalp, hence the “N” label,
that occurs between around 300 and 500 milliseconds after a meaningful
stimulus; it is strongest at around 400 milliseconds, leading to the “400”
label.
Marta Kutas and Steven Hillyard first measured the N400 in a study
published in 1980. In that study, they used EEG to measure how the

120
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
brain responds to different kinds of unexpected stimuli. In one condi-
tion, they varied whether the final word of a visually presented sentence
appeared in the same font as the previous words. When visual expecta-
tions were violated, this led to a large positive voltage; this is shown in
the dotted line in Fig. 22A. (Note that positive voltages are plotted down
in Fig. 22; this is a common convention in ERP plots but it is not always
followed. My advice is to always pay close attention to the axis labels.)
However, when the final word of the sentence appeared in an expected
font, but had an unexpected meaning, then there was a large negative
voltage, which they labeled the N400 – this is shown in the dashed line
in Fig. 22A. Moreover, strength of this N400 potential is proportional
to just how unexpected a particular word might be (Kutas and Hillyard,
1984). The N400 is generally strongest over the central-posterior part of
the scalp; this topography is shown in Fig. 22B.
While the N400 was first measured with sentences, it was quickly dis-
covered that the N400 can also be elicited by individual words.1 For
example, the N400 is smaller for words that are used frequently, and is
also reduced when words are semantically primed.2 The semantic prim-
ing effect is illustrated in Fig. 22C. In fact, the N400 can even be elicited
by non-linguistic stimuli; a priming effect can also be seen for pictures,
as shown in Fig. 22D. Results like these have led to the semantic mem-
ory theory of the N400: This brain response reflects neural processes
involved in the activation of meaning from semantic memory. More
activation is required, under this theory, to access the meanings of unex-
pected words. Indeed, you might already have noticed that the timing of
theN400 makes sense forthis sort oftheory: theN400 begins around200
to 250 milliseconds after the onset of a word (this is perhaps clearest in
Fig. 22C) and aligns quite well with the time-course of word recognition
that we saw in Chapter 5 (see especially Fig. 18 on page 93).
The semantic memory theory receives support from studies showing
that the N400 is in fact reduced by words that are entirely unexpected,
just so long as they are semantically related to predictable items. To
demonstrate this, Kara Federmeier and Marta Kutas (1999) presented
participants with sentences like the following:3
(1)
‘Checkmate.’ Rosalind announced with glee.
She was getting to be really good at…
The sentence could be completed by the expected word “chess” or one of
two unexpected words: “Monopoly,” which belongs to the same semantic

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
121
–
A.
B.
D.
E.
C.
+
–
0z
400 ms
Not primed
Primed word
‘‘football’’
‘‘monopoly’’
Not primed
Primed
picture
+
–
+
Cz
400 ms
‘‘chess’’
400 ms
+
10,μV
1.0 sec
XXXXX
Diﬀerence between
semantically
congruous and
incongruous
at 300 to 500
milliseconds
IT
WAS
HIS
FIRST
DAY
AT
WORK.
N400
Congruous
SOCKS.
SHOES.
WITH
HEELED
Semantically Incongruous
BREAD
HIGH
THE
WARM
HER
ON
SPREAD
PUT
HE
SHE
XXXXX
XXXXX
–
Figure 22. The N400 event-related potential. (A) The first observation
of the N400 showed a stark contrast in the brain response to visually
incongruous words (dotted line) and semantically incongruous words
(dashed line). Note that here, and in all panels in this figure, negative is
plotted upwards. (B) The N400 typically has a central-posterior
topography. The N400 can be elicited by single words (C) and even
meaningful pictures (D), and is reduced when words or pictures are
primed. (E) Words that are semantically related to an expected item, even
if the word itself is unexpected, lead to reduced N400 responses. This result
supports the semantic memory theory of the N400.
Sources: A: Kutas and Hillyard (1980); B: Kutas and Federmeier (2011); C: Holcomb (1988);
D: Holcomb and McPherson (1994); E: Federmeier and Kutas (1999).

122
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
category of board-game, or “football,” which belongs to a different se-
mantic category. Importantly, “Monopoly” and “football” are equally
implausible ways to complete this sentence for the participants. Despite
being equally implausible, words from the same category elicit smaller
N400s than words from a different category. This result is shown in
Fig. 22E.
This finding follows from the theory that the N400 reflects seman-
tic activation. As a sentence’s meaning is built up incrementally during
comprehension, predictable words, like “chess,” become pre-activated in
semantic memory. This activation, in turn, leads to semantic priming
of related words; that means that those other words become partially
activated as well. In this case, “chess” primes other board games like
“Monopoly.” Because “Monopoly” has been partially activated, the N400
is smaller than it would be for words that have not been activated at all,
like “football.” The diagram below illustrates the sequence of processing
stages under the semantic memory theory:
“Checkmate” Rosalind announced with glee.
She was beginning to get really good at...
...Monopoly
actual
next
word
chess
update semantic activations
small N400
(Monopoly, checkers ...)
pre-activate
predictable words
prime semantically
related words
The N400 illustrates how aspects of sentence meaning can affect,
or modulate, various stages of processing. But there is an alternative
account of the N400 that links it more closely with the computation
of sentence meaning itself. The semantic integration theory of the
N400 holds that this neural response reflects the plausibility of the
meaning that results when a new word is combined (integrated)
with the previous context. The following diagram sketches the stages
of processing that lead to an N400 under the semantic integration theory:

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
123
“Checkmate” Rosalind announced with glee.
She was beginning to get really good at...
...Monopoly
actual
next
word
integrate meaning
N400
generate meaning
for context
activate word
Notice how both theories predict that there will be a larger N400 for
words that don’t match the prior sentence context, but they associate
the N400 with different processing stages. The integration theory links
the N400 with a compositional process of building up the meaning of a
sentence, while the semantic memory theory links it with the activation
of individual word meanings.
In fact, current data indicate that both theories may, in part, be right.
To test this, we look to a strategy that we first saw when discussing how
to tease apart different aspects of processing during word recognition
(“single-trial analysis”; see around page 91). You can think of the degree
of match between a word and prior sentence context in two distinct –
yet correlated – ways. One way, by now pretty familiar to us, is in terms
of whether a word is predictable or not. You can test for a word’s pre-
dictability using something called a Cloze task. A Cloze task is like a
“fill-in-the-blank”; you give participants some incomplete sentence and
ask them to put in the word that they think fits best. The words that are
most commonly filled in are said to have a “high Cloze probability” –
they are predictable. But another way to test whether a word matches its
context is in terms of its semantic plausibility. A plausibility judgment
complements the Cloze task: You give participants a full sentence with
the target word, and ask them to judge how plausible the meaning of
the whole sentence is. Now, you are probabably thinking that these two
kinds of measurements are awfully similar to each other; something that
is implausible is going to be pretty unpredictable. And you are right! But
just because these are similar doesn’t mean that they are identical. To see
this distinction, consider the following sentence:
Lisa drank a glass of…
what do you predict?
ready?

124
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
… guava juice.
I suspect that if you were asked to “fill in the blank” in this case, almost
no one would write “guava juice.” In other words, the Cloze probability
would be 0. But none the less, the situation of someone drinking a glass
of guava juice is quite plausible (and delicious).
A large-scale study, comprising efforts from nine different labora-
tories, took advantage of how predictability and plausibility can be
disentangled across individual sentences.4 Over 300 participants lis-
tened to sentences with a noun that did or did not match the context.
While the highly predictable words were also highly plausible, words that
were not predictable were judged to span a range from high to low plausi-
bility. When they examined the correlation between word predictability
(from a Cloze task) and the EEG signal, they observed more positive
voltages (that is, less negative) for more predictable words. This is an
N400 effect that peaked between 300 and 400 milliseconds after word
onset (see the top left of Fig. 23A). Separately, increased sentence plausi-
bility also led to more positive (less negative) voltages, but this effect was
slightly later, peaking around 500 milliseconds, and also was measured
over a smaller area of the posterior scalp; see the top right of Fig. 23A.
These data indicate that predictability is the principal driver of the
N400 effect, which is consistent with the semantic memory theory of the
N400. But plausibility also seems to have an effect, albeit a smaller one,
consistent with the semantic integration theory. Notice also that the effect
for plausibility is later than that of predictability. This is exactly what you
would expect based on the time-course of word recognition that we have
already seen: (i) words are pre-activated by context; (ii) lexical access is
further modulated when the next word is encountered, 250–400 ms after
word onset; (iii) which is followed by the update of the meaning of the
whole sentence by around 400–500 ms.
We’ve established that the N400 ERP component is sensitive, at least in
part, to whether or not a word is predictable given its sentence context.
This effect reflects the fact that predictable words can be pre-activated

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
125
Predictability
A.
B.
C.
D.
Predictability
Mismatch to
discourse
Pz
400 ms
–
+
400 ms
3 μV
–3 μV
P3
Mismatch to
speaker voice
400 ms
1.5
0
ampliture, µV
+
–
Mismatch to
constituent
structure
Plausibility
100
200
300
400
500
600 ms
2
0
–2
2
0
–2
0
250
500
750
1000
0
250
500
750
1000
400 ms
400 ms
Plausibility
Figure 23. Predictability and the N400. (A) Both predictability and
plausibility affect the N400, with the predictability effect appearing earlier
and with larger amplitude; remember: more predictable = less negative
(smaller N400) = more positive. Different sources of information affect
predictability and, consequently, the N400, including (B) discourse, (C)
the identity of the speaker, and (D) grammatical structure. (Pay attention
to y-axis labels!)
Sources: A: Nieuwland et al. (2019); B: van Berkum et al. (2003); C: van Berkum et al. (2008);
D: Brennan and Hale (2019).

126
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
by their context; they get a boost that makes lexical access easier, lead-
ing to a smaller N400. Because the N400 reflects word predictability, we
can use it to test different theories of how people make predictions dur-
ing sentence processing. In particular, I will focus on evidence about the
kinds of information that people take advantage of when they make such
predictions.
The brain uses quite a lot of different sources of information to make
predictions during sentence processing. As we’re about to see, it seems
like we use just about any information that we can use. But we’ll also
see puzzling cases where it seems that the brain ignores perfectly good
information about what words to expect next. These instances of “bad
predictions” may actually point towards some deep principles of how the
brain uses stored knowledge for sentence comprehension.
So far, we’ve just seen examples of N400 effects for single, isolated
sentences, like “spread the warm bread with socks” (Fig. 22). But an
N400 is also observed when a word is unpredicted based on a broader
discourse context, even if it is perfectly well matched to the single
sentence that it appears in (Van Berkum et al., 2003). Here’s an example:
(2)
As agreed upon, Jane was to wake her sister and her brother at
five o’clock in the morning. But the sister had already washed
herself, and the brother had even got dressed. Jane told the
brother that he was exceptionally {quick, slow}.
Importantly, the target words “quick” or “slow” are both equally pre-
dictable (and plausible) if you consider just the final sentence alone. But,
because a word like “slow” doesn’t match the broader context of this little
discourse, it elicits an N400, as illustrated in Fig. 23B.
The sort of information that matters can come from linguistic
input, like the discourse above, or it can come from other sources. For
example, who is speaking provides valuable information about what
they might say, and the identity of the speaker seems also to affect word
predictions and the N400. For example, in a 2008 study Jos van Berkum
of the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics and colleagues used
sentences like the following that were spoken by different kinds of
speakers:

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
127
(3)
Male or female speaker
“If only I looked like Britney Spears in her last video.”
Child or adult speaker
“Every evening I drink some wine before I go to sleep.”
The researchers observed an N400 effect at the target word, underlined
in the examples above, when that word didn’t match what you would
expect based on the voice of the speaker (such as a child’s voice saying
“I drink some wine”). As you can see in the ERP shown in Fig. 23C,
the effect for this mismatch is quantitatively smaller than that observed
for mismatches against the discourse (Fig. 23B) or sentence context
(Fig. 22A, E). But the difference emerges in the same 300–500 millisec-
ond time-window, and on the same central-posterior areas of the scalp,
for a speaker mismatch as for the other kinds of prediction effects. The
difference in the strength of the voltage difference may be due to the fact
that speaker identity doesn’t provide quite as strong a clue to upcoming
words as a highly constraining sentence, like the chess sentence used in
example (1) on page 120.
In some cases, researchers have debated the degree to which some
kinds of information are used during rapid sentence comprehension.
One point of debate has been the role of abstract hierarchical struc-
ture – the constituency that is diagrammed in Fig. 21. The idea is that
such constituency can be complicated to compute rapidly, and it may
be that in everyday circumstances language users can make a fair guess
at meaning using strategies that rely on simpler information, like each
word’s syntactic category (so, hearing a NounA–Verb–NounB sequence
might be quickly interpreted as “A did something to B”).5 To test this,
researchers separately computed the probability of words based on the
word sequence that preceded them, or on the constituency structure of
the sentences that the words appeared in (Brennan and Hale, 2019). The
words themselves came from a chapter of the children’s story-book Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland, which participants listened to while EEG was
recorded. The idea here was to give the participants a kind of natural
everyday task. As illustrated in Fig. 23D, they observe an increase in neg-
ative scalp voltages for unpredictable words, but only when predictabil-
ity was based on the constituent structure of each sentence; this effect
was not seen with predictability based on word-sequence information
alone.

128
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
The take away message from these last few paragraphs is that the
brain makes use of many different information sources during sentence
comprehension. Each of these sources of information, from the broader
discourse, to who is talking, to the detailed constituent structure of the
unfolding sentence, provides a clue as to what words might come next.
These clues are combined in order to predict upcoming words, thus
helping us rapidly and efficiently understand a sentence.
Just how rapidly are these different sources of information combined
and used to predict upcoming input? Several pieces of evidence have
narrowed down this important question of time-course. This line of
research begins with a puzzle nicely illustrated by a 2016 study from
Wing-Yee Chow and her colleagues at the University of Maryland. The
experiment uses sentence stimuli that have semantic role reversals; what
this means is that nouns that are usually the agent of a verb are instead
given as the patient. An example is given below:
(4)
Normal semantic roles
The restaurant owner forgot which customerpatient
the
waitressagent had served during dinner yesterday.
Reversed semantic roles
The
restaurant
owner
forgot
which
waitresspatient
the
customeragent had served during dinner yesterday.
Notice that the target verb, served, is quite predictable when waitress is
the agent performing the action to the customer. In contrast, served is
quite unexpected in the second sentence, when the role of patient and
agent has been swapped. Despite this clear unpredictability, there is no
N400 when semantic roles are reversed, as in the second example sen-
tence. When the sentences are only slightly modified, the N400 “returns.”
For example, when the patient noun customer is swapped instead with
the noun in the main clause (the restaurant owner in this example), a
clear N400 is observed.
These semantic reversal sentences are interesting because the individ-
ual words involved are all semantically related (serve is related both to
customer and to waitress etc.). So whether the verb is predictable or not
doesn’t just depend on the meaning of the other words, but requires the
comprehender to process the word, to compute its semantic role, and to

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
129
use those pieces of information together to predict upcoming input. The
idea then is that while context can be rapidly used to make predictions
by pre-activating semantically related words (using a wide variety of in-
formation sources), more complicated information combinations, like
narrowing those predictions down based on semantic role information,
may take additional time. When the relevant words are right next to each
other, as in the example sentences just above, there has not been enough
time for this sequence of predictions to unfold:
The restaurant owner forgot
which waitress the customer had...
...served
get
next
word
(serve , pay , complain...)
match!
(pay ...)
pre-activate
words
narrow based on semantic
role information
predict next word
too late to
affect predictions
The nature of these limitations on rapid predictions is just beginning
to be uncovered, and a more nuanced picture is sure to emerge with
further study.6 Still, there is intriguing data suggesting that compre-
henders may just need a few extra tenths of a second in order to
incorporate and make predictions based on semantic roles and other
argument structure information. Shota Momma proposed a very elegant
demonstration of this in his dissertation research, completed at the
University of Maryland in 2016. This study takes advantage of a few
key properties of Japanese grammar. First, Japanese uses grammatical
markers to indicate the subject and the object of a sentence. Second,
Japanese has flexible word order, so both the subject (here, the agent)
or the object (patient) may appear before or after the verb. Third, argu-
ments may be left unspoken, or “dropped”, in grammatical sentences.
These three properties allow the creation of semantic role reversal
stimulus items:

130
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
(5)
Normal semantic role
beeagent sting
“The bee stings (something)”
Reversed semantic role
beepatient sting
“(Something) stings the bee”
The idea here is that the verb sting should be predictable when bee is
the agent, but not when it is the patient (we don’t typically expect bees
to be the victims of stinging). Then, the researchers simply varied how
much time passes between the presentation of the noun and the verb to
probe how long it might take for semantic role information to influence
predictions. When the verb and noun are separated by just 0.8 seconds,
then there is no N400, just as was observed for the semantic reversal
sentences above. But, when the verb and the noun are separated by 1.2
seconds, then there is an N400 when a noun like bee is the patient of a
verb like sting
The diagram in Fig. 24 on page 130 aims to draw together the vari-
ous pieces of this discussion of the N400 and prediction. There are really
just three things happening in this picture. When a word is first accessed
(as discussed in Chapter 5), there is additional pre-activation of possi-
ble upcoming words. This is shown in the curved solid arrows and the
“predicted” items in the bubbles. When the next word is encountered,
it leads to what you can think of as an update to the activations of the
This
sentence
is
unfolding
word
by
sound
book, cat...
is, will...
an, the...
one, in...
by
word
Mismatch
Predicted semantics don’t match input
Update lexical activation → N400 
(pre-)activate
words
update
activations
integrate
Figure 24. How semantic predictions might unfold. As a sentence
unfolds, lexical items are pre-activated, new input updates these
activations, and that input is integrated with prior words to guide further
predictions. An N400 ERP component may be generated when predictions
about lexical items are violated.

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
131
mental lexicon. This update is indicated by the dotted vertical arrows.
Third, the integration of the current word with the pre-activated words
serves to guide further predictions. The key to understanding the appar-
ent complexity of this process is that these processing steps happen again
and again as the sentence unfolds. And, as the sentence unfolds, words
may become more predictable; this is the case in Fig. 24 where there is
a strong prediction at the end of the sentence for the word “word”. But,
instead, the sentence ends with the word “sound”, which was not pre-
activated at all. The additional lexical activation needed to access this
unexpected word leads to an N400.
The N400 offers evidence that we predict or pre-activate lexical
representations while comprehending sentences. We saw in previous
chapters that prediction operates at other levels of representations as
well – in fact, in some circumstances we may even predict the sensory
form of upcoming linguistic input (see pages 58 and 91). Well, listeners
may also make predictions about the syntactic representations that they
expect to encounter during sentence comprehension. Evidence about
syntactic expectations comes from a second major ERP component
associated with sentence processing, the P600.
The P600 is an ERP component that peaks relatively late, between 600
and 900 milliseconds after encountering a word. It is a positive voltage
measured predominantly over the posterior part of the scalp. In contrast
to the N400, which seems to be sensitive to semantic mismatches, the
P600 is typically seen when encountering a word that syntactically
mismatches the context. For example, a 1991 study by Helen Neville and
colleagues found a P600 when when participants read ungrammatical
sentences like those in example (6) (underlining indicates the phrase
from which the P600 was measured):7
(6)
Ungrammatical
The scientist criticized Lucy’s of proof the theorem.
Grammatical
The scientist criticized Lucy’s proof of the theorem.
Another example comes from a study by Ana Gouvea and colleagues
in 2010. They show participants grammatical and ungrammatical
sentences like these:

132
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
–3 µV
400 ms
Grammatical
A.
B.
Difference between
grammatical and ungrammatical
at 700 to 900 milliseconds
Ungrammatical
Figure 25. The P600 ERP. (A) Ungrammatical sentences show increased
positive response starting about 0.5 second after an ungrammatical word.
(B) The P600 is strongest over central posterior parts of the scalp.
Source: Gouvea et al. (2010).
(7)
Ungrammatical
The patient met the doctor while the nurse with the white dress
show the chart during the meeting.
Grammatical
The patient met the doctor while the nurse with the white dress
showed the chart during the meeting.
Fig. 25 illustrates the time-course and topography of the P600 effect
observed by Gouvea and colleagues.
But the P600 is not only observed when sentences are ungrammatical.
It is also found for grammatical but unusual sentence structures. One
example of this is from a study by Lee Osterhout and Philip Holcomb
(1992), who presented participants with sentences like these:
(8)
More common syntax
The singer decided to perform the opera.
Less common syntax
The singer allowed to record the song.
The key thing to note here is that the target word, to, in the bottom
sentence is perfectly grammatical; think about a sentence that contin-
ues The singer allowed to record the song became a big star. That same
sentence could be rewritten as The singer who was allowed to record the
song…. The bottom sentence has what is called a “reduced relative clause”
because the words who was are optional. Reduced relative clauses like

THE NS AND THE PS OF SENTENCE PREDICTIONS
133
these are less common than sentences like the top one (… singer decided
to…). While both sentences are still grammatical at the target word, a
larger P600 was observed for the sentence with a more unusual structure.
Results like this suggest that the P600 signal may reflect expectations
(predictions) about likely syntactic structures.
There is significant debate about exactly what is going on in the brain
when it generates a P600 ERP.8 I’m only going to talk about a little part
of this interesting line of research that connects back to the broader
point in this section about how predictions matter for almost all aspects
of how the brain makes sense of sentences. I’m going to discuss an
apparent puzzle for the idea that the P600 connects, in some way, to
syntactic processing (notice that I’m staying kind of vague about exactly
what kind of “syntactic processing” is going on). The puzzle is nicely
illustrated in an EEG study by Albert Kim and Lee Osterhout (2005).
They presented participants with sentences that began in the following
way:
(9)
The hearty meal was devoured…
Semantic match
The hearty meal was devouring…
Semantic mismatch
Notice that the second sentence is unusual for apparently semantic
reasons: Meals don’t tend to devour people, people devour meals. De-
spite this apparent semantic mismatch, the ERP response to sentences
like those in (9) is not an N400, as you might expect, but rather
a P600.
To make sense of this apparent puzzle, let’s go back to why an N400
might occur in the usual cases. The semantic memory theory holds that
the N400 reflects the activation of a lexical item; it is larger for un-
predictable words because more activation is required for words that
haven’t already been pre-activated. The key idea to grab onto here is
that the N400 doesn’t reflect the prediction match (or mismatch) it-
self, but rather reflects what the brain does after a prediction has failed.
So if a prediction is violated, the brain may need to activate other lex-
ical items, and this leads to an N400 signal. But what if the brain does
something else when a prediction is violated? Instead of reactivating lex-
ical items, for example, perhaps the brain could change the syntactic

134
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
analysis of the sentence to accommodate the words that it has already
activated.
Something like this syntactic reanalysis may be going on for the “se-
mantic” P600 effect described above. A noun phrase like the hearty meal
pre-activates related lexical items (eat, devour, enjoy…), and it also may
activate appropriate syntactic representations. Typically, meals are the
patient, not the agent, of an action (you serve or eat a meal). So, it could
make sense to pre-activate a syntactic structure such as the passive voice
where the object of the verb, not the subject, is uttered at the beginning
of the sentence. To draw out this hypothesis, let’s augment the picture
from Fig. 24 with additional predictions about syntactic structure. These
are shown in Fig 26 by the syntactic diagrams in bubbles at the bottom.
These bubbles capture in a very simple way the idea that comprehen-
ders don’t just pre-activate words when processing a sentence; they can
pre-activate other linguistic representations, including syntactic phrases
and dependencies. Now, when a word like devouring is encountered,
there is a mismatch between the syntactic features of this word – it is
an active verb form – and the passive syntactic features that had been
pre-activated.9
Predictions are dynamic
Before wrapping up the discussion about how the brain makes predic-
tions during sentence comprehension, I want to mention some different
kinds of evidence for two key pieces of the dynamic process shown in
Figs 24 and 26: making predictions at multiple levels simulatiously, and
the interplay between making and updating predictions.
Clues that the brain makes predictions about different kinds of
linguistic representations simultaneously comes from an fMRI study
led by Alessandro Lopopolo (2017). Participants in this study listened
passively to a series of narratives during fMRI scanning. (These
naturalistic narratives offer another contrast to the ERP studies above,
which relied on carefully constructed “odd” sentences.) To tease apart
predictions at different linguistic levels, the researchers considered
the narrative stimuli in three different ways. First, they considered

PREDICTIONS ARE DYNAMIC
135
The
hearty
meal
was
devouring
...
NP
...N? A?
NP
...N?
...VP
passive V
...VP
... passive V
this is an active-voice
verb form
Mismatch
Predict passive but get active voice
Update syntax → P600
(pre-)activate
representations
update
activations
integrate
Figure 26. How syntactic predictions might unfold. Predictions unfold
at multiple linguistic levels simultaneously, including syntactic structure;
here, the word devouring violates the syntactic prediction for a passive verb
phrase, leading to a P600 ERP response.
the phonemes that make up the narratives; by counting how often
phonemes co-occurred, they quantified the probability of the phonemes
in each word. Second, they considered the probability of each word
by counting how often certain sequences of words appeared together.
Lastly, they considered syntactic probability in terms of how often
certain syntactic categories appeared in order together. Each of these
measures can be written out as a conditional probability, shown in (10).
You can translate these statements into English along the lines of: “The
probability of a given word, call it w, following two previous words, w1
and w2, is….”

136
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
(10)
Pr(phonemep
|
phonemep−1, phonemep−2…)
Pr(wordw
|
wordw−1, wordw−2…)
Pr(categoryc
|
categoryc−1, categoryc−2…)
The fMRI scans show distinct areas of the temporal lobe that are sensi-
tive to the predictability of these different representations. Unexpected
syntactic categories, for example, activate both posterior and more an-
terior areas of the left temporal lobe, while unexpected lexical items
activate an area that covers the middle of the temporal lobe, just posterior
to the auditory cortex.
Evidence that these predictions reflect a dynamic “back-and-forth”
between linguistic context and bottom-up information comes from a
study by Anastasia Klimovich-Gray and William Marslen-Wilson at the
University of Cambridge (2019). They used MEG to track how such pre-
dictions unfold and affect subsequent processing. Participants listened
to simple phrases made up of an adjective and a noun, like “yellow ba-
nana.” Some phrases used adjectives that were highly predictive of the
next noun (think “peeled banana”). The researchers calculated three val-
ues from their stimuli to tap into distinct stages of dynamically predicting
words in a phrase: pre-activating representations, checking predictions,
and updating activations. Pre-activation was tested by comparing ad-
jectives that were more or less predictive of the next noun. The step of
checking predictions was tested by computing the match between pre-
dictions from the adjective, and the first phoneme of the noun (e.g. [b]
from “banana”). The first of these values can be computed using variants
of conditional probabilities, as discussed in the paragraph just above.
The last semantic value is the simple average of all of the word embed-
dings that make up the phrase (take a look back at the diagram on page
103 for a refresher on word embeddings).
MEG affords the researchers remarkable precision in tracking these
processing stages in both space and time; the results are summarized in
Fig. 27. They show an effect for pre-activation even before the end of the
first word. This effect is in the left frontal lobe, specifically the inferior
frontal gyrus. This region has long been closely associated with language
processing in the brain (see page 10), and we see here the first clues that it
may play an important role in sentence comprehension; we’ll see more
about this region in Chapter 9. Just a few hundred milliseconds later,

CHAPTER SUMMARY
137
Effect for pre-activation
≈ 100 ms before predicted word
Effect for checking predictions
≈ 150 ms after predicted word
Effect for integrating semantic representations
≈ 100–200 ms after predicted word
Figure 27. Prediction dynamics. Predictive processing, localized to the
frontal lobe, affects sensory predictions and semantic integration to
subsequent linguistic input in the temporal lobe.
Source: Adapted from Klimovich-Gray et al. (2019).
the neural data show evidence for those predictions being checked as
new information from the second stimulus word – the noun – enters the
auditory cortex. Around the same time, activity in the posterior middle
temporal gyrus is sensitive to the integration, or semantic combination,
of the new noun with the just-heard adjective.
Chapter summary
This chapter introduced the foundations of how the brain makes sense
of sentences.
• To understand a sentence you must decode the constituency, or
structural relationships, as well the dependencies between words.
Meaning is a compositional function of the words and how they are
structurally put together.
• To do this efficiently and rapidly, the brain is constantly
making – and checking – predictions for what might come next in
the sentence.

138
STRUCTURE AND PREDICTION
• When confronted with an unexpected word, additional lexical
activation is associated with the N400 ERP component that is ob-
served as a negative voltage potential 300–500 milliseconds after an
expectation is violated on central-posterior areas of the scalp.
• When confronted with unexpected syntactic structure, syntactic re-
analysis is associated with the P600 ERP component as a positive
voltage at around 500–800 milliseconds on posterior areas of the
scalp.
• Linguistic predictions are based on a wide variety of clues, in-
cluding the broader discourse and social context of an utterance.
That information is used to shape expectations about multiple lev-
els of linguistic representations, including phonemes, words, and
syntactic categories.
One larger take way from this section is that when we study sentence
understanding in the brain, we are almost always looking at process-
ing of one or more words in some context. So we have to contend with
the predictions that have been made, and consider how the brain might
likely deal with some new input given that context. Keeping this firmly
in mind, we next turn to the neural operations that go into the building
of sentence structure itself.

8
Composing sentences
In the previous chapter, we reviewed how sentences are structured and
how the brain makes use of predictions in multiple ways to help make
sense of that structure rapidly and efficiently. Prediction is of funda-
mental importance in characterizing this capacity, but it alone does not
explain how we understand sentences. Simply put, being able to pre-
dict what comes next is not the same as understanding what someone
is saying. In order to understand, the brain must put words together to
form constituents, and also recognize the longer dependencies that un-
dergird sentence meaning. This chapter takes up how the brain forms
constituents, while Chapter 9 turns to dependencies.
A combinatoric network
The earliest research into how the brain puts sentences together con-
trasted sentences with structure to stimuli without structure, like word
lists:1
(1)
the man on a vacation lost a bag and a wallet
Sentence
on vacation lost then a and bag wallet man then a
Word list
These two types of stimuli differ in many ways. In addition to having
syntactic structure, the top sentence is also easily interpreted – it has
a clear meaning, and that meaning is even quite plausible. Moreover,
and I expect you’re already thinking this, real sentences are much more
predictable than word lists.
And indeed, many studies using stimuli like these show that a wide
range of brain regions are more activated by sentences than word lists.
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0008

140
COMPOSING SENTENCES
To give one example, Christophe Pallier and colleagues (2011) presented
participants stimuli like those shown in Table 5 while recording brain re-
sponses using fMRI. These stimuli include twelve-word sentences, word
lists, and also intermediate stimuli with phrases comprising two, four, or
six words (Table 5). As expected, the researchers observed a broad range
of regions in the left superior temporal gyrus and inferior frontal gyrus
that show greater activity for sentences that have more phrases (and
are more interpretable, plausible, predictable, etc.); a sample of their re-
sults is shown in Fig. 28A. These regions each show a steady increase in
activation for stimuli with more structure (i.e. larger and larger phrases).
We can think of this broad set of regions as a kind of combinatoric net-
work of brain areas that are engaged in some way when understanding
sentences. Of course, it is not immediately clear what functions might
be reflected in these different regions given the many differences be-
tween sentences and word lists. To reduce this ambiguity, at least a
Table 5. Stimuli from Pallier et al. (2011). Examples of sentence, phrase,
and word list stimuli from Pallier et al. (2011) (adapted from French). The
pseudoword items are less predictable than the real word items.
Words
per
phrase
Stimuli
REAL WORDS
12
[I believe that you should accept the proposal of your new associate]
6
[the mouse that eats our cheese] [two clients examine this nice couch]
4
[mayor of the city] [he hates this color] [they read their names]
2
[looking ahead] [important task] [whodies][his dog] [few holes] [they write]
1
thing very tree where of watching copy tensed they states heart plus
PSEUDOWORDS (“Jabberwocky”)
12
[I tosieve that you should begept the tropufal of your tew viroate]
6
[the couse that rits our treeve] [fow plients afomine this kice bloch]
4
[tuyor of the roty] [he futes this dator] [they gead their wames]
2
[troking ahead] [omirpant fran] [who mies] [his gog] [few biles] [they grite]
1
thang very gree where of wurthing napy gunsed they otes blart trus

A COMBINATORIC NETWORK
141
TP
left hemisphere
pSTS/STG
BA44
inferior
frontal gyrus
posterior
temporal lobe
pars
opercularis
pars
triangularis
anterior
temporal lobe
superior temporal gyrus
middle temporal gyrus
supra-marginal
gyrus
post-central gyrus
aSTS
pSTS
TPJ
0.4
TP
normal
jabber
c01
c02
c03
c04
c06
c12
0.2
0
Response Amplitude
A.
C.
E.
D.
B.
Figure 28. A combinatoric brain network. (A) Regions that show
increased activity for larger phrases span the left temporal and inferior
frontal lobes. (B) Some of these regions, like the temporal pole, show more
activity when sentences contain real words (circles) but not pseudowords
(squares). (C) That set of fronto-temporal brain regions are also observed
in a meta-analysis of 19 studies. (D) The same study also found that the
white-matter pathway directly connecting posterior temporal and
inferior frontal regions is aligned with the peaks of brain activity for
composition. Panel (E) schematically illustrates the primary foci of the
combinatoric brain network.
Sources: A and B: Pallier et al. (2011); C and D: Zaccarella et al. (2017b).

142
COMPOSING SENTENCES
little bit, the researchers also include a second set of stimuli in which
all of the content words have been replaced with pseudowords. These
pseudoword sentences are illustrated on the bottom rows of Table 5.
By retaining grammatical function words, the stimuli still have phrase
structure. These are called “jabberwocky” items after the famous non
sensical poem in Lewis Carroll’s Through the Looking-Glass. Without
content words, the stimuli become much less predictable. Of course,
such stimuli still retain quite a bit of complexity in addition to the syn-
tactic structure; for example, even pseudoword sentences still convey
meaning regarding who did what to whom.2 Several of the regions that
respond to phrases and sentences are sensitive to the difference between
real words and pseudowords. One such region is the left anterior tem-
poral lobe (or temporal pole, TP), whose activation pattern is shown in
Fig. 28B. Activity in this region only increases for larger phrases when
they contain real words. This may tease out sub-parts of this combina-
toric network that are sensitive specifically to predictions, or perhaps to
the kind of referential semantics conveyed by real words.
This same fronto-temporal combinatoric network is found in a num-
ber of studies. Emiliano Zaccarella and colleagues conducted a review
of 19 studies with a total of 295 participants (2017b), all using the same
approach of comparing sentences with word lists. Their review shows
almost exactly the same set of regions (Fig. 28C) with some impor-
tant nuance. First, their review again highlights the left inferior frontal
gyrus, or LIFG, as a region that appears to play a significant role in sen-
tence understanding alongside anterior and posterior temporal regions.
Second, they augment their review with an analysis of the structural con-
nectivity between regions within the combinatoric network using DTI
(see page 26). They use DTI to identify the white-matter tracts – large
bundles of axons connecting one population of neurons to another –
which go from the temporal lobe to the inferior frontal lobe. It has long
been known that there is strong structural connectivity between poste-
rior temporal and inferior frontal regions; this anatomical connection
is called the arcuate fasciculus. This particular analysis shows how that

COMPOSING SIMPLE PHRASES
143
pathway, which is illustrated in Fig. 28D, seems to connect the spe-
cific “hot spots” – or centers of neural activity – that are implicated in
comprehending sentences.
The combinatoric network shown in Fig. 28 is a reasonable starting
point for studying how the brain puts sentences together. But to uncover
the contribution of each of the individual nodes, and how they relate
to each other, we need to turn to a different set of experimental meth-
ods. A key limitation of comparing sentences with lists, and with variants
like pseudoword “jabberwocky” sentences, is that we don’t have a deep
understanding of what participants do when they are confronted with
stimuli of this sort. Do participants try to figure out phrases and mean-
ings even from random lists, or do they give up? In the review study
discussed above Zaccarella et al. (2017b), the authors identify interest-
ing differences between studies that constructed word lists in different
ways (such as by including or excluding grammatical function words);
perhaps participants try to make phrases when they see function words,
even if the words are all jumbled. The issue here concerns the linking
hypothesis connecting the experimental design – the stimulus, task, and
so forth – with the kind of neural processes that are required to perform
the experiment. We only have a limited understanding of how those links
work in the case of word lists, and consequently the conclusions we can
make about, say, differences when processing real words or pseudowords
are likewise limited.
So, what sort of experimental tools and linking hypotheses can we use
to dive deeper into this combinatoric network?
Composing simple phrases
One alternative approach is to study compositional processing in a more
minimal way, by focusing, for example, just on what makes a two-
word phrase different from two words that do not form a phrase. This
approach, which I’ll call “simple composition,” has fewer variables com-
pared with full sentences, making for a simpler linking hypothesis. That,
in turn, helps researchers draw out more specific conclusions about the
function of the individual pieces of the broader combinatoric network.

144
COMPOSING SENTENCES
The basic idea is illustrated by the experimental design in (2), below,
which was developed by Douglas Bemis and Liina Pylkka¨nen at New
York University (2011).
(2)
Composition task
List task
Two words
red
boat
cup
boat
One word
xkq
boat
xkq
boat
Two factors are manipulated here in order to isolate, in a minimal way,
the processes that combine two words into a single phrase. The first fac-
tor is whether the stimulus contains two words or just one. This is shown
across the rows in (2). The two columns differ in terms of the task that
the participant is asked to do; both are variants of a picture-matching
task. For the left-hand column, the task is to answer whether the picture
matches the full, composed meaning of the words. So, a “red boat” is a
match, and just the word “boat,” but “blue boat” would not be a match. In
the right-hand column, the task is to answer whether the picture matches
any of the words. This “list task” does not require compositional process-
ing. Note also that none of these conditions are particularly predictable:
a color word like “red” does not raise (or lower) your expectations for the
word “boat.” So, the idea here is to look for brain activity that increases
when composing two words together, compared to any of the other three
conditions.
Just such a response pattern was observed using MEG in two brain
areas: first, in the left anterior temporal lobe, or LATL, at around 250
milliseconds after the onset of the second word, followed by activity at
around 400 milliseconds at the anterior tip of the frontal lobe, a region
called the ventro-medial prefrontal cortex, or VMPFC.3 These findings
are shown in Fig. 29A. Taking advantage of the fine temporal resolution
offered by MEG, the researchers reasoned that the LATL activation re-
flects an initial stage of composition, while the later VMPFC activation
reflects a later, perhaps semantic, evaluation based on the composed
phrase. Interestingly, there was no indication of activity in the LIFG,
which was so prominent in the comparisons of sentences and lists, in
this more minimal instance of composition.4

COMPOSING SIMPLE PHRASES
145
English
amplitude (nAm)
amplitude (nAm)
two-word
composition
American Sign Language
A.
B.
C.
two-word
composition
amplitude
Modifier
none
non-specific specific
Non-specific Specific noun
amplitude (nAm)
4
16
12
8
4
–100
0
100
16
12
8
4
–100
0
100
200
300
time (ms)
400
500
600
200
300
time (ms)
400
500
600
nAm
3
2
1
0
100
200
300
msec
400
500
4
nAm
3
2
1
0
12
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
(nAm)
10
8
6
4
2
0
100
200
300
msec
400
500
Left BA 38
qptg dish
vegetable dish
tomato dish
qptg soup
vegetable soup
tomato soup
two-word
composition
Figure 29. Simple composition and the anterior temporal lobe. (A)
Reading simple two-word phrases leads to more left anterior temporal
activation, compared to single words (see page 144 for stimuli). (B) This
“simple composition” effect in the LATL is also observed for producing
phrases in multiple languages. (C) The LATL effect for composition is not
strictly syntactic, as it shows a sensitivity to the conceptual specificity of the
terms that are being composed; the interaction between semantic and
syntactic factors is shown on the right-hand side.
Sources: A: Bemis and Pyllkänen (2011); B: Blanco-Elorrieta et al. (2018); C: Zhang and
Pylkkänen (2015).

146
COMPOSING SENTENCES
A number of studies have used variants of the “simple composition”
experimental design both to test the generalizability of these findings and
to better understand the nature of the compositional processes carried
out in these regions. For example, the LATL and VMPFC also show
increased activation for phrase composition when participants produce
phrases, not just comprehend them. And this effect has been further ob-
served in speakers of different languages, including languages as diverse
as English and American Sign Language.5 Fig. 29B shows MEG results
from the LATL from participants who were producing either American
Sign Language (top) or English (bottom). Regardless of language, the
LATL showed increased activity for phrases, compared to lists. Be sure to
note that the timing of the activity between panels A and B of this figure
are a bit different because participants are reading words for Fig. 29A,
but producing them for Fig. 29B.
One of the issues I’ve highlighted repeatedly in this chapter is how sen-
tence understanding depends on many interdependent processes. This
complexity still holds even for the relatively minimal phrases, just an
adjective and a noun, used in these studies. For example, we saw at
the beginning of the chapter that building sentences requires not just
identifying dependencies and phrase structure, but also combining the
meanings of words together according to those structures (take a look
back at Fig. 21 on page 117). In other words, syntactic structure-building
is always correlated with semantic combination.
How can we tell whether the activation in the LATL for phrase com-
position reflects syntactic structure-building or semantic composition?
Above, we considered the tentative idea that the earlier (around 250 mil-
liseconds) activity in the LATL might reflect structure-building, while
later activity in the frontal lobe might be more semantic. But we’ve actu-
ally already seen some evidence that the LATL itself could play more of
a semantic role in sentence understanding. Those clues came from the
discussion of a semantic hub for the representation of word meaning,
which we saw back in Chapter 6 (see Fig. 20 on page 105). That discus-
sion looked at evidence from semantic dementia and other sources that
the anterior temporal lobe appears to play an important role in how the
brain represents specific concepts.

COMPOSING SIMPLE PHRASES
147
Let’s consider, then, the semantic consequences of composing a
phrase: The meaning of a phrase like “red boat” seems, at least intu-
itively, to refer to a more specific kind of concept than the single word
“boat.” Could it be, then, that the LATL activity observed for phrases
reflects this more specific kind of conceptual meaning, rather than
a structure-building process? Linming Zhang and Liina Pylkka¨nen
(2015) aimed to answer this question. They did so by augmenting the
“simple composition” experiment with another factor: whether the
modifier or noun, individually, denoted a more or less specific concept.
An example of their stimuli is shown in (3).
(3)
Modifier:
Noun:
None
Non-specific
Specific
Non-specific
xpt dish
vegetable dish
tomato dish
Specific
xpt soup
vegetable soup
tomato soup
Here, “soup” and “tomato” each refer to more specific concepts than
their counterparts, “dish” or “vegetable.” The evidence from semantic de-
mentia that we discussed back in Chapter 6 suggested the LATL would be
more engaged by the specific concepts than by the non-specific concepts.
As “tomato soup” is even more specific than “tomato” or “soup,” that
same theory predicts a simple increase in activity for phrases compared
to words.
But, the researchers observe a more complex pattern of results than
what would be predicted if the LATL solely reflected conceptual speci-
ficity. This complex pattern is illustrated in Fig. 29C. What they found
was that neither conceptual specificity nor syntactic structure-building
alone capture the pattern of results. Rather, these factors appear to
interact: There is increased activity for structure-building, but only
when the words that are being composed have meanings that are
relatively specific. For example: “tomato dish” leads to increased LATL
activity relative to just “dish,” but a phrase like “vegetable dish,” with a
less specific modifier, does not.
While the pattern of results is a bit complicated, the bigger take
away supported by the data at hand is actually rather elegant. And it

148
COMPOSING SENTENCES
shows how observations from very different methods addressing dif-
ferent questions can begin to converge into a consistent picture. The
picture seems to be this: The LATL is involved in a process that com-
bines the conceptual features of words. This theory – which is still
being developed – makes the interesting prediction that phrases that
don’t derive a more specific concept will not involve additional LATL
activity. This prediction appears to be correct. For example, phrases
that involve syntactic structure but don’t alter conceptual features, like
the number phrase “two boats,” don’t seem to affect LATL activity
(Blanco-Elorrieta and Pylkkänen, 2016).
Still, challenges remain. One chief challenge comes from looking again
at patients with damage to anterior temporal regions. These patients,
who do show semantic dementia, do not appear to have any system-
atic difficulties understanding compositional meaning.6 An open line of
research concerns how neural systems may change, or compensate, in
response to damage. One way forward is to consider carefully how the
network of brain regions involved in word – and sentence – understand-
ing might work together (recall Fig. 28), and maybe even redundantly,
for effective understanding.7
A second major challenge concerns the role of different sub-regions
within the LATL. Notice how the LATL area outlined in Fig. 28E spans
the anterior portions of the superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyrus.
This region also includes the temporal pole where the gyri converge
at the anterior tip of the temporal lobe. This large part of the temporal
lobe contains many neural circuits that are involved in many different
cognitive processes. Indeed, the maps of the combinatoric network in
Fig. 28A and C show at least two separate “hot spots” within this larger
LATL area. But current research does not neatly identify these distinct
hot spots with different syntactic or semantic processes. A chief goal of
ongoing research is to better understand the roles of different parts of
this larger temporal area.
We turn next to the roles of other nodes in this broader combinatoric
network.

SYNTAX AND THE POSTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE
149
Syntax and the posterior temporal lobe
There are quite a number of questions lingering from the discussion of
composition so far: (i) What is going on with the LIFG? (ii) What about
that other temporal region, the LPTL? And (iii) Do these simple compo-
sition results generalize to “real-world” language? For the first question,
I’m going to ask you to be patient. We’ll get back to the LIFG when we
turn our attention to linguistic dependencies in the next chapter. Before
that, we turn to the left posterior temporal lobe and also generalizability;
these two questions, it turns out, can be addressed together.
A clue as to what role the LPTL plays in sentence understanding
comes from an innovative study by Steven Frankland and Joshua
Greene (2015). They use multi-voxel pattern analysis (MVPA), which
was first introduced on page 67 in Chapter 4. Recall, this is a way of
analyzing fMRI data that can help to tell whether different kinds of
linguistic representations “matter” to a particular brain region, without
committing to whether the brain response is supposed to be larger or
smaller, or even whether all voxels in the area should respond in the
same way. Frankland and Greene focused on the linguistic representa-
tion of argument structure. They presented participants with sentences
with different argument structures:
(4)
Role for “ball”
Grammatical
Thematic
The truck hit the ball
Object
Patient
The ball was hit by the truck
Subject
Patient
The ball hit the truck
Subject
Agent
The truck was hit by the ball
Object
Agent
These stimuli vary two factors: the grammatical role of a word
(whether it is a subject, object, etc.), and also whether it is the agent
or patient of the event denoted by the verb. This second factor is the
word’s thematic role. These factors are separable from each other, and
also from individual words (both “ball” and “truck” fill all possible roles
in the example shown).

150
COMPOSING SENTENCES
Using MVPA, the researchers test for small sets of voxels whose ac-
tivation pattern can indicate, or predict, whether a word was presented
as the agent or patient of a sentence. They find just such a region in the
LPTL. Moreover, in a follow-up experiment, this method revealed two
distinct adjacent parts of this LPTL region; activation in one part reli-
ably indicated which word was the agent of a stimulus, while the second
reliably indicated which word was the patient (Fig. 30B).
To understand this pattern of results, think about a folder on your
computer. Maybe this folder contains all of your digital photos. The con-
tents of the folder will change over time – perhaps quite often if you take
a lot of pictures. Despite this change of contents, you always know where
to look on your computer for your latest photo. These brain regions may
do the same sort of job as a computer folder. But instead of answering
“What’s my latest photo?” these regions answer a different question, like
“Who is performing the action?” or “What is the action being performed
on?” In computer science terms, these brain regions act like a register –
they reliably store a certain kind of information even as that information
changes over time.
What about the timing of the LPTL as it supports sentence com-
prehension? These fMRI data don’t provide the same sort of timing
information that we saw with MEG, on page 144, showing LATL
activation for composition at around 200–300 milliseconds. William
Matchin, Ellen Lau, and their colleagues (2019) combined the spatial
precision of fMRI with the temporal precision of MEG to address this
gap. In their study, participants performed the same task during fMRI
recording and, separately, during MEG recording. Connecting with
the work we’ve already discussed, they presented participants with
stimuli composed of simple phrases, or whole sentences, and also varied
whether the stimuli had normal content-words or pseudowords with
less semantic content, shown in example (5). (You’ll recall from page 143
some of the complications that might arise when participants encounter
such “jabberwocky” stimuli; I’m not going to discuss those results here).

SYNTAX AND THE POSTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE
151
IFG
A.
10
5
0
ATL
PTL
TPJ
10
5
0
10
5
0
10
5
0
0
500
the
poet
fencer
the
baby
their
bill
will
recite
a
verse
the
1000
1500
2000
2500
structure x position
interaction
structure x position
interaction
B.
patient
agent
Figure 30. Syntax in the posterior temporal lobe. (A) Combining
fMRI and MEG methods reveals an increase in left posterior temporal
activity for sentences, compared to phrases, at the beginning of the
sentence (arrow). This pattern is consistent with composing syntactic
structure predictively. (B) Activity in distinct parts of the left posterior
temporal lobe appears to act like “registers” that encode the thematic role
of a noun, such as whether it is the agent or patient of a verb.
Sources: A: Matchin et al. (2018); B: Frankland and Greene (2015).
(5)
Content words
Phrase
[the fencer] [the baby] [their bill]
Sentence
[the poet will recite a verse]
Pseudowords
Phrase
[the tevill] [the sawl] [their pand]
Sentence
[the tevill will sawl a pand]
The fMRI data from their study revealed several now-familiar nodes
of activation along the left temporal and frontal lobes. These regions
are shown on the left side of Fig. 30A. The MEG data furnished a
millisecond-by-millisecond record of activation in these regions. In the

152
COMPOSING SENTENCES
LPTL they observed more activation for sentences, compared to phrases,
right after the very first content-word of the stimuli; this is marked with
a black arrow in Fig. 30A.
Stop right here and look carefully at this figure. You’ll see that both
of the stimuli illustrated at the bottom begin with a simple noun phrase
(e.g. the poet or the fencer). Well, how would a participant know so early
in the sentence that one of these stimulus items will be a full sentence and
the other will be just a set of separate phrases? The answer is that partic-
ipants viewed each of the types of stimuli in short blocks; so a set of full
sentences would be presented together, followed by a block of phrases,
or pseudoword sentences, etc. For each stimulus item, then, the partic-
ipant has a idea of what sort of structure it might have. This explains
how participants might “know” right away that one content-word be-
longs to a full sentence, while the other doesn’t. Basically, participants
could be building a kind of scaffolding for the rest of the sentence that
they expect to encounter (see the bottom of Fig. 26 back on page 135 for
an illustration of this), and this building process seems to evoke LPTL
activity.
There are other interesting things happening in these results that I
don’t want to dwell on here (including phrasal effects in the more pos-
terior temporal-parietal junction (TPJ) area as well as semantic effects
in the LATL that line up with our earlier discussion of that region). The
key take away is that processing more complex phrase structures, such
as is found in full sentences, leads to more activity in the LPTL, and the
timing of this activity is consistent with the kind of syntactic predictions
that we’ve already seen earlier in this chapter.
More evidence linking the left temporal lobe with composition,
and linking the LPTL specifically with composing argument structure,
comes from efforts to probe linguistic composition in a way that gener-
alizes to more everyday uses of language. Rather than read or listen to a
series of phrases or single sentences, each unrelated to the next, partic-
ipants in these more naturalistic studies simply read a narrative text or
listen to an audiobook story. The idea is that these sorts of stimuli engage
the same sorts of language processing that we use on an everyday basis,
such as when we listen to an audiobook while taking the bus.8

SYNTAX AND THE POSTERIOR TEMPORAL LOBE
153
Table 6. Quantifying syntactic features. Wehbe et al. (2014) quantified a
range of linguistic features in a popular novel. The features span different
levels of language processing. Shading indicates the presence, and strength,
of each feature word by word.
Harry
had
never
believed
he
would
meet
a
boy
he
hated
more
than
Dudley
WORD LENGTH
PROPER NOUN
SUBJECT
Leila Wehbe and colleagues at Carnegie Mellon University (2014)
took this approach in an fMRI experiment where participants read a
chapter of Harry Potter and the Sorcerer’s Stone while brain activity was
measured. They used the MVPA data analysis technique, mentioned
above on page 149. This technique, you’ll recall, can indicate if a brain
region is sensitive to certain kinds of linguistic information. Because
participants read from a rich natural text, the researchers annotated
many different kinds of linguistic information. Table 6 gives a somewhat
simplified example. Here, each row corresponds to a linguistic feature
examined in this study; gray shading indicates the presence or absence
of that feature at each word in the story. The idea is to build a statistical
model that uses the fMRI data to predict what the value of each feature
ought to be. Clusters of fMRI voxels that do this well are said to “en-
code” that particular feature. As you can see from Table 6, the researchers
encoded different kinds of linguistic features; WORD LENGTH captures
something about the visual stimulus itself, while SUBJECT is a syntactic
feature that relates to argument structure. And indeed, syntactic features
were reliably encoded by voxels in the LPTL.
The syntactic features used in this study address a similar kind of
question to the study of argument structure processing that we saw on
page 149. Other naturalistic studies use syntactic features that align with
whether the sentence structure is more or less complex, along the same
lines as the simple composition studies discused earlier in this chapter.
In one such, participants listened to an audiobook chapter from Alice’s
Adventures in Wonderland during fMRI scanning (Brennan et al., 2016).
The researchers annotated the stimulus with phrase structures, similar
to what we saw at the beginning of the chapter in Fig. 21. Then, they

154
COMPOSING SENTENCES
counted how many phrases were completed by each word in the stim-
ulus. You can get a sense of this by going back to Fig. 21: The word
table completes four phrases (including the sentence itself ), the word cut
completes three phrases, and apple completes two phrases. With these
measurements, they tested whether the fMRI signals followed the pat-
tern of phrase complexity such that the fMRI signal increased for more
complex phases and decreased for simpler phrase structures. They ob-
served exactly this pattern in three brain regions: the LPTL, the LATL,
and the LIFG.
These sorts of studies, which use more natural “everyday” stimuli like
narrative texts or audiobooks, are powerful tools to test how well obser-
vations about the brain generalize beyond a highly controlled laboratory
experiment. The results seem to show reasonable agreement with more
controlled studies. To review: The results are consistent with a LPTL re-
gion that is involved with processing phrase and argument structure, as
well as a LATL region that is involved in the composition of semantic
representations.
But, as you may have already noticed, these naturalistic studies re-
quire the researcher to commit to a very precise account, or model, of
what they think the brain is doing when processing the text. We saw, for
example, in Table 6 that the researchers converted different linguistic
features into precise numbers. As in any ongoing research, these mod-
els are unlikely to be fully correct; I expect future work to improve on
the sorts of models that are used to specify the linguistic features be-
ing processed during these stimuli. Notice the great opportunity here!
These models depend on careful reasoning about the kinds of linguis-
tic structures that the brain is using, and so this kind of work really
highlights the benefits when careful linguistic theory is connected with
neural methods.
Other ongoing work also aims to better understand distinctions be-
tween different aspects of the posterior temporal lobe. As with the LATL,
the LPTL constitutes a very large area of the cortex. The combinatoric
network illustrated in Fig. 28 actually shows two “hot spots”: one span-
ning the posterior superior temporal gyrus, and a second, more posterior
one that borders on the parietal lobe (the so-called temporal-parietal
junction, or TPJ). We further saw in this section evidence that different

CHAPTER SUMMARY
155
parts of the LPTL may encode different aspects of argument structure.
But teasing apart the distinct roles of these finer sub-division is only just
beginning.
Chapter summary
In this chapter we saw several different approaches to uncovering how
the brain identifies constituents during language comprehension – how
it builds sentence structure.
• Sentence processing involves a network of interacting regions that
span the anterior and posterior temporal lobe (LATL, LPTL) of the
left hemisphere, as well as the left inferior frontal gyrus (LIFG).
• MEG studies reveal increased activation in the LATL even for very
simple phrases, not just complex sentences, within just 200–300
milliseconds of encountering a word. This region’s function ap-
pears to be sensitive both to constituency and to the conceptual
specificity of a phrase.
• The LPTL is also involved in processing constituency and argument
structure. There is debate about its specific function, but one the-
ory connects a part of this region with building syntactic structure
predictively.
We’ve seen repeatedly that the frontal lobe, not just the temporal lobe, is
also involved in sentence processing. You’ve been very patient as I asked
you to wait (“We’ll get to it later”). Well, we can now turn to this question,
which has been a very vexing one in neurolinguistics for a long time, of
what role the LIFG of the frontal lobe plays in sentence understanding.

9
Building dependencies
Travel back in time with me, for a moment, in order to consider the “clas-
sical model” of language in the brain that was presented all the way back
in Chapter 1 (page 12). That model, which was based on the ground-
breaking deficit/lesion work by people like Broca and Wernicke, posited
two primary neural centers for language: a region in the left posterior
temporal lobe associated with comprehending words and a region on the
left inferior frontal gyrus associated with producing words. First, just take
a moment to appreciate how remarkable it is that, over 150 years later,
these two areas of the brain are still understood to be central to the brain
bases of language. But now, let’s acknowledge that the functional role of
these areas has been much refined.
Focusing on the LIFG, that classical model divided language into
two processes: comprehension on the one hand, and production on the
other. More modern understanding, as we’ve seen throughout this book,
has been grounded in dividing language into separate levels of repre-
sentation like phonemes, lexical items, phrases, and sentences… each
of which is invoked in different ways during both comprehension and
production. And indeed it has been recognized for over 50 years that
deficits in speech production, like non-fluent “Broca’s” aphasia, can’t
solely be understood in terms of production. “Broca’s” aphasia has also
been linked to comprehension deficits, specifically difficulties with more
complex aspects of syntax.
Dependencies, prediction, and memory
Cases of syntactic deficits in non-fluent aphasia were brought to the
fore in a series of articles by the neurologist Norman Geschwind (1970;
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0009

DEPENDENCIES, PREDICTION, AND MEMORY
157
1972) in the 1960s and 1970s. He observed, in particular, that patients
with non-fluent aphasia had difficulty understanding complex sentences
when the subject and object of the main verb were semantically inter-
changeable. Such participants have no difficulty, for example, choosing
the correct picture to match the sentence like that shown in (1a). But they
do show difficulty for sentences that seem equally simple, such as in (1b).
(1)
a. The deer was chased by the lion
b. The tiger was chased by the lion
What sets these two sentences apart? They differ in how the word
meanings – the animals used – provide clues about the grammatical and
thematic roles for the sentence. In (1a), lion is easily understood as the
subject – and agent – of the chase action; lions naturally chase deer! But,
in (1b), there is no such easy clue as to who is doing the chasing. The
sentence in (1b) is semantically reversible: Both of the nouns could be
either the subject (agent) or object (patient) of the verb. The other thing
to note about both of these sentences is that they are in the passive voice.
In this sort of sentence, the subject and object of the verb are not in their
usual position. Instead, there is a long-distance dependency that indicates
that the grammatical object, which usually appears after the verb in En-
glish, is in fact the noun that appears at the beginning of the sentence:
(2) The tiger was chased
by the lion.
So, it seems that patients with non-fluent aphasia have a rather inter-
esting kind of deficit in syntactic comprehension as well: They have
difficulty resolving long-distance dependencies without the help of extra
semantic clues.1
But wait! These early observations linked aphasia symptoms (non-
fluent or “Broca’s” aphasia) with a syntactic comprehension deficit. They

158
BUILDING DEPENDENCIES
don’t directly link a particular brain region, like the LIFG, with such a
deficit. Quite a number of studies have sought to make exactly such a
link, including case studies of single individuals and large-scale group
studies of aphasia patients. One of the challenges raised by those efforts
is how to integrate findings from different participants with distinct, but
perhaps overlapping, deficit and lesion patterns.2 Using advanced sta-
tistical techniques to correlate patterns of lesion overlap with shared
symptoms is one way to address this challenge, as in a study of over 70
stroke patients by Nina Dronkers and colleagues in 2004. Another strat-
egy is to focus on a patient group with somewhat more homogeneous
patterns of brain damage and deficits. Just such patterns can be found in
neurodegenerative disorders that affect language-related brain regions
in a systematic way. These are Primary Progressive Aphasias (PPA).3 In
fact, we’ve already seen an example of one of these before: semantic de-
mentia from Chapter 6. Whereas semantic dementia primarily affects the
anterior temporal lobes, other examples of PPA lead to selective neural
degeneration in posterior temporal regions and frontal regions.
Serena Amici, Maria Luisa Gorno-Tempini of the University of Cali-
fornia, San Francisco, and their colleagues conducted a relatively large-
scale study in 2007 of syntactic comprehension in 58 patients with
variants of PPA.4 In addition to the collection of MRI data indicating
the location of brain damage, all patients completed a comprehensive
battery of language tests. These tests included picture-matching tasks,
similar to the ones shown in example (1b), that contain long-distance
dependencies and, importantly, have arguments that are semantically
reversible.
The effects of neurodegeneration on brain structure are different than
those for stroke-induced lesions. To measure progressive neural dam-
age, these researchers used something called voxel-based morphometry
(VBM). This approach measures the thickness of the cortical gray matter
across different areas of the brain; see the inset of Fig 31A for an illus-
tration. The key idea is that neural degeneration reduces the amount of
gray matter – cell bodies – in a particular region, and this degeneration
affects cognition. Indeed, difficulties with the most complex semantically
reversible sentences were found to correlate with just such reduced gray
matter in the inferior frontal gyrus, including the pars triangularis; this

DEPENDENCIES, PREDICTION, AND MEMORY
159
VBM
A.
B.
wh-question
2.5
L
2
1.5
% signal change
1
0.5
0
short
long
backwards
anaphora
Figure 31. Dependency processing in the LIFG. (A) Primary
progressive aphasia patients with inferior frontal neurodegeneration show
decreased understanding of sentences with long-distance dependencies.
(B) LIFG activation does not solely reflect certain specific long-distance
dependencies, like those found in wh-questions, but instead seems to
correlate with more general predictions that make demands on working
memory.
Sources: A: Amici et al. (2007); B: Matchin et al. (2014).
result is shown in Fig. 31A. In other words, patients with less inferior
frontal gray matter did a worse job interpreting semantically complex
sentences.
These are among the many deficit/lesion studies that compellingly
link the LIFG with the processing of long-distance dependencies. Many
different theories have been proposed to account for this link; these
theories differ in the exact function that is ascribed to the LIFG.5 One
major dividing line is between theories that ascribe a function that is
just for language, or domain-specific, and theories that link this LIFG
processing with a broader domain-general function. An example of a
language-specific theory is the trace-deletion hypothesis developed by
Yosef Grodzinsky (Grodzinsky, 2000; Grodzinsky and Santi, 2008).
Here, “trace” refers to the part of a long-distance dependency where a
word is interpreted – this is the gap that is underlined in the example sen-
tence in (2). The idea is that damage to the LIFG might impair how in-
dividuals represent the structure of the long-distance dependency, thus
causing poor comprehension for such sentences. An alternative, more
domain-general hypothesis is that the LIFG is involved in maintaining a
representation in working memory for subsequent processing.6 Indeed,
it’s quite reasonable to think that many long-distance dependencies do
require extra working-memory resources. For example, to understand
the passive sentence illustrated in (2), a listener must keep the noun

160
BUILDING DEPENDENCIES
phrase the tiger in mind until after encountering the verb chased, like
this:
(3)
The
tiger
was
chased
by...
•
•
add to
working memory
hold in memory
integrate
with verb
The working memory demand schematized here is closely related to the
kind of predictive processing discussed in the last two chapters; there is
indeed a prediction for a transitive verb – a verb that takes an object like
tiger – later in the sentence.7 This sort of demand on working memory
is actually pretty common for long-distance dependencies. Here is an-
other example of such a dependency that comes from how questions are
formed in English:
(4)
a. Which song did the band play
at the concert?
b. Which song did the band play at the concert?
•
•
add to
working memory
hold in memory
integrate
with verb
This is called an English wh-question because of how the syntax is similar
for questions starting with words like which, what, why, etc.
Now, looking at the two diagrams in example (4), you might think:
“Those look awfully similar to each other; aren’t they showing the same
thing?” The answer is: not quite, and the difference is actually really im-
portant for teasing out what the LIFG might be doing. The diagram in
(4a) shows part of the grammar of this sentence; this is the mental repre-
sentation of its structure. In contrast, the diagram in (4b) shows part of
the parsing process that the brain goes through as it builds this structure.
This is a concrete example of the levels of description that were intro-
duced way back on page 3 in Chapter 1. The grammar of a sentence is
part of a computational description of the problem the brain is solving,
while the parser is an example of an algorithmic solution to that problem.
We must keep this important distinction in mind when we consider the
linking hypotheses between grammar and brain signals from the LIFG.

DEPENDENCIES, PREDICTION, AND MEMORY
161
In fact, the same sort of parsing processes – and working memory re-
sources – are used even for different kinds of syntactic representations.
The sentence in (5) uses a pronoun and a name; both refer to the same
individual. There is no “trace” in the syntax here; this is a different gram-
matical structure than what we saw for the wh-question in (4).8 But,
because the pronoun occurs first, when you read this sentence, you must
hold it in working memory until you find the noun that “fills out” what
it is referring to, as diagrammed in (6).
(5) Because she extinguished the flames, the firefighter saved
them.
(6) Because she extinguished the flames, the firefighter saved
them.
•
•
add to
working memory
hold in memory
integrate
with noun
Let me add a quick bit of terminology here: the term anaphora refers
to words, like pronouns, that have their meanings filled in by context.
When the pronoun occurs before the word or phrase that describes its
meaning, it is called backwards anaphora. Let’s put the pieces from the
last few paragraphs together. Under a domain-specific theory of the LIFG
like the trace-deletion hypothesis, this region is specifically involved
the grammatical representation of certain long-distance dependencies
as found in the wh-question in (6) but not by the use of backwards
anaphora in (5). However, under a domain-general theory that links the
LIFG to more general working memory demands, both wh-questions
and backwards anaphora should be supported by processing in the
LIFG: Even though they involve different syntactic structures, they make
similar demands on working memory.
William Matchin, Jon Sprouse, and Gregory Hickok (2014) at the Uni-
versity of California, Irvine, aimed to tease apart these hypotheses for
the LIFG using fMRI. Participants read sentences with wh-questions
and backwards anaphora that varied in length. The researchers reasoned
that longer dependencies should place additional demands on working
memory. Just one brain region showed an effect for increased working
memory demands, the pars triangularis of the LIFG. As shown in Fig.

162
BUILDING DEPENDENCIES
31B, this effect was observed both for wh-questions and for backwards
anaphora. This result supports the idea that at least some sub-parts of
the LIFG, like the pars triangularis, are involved in the domain-general
working memory demands of complex sentences.
We’ve just seen an argument linking (parts of ) the LIFG with domain-
general working memory, not domain-specific linguistic representa-
tions. But the stimuli for this experiment were entirely linguistic; it’d
be nice to test whether non-language working memory demands also
involve the same parts of the LIFG that are seen for long-distance
dependences. Actually, just such evidence is available from a familiar
source. The 2007 study by Serena Amici and colleagues that investigated
neurodegeneration (PPA) and syntax, discussed on page 158 above, also
included an examination of non-linguistic working memory. They used
a commonmeasure ofgeneralworking memory: Participantswere asked
to repeat a list of numbers in reverse order; the list progressively in-
creased in length. Participants with poorer working memory under this
measure had decreased cortical volumn in the same part of the LIFG –
including the pars triangularis – that was already linked with processing
long-distance dependencies.
A natural extension of this line of research is to look at other kinds
of linguistic dependencies, such as agreement (see Fig. 21). Indeed,
both fMRI and aphasia research, especially with agrammaticism (see
page 95), implicates the LIFG in agreement processing.9 But, as al-
ways, details matter, and aspects of both neural localization and patterns
of grammatical deficit point to both overlap and differences in the
neural foundations for agreement as compared to other long-distance
dependencies.
Where, when, and what next
These last few chapters together have addressed the remarkable ques-
tion of how the brain composes words together to make new meanings.
The infinitude of expression made possible by human grammar is what
sets it apart from any other communication system in the animal king-
dom. We’ve seen that great progress is being made in understanding

WHERE, WHEN, AND WHAT NEXT
163
“where” and “when” the brain builds compositional meaning. Research
has mostly focused on three areas of the brain (you may want to refer
back to Fig. 28E on page 141):
LATL a left anterior temporal area that appears to be related to
composing complex concepts at around 200–300 milliseconds after
encountering a word (Fig. 29 on page 145);
LPTL a posterior temporal area that is implicated in predictively
computing argument structure (Fig. 30 on page 151);
LIFG the left inferior frontal gyrus that is associated with process-
ing complex sentences, perhaps due to increased working memory
demands (Fig. 31 on page 159).
Ongoing work is digging deeper into each of these regions to better delin-
eate the specific neural part (or parts) in each broader area, and to better
characterize the syntactic, semantic, and parsing functions associated
with each neural circuit.
These answers to the “where” and “when” questions about sentence
composition are the first step towards understanding how the brain com-
poses sentences. But a complete answer will need more than just the
map we’ve seen so far here. Consider the instruction manual for a new
appliance. The first page likely contains a labeled diagram of all the but-
tons, switches, and components of the device. With this diagram, you can
start to explore the rest of the manual to find out how the thing actually
functions.
We don’t have a manual for the brain, of course, but new efforts
have begun to probe such “how” questions. One direction of progress
builds on the computational models, discussed briefly in the previous
chapter, that aim to quantify more precisely the sorts of computations
that specific nodes in the composition network must be making.10 An-
other direction of research builds on insights into neural oscillations. We
were introduced to oscillations back in Chapter 3, where we saw how
they might play an crucial role in mapping from continuous acoustic in-
formation to categorical speech representations. Now a growing number
of studies suggest that oscillations might also play an important role in
mapping from strings of words to compositional phrases.11

164
BUILDING DEPENDENCIES
So, consider the resources in these last few chapters as a jumping-off
point into this exciting research area.
Chapter summary
This chapter focused specifically on how the brain makes sense of
dependencies between words; together with constituents (Chapter 8),
this constitutes the “hidden” structure that our brains must uncover to
understand what sentences mean.
• Evidence from aphasia demonstrates that the left inferior frontal
gyrus (LIFG) is involved in processing particularly complex sen-
tences, including those that involve long-distance dependencies.
• There are many theories for what specific kind of processing the
LIFG could be doing; some theories hold that the LIFG is im-
portant for domain-specific linguistic representations, others hold
that it plays a more domain-general role in maintaining things in
working memory.
• While the question is not yet settled, current evidence from fMRI
and the study of primary progressive aphasia seems to support the
hypothesis that at least some parts of the LIFG play a more domain-
general role
This remains a very active research area. As with research into the LATL
and LPTL discussed in the previous chapter, one key issue is whether dif-
ferent sub-parts of the LIFG perform different functions. Studies in this
area are becoming more sophisticated in teasing apart sub-areas like the
pars triangularis and pars opercularis. But it is not clear yet whether these
sub-parts are at the right “level” of brain area to link with a specific lin-
guistic function, or whether (and I think this is more likely), even smaller
components must be identified. Indeed, careful fMRI research using the
“simple composition” protocol has isolated just one part of the pars oper-
cularis (Zaccarella and Friederici, 2015); could some parts of the LIFG
be involved in domain-specific phrase-structure representations while
others are involved in domain-general working memory?

CHAPTER SUMMARY
165
Another active area of research concerns how the LIFG interacts with
other parts of the combinatoric network to carry out domain-specific
processing, as shown back in Fig. 28D on page 141. One intriguing hy-
pothesis, developed by Angela Friederici (2017), suggests that the unique
compositionality of language emerges from increased structural con-
nectivity between posterior temporal regions and these inferior frontal
regions.

10
Wrapping up
In many ways, a book like this one is the sum of its parts. My goal has
been to give an overview of how neurolinguistics is studied, and what has
been learned from this work. We tried to reach this goal this by exam-
ining in greater and lesser detail some of the individual research studies
and data points that, collectively, contribute to the broader science of
understanding how language is instantiated in the human brain. These
are the parts. To take stock of how they sum together, this final chapter
first checks in to see how we well we achieved the goals that were set out
at the beginning of the book. We then look at some of the bigger lessons
that have been learned about the brain bases of language, with a focus
on where the field may be heading next.
Where are we (in terms of this book)?
There are five broad aims for for this book. Let’s check in with each of
them.
1. Introduce the tools of neurolinguistics
Chapter 2 presented a jam-packed overview of the methodologies
used by scientists to study the brain bases of language. The key take aways
from these tools are summarized in Figs. 7–9, and especially the “cheat
sheet” in Table 3 on page 41. But let’s be honest. It’s nearly impossible to
make sense of the importance of fMRI, the value of MEG, or the unique
insights from a TMS study without seeing how these tools are used in
practice. It is only when we saw the methods actually put to use to study
Language and the Brain. Jonathan R. Brennan, Oxford University Press.
© Jonathan R. Brennan (2022). DOI: 10.1093/oso/9780198814757.003.0010

WHERE ARE WE (IN TERMS OF THIS BOOK)?
167
how the brain processes speech, words, and sentences that we began to
engage with the essential issue that different tools are most suitable for
answering different kinds of questions.
This match of question with tool deserves reflection. I invite you,
for example, to pick a study that caught your attention in the previous
chapters and ask: “Why did the researchers choose this particular tool,
and not another?” And, “How might another methodology contribute to
this question?” Consider also how a particular experiment is crafted to fit
with the constraints of a given tool (for example, by carefully controlling
stimulus timing with MEG or EEG).
2. Describe linking hypotheses that connect brain signals to linguistic
representations
Table 1 back on page 3 invited us to consider three different levels of
description of a complex cognitive system like language. We might ask
about the computational goals of that system, the algorithm by which
those goals are reached, or the physical implementation of that algo-
rithm. Neurolinguistics, we saw, demands our attention to all three levels
and, importantly, how they connect together. These connections are
linking hypotheses. Examples of linking hypotheses have been threaded
through the book, although they perhaps have not always been clearly
named as such.
One kind of linking hypotheses we have confronted concerns the sig-
nals that our tools measure. When a researcher reports some particular
observation or result, they commit, whether explicitly or implicitly, to a
particular linking hypothesis. On the relatively straightforward side are
results of the sort “BOLD signal in the inferior frontal gyrus increased
for condition A compared to condition B”; this entails a linking hy-
pothesis along the lines of “The linguistic contents of condition A make
additional hemodynamic demands at a certain moment in time com-
pared to condition B.” (While hypotheses and results are similar, note
that the hypothesis is a statement about how things in the world con-
nect together, while in contrast the results are a statement about fixed
observations.) A slightly more complicated linking hypothesis might be

168
WRAPPING UP
something like “BOLD signal will increase logarithmically as the num-
ber of phrases in the sentence increase”1 or perhaps “Speech signals with
different frequencies are processed by neural populations that follow a
spatial gradient.”2
When linking hypotheses are laid out in this way, we see where they
are incomplete and deserving of further refinement. Careful discus-
sion of the linking hypotheses concerning the P600 ERP component,
for example, pointed out a way to understand how it may be influ-
enced by syntactic or semantic factors (as discussed around page 134 in
Chapter 7) or highlighted gaps in understanding that must be addressed
to disentangle how the brain may or may not decompose words into
component morphemes (page 98 in Chapter 5). You can, and should, do
this yourself with some of the many examples in the previous chapters.
To take one of the examples from a moment ago: Why would BOLD
signal increase logarithmically, and not linearly, for bigger phrase struc-
tures? Does this relationship hold for sentences that have long-distance
dependencies between clauses? Or highly predictable sentences?
The bigger lesson here is that making linking hypotheses explicit and
transparent is a necessary step in moving forward and making progress
on difficult questions.
3. Review state-of-the-art results that have emerged from this research
Honestly, this is the easy part. There are a great many interesting and
compelling lines of research, and fascinating and clever experiments de-
signed to address them. It is easy for me, sometimes, to get drawn in to
a “laundry list” of specific research studies, each with clever methods
and complicated patterns of results. But it is necessary to combine close
attention to the detail and nuance of individual studies with a broader
perspective. That is, it is important to step back and see how individual
efforts fit together coherently in order to contribute to addressing larger
questions.
Taking such a step back involves asking several questions of the re-
search, and of ourselves as researchers and students. Most obviously,
we ask: “What is the goal of this study?” or some other variant that
addresses the research question at issue. But I don’t think this alone is

WHERE ARE WE (IN TERMS OF THIS BOOK)?
169
enough to get a proper look at the bigger picture. Equally important
is the question: “How does this study fit in with our current state of
knowledge?” Perhaps you are reading a study that uses a new method
to address a long-standing question? Or maybe previous research stud-
ies have shown conflicting results, and a new study sheds light on this
conflict? There are a great many possible questions, and it would be a
disservice to try to limit or constrain what counts as a valuable contribu-
tion to the broader scientific community. But my point is that we should
pay attention to what that broader discussion might be, and in what way
some particular research study fits.
In neurolinguistics, the state-of-the-art picture that emerges from this
exercise still has, let’s be honest, many holes. There is just a lot that we
do not yet understand about how the brain implements the human fac-
ulty for language. This partial understanding manifests, for example, in
the many conflicts and debates that we saw: to pick just two examples.
In terms of the functional role of specific brain regions, like the infe-
rior frontal gyrus, or the cognitive representation of linguistic building
blocks such as morphemes. Each of these debates presents a truly dif-
ficult puzzle, but they offer some of the best opportunities to hone our
abilities for critical thinking and careful scientific reasoning.
4. Provide a foundation for you to read this literature for yourself
It is my hope that the material reviewed here provides enough foun-
dation that the interested reader could begin to engage with the primary
research literature. This hope can only be put to the test when you,
reader, follow the references and notes sprinkled through each chapter
and start to read the studies that most capture your attention.
The thing is, I don’t think you can expect to get the most out of a sci-
entific research paper by picking it up and simply reading it from start to
finish. In my own experience, I’ve found it helpful to read “non-linearly”,
that is, to skim some portions of a new paper before going back and read-
ing more thoroughly. The idea here is to gather a good sense of what the
larger story of the paper is: What are the researchers trying to do and
what strategy are they using? Then, when I go in to make sense of the
background research, the methods section, or results, my goal is to fit

170
WHERE ARE WE (IN TERMS OF THIS FIELD OF RESEARCH)
each particular detail into the bigger “story” that is being told in the pa-
per. If a detail doesn’t fit in (What does this term mean? Why did they
use that method for this question?), then I know what parts I need to pay
even more attention to.
Now, I have a very particular way I do this, and I wouldn’t expect my
strategy to work equally well for others. But, at least as a starting point,
I tend to read in the following way: abstract (twice), conclusion section,
abstract (again), all figures and tables, and then start a “proper” reading
from the beginning. I encourage you to reflect on what sort of strategy
might make it easiest to get a handle on the take away message of a paper,
and then see how the nitty-gritty details serve to support that message.
5. Point you towards the resources they may use to engage with this
research themselves
Follow the references and notes. Have I said that enough? Not only
do they point to studies where you will learn more about this mate-
rial, but they also point towards resources that you yourself can use as
a neurolinguist. These resources include openly available repositories of
data as well as free, often open-source research software that spans the
many data types and methods used in neurolinguistics.3,4
Where are we (in terms of this ﬁeld
of research)?
Neurolinguistics is still a relatively young field. While it builds on pio-
neering work going back over 150 years, some of the most crucial tools
for new insights, such as fMRI, are only a few decades old. The begin-
nings of the field were contemporaneous with the beginnings of a new
kind of neuroscience: the localizationist perspective that specific func-
tions of the mind were housed in specific structures or regions of the
brain. Our modern understanding of the brain bases of language owes a
great deal to this perspective, as evidenced by the maps throughout this
book that localize specific linguistic computations and representations to

WRAPPING UP
171
locations in the brain as well as particular time-windows of processing;
the where and when of processing.
Yet we also have seen that a fuller answer for how the brain creates
language demands more. One important challenge is to engage with the
notion that both language itself, and neural activity at the bases of how
the brain works, are dynamic. Research has only begun to take on the
massive challenge of developing linking hypotheses that are, likewise,
fundamentally dynamic. A growing perspective in the neurosciences
more broadly recognizes that such dynamics are embedded in interact-
ing networks. On this view, the core cognitive building-blocks can only
be found, not by identifying specific regions or time-points, but by teas-
ing apart and unpacking the operations of such networks.5 Indeed, we
are starting to see the outlines of such interacting networks in speech
perception, lexical processing, and sentence understanding, but we are
certainly just at the beginning of this new stage.
One neural mechanism for implementing such dynamics may be neu-
ral oscillations, which we have seen crop up from time to time in the
previous chapters. I am keen to see these lines of research develop fur-
ther, as they offer one avenue to connect the macro-scale localizationist
data that has been collected so far with more micro-scale facts about how
neurons operate and interact with each other.
Another trend affecting the neurosciences more broadly, and neu-
rolinguistics specifically, is the absolute explosion of data made possible
by the many techniques that are now at our disposal. To give just one
example, the Pubmed scientific database maintained by the National In-
stitutes of Health6 indexed just about 28,000 papers related to fMRI in
2010, but by 2018 that number was over 40,000. This increase in data
must be met in kind with the development and refinement of theories
and models into which these data fit; these are the linking hypotheses
we dwelt on just above.
An area where more attention to data is needed concerns neurolin-
guistic studies from a broader array of languages. While there are over
7,000 languages spoken across the world, a very tiny fraction of those
languages are represented in the studies discussed in this book. Dif-
ferences between languages mean that some are more suitable than
others for studying specific neurolinguistic research questions than

172
WHERE ARE WE (IN TERMS OF THIS FIELD OF RESEARCH)
others (see, for example, the discussions of Turkish vowels on page 64,
Arabic morphology on page 96, and Japanese grammar on page 129).
Moreover the languages that have been most studied tend to reflect ex-
isting sociopolitical power structures which leave many communities
marginalized. Broadening the dataset that undergirds neurolinguistics
to include a representative range of languages and language users is a
necessary step towards developing more generalizable research.7 Such
steps build on existing cross-linguistic work that has focused on key top-
ics such as multilingualism and sign languages which have received only
glancing attention in these pages.
A theme that runs through all of these different trends is that of
connection: connections between different brain networks, connections
between data and models, or connections between data, models, and the
people that make up our many different and varied language communi-
ties. It is perhaps too easy to also note that neurolinguistics is, of course,
fundamentally about the connection between the scientific disciplines of
neuroscience and linguistics. As an interdisciplinary science, researchers
in neurolinguistics have seen directly how challenging it can be to make
connections that actually work. Indeed, as an interdisciplinary science,
neurolinguistics generates fierce debates as to whether and in what way
insights from linguistics are “relevant” for studies of the brain, and in
which ways studies of the brain do or do not “matter” for an understand-
ing of the human capacity for language.8 As fundamental a question as
this is, it is almost certainly one that does not have a clear answer. There
is no one way different scientific disciplines connect, one path to dis-
cover how the brain works, or one best tool for studying the human
capacity for language. But that doesn’t offer a free pass to go our separate
ways. Rather, the challenge of interdisciplinary work is to make the con-
nections between different ideas as explicit and as clear as possible – to
specify the linking hypotheses that we have returned to again and again.
Call to action
As promised, this book is as much about the questions that we ask in
neurolinguistics as it may be about any (partial) answers that scientists

CALL TO ACTION
173
have identified thus far. These questions mean that the state of neu-
rolinguistics is in flux, and this is exciting. It’s exciting because the
flux is grounded in a set of firm observations, including observations
about where and when certain aspects of language are processed in the
brain. It’s from this foundation that exciting ideas and developments are
emerging about how these systems operate together, interactively and
dynamically, in the service of language.
Some of these developments will refine our current understanding,
while others will most likely open the door to totally new perspectives
and insights. The thing is: These opportunities are there, ready to be
studied. We have so many good questions ready to be asked, and a range
of methodologies and tools that can be mastered with a little bit of dedi-
cation, focus, and time. Don’t just take my word for it. Take a look at the
program at the next annual meeting of the Society for the Neurobiology
of Language,9 or visit your library to check out the latest issue of Brain
& Language. I hope the book spurs your interest and leads to you to dis-
cover more about the research currently underway. In time, it may well
lead you on a path to your own innovative discoveries.

Abbreviations
AG
Angular Gyrus
ASD
Autism Spectrum Disorders
ATL
Anterior Temporal Lobe
BOLD
Blood Oxygenation-Level Dependent
DCS
Direct Cortical Stimulation
DTI
Diffusion Tensor Imaging
ECoG
Electrocorticography
EEG
Electroencephalography
ERF
Event-Related Field
ERP
Event-Related Potential
fMRI
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
fNIRS
Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
IFG
Inferior Frontal Gyrus
IPL
Inferior Parietal Lobe
LATL
Left Anterior Temporal Lobe
LIFG
Left Inferior Frontal Gyrus
LPTL
Left Posterior Temporal Lobe
MMR
Mismatch Response
MRI
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MVPA
Multi-Voxel Pattern Analysis
PET
Positron Emission Tomography
pMTG
Posterior Middle Temporal Gyrus
PPA
Primary Progressive Aphasia
PWD
Pure Word Deafness
rTMS
Repeated Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
SMG
Supramarginal Gyrus
TMS
Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation
VBM
Voxel-based Morphometry
VLSM
Voxel-based Lesion Symptom Mapping
VMPFC
Ventro-Medial Prefrontal Cortex

Glossary of terms
agnosia A neural deficit that affects one’s ability to recognize objects, sounds,
or other perceptual categories.
anaphora Words that have their meaning filled in by context (for example, the
pronoun “she”).
anomia A kind of aphasia that involves difficulty accessing words from the
mental lexicon.
aphasia A language deficit caused by brain damage.
classical model Early account of the neural bases of language that focused on
language comprehension in the left posterior temporal lobe, and language
production in the left inferior frontal lobe.
cytoarchitecture The arrangement of neurons into layers in the cortex of the
brain; used to differentiate brain regions.
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) Method to measure the structural connectiv-
ity between brain regions by measuring the diffusion of water along axons
using MRI.
electrocorticography (ECoG) Method that invasively measures neural volt-
age potentials in patients undergoing neurosurgery using electrodes placed
directly onto the surface, or penetrating into, cortical tissue with high spatial
and temporal resolution.
electroencephalography (EEG) Method to measure scalp voltage potentials
generated by tens of thousands of cortical neurons with high temporal but
low spatial resolution.
event-related potential (ERP) Time-aligned average of EEG signals used to
amplify cortical signals associated with perceptual or cognitive processes.
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) Method to measure neural
activity through the proxy of blood oxygenation with high spatial resolution
but low spatial resolution.
linking hypothesis (or linking function) Account specifying how computa-
tions or representations at one level of description are connected to those at

176
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
another (for example, a specification of how recognizing a phoneme might
impact brain activity recorded in a particular experimental setting).
M100 Evoked neuromagnetic signal recorded with MEG that reflects activation
in the auditory cortex about 100 milliseconds after sound begins.
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) Medical imaging tool used to create
high-resolution three-dimensional images of tissues, including the brain, by
recording the energy released by hydrogen atoms that are perturbed by a
strong magnetic field.
magnetoencephalography (MEG) Method to measure very small magnetic
fields generated by cortical neural activity with high temporal resolution and
moderate spatial resolution.
mismatch response (MMR) Evoked neural signal, measurable with EEG or
MEG, which is observed when a sequence of similar stimuli (the “standards”)
are interrupted by something with a different property (the “deviant”). Used
to study the processing and structure of categories, including phonemes.
N400 Event-related potential with a negative voltage peak approximatly 400
milliseconds after stimulus onset on the central posterior area of the scalp.
It is evoked by stimuli with a meaning that is unexpected or unlikely.
neural oscillations Rhythmic neural activity at discrete frequencies thought to
be important for synchronizing diverse populations of neurons to facilitate
information processing.
neurogram Neural representation of continuous acoustic information includ-
ing frequency spectra and temporal dynamics.
P600 Event-related potential with a positive voltage peak approximately 600
milliseconds after stimulus onset on posterior areas of the scalp. It is most
often evoked by stimuli that are ungrammatical or syntactically unexpected.
periodotopy Spatial organization of neurons found in the auditory cortex
such that adjacent populations of neurons respond to sounds with adjacent
temporal dynamics.
primary progressive aphasia (PPA) Family of neurodegenerative disorders
that affect language comprehension and production.
semantic hub Area of the anterior temporal lobes of the brain that has been
associated conceptual knowledge.

GLOSSARY OF TERMS
177
temporal windows of integration Account of the neural bases of speech per-
ception that is based the perceptual sampling of acoustic information in
discrete windows, perhaps via the mechanism of neural oscillations.
tonotopy Spatial organization of neurons such that adjacent populations of
neurons respond to adjacent sound frequencies.
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS, rTMS) Method to temporarily ex-
cite or inhibit neural activity from a small area using a magnetic field generated
outside of the scalp.
word embedding Computational technique to represent the meaning of the
word as vector describing a point in a semantic space whose dimensions may
be other words or fixed concepts.
