
Morphology

Edinburgh Advanced Textbooks in Linguistics
Series Editors
Peter Ackema, Reader in Linguistics (University of Edinburgh)
Mitsuhiko Ota, Reader in the Phonetics and Phonology of Language
Acquisition (University of Edinburgh)
Editorial Advisory Board
Ricardo Bermudez-Otero (University of Manchester)
Kersti Börjars (University of Manchester)
Greville Corbett (University of Surrey)
Anastasia Giannakidou (University of Chicago)
Caroline Heycock (University of Edinburgh)
Jack Hoeksema (University of Groningen)
Miriam Meyerhoff (University of Edinburgh)
Geoffrey Pullum (University of Edinburgh)
Andrew Spencer (University of Essex)
Donca Steriade (MIT)
Susi Wurmbrand (University of Connecticut)
TITLES IN THE SERIES INCLUDE
Essential Programming for Linguistics
Martin Weisser
Visit the Edinburgh Advanced Textbooks in Linguistics website at
www.euppublishing.com/series/EATL

Morphology
From Data to Theories
Antonio Fábregas and Sergio Scalise
EDINBURGH
University Press

A Paloma Varela, maestra y amiga
© Antonio Fábregas and Sergio Scalise, 2012
Edinburgh University Press Ltd
22 George Square, Edinburgh
www.euppublishing.com
Typeset in 10/12 Minion
by Servis Filmsetting Ltd, Stockport, Cheshire, and
printed and bound in Great Britain by
CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 0 7486 4314 1 (hardback)
ISBN 978 0 7486 4313 4 (paperback)
ISBN 978 0 7486 5628 8 (webready PDF)
ISBN 978 0 7486 5626 4 (epub)
ISBN 978 0 7486 5627 1 (Amazon ebook)
The right of Antonio Fábregas and Sergio Scalise
to be identified as author of this work
has been asserted in accordance with
the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.

CONTENTS
List of Abbreviations
Foreword
1 Morphology: Definitions and Basic Concepts
 1.1 What Is Morphology?
  
1.1.1 Its Object of Study
  
1.1.2 Morphology’s Place in Grammar
  
1.1.3 Differences between the Lexicon and Morphology
 1.2 Classes of Morphemes
  
1.2.1 Classes of Affixes
 1.3 Subdivisions of Morphology
  
1.3.1 Inflection
  
1.3.2 Word Formation: Derivation and Compounding
 1.4 The Spell-Out of Morphemes
  
1.4.1 Allomorphy
 1.5 Productivity
 Exercises
 Further Reading
2 Morphological Units
 2.1 Morphemes
 2.2 Words
 2.3 The Debate on the Existence of Morphemes

  
2.3.1 Replacive and Substractive Morphology
  
2.3.2 Mismatches between Grammatical Features and their
Exponents
  
2.3.3 Cranberry Morphemes
  
2.3.4 Priscianic Word Formation
  
2.3.5 Paradigmatic Motivation of Meaning
 2.4 Other Units
  
2.4.1 Roots and Stems
  
2.4.2 Constructions
  
2.4.3 Templates
 2.5 Correlations between Morphemes and Morphs and
Morphological Typology
 Exercises
 Further Reading
3 Morphological Structures
 3.1 The Motivation for Morphological Structures
  
3.1.1 Evidence in Favour of Word-Internal Structure
 3.2 The Properties of Morphological Structures
  
3.2.1 The Concept of Head
  
3.2.2 The Position of the Head
  
3.2.3 Binary Branching
 3.3 Arguments against Morphological Structures
  
3.3.1 A-Morphous Morphology
  
3.3.2 Exocentricity
  
3.3.3 Bracketing Paradoxes
  
3.3.4 Double Base
  
3.3.5 Parasynthesis
 Exercises
 Further Reading
4 Inflectional Processes

 4.1 Properties of Inflection
 4.2 Inflection and Grammatical Categories
  
4.2.1 A Comparison of Five Languages
  
4.2.2 Non-Inflected Categories: Prepositions, Conjunctions
and Adverbs
 4.3 Desinences and Theme Vowels in Grammar
  
4.3.1 The Status of Gender and the Notion of Desinence
  
4.3.2 Theme Vowels
 4.4 Paradigms
  
4.4.1 Syncretism
  
4.4.2 Defectiveness
  
4.4.3 Suppletion
  
4.4.4 Patterns of Irregularity
 Exercises
 Further Reading
5 Derivational Processes
 5.1 Properties of Derivation
 5.2 Category Changes
  
5.2.1 Nominalizations
  
5.2.2 Verbalizations
  
5.2.3 Adjectivalizations
 5.3 Semantic Changes
 5.4 Category Change without Formal Marking: Conversion
 5.5 Argument Structure Changes
  
5.5.1 Lexical Alternations
 5.6 Questions Raised by the Analysis of Derivational Processes in
a Single Language
 5.7 The Boundaries between Inflection and Derivation
  
5.7.1 Appreciative Morphology
  
5.7.2 Hybrid Categories
 Exercises

 Further Reading
6 Compounding and Other Word-Formation Processes
 6.1 Properties of Compounds
 6.2 Basic Classes of Compounds
  
6.2.1 Classes According to the Relation Established between
the Two Elements
  
6.2.2 Synthetic Compounds
  
6.2.3 Parasynthetic Compounds
  
6.2.4 Co-Compounds
 6.3 Compounding between Syntax and Morphology
  
6.3.1 Some Differences between Compounds and Phrases
  
6.3.2 Intermediate Cases
 6.4 Compounds and Grammatical Categories: Japanese and
English
 6.5 Other Word-Formation Processes
  
6.5.1 Clipping
  
6.5.2 Reduplication
  
6.5.3 Acronymy
  
6.5.4 Blending
 Exercises
 Further Reading
7 Morphology’s Relation to Syntax
 7.1 The Place of Morphology in Grammar: Lexicalism and
Constructionism
  
7.1.1 Lexicalist Theories
  
7.1.2 Constructionism
 7.2 The Generalized Lexicalist Hypothesis: Empirical Data
  
7.2.1 Syntactic Material inside Words: The No Phrase
Constraint
  
7.2.2 Non-Morphological Processes and the Internal Structure
of Words

  
7.2.3 Absence of Movement and the Theory of Syntactic
Domains
  
7.2.4 Absence of Coreference to Word-Internal Constituents
 7.3 The Relation between Syntax and Morphology in Diachrony:
Morphologization
 Exercises
 Further Reading
8 Morphology’s Relation to Phonology and Semantics
 8.1 Restrictions Imposed by Phonology on Morphology
 8.2 The Phonological Materialization of Morphemes
  
8.2.1 Morphology and Phonology Feed Each Other: Lexical
Strata
  
8.2.2 Morphology Is Independent from Phonology: The
Separation Hypothesis
  
8.2.3 Morphology Precedes Phonology: The Late Insertion
Hypothesis
  
8.2.4 Post-Syntactic Morphological Operations in Distributed
Morphology
 8.3 Accounting for Allomorphs: Localism and Globalism
 8.4 The Linearization of Morphological Structure: Morpheme
Order
  
8.4.1 Syntactic Accounts
  
8.4.2 Semantic Accounts
  
8.4.3 Purely Morphological Accounts
  
8.4.4 Phonological Accounts
  
8.4.5 Parsing-Based Accounts
 8.5 The Meaning of Words and Affixes
  
8.5.1 The Meaning of Units Is Decomposable
  
8.5.2 Semantic Atomicity
  
8.5.3 Do Affixes Have a Meaning of their Own?
 8.6 Compositionality and Semantic Unpredictability
  
8.6.1 The Unpredictability of Meaning

  
8.6.2 Dividing Structures and Concepts: Two Types of
Meaning
  
8.6.3 How to Represent Demotivation
 Exercises
 Further Reading
Answers to the Exercises
References
Index

ABBREVIATIONS
1st
first person
2nd
second person
3rd
third person
A
adjective
AdvP adverbial phrase
agr.
agreement
AOG
Affix Ordering Generalization
appl.
applicative
Asp
aspect
AspP aspect phrase
aug.
augmentative
caus. causative
CM
Construction Morphology
des.
desinence
DetP
determiner phrase
dim.
diminutive
DM
Distributed Morphology
En.
English
fem.
feminine
FP
functional projection
Fr.
French
fut.
future tense

Ge.
German
gen.
genitive
IA
Item-and-Arrangement
inch.
inchoative
inf.
infinitive
IP
Item-and-Process
It.
Italian
LE
linking element
LF
Logical Form
lit.
literally
masc. masculine
N
noun
neg.
negation
neu.
neuter
No.
Norwegian (Bokmål)
nom.
nominalizer
nP
functional noun projection
NP
noun phrase
P
preposition
PART particle
partc. participle
pejo.
pejorative
PF
Phonological Form
pl.
plural
PP
prepositional phrase
pref.
prefix
RHHR Right-Hand Head Rule
sg.
singular
Sp.
Spanish
suff.
suffix
sup.
superlative
T
tense

ThV
theme vowel
TP
tense phrase
V
verb
ver.
verbalizer
vP
functional verb projection
VP
verb phrase
WP
Word-and-Paradigm

FOREWORD
These are exciting times for linguistics, which means that these are
particularly exciting times for morphology. In the last 20 years, new
frameworks have appeared, old frameworks have been adapted to
new times and old and new data have been integrated in standard
descriptions. Morphology lies at the centre of discussions about the
nature of language, its organization and internal functioning. This is
so for two main reasons. The first one is that morphology –the study
of words and their internal structure– directly interacts with all the
components of grammar: syntax, phonology and semantics. This
makes the study of morphology a privileged location to explore the
relation between these components, their relative weight, their
ordering, etc. The second reason is that one fundamental question in
the study of language is how the memorized items that belong to the
component we call ‘lexicon’ are combined to build specific
utterances. Morphology is at the heart of this relation. It explores the
aspects of the grammar of a word which derive from the information
stored in the lexicon; it also tries to determine which aspects of the
grammar of words can be explained by general rules (or tendencies,
or principles) derived from the way these items are related to each
other.
This book is targeted to advanced students of linguistics. It
presupposes some basic knowledge of general linguistics and,
therefore, some familiarity with fundamental morphological notions
that are part of the standard linguistic tradition. The first chapter aims
at illustrating these basic notions, and then the rest of the textbook
moves onto the problems associated with these notions and the way

in which they have been interpreted in the last couple of decades.
These problems are ordered by the increasing complexity of the
notions that they presuppose. We start with problems related to units
(words, affixes, roots, constructions; chapter 2), then we continue
with problems related to structures (especially whether they exist or
not; chapter 3). Then we consider processes, divided, as it is
standardly, into inflection (chapter 4), derivation (chapter 5) and
compounding (chapter 6). Finally, we consider the interaction of
morphology with the three main components of grammar: syntax
(chapter 7), phonology and semantics (chapter 8). There are of
course aspects of morphology that, due to space restrictions, we
have not been able to cover here. Just to name a few: the acquisition
of morphology, lexicology and lexicography, computational treatment
of morphological corpora, etc… However, we are confident that the
topics covered in this textbook are all those necessary for any
morphological analysis of any kind, even when it is done in the areas
that we could not cover.
Each chapter contains some questions and problems at the end.
The goal of these exercises is to get students started on the exciting
task of doing their own research in morphology in whatever language
they decide to concentrate on. As the reader will see, most of the
exercises are open and allow the student to choose the language
where the data will be taken from, replicating with different sets of
data the analyses that have been illustrated in these chapters. This
is due to the advanced nature of this textbook: detailed research in
morphology requires deep knowledge about the properties of a
language, not only its morphology, but also fine-grained aspects of
the meaning of words, the contexts where they can be used, the way
in which they are actually pronounced (as opposed to how they are
written), their syntax and even their historical evolution. We believe
that at an advanced level, and for a textbook which does not target
students of any one language, this is the right format for the
exercises. Even the most complex linguistic research starts with a
collection of data organized in a particular way; students are
encouraged to take these problems as a way of getting their own
original research started.

Each chapter includes a further reading list. It has of course not
been possible to cover all relevant references in any of the topics;
the literature in morphology – luckily for the scientific strength of the
field – is vast. The reader must not interpret the absence of a
particular work from our reading list as any judgement on the quality
of that work. By necessity, we had to make some choices. We have
decided to concentrate on more recent publications, where readers
will find many years of research summarized and at the same time
will be able to perceive how known data have been analysed in new
theories. Of course, we have also included some classic references
which gave influential formulations of the problems discussed.
As individual researchers, we both have our ideas and our
opinions –usually, different opinions– about the problems that we are
covering. However, we have tried –to the extent that this is humanly
possible– to forget our own opinions when writing this textbook. To
the best of our capacity, we have tried to give the three main theories
covered in this book (Lexicalism, Constructionism and Construction
Morphology) the same treatment. Whether we have succeeded or
not, we leave for the reader to judge.
This textbook is different from most currently available ones for
several reasons. It is an advanced textbook which aims to present
phenomena from the view of different recent theories which are, in
general, not covered in other publications (Construction Morphology
and Distributed Morphology). It presents a variety of phenomena
which are discussed in relation to a variety of aspects and
languages, and it covers a wide set of problems not only directly
relevant to morphology, but also to theoretical views that deal with
the so-called architecture of grammar.
We would finally like to thank Peter Ackema and Mits Ota for
comments on a previous manuscript.
Tromsø / Bologna, June 2011

1
MORPHOLOGY: DEFINITIONS AND BASIC
CONCEPTS
1.1 WHAT IS MORPHOLOGY?
In this first section of the book we will illustrate some basic notions in
morphology. What does morphology study? What are the goals of
morphological analysis? What is its place within the general theory of
grammar?
1.1.1 ITS OBJECT OF STUDY
Morphology is the part of linguistics that studies the grammatical
properties of words and how words are related to each other in a
language. Indeed, the central task of morphology is to study how
words such as the pair in (1) are related to each other.
(1) a. deep
 
b. deepen
(1b) is intuitively more complex than (1a). On the formal side, it
contains an additional segment (-en), and on the semantic side, it
has a more complex meaning that presupposes the meaning of (1a):
‘become deep’ or ‘cause something to become deep’. In this case a
morphological analysis would tell us that the word in (1b) is the result
of applying some operation to the word in (1a). Thus, (1a) is the BASE
from which the word in (1b) has been built. The word in (1a) is

simple; the word in (1b) is complex. In general, part of the phonology
and meaning and some of the grammatical properties of a complex
word are expected to be explained by the characteristics of its base.
A complex word like the one in (1b) can be decomposed into two
different units: deep and -en. These units are MORPHEMES, which are
traditionally defined as the smallest meaningful elements that are
combined in order to build words. In clear cases, like the example in
(1b), morphemes are pairs of form and meaning. Deep is a
morpheme that denotes a property having to do with a physical
dimension; -en is a morpheme that forms verbs and is associated
with the meaning ‘(cause to) become X’, where X is the property
expressed by the other morpheme. The units that have been
identified in morphological analysis, and that have been claimed to
be useful to relate words to each other, are analyzed in Chapter 2 of
this book.
When deep and -en are put together in the word (1b), we obtain
the meaning ‘to (cause to) become deep’. In traditional terms,
morphology analyzes the way in which morphemes (and other units
that might prove relevant for relating words to each other) combine
with each other to form words. This implies both explaining how the
combination is performed and what combinations of morphemes are
possible or impossible in a language. In our example, this would
involve answering at least these questions:
a) What kind of morpheme is -en, and what kind of morpheme is
deep?
b) What grammatical properties does -en add to the word? In what
way are words containing -en different from those containing,
say, -ize?
c)
What are the properties of the morphemes that -en can combine
with, and what are the properties of the morphemes that deep
can combine with?
With respect to the question in (a) – and although it is a controversial
issue – traditionally -en and all those morphemes that can never
occur alone have been classified as BOUND MORPHEMES or AFFIXES. A

morpheme like deep, which in a language like English can form a
word alone, is a FREE MORPHEME or ROOT.
With respect to the question in (b), an analysis of the data would
probably conclude that – at the very least – the affix -en is
responsible for the fact that (1b) is a verb, and not an adjective as
the word in (1a). The analysis will also involve explaining that verbs
built with the morpheme -ize generally have the meaning ‘to cause
something to become X’ (standardize = ‘to cause something to
become standard’), not just ‘to become X’.
The question in (c) focuses on facts like this: why is the word in
(1b) well formed in English, but not the word in (2)? We would
probably answer that this affix combines with bases that are
adjectives, not nouns like dog.
(2) *dog-en
Although the way in which words are related to each other is the
central question in morphology, there are other related aspects
having to do with the grammar of words which are also part of
morphological research. Morphology – at least in its traditional sense
– also tries to answer the question of how the units that we have
called morphemes are organized inside the word. Let’s take a word
like the one in (3), where we see two morphemes which have
already been isolated. One of these morphemes – the last one – is
the HEAD of the word. Why? Well, the morpheme -er is responsible
for most of the grammatical properties of the whole word. It
determines that the word is a noun (not a verb, as sing would be),
and also that it denotes a human being that performs a particular
action (an ‘agent’). Aspects having to do with word-internal
structures are studied in Chapter 3.
(3) sing-er
Morphology also studies how a single word can change its
grammatical properties when put inside a whole syntactic
construction. For instance, all the forms in (4) are forms of the same
verb (to live), but each one of them is used in a different kind of
syntactic structure, depending on the tense and aspect of the

sentence and the person and number of its subject. These formal
changes that words experience depending on their role inside
sentences and other bigger syntactic constructions are considered
‘inflectional processes’, and are studied in Chapter 4.
(4) a. live
 
b. lives
 
c. lived
 
d. living
Because morphology studies the relations between words, it is
also its object of study to determine what procedures a given
language has to build new words from existing forms. For instance,
given the form in (5), a study of English morphology can tell us that
there are several ways of forming new words from it, adding affixes
or combining it with other roots (6a, 6b). Some of these
morphological procedures are able to create a large number of new
forms whose meaning and form are predictable and do not need to
be learnt by heart by speakers. Such processes are said to be
productive. Other processes, such as the one in (6c), are non-
productive and produce forms which, in one sense or another, have
special properties in their form, meaning or both, so they need to be
learnt by heart. Word formation is studied in more depth in Chapters
5 and 6 of this book.
(5)
alcohol
(6)
a. alcohol-ic
 
b. alcohol abuse
 
c. workaholic
The object of study of morphology – the word – is a kind of unit
that interacts with all the other components of the grammar. It
interacts with syntax because in order to form phrases and
sentences, we must combine words. It also interacts with phonology,
because words are pronounced. Finally, it interacts with semantics,
because words come associated with some meaning and the way in

which speakers use words is generally determined by this.
Therefore, the study of morphology is also the study of how words
interact with these three components.
With respect to syntax, one immediate question is why it is
possible to substitute the noun trucks for what and question it in (7a),
but not in (7b), where it is a part of the complex word truck driver. In
the first case, it is possible to ask about the kind of object that
someone drives; in the second case, the same kind of question is
impossible. The relationship between morphology and syntax is
explored in Chapter 7 of this book.
(7)
a. John drives [trucks] → What does John drive _____?
 
b. Mary likes a [truck] driver → *What does Mary like a
____ driver?
With respect to the relation between phonology and morphology,
one of the main issues is how a morpheme gets its phonological
shape inside a word and how some phonological conditions are
required by particular morphemes; for instance, why the morpheme -
ity changes the final consonant of the base in (8a) and why the
morpheme -ness does not.
(8)
a. atomi[k] > atomi[s]-ity
 
b. apostoli[k] > apostoli[k]-ness
With respect to semantics, morphology studies the way in which the
meaning of a morpheme is preserved or not inside a word: why black
in blackness can only refer to that particular colour (9a), but the
same morpheme in blackboard (9b) does not, as blackboards can be
green. Morphology’s relation to phonology and semantics is studied
in Chapter 8.
(9)
a. black-ness
 
b. black-board
1.1.2 MORPHOLOGY’S PLACE IN GRAMMAR

Grammar is conceived as a computational system that combines
units and associates those structures with sounds (or other physical
signals, like hand signs) and with meanings. This gives us the three
basic components of lingustic analysis (10):
(10)
a. a computational system that combines simple units into
bigger units (syntax),
 
b. a system that relates those units to physical signals
(phonology), and
 
c.
a system that relates those units to meanings
(semantics).
So where is morphology in this system? Different solutions have
been proposed. The first one suggests that morphology is part of the
computational system, that is, that morphology is part of syntax. The
reasoning is that if the computational system is a combinatorial
module where units are merged, then it should give an account of
both syntax, which combines words, and morphology, which
combines morphemes; there are no substantial differences between
the two components, so words are actually built in syntax. This
position is known as CONSTRUCTIONISM; DISTRIBUTED MORPHOLOGY
(DM) is the main Constructionist theory nowadays. Another answer
suggests enriching the scheme in (10) and having two different
components that produce new forms. The first one would take care
of the combinations of words (syntax), and the second one would be
responsible for the combinations of morphemes. This second
position, where syntax and morphology are distinct components of
grammar, has been characterized as LEXICALISM (11):
(11)
a. a computational system that combines morphemes to
form words (morphology),
 
b. a computational system that combines words to form
phrases (syntax),
 
c.
a system that relates words and phrases to physical
signals (phonology), and
 
d. a system that relates words and phrases to meanings

(semantics).
The computational system of the standard model of language has
been split into two constituents: morphology, which is used to
construct words, and syntax, which is used to combine words into
phrases.
As Williams (2007) notes, there are no theoretical arguments in
favour of Lexicalism. A theory such as the one represented in (10),
where there is only one generative component, the computational
system, that takes care of the combination of any kind of unit, is
generally considered simpler than a theory that proposes two, or
more, generative components. Note that, however, it might be the
case that a system is simpler in the number of components it
assumes, but those components are, internally, more complex. The
difficulty of measuring complexity has caused the debate to
concentrate mainly on empirical issues. Williams notes that the
reasons for proposing a division of labour between morphology and
syntax have not been theoretical, but empirical. Different
phenomena, which were identified mainly during the 1970s, led
many linguists to the belief that the principles that operate in syntax
are not identical to the principles that operate in morphology.
However theoretically desirable, fields in science cannot be unified if
this involves ignoring data that argue for crucial differences between
these fields. A more detailed comparison of the two approaches
presented here, and the empirical arguments that have motivated a
division of labour between morphology and syntax, are presented in
Chapter 7.
1.1.3 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE LEXICON AND
MORPHOLOGY
The use that part of the Lexicalist literature makes of the term
‘lexicon’ could cause some misunderstandings, to the extent that it
may lead to the belief that morphology and the lexicon are the same.
However, it is useful to separate the two concepts, which we will do
in this section.

Morphology is the set of operations that manipulate morphological
units in order to form new words or adapt the form of words to
specific syntactic contexts. The term refers, thus, to a component of
the grammar which has the power to generate well-formed objects of
a certain kind.
The lexicon, in contrast, is a list of units which is stored
somewhere in the mind of the speaker; these are the units combined
in syntax (and/or morphology). The lexicon, in a strict sense, does
not have generative power and does not create new objects. Its role
is to store the units that morphology and syntax can manipulate in
their operations; the list of units that the lexicon contains can be
expanded – for example, when we learn a new morphologically
simple word – but the lexicon itself does not have generative power.
All theories of language must assume a lexicon of the kind
described above. However, as we have seen, not all theories of
language assume that morphology exists as an independent
component of grammar; Lexicalism does, but Constructionism does
not.
The use of the term ‘lexicon’ to mean a mental storage room has a
very long tradition in linguistic studies, and is associated with the
idea that there is a part of the grammar of any language which is
purely arbitrary and just must be learnt by speakers acquiring or
learning a particular language (Jespersen 1933). The lexicon, in the
strict sense, is the list which contains this arbitrary information: for
instance, the underivable fact that the animal that barks is called kalb
in Arabic, cane in Italian and Hund in German.
Part of the Lexicalist tradition stretches this original meaning of the
term ‘lexicon’ and uses it, in practice, to refer both to the list of units
that morphology manipulates and to the set of operations which are
used to manipulate these units. This more general use of the term is
explained by the Lexicalist tenet that the idiosyncratic properties of a
particular unit as it is stored in the lexicon are crucial to determining
what kinds of forms it can generate. For example, part of the
idiosyncratic information associated in the lexicon with the unit grow
is that, when it is used to form a noun, it combines with -th and not
with -ion, which means that morphology will not be able to put
together a word such as *growion. Morphology and the lexicon are

tightly related in cases such as these, as they are both needed to
explain why some words are possible or impossible in a given
language.
There are linguistic theories that have a lexicon and no
morphology. We have already mentioned that DM proposes that
words are put together by syntax so that there is no distinct
morphological component, but this theory has a lexicon where
grammatical, phonological and semantic information is stored and
accessed at different points in the grammar. An extremely syntactic
theory where all properties of words are accounted for by syntactic
rules still needs to say that there is a list of stored units which syntax
combines and that can be used to construct syntactic phrases.
Notice that it would also be possible to imagine a system where
the lexicon is very powerful and plays the role that syntax plays in
other theories. This is the approach taken in CONSTRUCTION
MORPHOLOGY (CM; Booij 2010), based on the theory of CONSTRUCTION
GRAMMAR (Goldberg 1995). In this theory it is proposed that the
lexicon stores CONSTRUCTIONS, which are discussed in §2.4.2.
Constructions are complex units associated with an unpredictable
meaning, which can be combined with each other through different
operations. The combinations of units that other theories explain as
the output of a computational system are in this theory pre-
assembled units which are stored directly in the lexicon. Despite the
fact that we will mainly compare different Lexicalist theories to
Constructionist ones, in this book we will bring up CM in several
contexts.
Evidence for the interaction between lexicon and morphology:
Blocking
Evidence that the lexicon and morphology are different components
comes from the concept of MORPHOLOGICAL BLOCKING (Aronoff 1976).
It has been observed that, when speakers have an idiosyncratic form
of a particular word in their mental lexicon, morphology is prevented
from putting together morphemes to express exactly the same
meaning that the idiosyncratic form expresses.
Consider, for example, the irregular plural women in English. This
form needs to be listed in the lexicon, because it is associated with

unpredictable information that needs to be learnt by heart by the
speaker of the language. Once the speaker has this form in her
mental lexicon, there is no need to use a morphological rule to
combine other units to generate *womans, a form which would be
semantically and syntactically identical to the word which is already
stored. There is no reason to activate a relatively costly mental
operation that generates something when you already have an
equivalent unit stored which you can just use. To put it simply, if the
keyboard of your computer already has a key that writes the sign å,
you wouldn’t bother to press three or more keys to get the same sign
through the combination of smaller signs. This phenomenon is called
blocking: the stored form women blocks the generation of a
semantically and grammatically identical form *womans.
Of course, some speakers may be able to say womans and one
may even find this word in some contexts. This may be due to two
reasons. The first is that maybe some speakers do not have women
stored in their lexicon, that is, some speakers have not learnt the
form already, for example because they are children acquiring the
language or because they belong to a community where that
particular aspect of standard English is not used. Then blocking does
not play a role, because the idiosyncratic form is not listed. The
second reason could be that the speaker makes a semantic
distinction between women and womans. Blocking only acts when
the two forms, the one stored in the list and the one generated by
morphology, give identical results; if the results are different, of
course, there is a reason to generate a new form and, therefore, no
blocking effect is triggered. Notice that this is exactly what justifies
the existence of two plural forms for brother, namely brethren and
brothers, each one with different meanings (the first specialized for
the members of a religious community).
Blocking phenomena show that the lexicon and morphology must
be distinct components. For blocking to act, it is required that the
words that morphology generates be checked against the list of
stored units to confirm that there was no semantically identical form
already. This presupposes a two-way relation between morphology
and the lexicon: the lexicon feeds units to morphology, but it can also

read the output of a morphological process and block it if it contains
an equivalent form.
Existent and potential words
The concept of morphology and the lexicon as two related, but
different, components has given rise to one crucial distinction in the
study of words. The lexicon stores many different kinds of units,
among them words such as women, that have unpredictable
information which needs to be learnt. The words which are stored as
independent units in the lexicon must be EXISTENT WORDS of the
language, words which actually are in the mental dictionary of the
speaker and have the power to block other formations. In contrast
with this, morphology does not store units; morphology is composed
of rules that allow the speaker to create new words with a meaning
and a form which can be predicted from her knowledge of the rules
themselves. Morphology gives an account of the – in principle –
infinite set of POTENTIAL WORDS that can be generated in a particular
language, just as syntax gives an account of the potentially infinite
set of possible sentences of a language.
1.2 CLASSES OF MORPHEMES
It is customary to make a distinction between at least two kinds of
morphemes, depending on their phonological independence,
semantic contribution and positional freedom. Consider a noun like
the one in (12).
(12) holi-ness
As shown in (12), this word is segmented into two morphemes.
There are at least three grammatical differences between the
morphemes. The first one is their phonological independence. The
morpheme holi- (spelled out as holy) can appear alone as an
independent phonological unit, but the morpheme -ness cannot
occur alone and needs to combine with another morpheme in order
to be pronounced. The second one has to do with the position they
can occupy. The morpheme holi- can appear, as in (12), on the left
edge of the word, but also on the right edge, as in un-holy. However,

the morpheme -ness does not have the same positional freedom, as
it is always the rightmost element when combined with another
morpheme. Finally, if we concentrate on their meaning, an
immediate difference is that holi- has a fully fledged semantics, in
this case denoting a property of people and objects, while the
morpheme -ness has an abstract meaning that is not independent,
but depends on the meaning of another morpheme (in this case, -
ness would mean something like ‘quality associated with things
which are X’, where X would be the morpheme it combines with).
Morphemes that have the properties of holy are known as ROOTS,
while morphemes that have the properties of -ness are known as
AFFIXES. We can, then, define roots and affixes as in (13) and (14).
(13)
Roots
 
a. do not have a fixed position inside the word,
 
b. may be able to occur alone as words, and
 
c.
have a specific meaning
(14)
Affixes
 
a. have a fixed position inside the word,
 
b. cannot occur alone as words, and
 
c.
have a meaning that is abstract and operates on the
meaning of other morphemes.
In practice, one of the criteria used most to distinguish between roots
and affixes is related to the fact that affixes need roots in order to
create words. If we want to know, for example, whether two given
morphemes are affixes, we can try to construct a word just with the
two of them. If this is impossible, as in *un-ness, we know that they
are both affixes; if this is possible, as in un-fair, we know that at least
one of them is a root. We may repeat the procedure, if necessary, to
determine whether one of them is an affix.
Affixes used as free forms?
The distinction between roots and affixes is not absolute and several
difficulties arise when trying to apply it to all cases. Some affixes can

become free forms. Consider, for example, the Spanish affix in (15).
(15) -ismo
This affix is generally used, in combination with nouns and proper
names, to denote different artistic, political or social movements, as
in marx-ismo ‘Marxism’, impresionismo ‘impressionism’, colonial-
ismo ‘colonialism’, and so on. However, during the last century, this
affix started being used as a free morpheme meaning, precisely, ‘an
artistic or cultural movement’.
(16)
El surrealismo es un ismo de vanguardia.
 
The surrealism is an ism of avant-garde.
 
‘Surrealism is an avant-garde ism.’
This may challenge the view that affixes are always bound forms. In
(16), ismo is taken as a free form which is not combined with any
other morpheme. However, it may also be argued that this
morpheme has undergone a process of diachronic change that has
turned it into a root, a free morpheme, with a specific meaning close
to the meaning that the form has as an affix, and that now the
lexicon of Spanish contains two homophonous forms: one an affix,
the other a root. See §7.3 for cases of free forms that turn into bound
forms through historical change.
Neoclassical units
The notion of the neoclassical unit, such as logue, philo, and drome,
also challenges the distinction between roots and affixes.
Neoclassical stems do not have a fixed position inside the word. For
example, in Spanish, the morpheme logo can occur both in the left
and in the right slot of the word (17), so it cannot be classified as an
affix. Also like free forms, they can combine with an affix and
produce a well-formed word (18). Unlike roots, however, logo cannot
occur alone or combine with verb or noun inflection to become a full
word of Spanish (19). A neoclassical unit must be combined first with
an affix, as in (18), and only then can it be used as a word.

Consequently, neoclassical units also show mixed behaviour
between roots and affixes.
(17)
a. logo-peda ‘logopede’
 
b. filó-logo ‘philologue’
(18)
log-ic-a ‘logic’
(19)
a. *log-a
 
b. *log-o
1.2.1 CLASSES OF AFFIXES
One of the properties of affixes, as we have seen, is that they have a
fixed position with respect to the root they combine with. In this
section we will quickly review the different kinds of affixes that
emerge given this criterion.
Suffixes
A suffix is an affix that must appear to the right of the base with
which it is combined (20).
(20)
a. bil-en (Danish)
 
 
car-determiner ‘the car’
 
b. luki-ja (Finnish)
 
 
read-agent ‘reader’
 
c.
distin-çâo (Portuguese)
 
 
distinguish-nom. ‘distinction’
 
d. Tanaka-san (Japanese)
 
 
Tanaka-honorific ‘Mr Tanaka’
Prefixes
Prefixes are affixes which occur to the left of the base with which
they combine. Several examples are provided in (21).
(21)
a. pre-view (English)
 
b. til-by (Norwegian)

 
 
to-bring ‘offer’
 
c.
aba-ntu (Zulu)
 
 
pl.-person ‘people’
 
d. za-govorit’ (Russian)
 
 
inch.-speak ‘to begin to speak’
Prefixes and suffixes are the most frequent classes of affixes in
the languages of the world. Apart from their position, it is difficult to
find other universal properties that differentiate them. However, if we
consider only one family of languages, some tendencies can
sometimes be identified. In languages such as English, Italian and
Russian, prefixes tend to be unable to change the grammatical
category of the word they combine with; when they combine with
verbs, they give words which are also verbs, and when they combine
with nouns, they produce nouns. In these same languages, suffixes
frequently change the category of the base.
Infixes
Infixes are morphemes that require to be placed inside the root with
which they combine, breaking the phonological units that spell the
root. For example, Latin had an affix spelled out as a nasal
consonant which would break the verbal root in some present forms
of the verb (22a); in Spanish, the diminutive affix -it- may require to
be infixed inside particular roots, such as azúcar ‘sugar’ (22b).
(22) a. ru-m-po/rup-i (Latin)
 
 
break-present/break-past
 
b. azuqu-ít-ar (Spanish)
 
 
sugar-dim. ‘little sugar’
Interfixes
Prefixes, suffixes and infixes are positionally defined solely by the
position that they occupy with respect to the base. However, another
kind of unit, the interfix, is defined positionally because it must occur
between the base and some other additional morpheme. An
example of this can be found in Spanish, where there is a class of

affixes that modify the aspectual properties of the verb and must
appear necessarily between the verbal root and the theme vowel
(23a). The class of morphemes known as LINKING ELEMENTS (§6.1),
which occur between the two lexemes of a compound, are also
interfixes (23b).
(23) a. bes-uque-ar
 
 
kiss-interfix-theme vowel ‘to kiss irregularly’
 
b. speed-o-meter
Circumfixes
A circumfix is an affix that surrounds the base with which it
combines. Surrounding implies that part of the affix appears to the
left of the base, and part to its right. A circumfix is, necessarily, a
discontinuous morpheme, that is, an affix that materializes as two or
more separated phonological segments interrupted by material
belonging to other units. Some examples of this are given in (24).
(24) a. leg-nagy-obb (Hungarian)
 
 
sup.-big-sup. ‘very big’
 
b. ge-speel-d (Dutch)
 
 
partc.-play-partc. ‘played’
Circumfixation is not to be confused with parasynthesis (cf.
§3.3.5), the situation where two different affixes are simultaneously
added to the same base. Circumfixation involves the addition of only
one affix, and frequently neither of the two phonological segments
involved in the operation can be a morpheme by itself.
Transfixes
Discontinuous affixes are not the general rule in Indo-European
languages, but in other language families, such as Semitic, most
morphemes are discontinuous, and they not only appear
simultaneously to the right and to the left of a base, but intertwine
with it. In a language like Arabic, both affixes and roots are

transfixes. (25a) is a root and (25b) is an affix that gives us the
meaning ‘passive form of the past tense’.
(25) a. k-t-b ‘write’
 
b. u-i-a ‘passive, past tense’
In order to form a word, these two morphemes have to INTERDIGITATE,
that is, the word alternates segments belonging to one with those
belonging to the other, in such a way that it is not possible to find any
continuous unit in the word (26).
(26) kutiba ‘it was written’
Some authors have used the term TRANSFIX to refer to this kind of
discontinuous morpheme, which forms words by alternating
phonemes from one morpheme with those from the other. The
existence of such morphemes is, at first sight, a counterexample to
the theory that analyzes morphemes as discrete units in which a
word can be segmented (see §2.3). Other authors claim that these
morphemes are special only due to their phonological properties,
and that once the phonological side of a morpheme is differentiated
from the way in which it is represented inside the structure of a word
(see §8.2.2), the word can still be segmented and, at an abstract
level, it can still be said to be formed by two separate distinct
morphemes. The idea is that in languages with transfixes there are
phonological templates – fixed series of positions for vowels and
consonants – which have to be filled by the material contained in
each morpheme. For instance, the word in (26) would be the result
of applying a template like the one in (27) to the morphemes in (25).
Consonant positions (C) would then be filled by the root, and vowel
positions (V) by the affix. None of the morphemes forms an
uninterrupted sequence inside the word (a situation known as NON-
CONCATENATIVE MORPHOLOGY), with the result that the way in which the
morphemes combine is non-concatenative.
(27)

Due to this, systems with transfixes are also known as ROOT-AND-
PATTERN morphological systems; the pattern here is the template of
consonants and vowels which underlies the word.
1.3 SUBDIVISIONS OF MORPHOLOGY
It is traditionally believed that there is a distinction between the
processes that alter the shape and meaning of a word in order to
adapt it to specific syntactic environments and the processes that
create new words. Furthermore, it is customary to make a distinction
in this last group between processes that combine lexemes and
those that combine a lexeme with one or more affixes.
1.3.1 INFLECTION
If we consider the morphological process that relates the word run
with runs, the third person singular form of the verb, we realize that
this process involves a small number of changes. The word run is a
verb, and so is the resulting word runs. Run has a particular
meaning, roughly ‘to move fast by using one’s legs’, and this
meaning is preserved in the word runs. Someone who knows the
meaning of run does not need to look in any dictionary to know what
the meaning of runs is. The only thing that the morphological
process has changed is the syntactic construction where each one of
the words can appear: the form runs can be used with third person
singular subjects, while the form run is used for the rest of the
subjects in the present tense.
(28) a. John runs two miles every morning.
 
b. *John run two miles every morning.

Morphological processes that give the form of a word in a given
syntactic environment, without altering its grammatical category or its
core meaning, are INFLECTIONAL.
Inflectional processes generally do not produce new words; the
inflection of a word is the different forms that it adopts in the
syntactic constructions where it can occur. These processes include,
for example, those that mark nouns and adjectives for case in
languages such as Latin, Russian or Modern Arabic. In a relevant
sense, equus, eque, equum, equi and equo are forms of the same
word (‘horse’) in Latin, the difference being that each one of them
can be used only in some specific syntactic contexts. The set of all
inflectional forms that a word adopts, paired with information about
the contexts where each one of them can be used, is its PARADIGM.
As the grammatical category of a word is crucial to determine the
syntactic constructions where it can occur, it is generally the case
that each grammatical category has a different paradigm and that for
each category, the forms of the same word contrast in different
properties. For instance, in English, the verbal paradigm contrasts in
tense, aspect and, to some extent, person and number (run, ran,
running, runs …), while the noun paradigm has contrasts based on
number (dog, dogs). Properties of inflection are studied in Chapter 4.
1.3.2 WORD FORMATION: DERIVATION AND COMPOUNDING
In contrast to the process that relates run to runs, the process that
relates write to writer involves deeper changes that could justify
some dictionaries in listing the two words as separate entries. In this
case, the grammatical category of the two words is different: write is
a verb and writer is a noun. Also, the meaning has changed: writer
denotes a person with a particular occupation, while write denotes
an action.
Morphological processes that change the category, the meaning or
both aspects of a word are known as WORD-FORMATION PROCESSES.
These processes include operations such as those that form nouns
referring to agents from verbs (as in our example above), abstract
nouns from adjectives (good > goodness) or change-of-state verbs
from adjectives or nouns (red > redden).

These processes typically produce words which tend to be
included in dictionaries, although some authors would agree that,
when a word-formation process has a very regular effect on the
base, many of the formations do not need to be listed, because the
speaker who knows the meaning of the base form and how the
morphological process behaves can deduce the meaning and
behaviour of the new words. For example, with some exceptions, the
English nouns with -er built on top of verbs do not need to be listed,
because their meaning is easily predictable from the meaning of the
verb to which they are related, plus some basic knowledge of what -
er does to it. The same could be said about adjectives derived from
nouns or other adjectives with the suffix -ish or nouns derived with -
ation from verbal bases.
Most authors differentiate between two different kinds of word-
formation operations. The one illustrated in (29a) is known as
DERIVATION, while (29b) would be a case of COMPOUNDING.
(29) a. blu(e)-ish
 
b. navy-blue
Simplifying the concepts a bit, the difference between (29a) and
(29b) is that in the former a lexeme combines with an affix, while in
the latter two lexemes combine to form a new word. Properties of
derivation are studied in Chapter 5; compounding, in Chapter 6.
1.4 THE SPELL-OUT OF MORPHEMES
When considering morphemes, a distinction is generally made
between the contribution that each one of them gives to the grammar
and meaning of the word and the way in which they are spelled out
phonologically. In order to avoid confusion between these two
aspects of morphological units, sometimes the term MORPHEME is
used to refer to their grammatical and semantic properties and
MORPH is used to refer to the sequence of sounds that materializes
the morpheme. Consider the examples in (30). Here the root is
materialized with two different morphs, but they spell out the same
morpheme, which in both cases is a verb with one meaning.

(30) a. destroy-er
 
b. destruct-ion
The distinction between the grammatical and semantic side of
morphological units and their phonological representation is
traditional in morphology, but in some specific theories it has been
used as the basis for the SEPARATION HYPOTHESIS (§8.2.2), which has
implications for the interaction between phonology and morphology.
In this introduction, however, we will not address these topics and
instead we will use the distinction to introduce the basic notion of
allomorphy.
1.4.1 ALLOMORPHY
Allomorphy refers to the situation where the same morpheme is
spelled out as different morphs, each one occurring in a different
environment. The two forms of the root in (30) illustrate allomorphy.
Each one of the variants of the root (destroy and destruct) is an
ALLOMORPH. The morpheme that underlies the two variants always
has the same grammatical and semantic contribution; we could
represent it as MDESTROY. This morpheme, when materialized, adopts
two different forms: the allomorph destroy and the allomorph
destruct. Each one of them is used in different contexts. The morph
destruct- is used in more specific contexts, such as in combination
with the suffixes -tion and -ible (destruct-ible, vs. destroy-able, also
attested) while the other morph seems more general in its use, as it
is the form that surfaces when the root does not combine with any
other morpheme (to destroy), and also in combination with the
suffixes -er (destroy-er), -ing (destroy-ing) and -ed (destroy-ed). As
we can see from these examples, generally, when two or more
allomorphs compete, one of them is less marked and appears in a
bigger number of contexts. This is the DEFAULT ALLOMORPH: in our
example, destroy, which appears in more contexts and, crucially,
when the morpheme is not combined with other morphemes.
The distribution of allomorphs

One further question is what determines the distribution of two or
more allomorphs across contexts. One option is that the allomorphs
are sensitive to specifically morphological properties, for instance the
presence of some other morpheme in their environment. Consider
the suffix -able in English, which turns into -abil- in contact with the
affix -ity (enjoy-able > enjoy-abil-ity). The semantics and the
grammatical behaviour of -able and -abil- are identical, which makes
us conclude that they are two allomorphs of the same morpheme,
MABLE. In this case, the distribution of the variants is determined by a
property of the morphological environment, namely the contact with
another suffix. The suffix -ity requires the use of -abil-, but a similar
morpheme (also used to derive nouns from adjectives) like -ness
does not (agree-able > agree-able-ness). This contrast shows that
different 
morphemes 
require 
different 
allomorphs 
in 
their
environment, without any apparent phonological or semantic
motivation (see §8.2.1 for the way in which the different behaviour of
morphemes such as -ity and -ness is explained). This situation,
where the variants are distributed with regard to a morphological
property, is called MORPHOLOGICAL ALLOMORPHY.
In other cases, the distribution of the allomorphs seems to be
sensitive to some phonological property of the environment. This
PHONOLOGICAL ALLOMORPHY can be illustrated with an example from
Varela (1990). This author notices that one morpheme that produces
abstract nouns from adjectives in Spanish has two different
allomorphs: -ez and -eza. The distribution of the variants is generally
determined by the number of syllables of the base. If the base has
two syllables or fewer, the form preferred is the longer -eza; if the
base has three syllables or more, -ez is preferred.
(31) a. pesado vs. pesad-ez
 
 
heavy vs. heavi-ness
 
b. estúpido vs. estupid-ez
 
 
stupid vs. stupidity
 
c. raro vs. rar-eza
 
 strange vs. strange-ness
 
d. bello vs. bell-eza

 
 beautiful vs. beauty
When can we say that two variants are allomorphs?
It is also possible for roots to have different variants, as in go ~ went
or similar cases. In these situations, however, the term used is
SUPPLETION (§4.4.3), which shares with allomorphy the property that
the same morpheme is spelled out in different ways. However,
suppletion and allomorphy are different.
It is generally assumed that the different allomorphs of a
morpheme should have some phonological relation, since, in the
traditional notion of allomorph, they are variants of one and the same
lexical item. For this reason, it is expected that one variant can be
related to the other through some change in its shape, even if this
change does not generally take place in that language. That is, for
example, the case of the suffix that forms agent nouns from verbs in
Spanish. It has two allomorphs, -dor and -or. The first one appears
when the last segment of the base is a vowel (32a, b), while the first
shows up in contact with any kind of consonant (32c, d). The two
variants could be related by a phonological rule that avoids a series
of two consonants (/td/ in 32c; /sd/ in 32d) by erasing the initial /d/ of
the suffix. Given the possibility of relating the two variants by a
simple phonological rule, this is a case of allomorphy.
(32) a. mata-dor
 
 
kill-agent ‘killer’
 
b. bebe-dor
 
 
drink-agent ‘drinker’
 
c. pint-or (not *pint-dor)
 
 
paint-agent ‘painter’
 
d. confes-or (not *confes-dor)
 
 
confess-agent ‘confessor’
Note also that this phonological rule does not always apply in
Spanish, as sequences of /s/ followed by /d/ are otherwise attested
in the language (as in esdrújulo ‘stressed in the third-to-last
syllable’). The phonological rule that relates allomorphs has to be

plausible, that is, it must be related to phonological processes that
we otherwise see attested in languages of the world – and series of
adjacent consonants are frequently simplified across languages –
but it can be restricted to only some cases in the language we are
studying.
Instead, the relationship between go and went is generally
considered to be one of suppletion precisely because it does not
seem plausible that any phonological rule can derive one from the
other, or both from the same common representation. In cases of
suppletion it is generally believed that we are talking about two (or
more) different lexical items that happen to share the same
paradigm; as they are different lexical items, we do not expect that
their shape will be related by a phonological rule of any kind.
This phonological criterion does not always give clear results
precisely because what we define as a ‘plausible rule’ is subject to
discussion. For example, in Spanish several verb stems are irregular
for a number of reasons: either because their vowel becomes a
diphthong when it bears stress (33a), or because the vowel closes in
the same context (33b), or because a consonant is added to it (33c)
or undergoes a change (33d).
(33) a. cont-ar vs. cuent-o
 
 
tell-inf. vs. tell- 1sg. present indicative
 
b. ped-ir vs. pid-o
 
 
ask-inf. vs. ask-1sg. present indicative
 
c. ten-er vs. teng-o
 
 
have-inf. vs. have-1sg. present indicative
 
d. ha[θ]-er vs. ha[g]-o
 
 
do-inf. vs. do-1sg. present indicative
None of these pairs can be related to each other by an obvious
productive phonological process – as they involve operations such
as adding /g/ after a consonant or turning [θ] into [g], which are not
generally attested as productive phonological processes across
languages – and yet most authors find it counterintuitive to propose
that this is a case of suppletion, because the two forms are very

close and these three patterns appear with some frequency in the
Spanish verbal paradigms. These semi-regular patterns have
attracted some attention in recent analysis (§4.4.4).
Another criterion has been the historical origin of the word –
namely, if both variants share the same etymology – but this
criterion, useful as it is in lexicography and other linguistic
disciplines, does not give clear results in the study of contemporary
morphology. For example, in a Romance language, the relationship
between a word borrowed from Latin and the result of the historical
evolution of that same Latin word may be judged differently by
speakers depending on their historical knowledge of this relationship:
most Spanish speakers would agree that the relationship between
the two words in (34a) is suppletion, but the situation in (34b) would
be less clear for those with some knowledge of historical linguistics.
In this second case, the two forms of the root are historically related
to each other: the first is a historically regular phonological evolution
of the second. This is not true of (34a): each word comes from a
different form: hermano comes from Latin germanus, while fraterno
comes from the Latin adjective fraternus.
(34) a. hermano vs. fraterno
 
 
brother vs. brotherly
 
b. leche vs. lácteo
 
 
milk vs. dairy
As we see, in practice the boundaries between allomorphy and
suppletion are fuzzy. It is generally the case that the term ‘suppletion’
is used when discussing different roots which do not share clear
phonological similarities, while ‘allomorphy’ is reserved for cases
where either there are systematic phonological similarities between
the forms of a root or the morphemes that show variants are affixes.
1.5 PRODUCTIVITY
When analyzing the different morphological processes, one of the
factors that morphologists take into account is how easy it is for

speakers of a given language to apply those processes to existing
words.
Some processes can be applied quite freely, and can, for instance,
be applied to all words – or almost all words – belonging to a
particular grammatical category. An example of this is the process
that forms the plural of a noun in English by adding an -s. Most
nouns can take part in this operation (35a). The result is, most
frequently, predictable in two ways: what the meaning of the resulting
word is and how it will be pronounced. Moreover, when confronted
with a new noun that he or she had never heard before, any speaker
who knows the rules of English will be able to use this process to
make a plural form. Such processes are PRODUCTIVE PROCESSES. In
contrast, the process that adds -en to a noun to make the plural
(35b) is NON-PRODUCTIVE. First of all, there is a very restricted set of
nouns in current standard English that take -en to make the plural
(ox, child and brother; the last also accepts the productive -s plural).
Secondly, the result of this process is not predictable in its meaning
or form. The base brother has to change its vowel quality when
combined with -en, and its meaning is not just any group of brothers,
but is specialized to refer to those belonging to a religious
community. Naturally, this special meaning is possible because the
word competes with the regular brothers. Finally, it would be
surprising if a speaker decided to make the plural form of a noun he
or she never heard before with -en.
(35) a. dog-s
 
b. brethr-en
The two examples in (35) illustrate two extremes in a productivity
scale. Plural formation with -s is maximally productive; speakers do
not store the forms with -s in the lexicon, but build them by applying
a process to bases. Plural formation with -en is maximally
unproductive; speakers store the very small set of plural forms with -
en in the lexicon and do not extend this process to other bases.
However, productivity is a relative concept, and as such there are
degrees of productivity that have to do with different aspects,

depending on how productivity is measured. There are three main
ways of measuring productivity.
a) In order to build a form with particular properties, how often do
we use that process and how often do we use competing
processes that give the same kind of form?
b) How many restrictions does the process impose on its base?
c)
How easy is it to build a new form using that process?
If we start with the first notion of productivity, this is what we have
illustrated with the plural formation. When an English speaker needs
to build a plural form, the cases in which the -s form will be used are
much more frequent than those in which the -en form is used. Both
processes compete not only with each other, but also with the
possibility of not marking the plural form at all (sheep > sheep) and
with marking the plural with a vowel change on the root (man >
men). Using statistical methods it would be possible to determine the
relative productivity of each one of these ways of making the plural in
modern English. This allows for a continuous number of degrees of
productivity, depending on the relative frequency of each process
given a set of forms. This measurement is done taking into account
the set of EXISTING WORDS meeting some properties, that is, the group
of words actually attested in dictionaries, texts and other utterances
by speakers of a language.
Consider now the second notion. This parameter measures
productivity by considering how big the set of possible bases is.
When the process requires the base to meet a lot of requisites, there
will be fewer words built with that process; when the process allows
the base to be quite unrestricted, the number of words resulting from
it will be higher. Consider, for instance, what conditions the suffix -ly,
when used to form adverbs from adjectives, imposes on its base. It
cannot be applied to just any adjective of English. Not even all
adjectives that denote qualities can be the base of this process (cf.
*redly, *blackly), but still, some semantic subclasses of adjectives,
such as those denoting human behaviours, can undergo the process
quite freely. From this perspective the process is more restricted
because it imposes more conditions on the base, going beyond its

grammatical category: adjectives expressing colours cannot combine
with -ly because these adjectives do not express manners, but those
expressing properties that can be understood as manners of
behaving can. So in this case it can be said that the process
imposes two kinds of restrictions on its base: categorial restrictions
(the base has to be an adjective) and semantic restrictions (the base
has to denote a specific subset of properties). This way of measuring
the notion allows for different relative degrees of productivity, and it is
done considering not only the existing words of a language, but also
the POTENTIAL WORDS that speakers could build with that process,
even if they are not actually found in texts and dictionaries.
The third way of measuring productivity is to determine whether a
speaker would use a particular process when forming new words.
Consider Spanish. Spanish has the morphological property that all
verbs have to be marked with a vowel, which determines the way in
which the verb is conjugated (§4.3.2). There are three markers for
verbs in Spanish: -a, -e and -i.
(36) a. cant-a
 
 
sing
 
b. beb-e
 
 
drink
 
c. viv-i
 
 
live
The question is whether these three markers are equally productive
or not. To determine that, we can take a look at which marker or
markers speakers use with newly coined verbs that enter
contemporary Spanish as borrowings from English. Here we see that
Spanish speakers only use the marker -a to mark these new verbs,
never -e or -i.
(37) a. 
format 
(a
disk)
→ format-a
 
b. click
→ clic-a
 
c. chat
→ chate-a

 
d. blogg
→ blogue-a
The conclusion in this case is that -a is productive as a marker, but -
e and -i are not productive anymore, as no new verbs are marked
with them. As we can see, this measurement of productivity allows
for 
only 
two 
values: 
productive 
and 
non-productive. 
The
measurement is done considering the NEW WORDS that appear in a
language at a particular period.
As we hope has become clear from this very short presentation,
productivity is an extremely complex part of the study of morphology,
as it can be measured in different ways and can be defined in ways
that allow for different degrees. It will be impossible to do justice to
its complexities within the present book (see the further reading
sections below for expansion on this topic).
EXERCISES
1.
Give a segmentation of the following complex words in English
and determine whether they are produced by (a) inflection, (b)
derivation or (c) compounding. Notice that in some cases the
word might exhibit more than one of these processes.
 
expects, running, reader, book reading, childish, smallish,
imperfect, unexplainable
2.
In a language of your choice, try to find examples of (a)
inflection, (b) derivation and (c) compounding.
3.
Select a language, and determine whether in this language you
can find examples of affixes which are (a) suffixes, (b) prefixes,
(c) infixes, (d) interfixes, (e) circumfixes and (f) transfixes. Which
of these classes of affixes are used in inflection? Which are
used in derivation?
4.
Given the traditional definition of allomorph, discuss whether the
following alternations in English can be said to be cases of
allomorphy:
      a. -ation and -ment, as in modific-ation ~impeach-ment
      b. am and was, as in I am sick ~ I was sick
      c. a- and an-, as in a-morphous ~ an-alphabet

When you have given your answer, try to find comparable cases in
English or another language of your choice.
FURTHER READING
Given the introductory nature of this chapter, most of the further
readings that we can suggest will be provided in the next chapters,
when we expand on the topics mentioned above. Here we will
concentrate only on areas that we will not specifically discuss in the
following chapters.
The distinction between the lexicon as a set of stored items and
morphology is explicitly explored in DiSciullo and Williams (1987),
Aronoff and Anshen (1998) and Williams (2007); they all argue that
these two components of the grammar need to be kept distinct.
The analysis of transfixes that we have sketched is taken from
McCarthy’s (1979, 1981) theory of autosegmental morphology; an
alternative to McCarthy’s theory is presented in Hudson (1986).
Some recent studies of this phenomenon include McCarthy and
Prince (1990), Bat-El (1994), Benmamoun (2003), Ussishkin (2003),
Arad (2005) and Watson (2007).
With respect to productivity, the list of possible readings is
enormous. There are two recent monographs that cover all topics
related to productivity: Plag (1999) and Bauer (2001); see also Plag
(2006a) for an overview of the concept. Some of the fundamental
works that have discussed this concept include Rose (1973), Aronoff
and Schvanefeldt (1978), Anshen and Aronoff (1981), Riddle (1985),
Kastovsky (1986), Baayen (1993), Bolozky (1999), Plag, Dalton-
Puffer and Baayen (1999), De Jong, Schreuder and Baayen (2000),
Hay (2001), Hay and Baayen (2002), Cowie (2003) and Dressler
(2003).

2
MORPHOLOGICAL UNITS
2.1 MORPHEMES
The definition of a morpheme presented in the previous chapter – a
pairing between meaning and form – is the one traditionally used in
linguistics. Despite its initial simplicity, this notion of morpheme is
highly problematic, as has been emphasized in morphology since
the early 1970s. But before we can present its problems we need to
understand the implications of the definition.
Properties of morphemes
In the context of structuralism, units are identified because they can
be replaced by other units, giving rise to grammatical contrasts, and
because they tend to appear recurrently in similar contexts. Given
this methodology, the properties that a unit needs to have to be
considered a morpheme can be summarized as follows:
a) ISOLABILITY. A morpheme must be isolable, that is, it must be
possible to identify the unit and separate it from the rest of the
word.
b) CONTRASTIVENESS. In the context identified, the morpheme must
be able to be replaced by other morphemes, giving rise to
grammatical and semantic differences.
c) RECURRENCY. A morpheme cannot be restricted to one specific
word.
d) MEANING. A morpheme must be associated with a specific

meaning.
Consider how these four criteria allow us to say that -ation in
English is a morpheme. Take the word in (1):
(1) presentation
The segment -ation is isolable, as inside the word we can
differentiate it from the unit present, which corresponds to an English
verb. It can also be shown to be contrastive, because it can be
replaced by -able, producing the word presentable, which is different
in meaning (and in grammatical category) from the word
presentation. The unit -ation can also be shown to be recurrent,
because it can appear in many other nouns derived from verbs
(variation, authorization, manifestation, etc.). Finally, this unit has a
specific meaning, which can be identified once we ask ourselves
which semantic notion all the words ending in -ation share. It turns
out that all of them are the name that we give to the action or the
effect associated with a verb: presentation is the action of
presenting, or the effect obtained by that action; authorization is the
action of authorizing, or its associated effect; etc. Thus, -ation is a
morpheme, and the word in (1) can be segmented in two units.
(2) present-ation
What is not a morpheme
Consider how the structuralist method determines whether
something is a morpheme. In Spanish, there are nouns which refer
to a particular ideology, and they typically end in -ismo (3a). There
are at the same time nouns that refer to the person following a
particular ideology; they typically end in -ista (3b).
(3)
a. marxismo, ecologismo, surrealismo
 
 
Marxism, environmentalism, surrealism
 
b. marxista, ecologista, surrealista
 
 
Marxist, environmentalist, surrealist

The connection between the meanings of the two series of words is
apparent. Is it possible to say that we have a morpheme -is-, which
means ‘ideology’, and then two morphemes, -mo and -ta, which
mean, respectively, the abstract ideology and the human that follows
that ideology?
It might be possible to argue that -mo and -ta are isolable and
even that, in the light of the examples in (3), they can be paired to a
specific meaning. It can even be argued that they are also
contrastive units, as both of them would compete for the same
position inside the word. However, these elements lack the crucial
property of recurrency. In order to determine that they are
morphemes, we would need to see them in contexts not preceded by
-is-. But we do not have any pair of words ending in -mo and -ta, the
latter meaning a person that follows an ideology, unless these
segments are preceded by -is-. We conclude, thus, that -ismo and -
ista are the real morphemes here, as they are the only units that
meet all four criteria, while -mo and -ta are just sequences of sounds
inside the morphemes.
The apparently simple and uncontroversial traditional definition of
morpheme runs into a number of difficulties when confronted with a
variety of data. This has led to proposals that deny the existence of
morphemes. We will develop these problems in some detail in §2.3,
but now we will focus on two aspects of the structuralist definition of
the morpheme which must be clarified.
What does ‘having meaning’ mean?
The first problem here is to identify what is intended by ‘meaning’ in
the definition of the morpheme. Intuitively, we may want to consider
meaning as ‘denoting entities or states of affairs of reality external to
linguistics’. So -ist is a morpheme because it denotes – that is, it
symbolizes – followers of an ideology or movement. However, not all
morphemes are used to describe properties of the external world.
Consider (4), from Italian.
(4)
ragazz-e
biond-e
 
youngster-fem.pl.
blonde-fem.pl.

The noun ragazze can be decomposed in two morphemes: ragazz-,
which describes a particular class of people, and -e, which
simultaneously denotes two properties of that class of people: the
property of being female (because it is a feminine gender marker,
opposed to masculine plural -i) and the property of forming a group
(because it is a plural marker, opposed to feminine singular -a). In
this word, both morphemes have a meaning which refers to entities
or properties of the world.
Consider now the adjective bionde. It can be decomposed in two
units, biond-, which is a morpheme describing a property, that of
having hair of a yellowish colour, and -e. However, here, -e does not
describe a property of the real world, for the property of having
yellowish hair cannot be, in itself, male, female, plural or singular.
The appearance of -e in bionde is due to the fact that this word is an
adjective, and adjectives in Italian must share some grammatical
features with the nouns that they modify, in a formal process known
as AGREEMENT. The result of agreement is that the adjective has to
carry one or several morphemes which are required to satisfy a
formal property of the grammar of this particular language. Do these
units have a meaning and can they thus be considered morphemes?
If we answer this question negatively, we are forced to say that -e is
a morpheme in the word ragazze, but not in bionde, despite the clear
relation between the two elements. If we answer the question
affirmatively, then we need to reconsider what meaning is.
The option generally adopted is the second one: the definition of
‘meaning’ should not be restricted to the representation of concepts
of the world. The expression of specific relationships and properties
internal to the grammar, as happens with agreement, is also
considered meaningful. The morpheme -e is meaningful in bionde to
the extent that it marks a formal relation that is established between
an adjective and the element it modifies, the noun.
The notions of isolability and recurrency
In practice, isolability is diagnosed by considering whether or not the
unit can be segmented inside the word and whether, after isolating
that unit, the rest of the structure is identified with other morphemes.
In our example in (1), presentation, identifying the morpheme -ation

is unproblematic, because as a result, we obtain another unit that
can be identified as a morpheme: present. Not all examples are
equally unproblematic.
Consider what happens if, when we isolate a morphological unit,
the remaining part of the word does not have the aforementioned
properties (cf. (5), from Spanish).
(5)
fusión
 
‘fusion’
There are reasons to segment the morpheme -sión here. The
morpheme -sión is productive in the formation of nouns denoting
actions and effects in Spanish. The noun fusión is a noun that
denotes an event (‘the process or effect of blending’) and is related
to the verb fundir ‘to blend’. The problem is that by this segmentation
the sequence fu-is also isolated. The unit fu-, however, cannot be
linked to any morpheme of modern Spanish, because it is not
recurrent in other words; that is, hypothetical words such as *fu-ar ‘to
fu’ or *fu-dor ‘fu-er’ are not possible in Spanish.
For some authors (Pena 1999), these problems are enough to
propose that fusión cannot be segmented into -sión and fu-. They
argue that the word fusión is stored in the lexicon as an
unanalyzable unit, and, under this account, the presence of the
segment -sión and its meaning are not due to the word being formed
by the rules of Spanish morphology, but due to the etymology of the
word, which comes from Latin fussio(n), and is treated in Spanish as
a loanword.
Other authors, in contrast, argue that the average speaker does
not have access to the etymology of an item and that, independent
of its origin, speakers confronted with a segment -sión in a word with
a meaning of action or effect will automatically associate it with the
productive morpheme -sión. This requires considering fu- as another
morpheme, even if its isolability and recurrency are not immediately
obvious. One option is to consider fu- an allomorph (§1.4.1) of the
morpheme fund-. This allomorph occurs only in one context in the
whole language, but still it can be segmented.

2.2 WORDS
The notion of word has some intuitive reality in the mind of speakers,
who tend to consider words the basic units of language. However,
the definition of word is elusive. The reason is that words are
understood as the minimal autonomous units, and the ways in which
a unit can be autonomous differ depending on the criterion that is
used to define autonomy. By autonomous we mean that at some
particular level of analysis a sequence behaves as a complete and
undecomposable unit where all the information relevant for that level
has been satisfied. Problems are caused when the criteria do not
coincide, that is, when something behaves as autonomous for, say,
phonology, but not for semantics. All the English sequences in (6)
are minimal autonomous units in a sense.
(6)
a. militarism
 
b. to kick the bucket
 
c. d i jε  (‘did you eat yet?’)
 
d. truck driver
The orthographic word
In one sense, the word is an orthographically autonomous unit, that
is, an uninterrupted series of letters without spaces in between and
separated from other series of letters by blank spaces. This makes
(6a) a word of English, but not the rest. This is also the notion of
word which is relevant in psycholinguistic studies about the
acquisition or the performance of reading skills (Stanovich 1986).
Obviously, this definition of word is problematic, to the extent that it
implies that languages without a writing system – or speakers
unaware of this writing system – do not have words.
The word as a listed unit in the lexicon
Another definition of the word defines autonomy from a storage
perspective, as each one of the units that are stored separately in
the lexicon (Jackendoff 1975). A word, as opposed to a sentence or
a phrase, would be a unit listed in the lexicon. Some authors have
observed that speakers have an acquired knowledge of the words

that are stored in their lexicon, as opposed to those that can be
newly coined as the occasion demands it, but are not listed. In this
sense, (6b) is a word of English, as it is an expression with an
unpredictable meaning that needs to be listed as a whole in the
lexicon. Presumably, (6d) would not be listed in the lexicon, as it is
regular in meaning and form. This object, thus, would not be listed in
the lexicon, and thus would not be a word.
This definition of word, however, also has some problems. As
DiSciullo and Williams (1987) note, if we adopt this definition of
word, the objects that we classify together do not show a coherent
formal behaviour and, moreover, they belong to different domains of
grammar. Speakers store in the lexicon (among other things) any
pairing between form and meaning that cannot be predicted. This
includes phrases such as (6b), which are called IDIOMS; in this case
to kick the bucket behaves as a phrase if only because its first
component, the verb to kick, allows verbal inflection (is kicking the
bucket, has kicked the bucket, etc.): this shows that at the syntactic
and morphological levels the sequence is not treated as an
undecomposable unit, because one part of it can change without
affecting the other parts. The lexicon would also include intonational
patterns, such as the knowledge that a speaker of English has that a
raising intonation at the end of the utterance is interpreted as a
question; intonations are phonological units, not morphological ones.
DiSciullo and Williams propose the term LISTEME to refer to all the
objects stored in the lexicon; not all listemes are words and not all
words are listemes (see also §1.1.3).
The phonological word
The phonological word is the smallest sequence that meets some
phonological conditions, such as the presence of primary stress or
the fact that it can be uttered in isolation. In some languages, the
word can be defined through various phonological processes.
For example, in Turkish the vowel of an affix has to assimilate to
the final vowel of the base to which it attaches. Its plural morpheme
has two variants, -lar and -ler; the first is used when the final vowel
of the word is back (adam-lar ‘man-pl., men’) and the second, when
it is front (köylü-ler ‘villager-pl., villagers’). A sequence can be

identified as a word at this level when this kind of ‘frontness
agreement’ is visible.
Following this definition, (6c) would have to be considered a word,
because that sequence is pronounced without visible stops that
allow us to recognize smaller units clearly. However, intuitively, an
English speaker knows that it is a way of pronouncing a syntactically
complex structure equivalent to a whole sentence containing at least
an auxiliary, an adverb and a verb: ‘did you eat yet?’. We can agree
that this sequence does not represent a morphological unit of
analysis. Conversely, some units that morphologists consider words,
such as compounds, show a great deal of internal phonological
independence (§8.1); in Turkish, for example, the rule of vowel
assimilation that we have mentioned does not apply inside a
compound.
The morphological word
It has been claimed that morphological structures (words) have
properties distinct from those of syntactic structures (phrases), and
that one of them is the position of the head. Williams (1981) and
DiSciullo and Williams (1987) proposed that the head of the word is
always the rightmost element. A compound such as (6d) and a
derived word such as (6a) share the property that the morpheme that
determines its grammatical category is the rightmost morpheme (-
ism or -er). It is also the constituent that determines the meaning of
the whole word: whether it is an agent such as truck driver (and
other words formed with -er, like reader, teacher or speaker), or an
ideological viewpoint such as in militarism (or communism, fascism,
romanticism, etc.). Let us assume that this proposal is correct, for
the time being (see §3.2.2 for some counterexamples), and let us
consider the intuition underlying it. This proposal consists of defining
the word on the basis of some special property which differentiates it
from syntactic phrases or sentences. If words are created by special
rules, distinct from syntax, we expect them to have different
properties: this is the MORPHOLOGICAL WORD.
Since DiSciullo and Williams made their proposal, a number of
morphologists have accepted this way of defining the word, but
proposing other properties which do not involve reference to the

position of the head, as this particular definition runs into problems
when we consider bigger samples of words or languages. One
alternative is that words, as opposed to phrases, need to contain
special category markers (§4.3): a word is a structure that minimally
contains an inflectional marker that marks its grammatical category.
The constituents in (7), from Spanish, are morphological words
because they are the smaller units that contain these kinds of
markers, -a marking (7a) as a verb and -o marking (7b) as a noun.
This kind of marker for verbs is called ‘theme vowel’, and for nouns,
‘desinence’; see §4.3.
(7)
a. cant-a
 
 
sing-ThV
 
b. perr-o
 
 
dog-des.
This proposal has the problem that some languages entirely lack this
class of markers. Thus, in these languages this criterion is not
enough to identify a word.
Williams (2007) has proposed a different alternative to differentiate
morphological words from phrases. His proposal is that structures
put together by means of syntactic rules allow for DELAYED
RESOLUTION, while units constructed in morphology do not allow this.
Consider (8).
(8)
a. John is not afraid because Mary is with him.
 
b. John is unafraid because Mary is with him.
Williams characterizes the prefix un- as semantically equivalent to
the word not; the difference between these two units is solely the
level of grammar to which they belong. The form not is a word used
to build phrases, while un- is a morpheme that forms morphological
words. With these assumptions, consider the meaning of (8a). This
sentence is actually ambiguous; the negation can affect the adjective
afraid (‘John is not afraid, and the reason is that he feels protected
when Mary is around’), or it can affect the subordinate clause

introduced by because (‘John is afraid, but the reason is not because
Mary, a violent person, is with him, but because of some other
thing’). In contrast, the sentence in (8b) only has the first
interpretation: the prefix un- must semantically modify the adjective
with which it combines, afraid, and cannot wait until the subordinate
clause is introduced in order to modify it. Williams’ explanation of the
contrast involves the principle of DELAYED RESOLUTION. Negative
elements are required to satisfy a semantic condition, namely to
modify the information contained in a constituent. The word not, a
syntactic unit, does not need to satisfy this property as soon as
possible; it can wait until the subordinate clause with because is
introduced in the sentence and then choose it as the constituent that
is negated, or it can satisfy the semantic condition as soon as it is
combined with the adjective. The possibility of delaying the
resolution of this property produces the ambiguity. In contrast, the
negative element un-, an affix, cannot use Delayed Resolution, so it
must negate the adjective.
Words as syntactic atoms
Words are also the smallest units that syntax can manipulate. The
main idea is that if morphology and syntax contain distinct sets of
rules and create distinct objects, the rules of syntax cannot
manipulate the units built by morphology simply because they belong
to two different domains of grammar. This implies that syntax will not
be able to access morphemes inside words. Only units which are of
a higher level than morphemes can be accessed by syntax; if words
are composed of morphemes, syntax will be able to manipulate
whole words, but not individual morphemes. Accepting these
premises leads to the conclusion that the word is the smallest unit
that syntax can manipulate. Hence the use of the label ‘syntactic
atom’ to refer to words: their internal structure is not accessible, and
they are the smallest units accessible to syntax. From this
perspective, the utterances in (6a) and (6d) are syntactic atoms,
because their internal constituents cannot be manipulated by syntax,
for example by using them in questions (9), but the units in (6b) and
(6c) are not, because syntax can manipulate them, for example, by
making the verb agree with a subject or modifying the way in which

the question is performed (10). In §7.2 we will discuss in more detail
all the syntactic processes that cannot manipulate the internal
constituents of words, which form a family of properties that has
given rise to the GENERALIZED LEXICALIST HYPOTHESIS.
  (9)
a. *How militar- did John propose some ____-ism?
 
b. *Which truck is John a ____ driv-er?
(10)
a. Napoleon has kick-ed the bucket.
 
b. You didn’t eat yet!
The interesting systematicity in these examples is that the two that
can be classified as syntactic atoms can also be classified as
morphological words (6a, d). This correlation can be captured nicely
in a Lexicalist system (§7.1.1) in the following way: if something can
be defined as a morphological word, it is because it is the result of
applying morphological rules; as the units of morphology are not
units of syntax, being a morphological word implies being a syntactic
atom.
In conclusion, ‘word’ is a cover term that has been used in
linguistic studies to refer to a variety of constructions which
sometimes do not identify the same units as words. The most useful
notion of the word from the perspective of morphology is the notion
of morphological word, which also implies the notion of syntactic
atom.
2.3 THE DEBATE ON THE EXISTENCE OF MORPHEMES
Not all theories accept the existence of morphemes. Since the early
1940s there has been an ongoing debate about whether this kind of
unit exists or whether the only objects that morphology deals with
are words.
Theories that accept the existence of morphemes are called ITEM-
AND-ARRANGEMENT (IA; Selkirk 1982, Jensen 1990, Lieber 1992,
among many others). Morphemes are viewed in this theory as in
§2.1; in these theories, the lexicon contains a list of individual

morphemes. For example, the English word accepted would be
analyzed as in (11).
(11)
a. The minimal units that can be identified here are
accept-, a root, and -ed, a suffix.
 
b. The suffix -ed is paired with the meaning [past].
 
c.
The root accept- is paired with the meaning ‘receive
willingly’.
 
d. They combine together in order to construct a word,
specifically a verb form in the past tense, as in (i):
(i)
accept-
+
-ed
 
‘receive’
 
‘past’
Item-and-process
Next to this family of theories, there are other theories that do not
acknowledge the existence of morphemes. They can be divided in
two classes, the first of which is called ITEM-AND-PROCESS (IP; Aronoff
1976, Beard 1995). The basic unit in this framework is the root, also
referred to as the LEXEME – to the extent that the root has been
generally considered the morpheme that differentiates one word
from the other. Affixes are not considered pairs of meaning and form,
but markers of some processes that the lexeme undergoes. The
analysis of accepted in IP theories would be as in (12).
(12)
a. The minimal unit that can be identified here is accept, a
lexeme.
 
b. This lexeme has undergone a process: past tense
formation.
 
c.
The operation is marked by a change in the
phonological shape of the lexeme; in this particular
case, the operation is marked by adding the sequence
/ed/ at the end of the lexeme.
 
d. The operation can be viewed as a function that takes
the lexeme and gives as a result a new form of it, as
represented in (i):

(i)
Past (accept) = accepted
The different treatment of ‘affixes’ as independent units (in IA) or as
markers of a process (in IP) is very clear if we consider the analysis
of an irregular past tense in English. In IA, the surprising fact of a
past form like sang is that the [past] grammatical property is not
expressed here by a segmentable affix. Therefore it is necessary to
propose that in this particular verb, a morpheme without
phonological shape is used to express past (13).
(13)
a. sang is composed of two different morphemes: sang-Ø.
 
b. The grammatical property [past] is represented here by
a morpheme without phonological content (Ø).
 
c.
The root sing, when combined with this -Ø, must appear
as the allomorph sang.
As Nida (1948) observed, the problem is that this analysis proposes
that two different forms of the word are contrasted by means of a
zero morpheme, while at the same time a contrast (sing/sang) does
not mark any tense information.
An IP analysis of this verb does not encounter difficulties in
dealing with this case, because in this approach affixes are not
independent units. The idea is that the vowel change is the way in
which the morphological process is marked with this verb:
(14)
a. There is only one morpheme, the lexeme sing.
 
b. There is an operation (past) which applies to the lexeme
sing.
 
c.
The operation marks the lexeme, changing its vowel (i):
(i)
past (sing) = sang
In IP theories, the units which are stored inside the lexicon are
words, not individual morphemes.

Realizational morphology
WORD-AND-PARADIGM theories (WP; Robins 1959, Matthews 1965,
Anderson 1992, Stump 2001) also deny the existence of individual
morphemes and consider that only whole words are stored in the
lexicon. In this theory the basic unit is the word. Variations in the
shape of words are not caused by their undergoing processes, but
by the fact that they are integrated into paradigms, within which each
form of a word manifests a different set of grammatical properties.
From this perspective, accepted and sang are the word forms
associated with past tense in the paradigms of the verbs accept and
sing, respectively. WP morphology has been labelled REALIZATIONAL
MORPHOLOGY because it establishes correspondences between
different sets of grammatical properties and the different forms of a
word that realize each one of these sets of properties. Consider the
word homines (‘men, accusative’) in Latin. In a WP theory, this word
is viewed as the form which expresses a set of properties
(accusative, plural) in the paradigm of a particular noun; in the same
paradigm, hominis materializes a different set of features (genitive,
singular). Homo materializes nominative singular; hominum, genitive
plural; etc. No internal constituents are recognized, and there is no
need to posit any process that takes a basic form and marks it with
some phonological change, as all forms are organized inside the
paradigm, none being derived from another.
(15) a. [accusative, plural]
→homines
 
b. [genitive, singular]
→hominis
 
c.
[genitive, plural]
→hominum
 
d. [nominative,
singular]
→homo etc.
For more information about paradigms and their status in different
morphological theories, see §4.4. In the remainder of this section we
discuss the different pieces of empirical evidence that have been
used to argue in favour of IP and WP theories.
2.3.1 REPLACIVE AND SUBTRACTIVE MORPHOLOGY

IA theories need to find segments that correspond to grammatical
properties or pieces of meaning in order to decompose the word
exhaustively. This proposal runs into problems when confronted with
non-additive morphological processes, that is, those that do not add
any segment to the base.
The term REPLACIVE MORPHOLOGY describes cases where the
change undergone by a base implies replacing some phonological
property with another one. We have already seen a case of this: the
contrast between the forms sing and sang. Here it is not obvious that
any segment has been added; instead, the vowel of the base has
changed its quality, from /Ι/ to /æ/. In other cases, the contrast
comes from the position of stress. The difference between the verb
rebel and the noun rebel in English involves a shift in the stressed
syllable: /rΙ'bεl/ vs. /'rεbəl/. Similar contrasts between the noun and
the verb through a stress shift are visible in impact, import, abstract,
insult, insert, discourse and protest.
Replacive morphology is also common outside Germanic
languages. The plural form of a feminine noun in Italian usually
involves the replacement of the final segment -a by the segment -e,
as in casa ‘house’ vs. case ‘houses’. Nida (1948) reports that in the
Nilotic language Shilluk the plural form of nouns is marked by
changing the tone of the lexeme: wât ‘house’ makes its plural as wàt,
and yít ‘ear’ as yît.
SUBTRACTIVE MORPHOLOGY describes the morphological processes
that are marked by removing some phonological material from the
lexeme. One often-quoted case comes from French, where the
masculine form of nouns and adjectives typically involves the loss of
the last consonant with respect to the feminine form. The feminine
/plat/, written platte, ‘flat’, contrasts with the masculine /pla/, written
plat; the same contrast takes place in /lõg/, longue, and /lõ/, long
‘long’, or /sul/, soûle, and /su/, soûl ‘drunk’. It is not possible to
analyze these contrasts as cases of additive morphology that add a
consonant to the masculine form of the adjective in order to obtain
the feminine, because the last consonant of the feminine form is
different in each case, so no rule could be stated that associates
feminine marking with a specific segment in French. Rather it has to

be stated that the masculine is obtained by removing the last
consonant of the feminine adjective.
Subtractive morphology gives rise to BACKFORMATIONS, derived
forms that are phonologically shorter than the words they come from.
Some backformations can be explained by the historical evolution of
the language. The verb resurrect in English, for example, was
historically formed by removing the segment -ion from the noun
resurrection, taken (almost) directly from Latin. The word
resurrection was used in English before the verb resurrect existed,
so from a historical perspective it makes sense to state that the latter
was derived from the former by subtracting a string of elements that
could correspond to a morpheme in an IA theory. It is more dubious,
however, that a speaker of contemporary English unfamiliar with
these historical data would not assume that resurrection is derived
from the verb resurrect. This class of backformations is different from
the French case just discussed in that here it is possible to analyze
the contrast as a case of additive morphology.
2.3.2 MISMATCHES BETWEEN GRAMMATICAL FEATURES AND
THEIR EXPONENTS
IA theories assume that morphemes are pairs of form and
(grammatical) meaning. Another potential problem, therefore, is
caused by the cases where there is no one-to-one correspondence
between the meaning and the form of the segments that can be
isolated inside a word.
We have already seen this kind of mismatch in the form of the
zero morpheme that can be postulated to explain the past tense of
sang. ZERO MORPHEMES or NULL MORPHEMES are morphemes without
any phonological content that add information to the lexeme. IA
theories need to postulate them in order to keep the correspondence
between pieces of grammatical information and morphemes. Their
existence is dubious, as they cannot be seen directly in a word. As
they are not directly perceived, they pose problems for acquisition. It
is not obvious how a child realizes that her language has zero
morphemes if she never gets to hear them; perhaps the shift in
meaning carried by that zero morpheme could be a hint, but why

does the child not interpret it as showing that the base can have two
meanings? It is not obvious, either, what kind of signs zero
morphemes are, because their form would be null; evidence from
zero morphemes, thus, always needs to be indirect.
Another potential problem for IA theories appears when one
segment is the exponent of two or more grammatical properties that
are otherwise expressed by distinct segments. These cases are
known as CUMULATIVE EXPONENCE. Consider the Spanish forms in (16).
In (16a), an IA theory would segment the segment -s and associate it
with the second person singular inflection, while the segment -ba-
would be the exponent of the imperfective past tense. In (16b),
however, the same undecomposable segment, -ste, would carry both
the second person singular agreement and the information that the
verb is a perfective past tense. The segment -ste would have to be
considered a cumulative exponent for person and number
agreement, and for tense.
(16) a. canta-ba-s
‘sing’, 2sg., imperfective past
 
b. canta-ste
‘sing’, 2sg., perfective past
In 
some 
languages 
(§2.5), 
some 
distinct 
properties 
are
systematically expressed at the same time by the same segment. In
Latin declensions, for example, the ending of nouns and adjectives
expresses case and number at the same time. The endings -ibus or -
is express dative or ablative plural; the ending -em, accusative
singular; the ending -rum, genitive plural; etc.
Sometimes, two or more segments need to co-occur in order to
express a single piece of information. This situation, known as
EXTENDED EXPONENCE, can be illustrated with the formation of the
German participles. In German, regular participles are constructed
by adding the segment -t to the right of the verb and ge- to its left
(17).
(17)
lach-en
→ge-lach-t
 
laugh-inf.  
partc.-laugh-partc. ‘laughed’

2.3.3 CRANBERRY MORPHEMES
Zero morphemes are cases of grammatical properties not expressed
by a phonological segment. The opposite situation also exists: a
segment without an associated meaning. Consider the series of
words in (18).
(18) cranberry, strawberry, gooseberry, bearberry …
The recurrence of the segment -berry suggests for an IA theory
that it should be segmented as a morpheme. However, segmenting -
berry in the word cranberry leaves us with another morpheme which
is neither recurrent nor meaningful in (current) English: cran-. In the
rest of the words the situation is no better; it is possible to associate
the segments straw-, goose- and bear- with meaningful morphemes
in English, but it is clear that the meaning of strawberry, gooseberry
and bearberry cannot be reconstructed by combining these
meanings with the one that we may wish to associate with -berry.
These non-recurrent and meaningless segments, which an IA
theory would identify as morphemes, are known, since Aronoff
(1976), as CRANBERRY MORPHEMES. They challenge IA theories
because they show that trying to identify morphemes in a word
sometimes causes the collateral damage of treating some remaining
material which is not meaningful or recurrent as morphemes.
Cranberry morphemes, even though they cannot be paired with a
meaning of their own, are used to distinguish words. This is very
clear in another famous example discussed in Aronoff (1976).
(19)
Some recurrent phonological segments can be segmented inside
these words, among them -fer, -stitute, -ceive and -mit, which IA
theories would classify as roots, and re-, con-, in-, per-, trans-, pro-
and de-, which would be considered prefixes by these theories. The
problem is, again, that these recurrent units cannot be paired with a

specific meaning. What would be, for example, the common
meaning of -stitute in prostitute, restitute and constitute?
2.3.4 PRISCIANIC WORD FORMATION
The cases discussed up to now are evidence for any theory that
rejects the existence of morphemes. PRISCIANIC WORD FORMATION
(Matthews 1972) is, in contrast, evidence that supports WP theories,
as it shows that the shape that a word adopts to realize a particular
combination of grammatical features is determined by other forms
inside the paradigm.
Priscianic word formation (also PARASITIC WORD FORMATION) refers to
cases in which a form in the paradigm of a word is derived from
another paradigmatic form of that word, and not directly from what
can be identified as the lexeme. A case of this is the Latin future
participle, discussed in Aronoff (1994).
(20)
a. captur-, from capere, ‘take’
 
 
‘will/must take’
 
b. latur-, from ferre, ‘bear’
 
 
‘will/must bear’
 
c.
laudatur-, from laudare, ‘praise’
 
 
‘will/must praise’
The crucial morphological property of future participles is that they
always contain the segment that corresponds to the supine form of
the verb (21).
(21)
a. captum, from capere, ‘take’
 
 
‘(is) taken’
 
b. latum, from ferre, ‘bear’
 
 
‘(is) borne’
 
c.
laudatum, from laudare, ‘praise’
 
 
‘(is) praised’

The forms in (20) could be understood as the result of removing the
ending -um from the supine and adding the segment -ur- to the
remaining form. Crucially, however, the supine does not bring any
semantics to the future participle. This form has a passive
interpretation, but future participles, as seen in the glosses in (20),
are always active. This makes it difficult to analyze future participles
by decomposing them into the supine form and some additional
morpheme. The conclusion is that the form of future participles is
associated with the supine, but not in the sense that they share a
morpheme, because if that was the case they should also share a
meaning. The association is due to the fact that one form in the
paradigm is linked to another one, without the intermediation of any
morpheme. If this diagnosis is right, then it forcefully follows that the
forms of words cannot be understood unless structured inside a
paradigm.
2.3.5 PARADIGMATIC MOTIVATION OF MEANING
A second piece of evidence in favour of the WP approach comes
from some words whose meaning cannot be explained by the
combination of their morphemes, but is defined by their relation to a
whole paradigm. Consider the Spanish words in (22).
(22)
a. teléfono
 
 
‘telephone’
 
b. televisor
 
 
‘TV-receiver’
 
c.
telecontrol
 
 
‘control from a distance’
All these words share some properties both in their form and in their
meaning; they start with the segment tele- and involve in their
meaning the idea that there is an action that takes place at a
distance. The action is part of the meaning of the second segment of
the word, so the forms in (22) could be analyzed by segmenting two
morphemes. However, consider the words in (23).

(23)
a. telesilla
 
 
‘chair used to transport people to the top of a mountain’
 
b. telecabina
 
 
‘wagon used to transport people to a high place’
 
c.
telebocata
 
 
‘sandwich-delivery company’
The nouns in (23) are interpreted as denoting things involved in
actions that involve movement through a certain physical distance.
However, the nouns from which they seem to be derived do not
denote any action: silla means ‘chair’, cabina means ‘wagon’, and
bocata means ‘sandwich’. It does not seem obvious how to derive
the meaning of these words from the meaning of their morphemes,
unless this meaning is made very abstract. Despite the fact that no
segment inside them denotes an action, these words are interpreted
as objects used for actions that take place at a distance; it has been
proposed that this kind of meaning is obtained by associating these
words, in the minds of speakers, with a wider set of forms (those in
(22) and similar cases). This network of words with a similar
meaning is considered by some morphologists (Van Marle 1984) to
be a derivational paradigm, thus extending the notion of paradigm to
non-inflectional processes (see also §4.4).
2.4 OTHER UNITS
At this point we have discussed the basic units of morphological
analysis, and highlighted their controversial status. Here we will
review some other units, sometimes specific to a particular theory,
that have been proposed in morphology. In this chapter, we will not
discuss any further the notion of paradigm as a unit of morphological
analysis; see §4.4. for this.
2.4.1 ROOTS AND STEMS
Consider the words in (24), from Spanish.
(24)
a. canta

 
 
‘sing’
 
b. perro
 
 
‘dog’
If we compare them to the related words in (25), an IA theory would
want to segment them into two parts: cant- and -a; perr- and -o.
(25)
a. cant-or
 
 
sing-er
 
b. perr-uno
 
 
dog-ish
The segments -a and -o are formal markers that morphologically
mark a word as belonging to a certain grammatical category. The
first marker signals that a word is a verb, while the second marks a
word as a noun or an adjective (§4.3). The segment that remains
once we have eliminated all inflectional and derivational affixes, plus
the category markers of a word, is the ROOT: cant- in the first case
and perr- in the second case.
In Spanish, and in all the languages where words need formal
markers of grammatical category, roots are never independent
words: *cant and *perr are not possible words in this language. They
need to combine with other morphemes, such as those presented
here, in order to stand alone in an utterance, as in (24). In these
languages, the minimal words are combinations of roots and formal
markers of category; these combinations are known as STEMS.
Stems are the basic units for inflectional processes. In Spanish,
the form canta- is the basic form on which the present forms of the
verb are constructed. The same word may also have two or more
stems which are used by inflectional paradigms, each one for a
different set of forms. In Latin, for example, three different stems
have traditionally been recognized: the present stem (am-a ‘love’),
the perfect stem (am-av roughly ‘have loved’) and the supine (am-at-
roughly ‘loved’). All the paradigm forms of a verb in Latin are related
to one of these three basic stems. For example, the imperfective
forms of the verb, including the future and the imperative, are

inflected with the present stem (am-a-ba-s ‘you loved, imperfective’),
and the participles are inflected with the supine stem (am-at-us
‘loved, beloved’).
Roots in distributed morphology
We have seen that roots are the units that we obtain once we have
removed all affixes from the word that are associated with a
grammatical category. This situation has led some authors, working
in DM, to propose a definition of root which focuses on its defective
nature and the fact that the root requires other morphemes before it
can be inflected within a particular inflection class or paradigm.
In DM, roots are identified as special morphemes which, unlike
affixes, lack a grammatical category and need to combine with other
elements in order to acquire one. This is different from the traditional
proposal; there, the Spanish root cant- ‘sing’ is a verb which then is
marked accordingly. In DM, cant- is stored in the lexicon as not a
verb, but becomes a verb when it is combined with the marker -a
(cant-a) or becomes a noun when combined with the marker -o
(cant-o ‘song’). Accordingly, the root perr- ‘dog’ is not a noun, but the
combination of perr- and the marker -o is (perr-o).
The same reasoning extends to English, despite the fact that in
this language roots and stems are – generally – formally identical.
Marantz (1997) proposes that a root like grow (represented as
√GROW) is interpreted as a verb only when it appears inside a
structure which contains verbal information. When it combines with a
verbal head, as in (26a), the whole is categorized as a verb. Here,
the head v0 is a null morpheme, so the materialization of this root in
a verbal context is grow; with other roots, however, the verbal head
is represented phonologically as an overt affix, for example -ify
(26b). The same root √GROW can appear in a nominal context when it
combines with a nominal head; in the case of this particular root, n is
materialized as -th (26c). With other roots, like √DOG, the same head
is materialized as a null morpheme (26d).
(26)
a. [[√GROW] ØV]
 
b. [[√ELECTR] ifyV]

 
c. [[√GROW] thN]
 
d. [[√DOG] ØN]
This sense of root has been used, for example, in the analysis of
conversion (see §5.4). This treatment of roots as units without a
category has two empirical challenges. The first one is that the
phonological manifestation of the same head (v or n in (26)) is
variable, so it has to depend idiosyncratically on the root it combines
with. The second problem is related to overgeneration. If grow in
English is listed in the lexicon as a verbal root, then we do not expect
it to surface as an adjective or as a noun unless some specific
operation that turns verbs into these categories is applied to it.
However, if all roots are listed as morphemes without a grammatical
category, it becomes a mysterious fact that not all of them can
surface, in normal situations, as nouns, adjectives and verbs,
because in principle they should be able to appear in any kind of
combination without giving rise to any category incompatibility. See
§7.1.2 for the a proposed solution to this problem. For this reason,
this view of roots is rejected by many theories of morphology (see
Panagiotidis 2005, Spencer 2005a, 2005b, Williams 2007).
2.4.2 CONSTRUCTIONS
Theories of morphology differ with respect to what units are
considered to be stored in the lexicon. IA theories mainly store
individual morphemes, while IP and WP theories list whole words. In
CM (Booij 2010), the basic units stored in the lexicon are
CONSTRUCTIONS. Constructions are individual schemas consisting of
pairs of form and meaning which are used to organize the existing
forms in the lexicon and create new forms. For instance, the pattern
which in English forms agent nouns from verbs can be viewed as an
abstract schema paired with a meaning (27):
(27) [[ ]V -er]N ↔ ‘one who Vs’
The construction in (27) specifies some form (the ending -er), some
grammatical properties (the whole word behaves as a noun, and it

contains a verb) and is associated with a specific meaning. The
meaning in CM is not associated with individual morphemes, but with
the whole schema. Due to this, the segment -er is not directly
responsible for the agent meaning, and we expect it to appear in
other words without adding this meaning (as in six-packer; cf.
§8.5.3); the explanation is that this non-agent word is created using
a different construction that happens to contain the same segment,
but is linked to a different meaning. As opposed to IP and WP
theories, however, in CM the word can be decomposed into smaller
units.
A construction is a schema that contains available slots inside
which other elements need to be inserted. In (27), the slot with an
open position is the one that corresponds to the verb, for example
write. Some other constructions contain two available slots, like the
construction used to create compounds of two nouns in English
(adapted from Tuggy 2005).
(28) [[ ]N1 [ ]N2] ↔ ‘N2 establishes a relation to N1’
As can be seen in (28), a construction can have a very abstract and
general meaning. When this is the case, the construction normally
has associated SUBSCHEMAS which further specify the meaning
relation, and at the same time further restrict the set of elements that
can appear inside each slot. In this case, following Tuggy (2005),
among these subschemas we would find ‘N1 is the main ingredient
of N2’, which is only possible when the element inserted in N1 is an
edible thing (chocolate cake, but not birthday cake). In general, the
more open positions a construction has, the less specified its
meaning is. Constructions that lack any open position have a fully
specified meaning; a word like chocolate is viewed as a fully
specified construction where a complete form is associated with a
complete meaning.
Evidence in favour of constructions comes from cases where there
is a recurrent meaning in a series of words that cannot be predicted
from the meaning of the individual morphemes. Consider the
adjectives that contain -free in English, such as caffeinefree,
sugarfree, germfree, carefree, gunfree, etc. (Booij 2005b). The

meaning that free has in these words is not the one commonly
associated with this word when it appears as a simple adjective, but
is rather equivalent to ‘without’ (as it is also in complex phrases like
‘free of problems’). However, listing the special meaning of these
words individually, treating them as stored units learnt individually,
misses the point that speakers of modern English feel that there is a
pattern common to all these words and can create new forms
following that pattern. Even if English speakers have not heard the
words before, they will not have problems interpreting syntaxfree
morphology or religionfree reasoning. This shows that the speaker
does not need to learn each word individually with its specific
meaning. In general, COMPOSITIONAL IDIOMS (Pitt and Katz 2000) –
sequences with a special meaning that are, however, related to a
productive patterns – have been taken as evidence for the existence
of constructions.
2.4.3 TEMPLATES
In some languages, morphemes seem to be ordered in an arbitrary
way which follows a fixed sequence. Specific morphological
TEMPLATES have been proposed in order to explain these arbitrary
orderings. In languages with templates, affixes belong to POSITION
CLASSES, which refer to the slot that the affix occupies inside the
template. For example, in Swahili, the following template has been
described (simplified with respect to Schadeberg 1984; see also
Stump 1998).
(29) The Swahili template (simplified)
In this example we see that different families of affixes are assigned
to different positional classes or slots; for example, all the affixes
used for tense and mood distinctions would compete with each other

for the slot labelled 4. Templates are organized in such a way that a
slot can only be occupied by a single affix.
It has been argued that templates are units of morphological
analysis because some operations need to make reference to their
internal organization. One common sign that a language has
templatic morphology is that an affix shows allomorphy depending
on affixes that occupy non-adjacent positions inside the sequence. In
Swahili, the past tense morpheme (slot 4) can surface as li- or ku-,
depending on whether the negative morpheme in slot 1, ha-,
appears or not (30).
(30)
a. tu-li-taka
 
 
1pl.-past-want ‘we wanted’
 
b. ha-tu-ku-taka
 
 
neg-1pl.-past-want ‘we did not want’
As the two affixes are not adjacent and the allomorphy does not
affect the intermediate affixes (tu-), a way of stating this process is
by making reference to the template itself: ‘the presence of form X in
slot A triggers a change in form Y in slot B’. As the two forms are not
adjacent, it is difficult to explain this variation as a direct influence of
one morpheme on the other; instead, proponents of templates argue
that it is an effect of the whole template determining which forms
appear in one slot when a specific form appears in another.
Templatic morphology organizes morphemes in an arbitrary way,
and has been proposed in cases where there are effects such as the
one illustrated in (30) or where the order of morphemes does not
result from phonological, syntactic or semantic principles.
2.5 CORRELATIONS BETWEEN MORPHEMES AND MORPHS
AND MORPHOLOGICAL TYPOLOGY
The way in which grammatical features are manifested in specific
exponents and how regular this relation is have traditionally been
used to classify languages according to their morphological type. We
will shortly present this classification, but it is crucial to keep in mind

that it is an idealization and no natural language falls perfectly into
any of these types.
Analytic languages
Analytic languages – also called ISOLATING LANGUAGES – are
commonly described as languages without any morphology, where
all words are morphologically simple in the sense that they are
typically monomorphemic and there is a general coincidence
between word and morpheme. Consider (31), from Mandarin
Chinese.
(31)
gŏu
bù
ài
chī
qīngcàī
 
dog
not
like
eat
vegetable
The word gŏu could refer to a female or male dog, several dogs or
the whole class of dogs; in other words, this noun does not have any
marking for number or gender. If the noun needs to be counted, a
distinct word, called a classifier, needs to be added. Without this
classifier the noun cannot be combined with a numeral. The verb ài
could be past or present tense, as it does not get any tense
morphology. If any disambiguation is needed in Chinese,
independent time adverbials are introduced in the sentence. Many
South-East Asian languages have been classified as analytic,
among them Vietnamese, Tibeto-Burman, Thai and Khmer. Classical
Chinese is also given as a prototypical example of this kind of
languages, but it has been argued (Basciano 2010) that Modern
Chinese has developed some bound grammatical morphemes and it
is not entirely accurate to consider it an analytic language anymore.
In languages that fall into this class, morphosyntactic features are
very frequently not represented by specific exponents.
Agglutinative languages
Agglutinative languages are languages where a one-to-one
correspondence between segments and morphosyntactic properties
generally holds. In other words, in these languages most

grammatical properties come packaged in clearly differentiated
segments.
The typical cases of agglutinative languages come from Uralic and
Altaic languages, such as Turkish, Finnish, Hungarian or Estonian;
other languages classified as agglutinative are Bantu languages,
such as Zulu, Xhosa or Kîtharaka, and several native languages of
America, such as Nahuatl, Quechua or Salish. An example taken
from Turkish is given in (32), where there are distinct morphemes to
express case and number.
(32)  
Sing.
Pl.
 
Nominative
adam
adam-lar
 
Accusative
adam-i
adam-lar-i
 
Genitive
adam-in
adam-lar-in
 
Dative
adam-a
adam-lar-a
 
Locative
adam-da
adam-lar-da
 
Ablative
adam-dan
adam-lar-dan
Each morpheme can be clearly isolated and arranged in predictable
linear sequences: the morpheme for [plural] always occupies the
same position (adjacent to the base). A morpheme always has only
one meaning (e.g. -i always – and only – means ‘accusative’, both in
the singular and in the plural). In order to characterize an
agglutinative language, we could say that there is a biunivocal
correspondence between morphs and morphemes.
Fusional languages
Fusional languages – also called INFLECTING LANGUAGES – are
characterized by the fact that the same segment tends to express a
bundle 
of 
grammatical 
properties. 
These 
languages 
are
characterized by cumulative exponence being the norm rather than
the exception. As a result of this grouping of grammatical properties
corresponding to single morphemes, a higher degree of irregularity
arises in fusional languages than in agglutinative languages.
Fusional languages generally have very developed paradigms, and
frequently offer situations which suggest analysis of the WP type.

Typical examples of fusional languages come from the Indo-
European family. Spanish, German, Latin, Greek, Italian, Sanskrit
and Armenian have all been classified as mainly fusional languages.
In contrast with (32), where the relation between plural and case
marking was illustrated in an agglutinative language, (33) illustrates
the same relationship in Latin. Notice that in this kind of language,
two grammatical properties are mapped onto the same segment: for
instance, the morph -um expresses at the same time genitive and
plural, without it being possible to segment it into two distinct
segments, one for each of these two properties.
(33)  
Sing.
Pl.
 
Nominative
homo
homin-es
 
Accusative
homin-em
homin-es
 
Genitive
homin-is
homin-um
 
Dative
homin-i
homin-ibus
 
Ablative
homin-e
homin-ibus
EXERCISES
1.
In the languages of the world there is sometimes a relation in
form between interrogatives and other pronouns. For instance,
DiSciullo (2005) argues that in English some interrogatives can
be segmented in two morphemes: wh-ere, wh-at, wh-en. The
first morpheme gives the interrogative meaning, while the
second is recurrent in other expressions, like th-ere, th-at, th-en.
Consider interrogatives in a language of your choice and
discuss a possible segmentation from the perspective of (a)
isolability, (b) recurrency and (c) association with meaning.
2.
The possibility of identifying morphemes which are recurrent,
isolable and associated with a meaning is frequently related to
whether the forms discussed are regular or irregular, as we have
seen in our typological discussion (§2.5). Take the paradigm of
the present tense of a regular verb in a language of your choice
and try to segment all morphemes presented there; check
whether those segmentations respect the relevant criteria. Then

take the paradigm of the present tense of the verb to be or
another heavily irregular verb in the same language, and see
whether it is possible to make an equivalent segmentation or
whether there are no empirical reasons to identify discrete
morphemes.
3.
Consider the following sequences in English. All of them come
under at least one of the possible definitions of word. Which
definitions? Find similar examples to those in (a)–(e), in English
or another language you are familiar with.
      a.
John’s (as in ‘John’s hat’)
      b.
go bananas (meaning ‘to go crazy’)
      c.
pick pocket (as in ‘John is a pick pocket’)
      d.
unrealistic
      e.
blackbird
4.
Select a word-formation process in a language of your choice
(for instance, in English, you can choose adjectives derived from
verbs using -able, nouns derived from adjectives using -ness,
verbs derived from adjectives using -ize, etc.) and show how the
resulting words would be accounted for in (a) an IA theory, (b)
an IP theory, (c) a WP theory and (d) CM.
5.
In a language of your choice, try to find cases that show (a) a
one-to-one correspondence between morpheme and morph, (b)
a situation where the same morph expresses simultaneously
two or more morphemes, and (c) a situation where two morphs
must appear in order to express one single morpheme.
FURTHER READING
The reader interested in expanding on the traditional notion of
morpheme will find it useful to check Bloomfield (1933) and Harris
(1942). Problems with this notion were noticed very early, and this is
reflected in Hockett (1947, 1954), Nida (1948) and Anderson (1988).
Harbour (2009) addresses the problem of how to determine that two
morphemes with the same surface shape are distinct. New
approaches to the notion of morpheme have been developed
significantly in DiSciullo (2005), where a decomposition of small

functional words has been proposed, taking to an extreme the
segmentability of recurrent units. The problem of how to define a
word, noticed already in Togeby (1949) and Lyons (1968), was more
recently taken up by DiSciullo and Williams (1987) and is still an
issue in morphological research (Julien 2007).
The debate between IA, IP and WP theories started as a direct
consequence of the problems noticed in the classic works mentioned
above. Hockett (1954), Robins (1959), Bazell (1949) and Matthews
(1965, 1972) discuss this problem, a discussion which has been
continued to the present. The reader will find it useful to check
Aronoff (1976, 1994), chapter 1 in Anderson (1992), chapters 2 and
4 of Bochner (1993), and Stump (2001) for this debate. More recent
contributions to the debate include the papers collected in Singh and
Starosta (2003) and Bonet (2008). The important problem of null
morphemes has been addressed in Olmsted (1951), Marchand
(1969) and Aone (1990), and more recently in Beard (1995), Beard
and Volpe (2005) and Kastovsky (2005).
The notion of root in DM has been developed in Marantz (1997),
Embick (2000), and Arad (2003) (with a reply in Ussishkin 2006); it is
contested also in Lieber (2006). The status of stems has been
approached from different perspectives in Aronoff (1992, 1994),
Oltra (1999), and Embick and Halle (2005) – developing the notion in
DM. A good summary of how constructions can be used as units of
analysis is found in Tuggy (2005) and chapters 1 and 2 in Booij
(2010). Templatic analyses of the morphology of different languages
are found in Simpson and Withgott (1986), Inkelas (1993), Stump
(1993a) and Nordlinger (2010). In addition to Swahili and other
Bantu languages, others have been analyzed as having templates,
such as Kartvelian (Deeters 1930), the Athapaskan languages (Kari
1989) and Japanese and Korean (Sells 1995).

3
MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURES
3.1 THE MOTIVATION FOR MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURES
We have seen in the previous chapter that for IA theories words are
combinations of morphemes. Another property of this kind of theory
is that the meaning of a word is not obtained just by adding the
individual meanings of each morpheme. The way in which they are
combined with each other also provides aspects of the word’s
semantics in a compositional way (see §8.6 for further developments
of the concept of compositionality). This is what is called a structure.
Consider the word undecidable. Three units can be recognized
here: a prefix, un-, a verbal root, decid(e), and a suffix, -able. Let us
see, step by step, how the meaning of undecidable can be derived
from the combination of these units inside a structure. The word
undecidable means, roughly, ‘cannot be decided’. The prefix un- has
a negative meaning, also seen in adjectives such as unaware (not
aware), unfriendly (not friendly), uncivilized (not civilized), etc. This
prefix, then, is responsible for the negative meaning contained in the
word, ‘cannot be decided’. The suffix -able has a more complex
meaning: it forms adjectives from verbs, and its meaning is at the
same time passive and modal, and can be glossed as ‘that can or
deserves to be PARTICIPLE’, where the participle is the one of the verb
with which -able combines. We see this in enjoyable (can be
enjoyed), pitiable (deserves to be pitied) and readable (can be read).
Thus, this suffix is responsible for another part of the meaning of the
word. Once we have decomposed the meaning of the word and

associated it with each one of its units, we can establish the
correspondence in (1).
(1)
un-
decid(e)
-able
 
not
 
that can be PARTICIPLE
The question that arises at this point is why the meaning of the word
is ‘cannot be decided’ and not ‘can be not decided’. In the first case
we refer to an entity that, in any case and no matter how hard one
tries, cannot be decided; in the second case, we refer to something
that can be decided, but which does not need to be. The way in
which a speaker uses the word undecidable is the first and never the
second. How can we account for this?
It is at this point that the notion of structure comes into play. The
structure determines the morpheme with which another morpheme
combines, and therefore how the meaning of each of them relates to
the others. Identifying the structure of undecidable involves giving an
account of how the three units in (1) combine with each other, and
then of how their meanings affect each other. If we simply state that
the word has three units, as we did in (1), we do not predict that only
one of these two meanings is associated with the word. We need to
represent also how the units are organized inside the word, that is,
the structure of the word.
The difference between the real meaning of the word, ‘cannot be
decided’, and the unattested meaning, ‘can be not decided’, has to
do with the position that the negative morpheme occupies in the
structure: in the first case it modifies the suffix -able, and in the
second it relates to the verb. We need to propose a structure where
this property is clearly accounted for. In a first step, we combine the
suffix -able and the verb decide.
(2)

This gives us the meaning ‘can be decided’. One of the units is more
important than the other from the point of view of the grammatical
category. In this case, this unit is the suffix -able, which combines
with a verb, but gives as a result an adjective. The structure
represents a possible word in English, the adjective decidable,
formed from the verb decide. This complex word, in a second step,
combines with the negative prefix un-, as in (3).
(3)
In (3), the prefix un- combines with an adjective, decidable, not with
the verbal root decid(e). This accounts for the fact that, in the
meaning of the whole word (‘cannot be decided’), the negation
affects the combination of verb and -able, and not just the verb
decid(e). The structure in (3) accounts for the fact that the meaning
‘can be not decided’ does not correspond to the word undecidable.
This meaning would need a structure where the negative prefix
attaches to the verb ([un[decide]]) and then the whole is turned into
an adjective ([[un[decide]] able]), which is not theoretically
impossible, but is not the way in which the word has been stored in
the English lexicon.
There is a second reason why un- must combine with the structure
built by the suffix -able and not with the verbal root directly. If we
make a list of the English words that contain the prefix un-, we will
see that the vast majority of them are adjectives (unaware, unclear,
untrue, etc.). This tells us that, when the prefix has a negative
meaning, it generally combines with adjectives. The prefix un- can
combine with verbs, but in these cases it has a reversative meaning,
that is, the meaning of reversing an action that had already been
performed, as in undo, untie, unzip, unlock or unfold, which do not
mean ‘not doing’, ‘not zipping’, etc. The reversative meaning is not
the one used in this word, as we expect if the prefix combines with

something that is now an adjective. Thus, the structure in (3) not only
gives an account of the meaning of the word undecidable, but also
motivates why the prefix that appears inside it has the meaning that
it has.
At this point we are ready to define what is considered a structure
in morphology:
(4) The morphological structure is the organization of the units
that form a word, making it possible to account for its
semantic and formal properties.
We have already discussed above how the structure in (3) accounts
for the meaning of the word. As for the formal properties, the
structure in (3) shows several things:
a) the grammatical category of the whole word. The whole
structure is an adjective. This means that the whole word is an
adjective.
b) the unit that is responsible for the fact that the word belongs to
that particular category. The word is an adjective because its
last segment is -able. Units like these, which determine the
category of the word, are called HEADS (§3.2.1).
c)
the combinations of units that produce possible words, and what
their meaning is in each step. The structure in (3) explains that
the prefix un- has a negative, and not reversative, meaning in
the word undecidable.
In this chapter, we will present the properties of a morphological
structure, but we will also show the problems that have been
identified in trying to assign structure to some words. These
problems frequently have to do with the fact that a structural
representation does not account for the meaning of the word or
some of the formal properties that we have just presented. It is also
important to keep in mind that the notion of structure presupposes
that inside the word, different units can be identified. The theories
called IP and WP in Chapter 2 (§2.3), to the extent that they do not
admit that words can be decomposed into smaller units, do not

accept that words have an internal structure. We will present the
view that words do not have an internal structure in §3.3.
3.1.1 EVIDENCE IN FAVOUR OF WORD-INTERNAL STRUCTURE
The evidence for recognizing structure inside words is mainly related
to phenomena that operate with CONSTITUENTS – groups of units
which hold a direct relationship with each other – and are not based
on whether units are adjacent or not. In research in the 1960s and
1970s in syntax, movement, coordination and coreference were
typically used to show that grammar cares about structures and not
about adjacency relationships between units. We will see (in §7.2)
that these tests cannot be applied to morphology, due to the
Generalized Lexicalist Hypothesis, and therefore different sources of
evidence have been used.
Complex words with more than one meaning
Remember that a morphological structure must represent the
semantic and formal properties of a word. Given this, changes to the
way in which different units are related to each other automatically
result in changes to the meaning of the word. For this reason, the
fact that some words are AMBIGUOUS between two or more different
predictable meanings has been taken as evidence that words have
internal structure. If a word has two meanings with the same units in
the same adjacency relation, the ambiguity is due to the way in
which the units are structured inside the word, that is, how they are
organized. Consider the word in (5), taken from Spanish (Varela
1990). It allows for two meanings, represented in (5a) and (5b).
(5)
Sp.
in-util-iza-ble
 
 
un-useful-ize-able
 
a. can be made not useful
 
b. cannot be made useful
In the first meaning (5a), we talk about something that generally
fulfils some function, but that can be ‘deactivated’. Consider for
example a hypodermic syringe whose needle can be removed; here

the first meaning could be appropriately applied to it. In the second
meaning (5b), however, we are talking about something that does
not fulfil any function, because it can never be used. Consider for
example a word processor that is not compatible with your operating
system; the second meaning could be applied to this kind of item.
The difference between the two meanings in (5a) and (5b) does
not follow from different meanings of the units. The units have
exactly the same meanings in both cases. The prefix in- is a
negative prefix meaning ‘not’ and generally combines with
adjectives; the adjective útil is ‘useful’, and contributes the same
meaning to both paraphrases; the suffix -iza means ‘to make
something X’, and combines with adjectives or nouns to produce
verbs; finally, the suffix -ble (like English -able) attaches to verbs and
produces adjectives, with the meaning ‘can be PARTICIPLE’. The
different meanings in (5) arise from two different structures, two
different ways in which the morphemes can be organized inside the
word, and in particular from the position of in-.
The first meaning, in (5a), is obtained if the prefix in- combines
directly with útil, to obtain the constituent represented in (6a), whose
meaning is ‘not useful’ or, in better English, ‘useless’. Then this
constituent combines with -iza in (6b), giving the meaning ‘to make
useless’. Finally, the suffix -ble is added (6c), obtaining the meaning
‘can be made useless’, corresponding to (5a).
(6)
a. [in[útil]A]A, ‘not useful’
 
b. [[in[util]A]A iza]V, ‘to make not useful’
 
c.
[[[in[util]A]A iza]V ble]A ‘that can be made not useful’
The meaning in (5b) is obtained as follows. In the first step, the
adjective útil combines with -iza, to give the constituent in (7a), which
means ‘to make useful’. In the second step, this constituent
combines with the suffix -ble (7b), which gives ‘can be made useful’.
Finally, in the third step, this constituent combines with the prefix in-,
to give (7c), ‘cannot be made useful’.
(7)
a. [[util]A iza]V, ‘to make useful’

 
b. [[[util]A iza]V ble]A, ‘can be made useful’
 
c.
[in [[[util]A iza]V ble]A]A, ‘cannot be made useful’
Here we have an example where structures are exploited to give an
account of a meaning ambiguity. The units used and the order in
which they appear are identical in the two cases, and thus it may be
argued that the meaning difference must be due to a difference in
the way in which the structure of the word is composed. See,
however, §3.3.1. for another view on this.
Headedness
The concept of structure is associated with the concept of HEAD (see
§3.2.1) as the most important unit inside a structure. If units are not
organized with respect to each other, none of these units is expected
to be more important than the others, because the relation
established between any pair of units is always identical when their
hierarchical organization is considered. The head, in contrast,
imposes its grammatical category and other properties on the whole
word, and therefore requires a structure to account for this privileged
role.
When there is a structure, the grammatical category of the word is
explained by the presence of a head carrying this information. The
fact that undecidable is an adjective and undecidability is a noun is
explained because the head in the former is the unit -able, which
takes verbs and produces adjectives, while the head in the latter is
the unit -ity, a suffix that forms nouns from adjectives. The two words
correspond to two different structures (8a) and (8b) with different
heads (the head is underlined).
(8)
a. [un [[decid(e)]V able]A]
 
b. [[un [[decid(e)]V abil]A] ity]N
Combination of morphemes sensitive to the presence of
structure
A second piece of evidence has to do with some cases where the
availability of a morpheme depends on the existence of previous

structure. The most-discussed instance of this kind of situation has
been identified by Aronoff (1976: 54), and involves the suffixes -ment
and -al. Aronoff notices that not all the words ending in -ment can
further combine with -al; the contrasts are illustrated in (9).
(9)
a. ornamental, regimental, excremental, medicamental …
 
b. *employmental, 
*shipmental, 
*agreemental,
*basemental …
Aronoff proposes that the difference between the two series has to
do with whether the suffix -ment has been added to a base that
already exists in English or not. In all the cases in (9b), the result of
subtracting the suffix -ment from the noun gives as a result a verb of
English (employ, ship, agree, base), unlike what happens with the
cases of the previous series (*orna, *regi, *excre, *medica). The
nouns in (9b) are obtained by deriving a verb (for example, employ)
with -ment, as in (10b), while the base nouns in (9a) are
morphologically simple words in English (10a).
(10)
a. [ornament]N
 
b. [[employ]V ment]N
The generalization seems to be that the suffix -al cannot combine
with nouns derived by the suffix -ment, but accepts words that end in
this segment when they do not have internal structure. Although not
free of exceptions (governmental, developmental, judgemental), this
account shows that morphology can be sensitive to whether a word
has internal structure or not.
3.2 THE PROPERTIES OF MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURES
3.2.1 THE CONCEPT OF HEAD
Any structure is different from a linear series of concatenated units.
In the latter, all relationships between units are identical, while in the
former there is always a unit which stands in a privileged position

inside the structure. This unit is the head, which imposes its
properties on the whole word. In the word un-decid(e)-able, the head
is the suffix -able, as it transmits a number of properties to the whole
word:
a) the grammatical category. The word undecidable is an adjective,
and the affix -able is responsible for this categorization. Words
ending in -able are normally adjectives.
b) the semantics. The word undecidable denotes a quality, the
quality of being unable to be firmly established or refuted. This
meaning contribution is associated with the affix -able, as all
words ending in -able (or -ible) denote the quality of being able
to undergo a particular process (demonstrable, solvable,
deducible, inexpressible …).
From this we can see that the head inside a morphological structure
is identified because the properties of the whole word are the same
properties that the morpheme itself contains.
The properties carried by the head are crucial in determining the
behaviour of the word. The grammatical category is crucial when the
word is used in a syntactic context, as it determines what kind of
other words it can combine with, and the meaning of the word
determines its semantic behaviour.
In addition to these two properties, there is a third class which is
generally referred to as ‘formal’ or ‘morphological’, in the sense that
its members do not affect the syntactic distribution of the word or its
semantic behaviour, but specify some specifically morphological
properties of the word, such as its gender, its conjugation class or
whether its inflection is regular or irregular. Consider the English verb
undersell, which consists of two units, under- and -sell. The unit -sell
is its head, not only because it imposes its grammatical category and
crucial aspects of its meaning (the word denotes an action, not an
object or a quality), but also because this unit is responsible for the
fact that the inflection of the verb is irregular. Indeed, the past tense
of sell is the irregular sold, not the regular *sell-ed, and consequently
the past tense of undersell is the irregular undersold, not
*underselled. In the case of understand, similarly, the head of the

word is -stand, because it transmits its grammatical category, a basic
component of its meaning and a specific irregular form in the past
tense.
Readers familiar with traditional syntactic analysis have probably
already noticed that this is not the way in which syntactic heads were
traditionally identified. In traditional syntactic analysis, a head is the
only unit in a structure which can stand alone, without the other
units, and which cannot be eliminated from the structure without
resulting in an ill-formed construction. Thus, the head of a phrase
such as big boy would be boy, as it is the only unit which can stand
alone in the same contexts that big boy can occur in (as in A big boy
failed the exam) and whose elimination results in ungrammaticality
(*A big failed the exam). The head in morphology is frequently a
bound morpheme which cannot stand alone without having been
combined with other morphemes, as in government, where the head
-ment cannot form a word by itself (*This -ment is interesting). Thus,
the traditional syntactic criterion of defining the head as the only unit
of the structure which can be independent and does not depend on
co-occurrence with other units is not met by morphological heads.
This property of affixes being morphological heads has a parallel
in syntax. In particular, it has been argued that functional categories
in syntax – such as determiners – are the head of the structures they
introduce, even though they are not autonomous and must combine
with the noun. In the phrase the vampire, the head is the determiner
the. Indeed, it determines the formal properties of the whole, for
example the fact that it may appear as a preverbal subject – unlike
the bare noun vampire – as witnessed by the contrast between The
vampire came out of the closet and *Vampire came out of the closet.
The determiner also determines the semantics of the construction,
though in a grammatical sense which ignores the conceptual or
lexical meaning of the expression, because it is the presence of the
determiner that turns the noun vampire, which denotes a predicate,
into a definite description that can refer to an individual. However,
the determiner is not a constituent that may show up by itself: *The
came out of the closet. Similar reasoning has been used with tense,
mood, aspect, degree, conjunctions and other grammatical
elements. It is generally believed now, in contrast with the view in the

structuralist tradition, that being able to appear without other
elements is not a necessary property of heads.
By applying the reasoning that has just been presented, it can be
proposed that the underlined constituents in (11) are the heads of
the words, which account for the grammatical category of the words,
even if they are not able to appear by themselves in the absence of
the base.
(11)
a. [[white]A ness]N
 
b. [[computer]N ize]V
 
c.
[[child]N ish]A
More about the identification of heads
The fact that a head is the most important unit inside a word has
been interpreted in different ways, depending on whether the
meaning or the formal aspects of the word are considered. Indeed,
some linguists believe that the semantic criterion is not reliable
enough. It does not always give clear enough results; consider for
instance the verb understand. Despite the fact that -stand seems the
head of the word (understand > understood), the meaning of the
verb stand is present in the whole word only in a metaphorical
sense, if any: it is clear that ‘to understand’ does not refer to any way
of ‘standing’. This situation, in which the head of a word does not
impose its semantics on the complex word, is referred to as
DEMOTIVATION 
OF 
MEANING 
or 
LEXICALIZATION (§8.6.). 
As 
this
phenomenon is very frequent in morphology, some linguists suggest
that the semantic criterion cannot be exploited to identify the head of
a word.
Instead, several authors have proposed criteria based on the
formal aspects of the word in order to identify the head of a word. In
this approach, one criterion for identifying heads is the proposal that
the head of a word is the constituent where the INFLECTION (§1.3.1,
§4) of the whole word is manifested; that is, that the head is the
‘LOCUS INFLECTIONIS’ of the word. This criterion is useful in cases
where the same word contains two or more units that have the same
grammatical category, in such a way that the category of the

constituent words is not enough to decide which unit is its head.
Take for instance the compound strawberry field, a noun composed
of two nouns, strawberry and field. When in the plural form, the plural
morpheme -s combines with the unit field, resulting in the form
strawberry fields, not *strawberries field. This allows us to determine
that field is the head of the compound, and not strawberry.
Which units can be heads?
Most authors have assumed that constituents inside a compound
(§1.3.2, §6) and some derivational morphemes (§1.3.2, §5) can be
the heads of the word, but not the inflectional morphemes that carry,
among other things, AGREEMENT with other words. The reason for this
is that, as we pointed out in Chapter 1, inflectional morphemes do
not change the grammatical category or the semantics of the word.
This has generally been interpreted as meaning that inflectional
affixes do not carry with them information about the grammatical
category of the word, and, therefore they cannot assign a category to
the bases with which they combine. For this reason, they cannot be
viewed as heads. In English, for example, the final -s in writes is
there to mark an agreement relationship with a third person subject
(as in She writes), and as such it does not change the semantics or
the grammatical category of the verb write, with which it combines.
The dominant view in morphology is that inflectional morphemes
specify different values of a word – organized inside a paradigm – in
order to adapt it to a particular syntactic context, but they do not
change the substantive properties of a word, such as its grammatical
category or the concept it stands for. While derivational morphemes
create new words, inflectional morphemes create word forms and
not new words. More about this will be presented in Chapter 4.
By the same reasoning, most authors believe that in languages
like Spanish and English derivational suffixes, but not prefixes, can
be heads. In these languages it is generally the case that a prefix
does not change the categorial distribution or the morphological
properties of the units with which it combines. In the example
understand the prefix under- combines with the verb stand, which
transmits to the whole word both its grammatical category and its
irregularities. Some morphologists believe that this is due to the fact

that prefixes do not carry with them information about their
grammatical category, unlike derivational suffixes such as -ness, -ize
or -ly. In this sense, derivational prefixes are related to inflectional
affixes, although their role is very different from other points of view,
as we will see in detail in Chapter 4.
3.2.2 THE POSITION OF THE HEAD
Consider a language like English. Derivational suffixes can be heads
and appear to the right of the word; prefixes show up to its left and
cannot be heads; in the same way a compound such as strawberry
field has its head to the right.
The generalization that can emerge from these data has led to a
body of work about whether heads inside morphological structures
always occupy the same position. Williams (1981) and also DiSciullo
and Williams (1987) propose that a property of morphological
structures is that the head is always its rightmost constituent.
Consider the following cases (12).
(12) a. [high]A - [school]N
→[[high]A[school]N]N
 
b. [re] - [write]V
→[re[write]V]V
 
c. [lonely]A - [ness]N
→[[loneli]Aness]N
This generalization has been explained by proposing a hypothesis,
the Right-Hand Head Rule (RHHR; Williams 1981), which states that
the head of a word is always its rightmost constituent.
Several crucial problems for the RHHR have been identified in the
domain of compounding, so that today its status as a universal is
dubious. Although in Germanic languages it is generally true that
compounds consistently have their head to the right (13), Romance
languages generally have their head to the left (14).
(13) a. (Ge.)
Herz-krank
 
 
heart-sick, ‘love sick’
 
b. (No.)
kjærlighets-dikt
 
 
love-poem, ‘love poem’

 
c. (En.)
man wolf
(14) a. (Fr.)
bateau mouche
 
 
boat - fly, ‘excursion boat’
 
b. (Sp.)
papel moneda
 
 
paper - money, ‘money paper, bill’
 
c. (It.)
uomo lupo
 
 
man - wolf, ‘wolfman’
It seems that the RHHR cannot be considered a universal property
of morphological structures. How can this variation be accounted
for? One possibility is to propose that the position of the head is a
PARAMETER, that is, not a universal property but a property which can
be different in different language families but always has a fixed
value in a given language. Germanic languages fix this parameter to
the right, while Romance languages fix it to the left.
However, this also proves to be a simplification of the data. A
parameter is fixed inside a given language once and for all, in such a
way that if a language sets the position of the head to the left, this
should apply to all of its words. This is not always the case.
According to the information contained in the MorboComp database,
which contains a sampling of compounds belonging to languages of
different linguistic areas, the position of the head is the following
(where Romance, Germanic, Slavic and Eastern Asia languages are
distinguished).
(15)
This suggests that, at least on the surface, it may be plausible to
propose that the head is by default the rightmost element; however,
left-headed compounds are attested in all of the linguistic areas
proposed. This result is unexpected if the position of the head is said
to be a parameter, as we would then expect the values to be 100 per
cent or very close to that value.

Some languages correlate the position of the head with the nature
of the grammatical categories involved. In Chinese, for instance,
when two morphemes are combined inside a compound (Chapter 6),
the head is found to the left if the word is a verb but appears to the
right if the compound is a noun (Packard 2000).
3.2.3 BINARY BRANCHING
It has been claimed that another property of morphological structures
is that, when units combine with each other, they combine in pairs
and never in triplets or bigger sets. This is known as the BINARY
BRANCHING HYPOTHESIS.
Binary branching has been proposed as a property of grammatical
structures; the assumption is that the relationship established
between any pair of units within a structure needs to be
unambiguously stated, and different from the relationship that any of
the two units establish with a third one. This need bans a structure
such as the one in (16), where four units are combined with each
other without creating intermediate constituents, in favour of the one
in (17), where in each step only two branches are created. Notice
that in the structure in (16) the relationship that A has with B is
identical to the one that it has with C and D.
(16)
(17)

The structure in (16) only states that A is the head of the structure,
but it does not give any hierarchical ordering between B, C and D
with respect to each other.
We will see, however, that it is far from clear that all morphological
structures have binary branching; the phenomenon known as
PARASYNTHESIS (see §3.3.5) illustrates a situation where the structure
may be interpreted as ternary branching.
3.3 ARGUMENTS AGAINST MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURES
The existence of morphological structures is not uncontroversial and,
indeed, a number of proposals have been made in the morphological
literature to argue that words do not have an internal structure. In
this section we will present the most influential theory that argues for
this view, and then several phenomena that present problems for
morphological structures.
3.3.1 A-MORPHOUS MORPHOLOGY
The A-Morphous Morphology Theory, proposed by Anderson (1992),
extensively argues that words do not have internal structure.
Anderson gives a number of arguments against analyses that
propose internal structure in words.
We have seen that a structure is defined as a set of units
organized in a particular way. Thus, a prerequisite for having a
structure is identifying a set of units that can be organized. This
commits a theory that argues for word-internal structure to an IA
view of words (§2.3). Anderson’s first argument against the
existence of word-internal structures is that the relevant units,
morphemes, do not exist. Anderson’s proposal rejects the IA view of
morphology on the basis of the problems that the classic notion of
morpheme encounters in real analysis. Anderson’s view of
morphology is REALIZATIONAL in the sense presented in §2.3., that is,
a system where there are no one-to-one correspondences between
the meaning and the form of a word. In a system like this, the
meaning of a complex word cannot be established by identifying
smaller units which contribute their meanings to the whole.

Remember the case of CRANBERRY MORPHEMES (§2.3.3), as in
cranberry, where two distinct units could be identified (cran- and -
berry) but the meaning cannot be explained by combining the
meaning of these units, mainly because one of them does not have
any meaning outside of the word (cran-). A-morphous morphology
proposes that word meaning cannot be reconstructed in that way
precisely because the units that we have segmented are not real.
The word cannot be divided into smaller units, and, by implication, it
is impossible to identify any internal structure.
A-morphous morphology provides a second argument to show that
the intuitions of a speaker about meaning–form correlations are not
reliable. The argument has to do with PHONOAESTHEMES, that is,
sequences of sounds which evoke a particular meaning. Anderson
notices that words such as slide, slip, slither, slink and slippery
share, in the intuition of most speakers, a part of their meaning and a
phonological sequence, /sl/, but it would not be justified to propose
that sl- is a morpheme in English.
How are words related to each other?
In some cases, though, speakers have the intuition that a word can
be segmented into two or more units, each one of them with a clear
meaning contribution, as in our previous example, undecidable. A-
morphous morphology answers that the intuitions of the speaker are
due to the fact that speakers relate whole words to each other. A
speaker who feels that undecidable has word-internal structure does
so because she feels that it is possible to identify pieces with
constant meaning (un- ‘negation’, -able ‘can be X’ …). Nonetheless,
the reason why speakers feel this way is because they relate
undecidable to other words with similar sequences of sounds at the
beginning (un-) and at the end (-able), correlated with some shared
aspects of meaning. However, from here it does not follow that these
sequences of sounds need to be segmented as units. The same
relations in shape and meaning could be explained by relating whole
words to each other. Let us see how relations between words are
accounted for in a-morphous morphology.
This is achieved through DERIVATIONAL RULES. Let us take the word
discontentedness. In morphological description, we want to be able

to state that this word is related to content through two intermediate
steps, discontent and discontented. The proposal is that content and
discontent are related through a derivational rule (the 
DIS-
derivational rule) as in (18a); discontent and discontented are related
through another derivational rule (the -ED derivational rule) (18b) and
so on until we reach the most complex form (18c). In this way, only
the base of the word and the word itself are related through the rule,
but not the previous steps.
(18)
a. content – [derivational rule 1] → discontent
 
b. discontent – [derivational rule 2] → discontented
 
c.
discontented – [derivational rule 3] → discontentedness
The sequence in (18) explains the relations between the words, but,
crucially, it does not claim that inside the word discontentedness we
can find the words content, discontent and discontented.
What is the advantage of this proposal, in which relationships are
not established between morphemes but between whole words? Let
us take the word destructible. According to the a-morphous
morphology theory, the meaning of this word is understood because
the word is related to words such as edible, eligible or erodible,
which also express the quality of being able to undergo a particular
action. However, by relating the whole words to each other, and not
claiming that they share a unit, an a-morphous morphology analysis
does not have to claim that units such as ed-, elig-or erod- are
segmented as English morphemes, something which is welcome, as
most speakers would hesitate to acknowledge that these are
morphemes in their lexicon.
This procedure of relating words by derivational rules and not by
claiming that specific units are added to them inside a structure can
also account for meaning ambiguities. The semantic ambiguity that
we discussed in §3.1.1 – the Spanish word inutilizable, which can be
‘can be made useless’ or ‘cannot be made useful’ – would be
analyzed as an effect of the interplay between the derivational rules
involved in the formation of the word. The theory would claim that the
word inutilizable is semantically ambiguous because it can be related
to two different words by two different derivational rules. The first

meaning (‘can be made useless’) is explained by relating the word to
the word inutilizar (‘to make useless’) by a -BLE derivational rule
(19a). The second meaning (‘cannot be made useful’) is accounted
for by relating the word to utilizable (‘can be made useful’) via an IN-
derivational rule (19b).
(19)
a. inutiliza – [derivational rule 1] → inutilizable
 
b. utilizable – [derivational rule 2] → inutilizable
Other consequences of the absence of word-internal structure
If a structure is used to represent a complex word, the whole history
of the word is represented in that structure. In a structural
representation, the word discontentedness literally contains the
words content, discontent and discontented. With the a-morphous
proposal, in contrast, only the last step – that is, the word that the
rule has produced – is represented. Anderson notices that, in
morphology, it has been shown that only the information contained in
the outer layer of the word is accessible to morphology and to syntax
(see 
also 
§7.2). 
In 
other 
words, 
the 
rule 
that 
derives
discontentedness from discontented only takes into account the fact
that discontented is an adjective, and ignores the fact that this
adjective has been derived from a noun with a prefix. The same
goes for syntax: when syntax uses the word discontentedness, it
treats it in the same way as other nouns denoting abstract
properties, such as beauty or glory, which have not been derived
from any other word. In other words, the selection that a rule makes
is strictly LOCAL, that is, it only makes reference to the immediate
context and not to the previous steps that led to that context.
A-morphous morphology argues that if these previous steps are
represented in the internal structure of a word, it comes as a surprise
that morphological and syntactic operations systematically ignore
them. In contrast, if there are no internal structures in words, the fact
that these previous steps are ignored follows from the simple fact
that they are not represented in any way.
Theories of morphology that argue in favour of word-internal
structures need to propose additional principles to explain why that
structure is not accessible to syntax. The phenomena subsumed

under the Generalized Lexicalist Hypothesis – all the cases where it
is shown that syntax cannot access internal components of a word,
which will be presented in §7.2 – follow naturally if words lack an
internal structure.
The absence of morphological structures: An empirical case
Anderson (1992) observes that the notion of ‘word-internal structure’
would be proven if there were evidence that morphological
operations are sensitive to the existence of distinct units inside the
word. Aronoff’s (1976) analysis of truncation seemed to suggest
precisely that. TRUNCATION is the process by which a segment of the
base is cancelled when another segment is added, as, for example,
in demonstrable (not *demonstratable), where the -ate ending of the
verb demonstrate has disappeared following the addition of -able.
Aronoff claimed that only whole morphemes could be truncated, and
this seemed to be evidence that a morphological operation is
sensitive to units inside the word. However, Anderson argues that
what is truncated is not necessarily a morphological unit, but just a
phonological segment which may or may not correspond to a
traditional morpheme. The segments which disappear in the pairs in
(20) – taken from Corbin (1987) by Anderson –are not in fact
generally considered morphemes in French: -us, -um, -ide, -ain.
(20)
a. virus – viral; cactus – cactée; rectum – rectal
 
b. stupide – stupéfier – stupeur
 
c.
certain – certitude
A-morphous morphology has it as its central idea that morphemes
cannot be identified inside a word, and, therefore, that structures are
impossible inside words. However, some other phenomena
constitute problems for the existence of word-internal structures
even if the existence of morphemes is assumed. In the following
subsections we will review these phenomena.
3.3.2 EXOCENTRICITY

It is a property of any structure to contain a head, the most important
unit, which is responsible for imposing its properties on the whole
object. EXOCENTRICITY is a situation in which none of the units that
can be segmented inside a word is responsible for the properties
that the word exhibits. In these cases, it has been proposed that the
word lacks a head and, therefore, it is dubious whether there is an
underlying structure in that object.
Exocentricity has been studied especially in the domain of
compounding, so we will concentrate on these cases here. The two
cases presented in (21) have been claimed to illustrate exocentricity
in compounding, though for different reasons.
(21)
a. to grandstand
 
b. pick pocket
The case in (21a) is exocentric because the unit that seems to
impose its grammatical category (verb) on the whole object does not
impose the rest of its properties on the word. The participle of
grandstand is not grandstood, which is surprising if the head of the
construction is the verb stand, whose participle is stood. This case is
to be contrasted with understand, derived from stand by the prefix
under-.
The compound in (21b) is exocentric in the sense that none of its
elements can explain the semantics of the word: a pick pocket is a
kind of thief, and thus a kind of human being, not a kind of pocket or
a kind of pick. Also, the word is a noun, but the unit which is also a
noun inside the compound (pocket) is an unlikely candidate for the
head of the structure, as it does not seem to be responsible for
introducing pick – rather the contrary, as the gloss would be
‘someone who picks the pockets of other people’, not ‘a pocket used
to pick’ or something similar. Williams (1981) proposed that these
objects are created through exocentric rules, that is, rules that
transform the properties of the object, but do not add any new unit
that introduces these properties. However, accepting exocentric
rules amounts in practice to accepting that some words do not have
a complete morphological structure.

As we can see, exocentricity is used in practice to label all the
situations where the properties that an object has are not the
immediate reflection of the properties of one, and only one, of its
units. For this reason, it seems appropriate to classify the different
kinds of exocentricity depending on the kind of property that shows
the mismatch. We will discuss, in turn, category features, semantic
features, and morphological features such as whether a verb is
irregular or regular, or to which gender it belongs.
Mismatches with category features
Cases have been reported where apparently none of the
constituents transmits its grammatical category to the word. The
situation has been identified – to the best of our knowledge – in all
languages, and plenty of these cases have been found in languages
such as Chinese or Vietnamese. For illustration, consider the
Chinese examples in (22).
(22)
a. cái-feng
cut - sew, ‘tailor’
 
b. guăng-gào
wide - announce, ‘advertisement’
In (22a), we obtain a noun by combining two verbs; in (22b), the
noun is obtained by combining an adjective and a verb. The category
cannot come, thus, from either of the two constituents of the
compound.
It could be argued that, as Chinese has an impoverished
morphology, we do not have direct morphological evidence about the
grammatical category of the units in a particular compound.
However, this mismatch is also found in languages with richer
morphological marking. In these languages it is possible to judge the
grammatical category of the constituents from their morphological
make-up. One case is found in Romance languages, in nominal
compounds with agentive or instrumental meaning, built with a
verbal stem and a noun interpreted as the semantic patient of the
verb (23).
(23)
a. It.
porta-lettere

 
 
carry-letters, ‘postman’
 
b. Sp. abre-cartas
 
 
open-letters, ‘letter opener’
The noun in the internal structure of the compound cannot be
considered the head on semantic grounds, because ‘letters’ cannot
be seen as the agent of the action. The verbal stem cannot be
responsible for the category of the word, although its semantic
contribution is closer to being the semantic head of the word. Neither
of the two units, then, seems responsible for the grammatical
category of the compound. VN compounds in Romance are plausible
candidates for illustrating categorial exocentricity.
Mismatches with semantic features
The traditional view is that the head of a compound imposes its
semantic type on the whole word, in such a way that the compound
denotes a HYPONYM (that is, a particular type of entity inside a bigger
class) of the class of objects denoted by the head. This
generalization is captured by the IS A rule (Allen 1978): a blackbird,
for example, ‘is a’ bird. The intuition behind the IS A rule is that,
inside a compound, the constituent which is not the head has as its
semantic role that of specifying the denotation of the head.
Therefore, in a compound such as blackbird the non-head, black,
defines a subclass of bird, which is the denotation of the head.
Different situations have been identified where the compound
does not follow the IS A rule. The first case refers to CO-COMPOUNDS
(Wälchli 2005). Co-compounds (§6.2.4) are compounds where two
words – normally of the same grammatical category – which share
substantial parts of their semantics are combined together to denote
their HYPERONYM (that is, a superordinate class that includes two or
more classes). For example, in Tok Pisin (Mühlhäusler 1979), the
compound brata-susa ‘brother-sister’ denotes ‘siblings’. The concept
‘sibling’ is not a subclass of brothers or sisters. It is the superordinate
class that includes both classes. The question with this class of
counterexamples to the IS A rule is whether we must take these
compounds to be exocentric or rather need to define semantic
headedness in a way that also covers co-compounds. It seems odd

to say that the meaning ‘sibling’ cannot be derived from the
combination of the word referring to sister and the one referring to
brother.
Another relevant case refers to some compounds containing
adjectives and nouns, such as paleface, big- mouth, pretty-face, etc.
Notice that a paleface is not a type of face, but a class of human
beings. These compounds do not follow the IS A rule. However, in
this case it is also possible to find a way to connect the meaning of
the word to that of its constituent parts. Booij (2002) has called this
class of word METONYMICAL COMPOUNDS. All human beings have faces
and faces are a prominent part of what we define as a human being.
Therefore, the noun ‘face’ can be used to denote, by a semantic
association based on the proximity of two concepts, a human being
described by a particularly salient property of her or his face. If we
accept’s proposal, then, the pale face types of compound have a
semantic head which, perhaps not accidentally, is also the
constituent that defines the grammatical category of the word, only
this semantic head is interpreted via a metonymical relationship.
There are also, however, clear cases of semantic exocentricity,
next to these intermediate cases. This exocentricity is expected,
because a crucial property of words – and, in general, of units stored
in the lexicon – is that they may develop DEMOTIVATED MEANINGS which
are underivable from the meaning of their parts. Such examples are
frequently words which belong to older stages of the language. For
instance, in Spanish, the compound pati-difuso, lit. ‘leg-fuzzy’, has a
meaning, ‘puzzled’, which does not seem easily derivable by
metonymy or any other semantic operation from its internal parts. It
can safely be said, then, that pati-difuso lacks a semantic head, but
the question is whether this property altogether denies the existence
of structure or can be explained by some specific lexical information,
as we will see in §8.6.
Mismatches with morphological features
Sometimes the constituent that defines the category of the
compound – and also its semantics – does not transmit its
morphological properties to the word. Consider the pale face class in
Romance languages. In this family of languages, gender is lexically

defined for each noun (§4.3.1). The translation of skin head in Italian,
testa rasata, should be expected to be a feminine word. The reason
is that the constituent, testa ‘head’, which defines the grammatical
category of the compound, is feminine: for instance the adjective
rasat-a ‘hairless’ agrees with it in feminine.
This is not how the compound behaves, however. It is not
restricted to the feminine form, as it can be used as a masculine
noun and combine with the determiner il (il testa rasata), restricted to
masculine nouns. In the same kind of compounds, Spanish also
shows mismatches. The compound relaciones públicas ‘public
relations officer’ contains the feminine plural noun relaciones
‘relations’. This constituent acts as the categorial head, as it is the
only noun inside the compound. However, the compound can be
used as a masculine singular noun: it can combine with el, the
masculine singular determiner, without changing the form of the
noun constituent (el relaciones públicas ‘the public relations officer’).
Therefore, this class of compounds is morphologically exocentric in
Italian and Spanish.
3.3.3 BRACKETING PARADOXES
A crucial property of a structure is that both the formal and the
semantic properties of the word need to be represented in the
structure. For this reason, the situations where the semantic and the
formal properties of an object do not coincide are problematic for the
idea that words have internal structure. These situations are known
as BRACKETING PARADOXES (Williams 1981, Beard 1991). There are at
least three kinds of bracketing paradox.
One kind of bracketing paradox is the situation in which the formal
properties of one of the units requires it to combine with a particular
base, but the meaning of the word suggests that it combines with a
unit smaller than the base. Take the word international. The formal
properties of the word require the prefix inter- to combine with the
adjective national, as the word *internation does not exist in English.
This structure is represented in (24a). However, this structure gives
the wrong semantics for the word, ‘relation between at least two
national things’. The word means more precisely ‘among nations’.

Thus, as far as the meaning of the word goes, the prefix does not
combine with the adjective national, but with the noun nation from
which national is formed (as in the structure in (24b)). However,
(24b) is impossible on formal grounds, because, the prefix cannot
combine directly with the noun nation, as *internation does not exist,
and this structure contains inside it this impossible word. Thus, the
two possible structures make wrong predictions at some level.
(24)
a. [inter [[nation]N al]A]A
 
b. [[inter[nation]N]N al]A
Another kind of paradox comes when a unit combines with a word
but semantically modifies not only that word, but a bigger structure in
which the word is included. Consider the expression Vulgar Latinist.
This does not refer to a Latinist who happens to be vulgar, but to
someone who studies Vulgar Latin. This requires the suffix -ist to
combine with the whole phrase Vulgar Latin, and not only with the
noun Latin, because that would give us the wrong semantics.
However, it is generally assumed that one of the properties of affixes
is that they cannot combine with phrases, but only with
morphological objects (§7.2.1).
The last kind of paradox that we will consider requires taking into
account phonological factors. In the case of unhappier, there is a
paradox in the sense that the meaning of the adjective (‘more
unhappy’) requires the suffix -er to combine with the trisyllabic
adjective unhappy. However, it is generally the case in English that
trisyllabic adjectives require the adverb more in the comparative.
Avoiding this phonological infraction implies proposing that -er
combines with happy, and then un- (the prefix that means negation)
combines with happier. However, this gives the wrong semantics, as
it predicts the meaning ‘not more happy’, which is not how speakers
interpret this word.
There is no analysis for bracketing paradoxes in the general case,
that is, an analysis that covers the three kinds of paradox that we
have described here. The analyses that try to fit them inside a
structure usually involve relaxing some of the formal conditions
imposed on affixes, such as allowing them to combine with some

phrases provided that they are inside the lexicon – as in Vulgar Latin
– or allowing them to combine with words which are non-existent, yet
possible and grammatical in the language (Corbin 1987).
Sometimes, movement internal to the word has been argued for
(Pesetsky 1985) in order to give an account of the interpretation
without infracting the formal requisites of the affix; for example, the
suffix -er could combine with happy, and then, following addition of
un-, change its position inside the word so that it takes scope over
the negative prefix. There is no analysis of these constructions which
is accepted by all authors without dispute.
3.3.4 DOUBLE BASE
The structure of a complex word represents the derivational history
of the word, such that the structure contains the forms to which the
word is semantically and formally related. For this reason, when a
word is semantically related to a word from which it cannot have
been formally derived, the structural account encounters difficulties.
This situation is known as DOUBLE BASE, because two different
bases seem to be necessary to account for the properties of a word:
one to capture its semantics and one to capture its form.
The following cases illustrate the situation in Spanish: although the
nouns in (25a) are formed by adding the suffix -ncio/-ncia to the verb
represented in (25b), they are interpreted as the abstract quality
associated with the adjectives or participles in (25c). However, it is
not clear that the nouns in (25a) can be derived from the adjectives
in (25c).
(25) a. [[cansa]ncio], [[abunda]ncia], [[ignora]ncia]
 
 
tired-ness,
abund-ance,
ignor-ance
 
b. cansa-, abunda-, ignora-
 
 
tire, abound, ignore
 
c. [[cansa]do],
[[abunda]nte], [[ignora]nte]
 
 
tir-ed,
abund-ant,
ignor-ant
3.3.5 PARASYNTHESIS

The phenomenon known as PARASYNTHESIS constitutes a problem for
morphological structures because it casts doubt on one of its crucial
properties, namely binary branching. Remember that non-binary
branching was rejected before on the grounds that when more than
two units are combined at a time the relationship which is
established between them is not unambiguously stated.
Parasynthesis is the situation where two different affixes –
normally a prefix and a suffix – seem to be added simultaneously to
the same base. One example of this is the Spanish verb
engrandecer ‘to enlarge’, from the adjective grande ‘big’. Neither the
set formed by the base and the suffix (a hypothetical verb
*grandecer) nor that which includes the prefix and the base (a
hypothetical adjective *engrande) constitutes a word in Spanish. In
consequence, if it is assumed that only existing words can form the
basis for further derivation, one is forced to conclude that the verb
engrandecer has been formed by adding two units at the same time,
the prefix en- and the suffix -ece, to the base grande, as represented
in (26a), where three units, and not two, have been put together. The
same structure, with a zero suffix, has also been proposed in English
for words such as enlarge (27b); in this way, the analysis avoids
saying that the prefix en- is responsible for the category change,
since in English prefixes generally do not have this ability.
(26)
a. [en
[grand(e)]A
ece]V
 
b. [en
[large]A
  Ø]V
It is crucial in parasynthesis that the combination with only one of
the two affixes does not produce an existent word in the language. In
other words, English discontented is not a case of parasynthesis,
because the root and the prefix form an existent word (discontent);
equally, the root and the suffix form one (contented).
Different proposals have been made to avoid the ternary structure
in (26). One of the most widely accepted is to consider the prefix and
the suffix to be a discontinuous morpheme, a circumfix (§1.2.1). In
this way, the structure would be binary branching, as only two units,
[en … ece] and [grande], are combined. A phonological property of
the first unit would force it to appear around the base and not only to

one of its sides. A variation of this analysis, framed in the DM
approach, is to consider these discontinuous affixes as single units
in the structure which are forced, by a process called fission, to
materialize as two different morphemes. More information about this
operation is given in §8.2.4.
The analysis of parasynthesis as a circumfix, however, has an
empirical problem. Notice that the circumfix that should be proposed
in the case of engrandecer has a second part which is identical to a
Spanish suffix (27) and a first part that, again, is identical to a
Spanish prefix (28). The fact that these units exist independently of
each other suggests that it is not accurate to propose that a circumfix
is responsible for the verb engrandecer.
(27)
palid-ece
 
fade (from pálid-o ‘pale’)
(28)
en-frente
 
in-front (‘in front’, from frente front)
Another analysis of the parasynthetic formations that is compatible
with the binary branching hypothesis can be found in Scalise (1983),
where it is proposed that first the suffix is added, transforming the
base (a noun or an adjective, as grande) into a verb (grandecer,
which would be a possible but non-existent word in Spanish), and
only then is the prefix added (engrandecer). The weak side of this
analysis is that it has to postulate an intermediate phase with a
possible but non-existent word (by hypothesis, grandecer), a
possibility that some linguists accept but others deny. A variation of
this analysis, applied to cases like enlarge, can be found in
Neelemann and Schipper (1992).
EXERCISES
1.
Explain why the following words have been claimed to be
exocentric. From which perspective are they exocentric? Is it
possible to analyze some of these words as endocentric?
Provide similar examples in another language of your choice.
 
know-nothing, white-collar, see-saw, bacon ’n’ eggs

2.
In the following list of English words, determine which ones are
parasynthetic. Explain your answer and produce similar
examples in another language you are familiar with.
 
kind-hearted, 
impoverishment, 
outstanding, 
dishearten,
aerodynamics, disembowelled
3.
The following English words have been considered bracketing
paradoxes. Explain how the words are formed in order to
account for their formal properties, and then compare the order
of operations necessary to account for their meaning. Can you
find similar examples of bracketing paradoxes in another
language of your choice? molecular biologist, supernatural,
unluckier
4.
(a) is the structure of the word impersonal in English. Explain
how this structure gives an account of the formal and semantic
properties of the word, as well as of possible and impossible
formations related to this word in English. Compare it to the
structure in (b) and the sequence in (c) and explain what
incorrect predictions they make.
       a.
[im [[person]al]]
       b.
[[im[person]] al]
       c.
[ [im] [person] [al]]
5.
Take a set of morphologically related words in a language of
your choice and explain how the meaning–form relationships in
them would be accounted for in (a) a structural approach, (b) the
a-morphous morphology theory and (c) CM (remember §2.4.2).
FURTHER READING
Earlier accounts of the meaning–form relationship inside words by
means of an internal structure are found in Siegel (1974) and Selkirk
(1982); an opposing view is presented in Matthews (1972), Aronoff
(1976) and Anderson (1992, forthcoming). More recent work in the
structure of complex words includes Koenig (1999), Hale and Keyser
(2002) and DiSciullo (2005), where morphological structures are
organized in standard tree structures. Among the recent works that

question the existence of word-internal structures are Stump (2001),
Singh and Starosta (2003) and Sadler and Nordlinger (2004).
The notion of a head has received a great deal of attention in
morphological theory: Williams (1981), Trommelen and Zonneveld
(1986) and Scalise (1988b), the last of which pays special attention
to the position of heads; also Zwicky (1984) and Hoeksema (1988,
1992), specifically about the relation between the notions of syntactic
head and morphological head. Studies of category-changing prefixes
include Neeleman and Schipper (1992), Drijkoningen (1999) and
Amiot (2004). Those further interested in the notion of exocentricity
are advised to read Jackendoff (1975), Scalise and Guevara (2006)
and Bauer (2008a), the last of which focuses on the specific case of
compounds, where most of the discussion has concentrated.
Parasynthesis has received some attention, especially in
Romance languages. For particularly influential analyses, see Corbin
(1980, 1987) for French; Scalise (1983) and Crocco and Iacobini
(1993) for Italian; Schroten (1997) for Spanish.
There is extensive literature on bracketing paradoxes. Strauss
(1982) and Pesetsky (1985) constitute early attempts at analyzing
some of them structurally; the second analysis started a vigorous
controversy, as witnessed in Sproat (1985, 1992), Kitagawa (1986)
and Hoeksema (1987). Alternative analyses which give up the
traditional notion of structure were provided in Spencer (1988),
Zwicky (1988), Beard (1991), Stump (1991), Carstairs-McCarthy
(1992) and Becker (1993). Inkelas (1990) approaches bracketing
paradoxes by proposing that words and phrases have parallel
structures, and Cohn (1989) analyzes them as the result of a
particular interaction between morphology and phonology. More
recent analyses include Crysmann (1999), Müller (2003) and Booij
(2007), the last in CM.

4
INFLECTIONAL PROCESSES
4.1 PROPERTIES OF INFLECTION
A morphological operation is considered inflectional when it fulfils
two main criteria. The first one is that it does not change the
grammatical category of the base, its meaning or the number or
class of constituents selected by it. When the noun car appears in its
plural form, cars, it is still a noun and it denotes the same object as
before, only now the object is a group of objects. The difference
between car and cars depends on the syntactic context in which
each form appears: the first in a singular context, the second in a
plural context. This leads us to the second property of inflection:
inflectional processes do not produce new words, but give us the
forms that a single word can adopt in the different syntactic contexts
where it appears. Inflection can be understood as a morphological
operation that adapts a word to a particular syntactic context
manipulating properties like number, gender, case, aspect, tense or
mood. Cases where only one of the two criteria are fulfilled are
generally difficult to categorize as inflection or derivation; we explore
them in §5.7.
Inflection and dictionaries
This characterization of inflection has several consequences.
Consider one: as inflection does not create new words, the
inflectional forms of a word are generally not listed in the dictionary.
Independently of how complete a dictionary of English is, the form
cars will not appear there as a separate lemma. This is so because

the plural formation does not alter the grammatical category of the
word or the kind of object that it denotes; consequently, any speaker
that knows what a car is must also be able to work out what cars
stands for.
Inflection and productivity
A second consequence is that, as syntax is assumed to be
maximally productive, the productivity of an inflectional process
should also be maximal, because inflection gives the form of words
in different syntactic contexts. In general, if a process is inflectional,
all words belonging to a syntactic class should be able to undergo
this process.
Inflection and syntax
Inflection closely interacts with syntax, as opposed to derivation or
compounding. This can be seen in agreement processes. The
inflectional properties of a given noun (see (1), from Spanish) are
copied under agreement with adjectives and other noun modifiers;
however, the derivational morphemes of a word, like the agent
morpheme in (2), are never copied under agreement.
(1)
l-as
precios-as             cas-as
 
 
the-fem.pl.
beautiful-fem.pl.  house-fem.pl.
 
(2)
l(*-dor)-as
precios-(*dor)-as
anima-dor-as
 
the-Agent-fem.pl.
beautiful-Agent-
fem.pl.
cheer-Agent-
fem.pl.
 
‘the 
beautiful
cheerleaders’
 
 
This means that some of the inflectional properties of a word are
determined by the syntactic context. Consider a language where
nouns show case inflection, like Russian. The morphological
component is able to determine a great number of the properties of a
noun (whether it is derived or not, some semantic and phonological
characteristics, etc.), but prior to its insertion in a syntactic context,
morphology is not able to know which one of all the case forms will
be required by this context, as each of these cases matches a

different set of syntactic functions (nominative case is used for the
subject, accusative for a type of object, and so forth). The same
happens with an adjective in a language like Spanish, where
adjectives show morphological agreement with nouns. Until the
adjective is inside a syntactic context, the morphology cannot
determine which of the forms of the adjective will be required.
This close interaction between inflection and syntactic processes
has been interpreted by some Lexicalist theories (the so-called WEAK
LEXICALIST THEORIES) as a sign that inflection is not performed in the
lexicon, but is a process performed in the syntax. The idea is that
morphology forms a word – for instance, a Spanish adjective derived
from a noun (3) – which is then introduced inside a syntactic context.
However, when inflectional processes are involved, some of the
properties are left undetermined by the morphology (which is what
we try to convey in (3) with the notation ‘α’ in the place where the
agreement markers of the adjective should be). Once inside a
syntactic context, a syntactic rule adds the missing properties to the
word, here adding those that mark gender and number agreement
(4).
(3)
[fam-os-α]
 
fam-ous-agr.
(4)
mujeres famos-as
 
women famous-fem.pl.
Syntax on its own will not be able to determine the form that the
word adopts as an effect of this inflectional process. The shape of
the segments used to perform agreement, or the unpredictable forms
that the word might adopt when an inflectional process takes place
(went, teeth), are determined by the lexicon. Thus, in inflection,
according to Weak Lexicalism, there is a division of labour between
syntax and the lexicon which is not required in derivation or
compounding.
Inflection and morpheme order
The fact that inflection interacts with syntactic processes such as
agreement has been related to the tendency of inflectional segments

to appear in the outer layer of a word. In this outer layer of the word,
the information will be accessible to syntax. Inflection, when marked
with affixes, is generally external to derivation, as can be seen in
(5a), for English, and the equivalent word in Spanish (5b).
(5)
a. runn-er-s
 
b. corre-dor-es
Inherent and contextual inflection
There are exceptions, though, in which properties generally thought
of as inflectional (for instance, number) do not appear in the
outermost layer of a word or have unexpected effects in the
semantic interpretation of the base. (6a) is a German compound and
yet the number marking -er appears inside the word. (6b) has a non-
predictable meaning (‘intelligence’, as in to have brains).
(6)
a. Kind-er-wagen
 
 child-pl.-carriage, ‘pram’
 
b. brains
Such examples have led some to differentiate between two kinds
of inflection: INHERENT and CONTEXTUAL (Booij 1996); such that the
same morphological property can be inherent in one grammatical
category and contextual in another category. Inherent inflection
refers to cases where the choice of an inflectional form is determined
by the speaker’s communicative intention when a word is used, and
not by any recognizable syntactic context. In nouns, number is
inherent inflection. The choice of whether a noun appears in the
singular or the plural is not determined by any formal process of
agreement, but depends on whether the speaker intends to refer to a
single entity or to a group of entities when using that word. The
cases in (6) are instances of inherent inflection. As the inflection in
these examples is not directly determined by the syntactic context
and is not due to agreement, it is not required to be external to the
word; as it is motivated by the meaning, it can have specific
semantic effects which might require that the word be listed in the
dictionary.

Contextual inflection, conversely, is purely motivated by the
syntactic context. The clearest example of this is the agreement
displayed by a word inside a whole phrase or sentence. Number
agreement in verbs, for instance, is contextual inflection. The third
person singular -s in the English present verb appears in the outer
layer of the word, and its presence is determined by agreement with
the subject. Contextual inflection has all the properties expected of
inflectional processes: it is in the outer layer of the word and does
not trigger unexpected meanings of the word. Notice also that it is
more frequent to find irregular forms for inherent inflection than for
contextual inflection. Several nouns in English have a special plural
form (women, mice, teeth, etc.); these kinds of irregularities, where
the root of the word changes, are normally not used to mark the
agreement of a word with the syntactic context. Verbs in English,
with few exceptions (like the verb to be and other auxiliaries), do not
use a special form to materialize the third person singular
agreement.
4.2 INFLECTION AND GRAMMATICAL CATEGORIES
Inflection is unable to change the grammatical category of the base,
and, precisely for this reason, the inflectional characteristics of each
word are determined by the grammatical category of the base. In the
Western linguistic tradition it has been customary to identify the
different grammatical categories on the basis of their inflectional
properties (as opposed to their prototypical meaning or their
syntactic position). This tradition started in the second century BC,
with the Greek grammarian Dionysius Thrax and his book Art of
Grammar.
It is crucial to mention, however, that this manner of defining
grammatical categories through their inflectional characteristics
cannot establish universal definitions of each category, which would
make it possible to identify the categories in every language,
independently of their typological properties. The reason is that the
tradition in Western grammar built the definitions only on the basis of
the inflectional properties of words in (some) Indo-European
languages. Typological studies have shown repeatedly that, in

different linguistic families, the range of properties expressed by
inflection in each grammatical class can vary to a great extent. Here
we will illustrate this variation by comparing the inflectional marks of
the three major grammatical categories of noun, adjective and verb
in five typologically diverse languages. This will show that inside a
given language this criterion can be applied successfully to the
identification of categories, but, at the same time, that it does not
allow us to establish universal principles.
4.2.1 A COMPARISON OF FIVE LANGUAGES
Table 4.1 gives a short overview of the inflectional properties of five
unrelated languages: Spanish (which is a Romance language),
Norwegian (Germanic), Classical Arabic (Semitic), Hungarian
(Uralic) and the Native American language Navajo (Athabaskan). We
consider only those properties expressed in regular forms with a
morpheme, thus ignoring constructions involving suppletion (§4.4.3).
The first fact that is illustrated by this comparison is that there is
wide variation in the languages of the world with respect to which
inflectional properties each category allows. There are some typical
situations, such as nouns inflecting for number and verbs inflecting
for tense or aspect, but these are tendencies more than real
generalizations. Moreover, not even the grammatical categories that
can be identified in one language are identical to those found in
another one: the traditional description of Navajo is that the language
lacks adjectives; to express the concepts denoted by this category in
languages like English, Navajo uses verbs. Facts like these must be
kept in mind when trying to establish generalizations about
grammatical categories.
With respect to the similarities mentioned, these seem to reflect a
syntactic or semantic property more than a morphological one. For
instance, the fact that verbs tend to inflect for aspect or tense reflects
the fact that sentences are anchored in time and verbs are generally
core elements inside sentences. Even if these facts are universal,
they are not immediately reflected in the morphology, because these
properties do not necessarily have to be reflected as morphemes
attached to the lexical category. Even if sentences are interpreted as

anchored in time in a language like Chinese, this language chooses
not to express this information as a morpheme attached to the verb.
Instead, a separate word is used, thus not counting as inflection (cf.
§2.5).
Table 4.1 Overview of the inflectional properties of five unrelated
languages
Language
Nouns
Adjectives
Verbs
Spanish (Indo-
European,
Romance)
Gender: perr-
o/perr-a ‘dog’,
masc., fem.
Degree:
bueno/buenísimo
‘good’, positive
degree,
superlative
degree
Aspect: canta-ba/cant-é
‘sing’, imperfective
past, perfective past
 
Number:
papel/papel-es
‘paper’, sg., pl.
Agreement in
gender: buen-
o/buen-a ‘good’,
masc., fem.
Tense: canta/canta-rá
‘sing’, present, future
 
 
Agreement in
number:
pobre/pobre-s
‘poor’, sg., pl.
Mood: cant-a/cant-e
‘sing’, indicative,
subjunctive
 
 
 
Finiteness: canta/canta-r
‘sing’, finite, non-finite
 
 
 
Agreement in person:
canta/canta-s ‘sing’,
3rd, 2nd
 
 
 
Agreement in number:
canta/canta-n ‘sing’,
3rd sg., 3rd pl.
Norwegian
(Indo-European,
Germanic)
Gender:
venn/venn-inne
‘friend’, masc.,
fem.
Degree: dyr/dyr-ere
‘expensive’,
positive degree,
comparative
degree
Tense: snakke/snakke-t
‘talk’, present, past
 
Number:
hund/hund-er
‘dog’, sg., pl.
Agreement in
gender:
liten/lita/lite
Finiteness: snakke-r/
snakke ‘talk’, finite,
non-finite

‘small’, masc.,
fem., neu.
 
Definiteness:
hund/ hund-en
‘dog’, indefinite,
definite
Agreement in
number: dyr/dyr-
e ‘expensive’,
sg., pl.
Voice: snakke/snakke-s
‘talk’, active, passive
 
 
Agreement in
definiteness: dyr/
dyre ‘expensive’,
indefinite, definite
 
Classical Arabic
(Semitic)
Gender: ṭa:lib/
ṭalib-at
‘student’,
masc., fem.
Degree:
ṣaġi:ru/’aṣġaru
‘small’, positive
degree,
comparative and
superlative
degree
Aspect: kataba/taktubu
‘write’, perfect,
imperfect
 
Number: malikat/
malikat-a:ni/
malika:tu
‘queen’, sg.,
dual, pl.
Agreement in
gender: ğamil/
ğamil-a ‘nice’,
masc., fem.
Mood: taktub-u/ taktub-
a/taktub ‘write’,
indicative, subjunctive,
jussive
 
Case: bayt-
u/bayt-a/ bayt-i
‘house’,
nominative,
accusative,
genitive
Agreement in
number:
mari:ḍata:ni/
mari:ḍa:tun ‘sick’,
dual, pl.
Voice: kataba/kutiba
‘write’, active, passive
 
Definiteness:
baytu-n/ al-
baytu ‘house’,
indefinite,
definite
Agreement in case:
wa:si‘-u/wa:si‘-
a‘white’,
nominative,
accusative
Agreement in person:
’aktubu/taktubu ‘write’,
1st, 2nd
 
 
Agreement in
definiteness:
wa:si‘u-n/al-
wa:si‘u‘white’,
indefinite, definite
Agreement in number:
’aktubu/naktubu‘write’,
1st sg., 1st pl.
 
 
 
Agreement in gender:
katabta/katabti ‘write’,

3rd sg. masc., 3rd sg.
fem.
Hungarian
(Uralic)
Number: kéz/kez-
ek ‘hand’, sg.,
pl.
Degree:
drága/drág-ább
‘dear’, positive
degree,
comparative
degree
Tense: kérek/kér-t-em
‘ask for’, present, past
 
Case:
lámpa/lámpá-t
‘lamp’,
nominative,
accusative
Agreement in
number:
magas/magas-
ak‘tall’, sg., pl.
Mood: kérek/kér-j-ek ‘ask
for’, indicative,
subjunctive
 
Agreement in
possession:
táská-m/ táská-
d ‘bag’, 1st sg.
possessive,
2nd sg.
possessive
 
Finiteness: kér/kér-ni
‘ask for’, finite, non-
finite
 
 
 
Agreement in person:
kérek/kérsz ‘ask for’,
1st sg., 2nd sg.
 
 
 
Agreement in number:
kérek/kérünk ‘ask for’,
1st sg., 1st pl.
 
 
 
Agreement in
definiteness with the
direct object: építettél/
építetted ‘build’, 2nd
sg. past, definite,
indefinite
Navajo
(Athabaskan)
Number:
’ashki:/’ashi:ké
‘boy’, sg., pl.
Adjectives do not
exist in this
language
Aspect: nishááh/níyá
‘arrive’, imperfective,
perfective
 
Agreement in
possession:
shi-tsi:’/ ni-tsi:’
‘head’, 1st sg.
possessive,
 
Agreement in person
with the subject:
yishtin/nitin ‘freeze’,
1st sg., 2nd sg.

2nd sg.
possessive
 
 
 
Agreement in number
with the subject:
yishtin/yi:tin ‘freeze’,
1st sg., 1st pl.
 
 
 
Agreement in person
with the object:
yishteeh/nishteeh ‘put
on the water’, 3rd sg.
object, 2nd sg. object
 
 
 
Agreement in number
with the object:
nishteeh/nihishteeh‘put
on the water’, 2nd sg.
object, 2nd pl. object
(7) a. wŏ
zài
măi
shū
 
 I
PART buy
book(s)
 
 ‘I am buying books’
 
b. wŏ
măi
shū
le
 
 I
buy
book(s) PART
 
 ‘I bought books’
4.2.2 NON-INFLECTED CATEGORIES: PREPOSITIONS,
CONJUNCTIONS AND ADVERBS
In addition to these major grammatical categories, the Western
tradition identifies three other categories which cannot be
differentiated by their morphological properties alone because, in the
languages considered, they do not show any inflection. These are
adverbs, conjunctions and prepositions. The differences that led to
the division of these uninflected words into three classes are
syntactic. Adverbs may occur as modifiers of other categories, but
are not used to introduce other constituents (well in John speaks well
or John is well fed); in contrast, prepositions and conjunctions are

used to introduce new constituents and relate them to the previous
structure. Prepositions relate nouns or pronouns to something else,
as in A man with a hat. Conjunctions are able to relate whole
sentences, as in John came and Anna left, Jack asked whether
Louise was sick.
This 
traditional 
characterization, 
however, 
is 
faced 
with
counterexamples in some European languages, as a reminder of our
general point that it is not possible to establish a universal
association between categories and inflectional properties. For
example, in Welsh, prepositions inflect for person, number and
gender depending on the properties of the nominal with which they
combine. The preposition ar ‘on’ shows the following forms:
(8)
 
Sg.
Pl.
 
1st
arnaf
arnom
 
2nd
arnat
arnoch
 
3rd masc.
arno
arnynt
 
3rd fem.
arni
 
As for conjunctions, it has been shown that in some varieties of
Dutch and other continental West Germanic languages these words
take agreement with the subject of the subordinate clause they
introduce. The data in (9) illustrate this for South Hollandic Dutch
(taken from Zwart 2006).
(9)
dat-e
se
spel-e
 
that-agr.
they
play-pl.
 
’that they play’
In conclusion, it might be possible to make generalizations in one
language about how the grammatical categories behave with respect
to inflection, but it is not easy to find universal principles in this
respect.
4.3 DESINENCES AND THEME VOWELS IN GRAMMAR

4.3.1 THE STATUS OF GENDER AND THE NOTION OF
DESINENCE
The status of gender in the languages of the world is controversial.
As opposed to number, which can be associated with a particular
meaning (individuals, groups, pairs, etc.), gender is generally not
systematically matched with any semantic interpretation. Its two
most common values are called MASCULINE and FEMININE, but it is
clear that these labels do not necessarily represent the biological sex
characteristics of an entity, as gender is also exhibited by inanimate
objects where this categorization cannot be applied. From a
semantic perspective, it does not make much difference that the
moon is feminine in Italian and masculine in German, but it is
certainly relevant for the grammar that the word for ‘moon’ is
feminine in the first language (la luna) and masculine in the second
(der Mond). Given these facts, gender values are viewed as
systems, internal to the language, that formally classify the nouns
into different subclasses. Sometimes semantic or phonological
criteria are used for parts of this classification (Corbett 1991), but the
assignment of each noun to a gender class is, in general,
idiosyncratic.
There are some other differences between number and gender
apart from the fact that only the former clearly corresponds to a
meaning notion. Number values seem to be limited crosslinguistically
to five: singular, plural, dual (exactly two), trial (exactly three) and
paucal (a small group); moreover, these values seem to be ordered
in a hierarchy, such that languages that have trial usually also have
dual, singular and plural, but languages that have singular and plural
do not necessarily have dual or trial. In contrast, there is not an
equivalent fixed set of gender values. Spanish has two in nouns,
German has three and some Bantu languages, like Nguni, have
more than a dozen. These values are not ordered with respect to
each other; a language with two genders could select masculine and
feminine, as Spanish does, or neuter and non-neuter, as Dutch does.
Desinences
In some languages it is necessary to differentiate gender from a
morpheme that marks nouns as belonging to a specific noun class.

This morpheme is called the DESINENCE, and it is present, for
example, in Spanish. The desinence does not contain the gender
information of the noun, as illustrated in (10).
(10) a. la
man-o
 
 
the.fem.
hand-des.
 
b. el
pel-o
 
 
the.masc.
hair-des.
 
c.
la
car-a
 
 
the.fem.
face-des.
 
d. el
dí-a
 
 
the.masc.
day-des.
 
e. la
frent-e
 
 
the.fem.
forehead-des.
 
f.
el
puent-e
 
 
the.masc.
bridge-des.
The data in (10) show that it is not true that the desinence -o always
carries masculine gender or the desinence -a, feminine. The gender
of the word is independent from this marker, because words carrying
the marker -a can be masculine or feminine, and the same for those
carrying -o or -e. These markers determine a particular word class,
but do not give any information about the gender value of the noun –
as manifested under agreement – or about its semantics.
In languages with desinences, three different notions of ‘noun
gender’ have to be differentiated:
a) a semantic level, where some nouns show gender and
desinence distinctions interpretable as biological gender
differences;
b) a morphological level, where nouns are accompanied by a
specific marker – the desinence – that associates them with a
particular class of nouns; and
c)
a syntactic level, where there is a gender value which is active
in agreement processes.

In a noun like niño/niña (‘boy’/‘girl’), the three levels seem to coincide
in the information they provide us with, but in a feminine non-animate
noun ending in -o, like mano ‘hand’, they need to be kept apart.
The role of the desinence seems to be purely morphological. In
fact, in languages where nouns have rich inflection (like Latin or
Russian) the role of the desinence is to classify nouns into specific
subparadigms: this marker determines the segments that mark, for
instance, the number and the case of that noun. As an example,
consider (11), taken from Latin. We have two nouns, differentiated by
their desinence (-a- in the first case, -i- in the second), despite the
fact that they are both feminine. The segment used to mark ablative
case and plural number is different in the two cases (12).
(11) a. ros-a
 
 
rose-des., ‘rose’
 
b. nav-i
 
 
boat-des., ‘boat’
(12) a. ros-is
 
 
rose-ablative pl.
 
b. nav-ibus
 
 
boat-ablative pl.
4.3.2 THEME VOWELS
In languages like Spanish and Italian, verbs have their own
equivalent of the desinence: the theme vowel. Like desinences,
theme vowels are morphological markers that do not determine the
syntactic or semantic properties of the verb. That is, having a theme
vowel -a- or -e- does not determine whether the verb is transitive or
intransitive, whether its meaning is dynamic or stative, or any other
similar notion. (13) gives an example from Spanish.
(13) a. cant-a
 
 
sing-ThV, ‘sing’
 
b. cog-e

 
 
grab-ThV, ‘grab’
As happens with desinences, theme vowels are not copied under
agreement processes, but they classify verbs into specific
morphological classes that determine the specific segments that they
will use to mark other inflectional properties. For instance, a verb like
(14a), with the theme vowel -a-, uses the segment -ba- to mark the
imperfective past, but a verb like (14b) uses the segment -a- for the
same type of inflection (and, additionally, the -e- shows an allomorph
-i- in this context).
(14) a. cant-a-ba
 
 
sing-ThV-imperfective past
 
b. cog-í-a
 
 
grab-ThV-imperfective past
The existence of desinences and theme vowels, and their nature
as purely morphological markers without any incidence in the syntax
or the semantics of the word, have been one of the empirical
phenomena that Lexicalist theories have used to argue against the
possibility of building words in the syntax (§7.2). Lexicalist theories
analyze these markers as MORPHOMES (Aronoff 1994), that is, as
markers that provide information that is only relevant for morphology,
and as such they argue in favour of keeping morphology as a distinct
component of the grammar.
As an answer, some Constructionist theories, like DM, have
proposed that desinences and theme vowels are not present when
the word is built in the syntax. These theories agree that it is not
possible to match desinences and theme vowels with any syntactic
or semantic property, but in this framework they are treated as
additional morphology which is added in the morphophonological
representation of the word alone, and as such they can play a role in
controlling allomorphy, but will never influence the meaning or the
syntax of the word. This treatment of desinences and theme vowels
as DISSOCIATED MORPHEMES has been developed, for instance, in Oltra
(1999) for Catalan. This author argues that languages like Spanish
have a morphophonological constraint that forces every verb to be

marked by a special morpheme – the theme vowel – and that this
marking happens at the level of the phonological representation of
the word, not at the level of its morphosyntactic structure. A rule in
the form of (15) would state that whenever a verb is found, the
phonological component has to introduce a theme vowel.
(15) v → v + ThV
4.4 PARADIGMS
Paradigm is a term which refers to the set of all the different forms
that a word adopts depending on the grammatical characteristics
that it shows in a syntactic context. Due to this association with the
grammatical characteristics, paradigms are related to specific
grammatical categories, because each category is frequently
characterized by a distinct set of inflectional properties. The
paradigm of the word dog in English is very simple and contains only
two forms, dog – singular – and dogs – plural; each of the forms
stands for a different set of grammatical properties, or CELL, inside
the paradigm. The paradigm of a verb contains different cells from
the paradigm of a noun. A verb like write contains the forms write (for
imperative, infinitive and most present forms), writes (for the third
person singular of the present), wrote (for the past), written (for the
participle) and writing (for the gerund).
In languages with richer morphology than English, even if the cells
are generally the same for all the words belonging to one category,
the patterns of how these cells are materialized can differ depending
on subdivisions established inside each grammatical category. In
these languages, we have SUBPARADIGMS. This is the case of
CONJUGATION CLASSES, which are different patterns of materialization
for a verbal paradigm inside a given language. Compare, in (16), the
two different ways in which subjunctive mood is realized in Spanish,
depending on the conjugation class of the verb.
(16)
 
cant-a ‘sing’, first
conjugation
beb-e ‘drink’, second
conjugation

1st sg.
cant-e
beb-a
2nd sg.
cant-e-s
beb-a-s
3rd sg.
cant-e
beb-a
1st pl.
cant-e-mos
beb-a-mos
2nd pl.
cant-é-is
beb-á-is
3rd pl.
cant-e-n
beb-a-n
In the verbs belonging to the subparadigm of the first conjugation,
the present subjunctive is formed by adding the segment -e- (which
replaces the theme vowel); in the verbs belonging to the second
conjugation, the same form is created by replacing the theme vowel
with -a-. The association of a verb with a particular subparadigm is
morphologically marked by the theme vowel, -a- and -e- (§4.3.2). A
verb is assigned to a conjugation class on the basis of this marking
alone, and it has not been possible to establish semantic, syntactic
or phonological explanations behind this system of classification.
A desinence is a way of subdividing nouns into different
morphological classes, without any direct syntactic, semantic or
phonological rationale. In nouns, subparadigms are normally called
DECLENSION CLASSES. (17) illustrates two of them in Modern Russian.
The desinence (null in the first case, -a in the second) determines
which specific allomorphs the noun takes to express each one of the
slots in the paradigm. Notice that both nouns are feminine, but still
the declensions are different, which again shows that there is no
direct correspondence between gender and desinence marking.
(17)
 
dver’-Ø ‘door’, third
declension
sestr-a ‘sister’, first
declension
Nominative
sg.
dver’
sestra
Accusative
sg.
dver’
sestri

Genitive sg.
dveri
sestry
Dative sg.
dveri
sestre
Prepositional
sg.
dveri
sestre
Instrumental
sg.
dverju
sestroi
Paradigms as primitives or as derived notions in morphological
theory
As a descriptive term, ‘paradigm’ is used in descriptive grammars to
refer to the set of inflectional forms of a word. However, theories of
morphology differ with respect to the status that paradigms have in
the organization of the morphological component that they propose.
In WP theories, such as that in Stump (2001), paradigms are
primitive objects which are used by morphology to organize the
inflection of words, and to which specific rules in morphology make
direct reference (as we will see in the next sections). Remember that
in a WP theory, words are not decomposed into smaller units, such
as morphemes. The primitive units of analysis are words, which are
viewed as the way in which different sets of grammatical properties
are realized in the morphology. Paradigms are the constructs that
organize the correspondence between sets of features and specific
forms of words, establishing systematic associations between forms
and meanings in specific categories or subcategories. As
morphemes are not isolated here, the notion of paradigm cannot be
reduced to any other simpler object. Several pieces of evidence,
which we will review in the following subsections, argue in favour of
this view.
The alternative would be to claim that paradigms are not primitive
notions, but the list of forms that is obtained when a word is
combined with all the different inflectional morphemes that it can
take. In this view, used in IA theories, each morpheme adds to the
word different grammatical properties required in the syntactic
context. Once all the possible inflectional morpheme combinations
are established for a particular word, we can organize them,
descriptively, in a paradigm, but the paradigm is derived from the

information added by individual morphemes. Consider the word
stolom ‘with the table’ in Russian. In a WP theory, this is the form
that fills the cell in the paradigm standing for singular instrumental for
the noun stol; in an IA theory, the singular instrumental information is
added to the noun by the morpheme -om, without direct reference to
a paradigm.
Reducing a paradigm to the sum of the information of all the
inflectional morphemes that a word carries encounters the usual
problems faced by IA theories (§2.3). Associating the inflectional
properties with specific morphemes, and not with cells inside a
paradigm, has the problem that, when there are no discrete
segments associated with each inflectional property, null morphemes
have to be postulated. This was already noted in Chomsky (1965).
Given the German word Brüder, which stands for the genitive plural
of the masculine noun Bruder, decomposing each one of these three
inflectional properties (case, number and gender) in morphemes
would force the segmentation in (18):
(18) Brüder - Ø
- Ø
- Ø
 
brother-
masc.
-pl.
-genitive
In contrast, if the notion of paradigm is introduced here, these cases
do not pose additional problems. Given a correspondence like the
one in (19a), where the left side is a particular form of the paradigm
and the set of features on the right side correspond to the inflectional
features the word stands for, no null affixes are proposed. This kind
of correspondence can be presented in the form of a rule that
generates the specific form for a particular word. In WP theories this
is captured by a REALIZATIONAL RULE (19b).
(19) a. Brüder ↔ [Masculine, Plural, Genitive]
 
b. ℜ(Bruder, [Masc., Pl., Gen]) = Brüder
The alternative to both pure IA theories and WP theories is not to
reduce the paradigm to the sum of all morphemes used, but to the

sum of all the independent grammatical features contained in the
cells. In other words, the alternative is to divide the set of properties
on the right-hand side of (19a) into three independent features, each
standing for one of the three grammatical properties presented here.
These 
morphosyntactic 
features 
are 
independent 
from 
the
phonological materialization that each word uses to spell them out,
so the problem represented in (18) does not apply to the proposal.
This is the solution generally proposed in IA theories. The idea is
that, for instance, a noun is combined with syntactic features that
determine its gender, its number and the case that is required by its
grammatical function. The sum of these different features can then
be spelled out by a single morpheme, or, as in the case of the noun
Bruder, by a modification in the shape of the root, Brüder, but this
materialization only informs us about the morphophonology of the
segments involved. Despite the fact that Brüder is a cumulative
exponent of a set of features, the features themselves are
independent syntactic properties which do not need a paradigm to
be defined. We will revisit this issue in relation to the Separation
Hypothesis in §8.2.2.
Extending the notion of paradigm to word formation
It is worth noting, in any case, that inside WP approaches the notion
of paradigm is not restricted to inflectional morphology. In contrast to
the use of the term in traditional grammars, paradigms are also used
to give an account of morphological derivation and sometimes even
compounding. Notice that once the paradigm is introduced as a
primitive, it gives us a powerful mechanism for associating different
forms of words with sets of specific grammatical properties. If we
extend the set of the grammatical properties that we include in the
cells of the paradigm to more semantic notions such as agent,
instrument, event noun, etc., which are normally understood as
involved in word formation, we can also give an account of
derivational processes via realizational rules. (20) shows a possible
example of this, illustrated with the word destroy:
(20)

Agent noun
destroyer
Instrument noun
destructor
Event noun
destruction
Predisposition to
destructive
Nevertheless, other scholars argue that the notion of paradigm is not
applicable to derivation, due to the lack of full productivity in the case
of derivational processes (cf. §5.1). Not all verbs have a form for the
notions that we have collected in (20). If we consider the verb to
moderate, for instance, we find moderator and moderation, but most
speakers lack the form *moderative.
4.4.1 SYNCRETISM
Consider the forms in (21), which correspond to the present
indicative and the imperfective past of a Spanish verb belonging to
the first conjugation.
(21)
 
Present tense
Imperfective past tense
1st sg.
canto
cantaba
2nd sg.
cantas
cantabas
3rd sg.
canta
cantaba
1st pl.
cantamos
cantábamos
2nd pl.
cantáis
cantabais
3rd pl.
cantan
cantaban
In the present tense, each one of the forms corresponds to a
different person and number combination. However, in the
imperfective past, the same form, cantaba, stands for first person
singular and third person singular. This situation, where the same
form of a word fills two or more cells in a paradigm, is known as

SYNCRETISM (also PARADIGMATIC SYNCRETISM, in order to differentiate it
from SYNTAGMATIC SYNCRETISM, another name given to the cumulative
exponence presented in §2.3.2)
There are two major proposals to account for syncretism. In WP
theories, the phenomenon is accounted for with a rule that makes
explicit reference to the paradigm: a RULE OF REFERRAL. This is,
basically, a rule that states that the cell for a particular set of
grammatical properties inside a paradigm is filled by the word form
that realizes another set of properties inside the same paradigm.
(22) illustrates this kind of rule, using the notation proposed in Stump
(1993b), for the Spanish case just presented:
(22) Rule of Referral [past, imperfective, 1st, sg] ([σ]) = [σ]/3rd, sg.
The rule states that the form corresponding to the set of features
Past, Imperfective, First Person and Singular is identical to the form
used in the same paradigm to realize the third person singular slot.
Rules of referral can be restricted to a specific conjugation class; this
is not necessary in the account of the Spanish verb, because the
same syncretism happens in the second (bebía ‘I or he drank’) and
third conjugations (partía ‘I or he left’). Notice that a rule of referral
can in principle relate any two cells inside a paradigm; syncretism is,
as such, viewed as a purely morphological phenomenon without
connections to syntax.
The alternative used in DM – and some other IA theories – is to
account for syncretism through FEATURE IMPOVERISHMENT. The idea is
that two sets of grammatical features are materialized by the same
morpheme when the differences between the two sets are eliminated
by a rule that erases the differentiating features.
Assume that the difference between third and first person is
obtained by different features. We can characterize third person with
a [person] feature, and first person by adding to it the feature
[speaker], meaning that the person refers to the author of an
utterance. As such, the difference between first and third person
could be captured by a different set of morphosyntactic features:
[person, speaker] for the first, [person] for the third; the second
person could be characterized by the set [addressee, person].

Assume that Spanish has a rule that states that, in the presence of
the features [past, imperfective] for tense and aspect, the feature
[speaker] has to be erased. This is a rule of impoverishment that
removes a morphosyntactic feature from the representation before
the form of the affix is determined. (23) states it like this: [speaker]
becomes zero (that is: erase [speaker]) in the context [past,
imperfective].
(23) [speaker] → Ø / ____ Past, Imperfective
After the rule is applied, the third and the first person have the same
feature content (24).
(24) a. [speaker,
person,
past,
imperfective]
 
b. [
person,
past,
imperfective]
As now the two forms are non-distinct in their feature content, the
same morphophonological form will be used to materialize them
both. This rule does not make reference to a whole paradigm, but
operates on individual sets of morphosyntactic features. Unlike a rule
of referral, feature impoverishment predicts that syncretism will only
happen between forms which have a similar feature content, so that
feature erasure can give non-distinct forms. It also predicts that,
whenever there is systematic syncretism between two elements, the
syncretic form will be less specified in its featural content. In our
case, the form that is used to replace another one (the third person)
is the one that contains fewer features than the form that is replaced
(the first person). Rules of referral, in contrast, are a more powerful
procedure which allows syncretism between any two cells in the
paradigm.
4.4.2 DEFECTIVENESS
Inflection is generally expected to be maximally productive. This is
indeed the typical situation, but there are exceptions, cases where
words lack one or more inflectional forms. For example, in English,
modal verbs – such as must or shall – lack a gerund form; *musting

or *shalling do not exist and there is no other form in the paradigm
that replaces them. Another relevant case is the one of pluralia
tantum and singularia tantum nouns. PLURALIA TANTUM (‘plural only’)
nouns are ones which do not appear in the singular (for instance, the
English noun odds, meaning ‘probability’), and SINGULARIA TANTUM
(‘singular only’) nouns are ones without a plural form (English thirst).
This situation, where a cell inside a paradigm is not filled by any
form, is known as DEFECTIVENESS.
Defectiveness, in some cases, can be explained by semantics,
namely, when the meaning of the word is incompatible with some
grammatical properties. Meaning can explain that the verb to rain in
English and its equivalents in other languages generally lack all the
person values in the languages except for the third person: as the
word denotes an impersonal process whose subject cannot be
human or a group, the other combinations would not make sense
with what we know of the real world. However, in other cases, no
specific semantic reason can be found for the lack of a word form;
this would be the case with the lack of gerund form in must (but not
in the semantically close predicate be forced to) and other modal
verbs like should and can. The reason for this gap in the paradigm is
not obviously syntactic either; other auxiliaries allow for gerunds
(being, having), and verbs that denote states, too (knowing, owning,
etc.). Unless a theory can be developed that motivates modal verbs
not inflecting like other verbs in English by some syntactic principle,
this absence will be analyzed as the effect of a MORPHOLOGICAL GAP.
In WP theories, morphological gaps in the paradigm are easily
described, for instance by saying that the paradigm is defective and
there is no materialization of one or several of its cells. DM, in
contrast, needs to find some morphosyntactic reason that makes it
impossible for a modal verb like must to be combined with the
features that produce a gerund; in our case, it has to define the
defectiveness as some kind of incompatibility between the
morphosyntactic properties of the verb and those of the gerund.
4.4.3 SUPPLETION

Sometimes, different roots are used inside the same paradigm. For
example, the contrast between the present and the past of the verb
to go is performed not by adding extra segments to the same basic
form, but by substituting the root: go ~ went.
In these cases, we do not talk about allomorphy because, as
mentioned in §1.4.1, allomorphy in its traditional sense requires the
two 
forms 
to 
be 
derivable 
from 
the 
same 
phonological
representation. Currently, it does not seem motivated by the
knowledge we have about contemporary English phonology to
propose a set of rules that derive one of these forms from the other
(or both forms from the same underlying representation). These
cases are known as SUPPLETION.
Suppletion has been taken, by itself, as an argument against IA
theories. Inside a WP theory, suppletion is easily described via a
realizational rule (25a); the same format of rule is used to account for
a form where the root is not replaced, but slightly altered (25b) and
where the root does not change (25c). Remember that in WP
theories the term ‘root’ is only used descriptively, and the word is not
required to be segmented into smaller parts.
(25) a. ℜ(go, [past]) = went
 
b. ℜ(write, [past]) = wrote
 
c. ℜ(burst, [past]) = burst
As we said in §1.4.1, the boundaries between allomorphy and
suppletion are sometimes fuzzy. This happens when it is not clear
whether two forms can be derived from the same phonological
representation by a phonological rule. The following alternations
present the problem in English:
(26) a. sing ~ sang
 
b. sit ~ sat
 
c. write ~ wrote

On the one hand, it is clear that no contemporary rule of English
phonology changes the vowel of the root in this way, but at the same
time the two related forms are phonologically similar enough to make
it tempting to have a shared phonological representation.
4.4.4 PATTERNS OF IRREGULARITY
One last empirical phenomenon that has been invoked to argue
for the autonomy of paradigms is the observation that, inside
irregular paradigms, the irregularity follows a pattern and is
frequently organized in some coherent way. This observation is
illustrated in (27), taken from Spanish (irregular verb val-er ‘to cost’).
(27)
 
Present indicative
Present subjunctive
1st sg.
valg-o
valg-a
2nd sg.
val-es
valg-as
3rd sg.
val-e
valg-a
1st pl.
val-emos
valg-amos
2nd pl.
val-éis
valg-áis
3rd pl.
val-en
valg-an
As can be seen, this verb is irregular because the root adopts two
varieties, one val-and the other valg-. The distribution of the
irregularity is clear: first person singular in the present indicative and
the whole present subjunctive. Consider now the irregular verb cab-
er ‘to fit’.
(28)
 
Present indicative
Present subjunctive
1st sg.
quep-o
quep-a
2nd sg.
cab-es
quep-as

3rd sg.
cab-e
quep-a
1st pl.
cab-emos
quep-amos
2nd pl.
cab-éis
quep-áis
3rd pl.
cab-en
quep-an
This is a different irregularity, but the alternation is distributed in
exactly the same way as before: the form used in the first person
singular present indicative is used in the forms of the present
subjunctive.
What this distribution shows us is that irregularity is not chaotic,
but follows some rules inside the paradigm, building patterns that
tend to repeat themselves for different, historically unrelated irregular
forms. There are no phonological, syntactic or semantic connections
between the two verbs presented in (27) and (28) and yet the way in
which the alternation is instantiated is the same. This suggests that
paradigms have an internal structure which is used to organize the
distribution of the irregular morphemes; these ‘regular’ patterns
inside irregular paradigms have been considered morphomes,
because the rationale behind their distribution is morphological,
without a clear phonological, semantic or syntactic motivation.
EXERCISES
1.
Take five typologically different languages and determine the
inflectional properties of nouns, adjectives and verbs in them.
Make a table like Table 4.1 comparing the results. Remember
that you might not find independent evidence that the three
lexical categories are attested in the language.
2.
Consider the whole verbal paradigm of a regular verb in your
own language, and find a counterpart in a foreign language. List
all the cases of syncretism displayed by the verb in each of
these two languages and write referral rules to account for them.
Are there any patterns of syncretism that repeat themselves
inside each language or between the two languages? Are the

syncretic forms related in their feature content? If so, could you
account for the syncretism using feature impoverishment?
3.
Notice that, instead of claiming that there is syncretism between
two forms inside a paradigm, it could also be claimed that two
forms happen to be distinct, though homophonous (much as the
noun can and the verb can accidentally sound the same despite
being different, unrelated words). What are the disadvantages of
claiming that, for example, are (second person plural) and are
(first person plural) constitute homophonous forms instead of
saying that they are syncretic?
4.
Another way of replacing syncretism is to claim that two identical
forms are in fact differentiated by the presence of null
morphemes (Ø). Imagine that someone claims that are (second
plural) is actually are-Ø2nd.pl. and that are (first plural) is are-
Ø1st.pl., that is, that despite their sounding alike, the
morphological structure is different. What are the problems with
such a proposal?
5.
Take a sample of irregular verbs in your own language and
describe the irregularities that they exhibit. Can you distribute
those irregularities in patterns, as seen in §4.4.4? Are these
patterns repeated across verbs?
FURTHER READING
The literature devoted to inflection has mainly concentrated on two
topics: the inflectional properties of languages on the one hand and
the notion of paradigm and the different morphological relations
established inside paradigms on the other. On the first topic, there
are a number of monographs devoted to the different inflectional
properties and how they are instantiated across languages. Gender
is studied in depth in Corbett (1991); number in Corbett (2000) –
from a typological perspective – and Harbour (2007); case in Blake
(2004); and person in Siewierska (2004). Aspect and tense have
been studied in Comrie (1976) and (1985), respectively, while the
crosslinguistic aspects of mood are studied in Palmer (1986). The

reader will find overviews of agreement in Corbett (2006) and Baker
(2008).
From a theoretical perspective, we can mention Harley and Ritter
(2002), who propose an organization of the inflectional features of
nouns, and Cowper (2005), who analyzes the same problem in
verbs. The status of theme vowels and conjugation markers has
been recently explored in Aronoff (1994), Oltra (1999), Galani
(2003), Arregi and Oltra (2005) and Trommer (2008); the nature of
desinences is discussed in Harris (1991), in the papers compiled in
Müller, Gunkel and Zifonun (2004) and in Bermúdez-Otero (2007a).
The status of paradigms in morphological theory is discussed in
Stump (2001) and Williams (1994), who argue in its favour, and in
Bobaljik (2002, 2008) and Halle and Marantz (2008), who propose
that pardigms are epiphenomena of how individual morphemes spell
out sets of features. We can only mention a small part of the wide
literature on processes taking place inside paradigms. A recent
typological overview of syncretism is found in Baerman, Brown and
Corbett (2005). As for particular analyses, Bonet (1991), Noyer
(1992) and Halle (1997) are examples of how to obtain syncretism
via impoverishment, a standpoint criticized in Baerman (2004).
Stump (1993b), Blevins (1995) and Hansson (2007) are among
those that account for syncretism using paradigm-internal relations.
Defectiveness – which has a recent overview in Karlsson (2000) –
has been studied in some recent papers and monographs: Fanselow
and Féry (2002), Frampton (2002), Boyé (2005) and Sims (2006).
Suppletion, which has overviews in Carstairs-McCarthy (1994) and
Corbett (2009), has been studied in Wurzel (1990), Mel’cuk (1994),
Plank (1994) – focusing on its relation to allomorphy – Aski (1995)
and Fertig (1998).
Patterns of irregularity have been extensively studied by Maiden in
a series of papers: (1992, 2000, 2005), among others. The topic is
also studied in Bybee and Pardo (1981), Booij (1997), Aronoff (1998)
and Magni (2000).
The reader interested in paradigms should be aware that they play
a role in phonological analysis, something we could not develop in
the presentation. The notion of paradigm uniformity is presented in
Benua (2000). considering both inflection and derivation, and in

McCarthy (2005). The role of paradigms in derivational morphology,
which we mentioned briefly, is developed in Corbin (1989), Bauer
(1997), Schultink (2000) and Krott (2001).

5
DERIVATIONAL PROCESSES
5.1 PROPERTIES OF DERIVATION
Inflectional processes do not alter the properties with which an item
is listed in the lexicon, but rather result in the different grammatical
forms that this item adopts in different syntactic contexts. A
derivational process alters one or several of the properties
associated with an item listed in the lexicon, making it necessary in
many cases for the new form to also be listed. Therefore, it is said
that derivation (and compounding, see §6) is a process that creates
new words; it is a WORD-FORMATION PROCESS.
Derivational processes are those that alter one or several of the
following properties:
a) the GRAMMATICAL CATEGORY of the input form. The assumption is
that units are listed in the lexicon with their grammatical
categories, so when a morphological process changes this
information, it produces a new word. Consider, for instance,
whiteness, a noun created from the adjective white.
b) the CONCEPTUAL SEMANTICS associated with the input form. For
example, the word underworld has a different meaning from the
word world, from which it is formed.
c)
the NUMBER OF ARGUMENTS of a base (‘subcategorization’ of an
item) and the SELECTIONAL RESTRICTIONS that a unit imposes on
these arguments. The idea is that in the lexicon there must also
be information stating that a particular word, such as read,

requires two syntactic arguments: one acting as the subject and
interpreted as the agent of the action, and one as the object,
corresponding to the undergoer of the action (John reads a
book). Any process that changes the number or the distribution
of these arguments changes the subcategorization of the base.
For instance, the verb wail takes a subject, whatever or whoever
makes the sound, but the verb never takes adirect object
expressing the cause of the pain (*John wailed the dead). The
verb be-wail, in contrast, requires a direct object expressing
precisely this notion (John bewailed the dead).
A change in any of the previous properties often justifies the
introduction in a dictionary as a separate entry of the word created
by the morphological process. Derivational processes create new
words, and the syntactic context will never demand that only a word
that has undergone such a process can appear (as it can do with
inflectional processes).
Lexical gaps
Given that syntactic processes are assumed to be maximally
productive, inflection is expected to be more productive than
derivation; derivation lists new forms in the lexicon and these forms
can be subject to idiosyncratic properties more easily than forms
which are not listed in the lexicon. Derivational processes have
unexpected gaps in their productivity. Consider the following list of
nominalizations (§5.2.1) in Italian.
(1)
a. pettinare ‘to comb’– pettinatura ‘hairdo’
 
b. profanare ‘to profane’ – profanazione ‘profanation’
 
c. allontanare ‘to remove’ – allontanamento ‘removal’
 
d. indovinare ‘to guess’ – Ø
 
e. assaporare ‘to taste’ – Ø
All these verbs share similar properties: they are transitive (they take
a direct object), they belong to the same conjugation class (marked
by -a-), they all allow for human subjects, and they all express
actions. Despite these similarities, the verbs in (1d) and (1e) do not

have any related nominalizations. This is an unexpected gap in the
productivity of the rule.
Conditions on the input
The closer relation of derivation to the lexicon is shown by the fact
that there are aspects of the semantics of the base which are taken
into account by derivation, but not by inflection. From the perspective
of inflection, different syntactic classes of verbs have the same
inflectional properties: in English, for instance, both transitive
(explain) and intransitive verbs (sneeze) take -s in the third person
singular. The inflectional process, thus, is not sensitive to the
subcategorization of the base. However, this lexical information is
crucial for derivational rules: an English adjective in -able is normally
constructed only from transitive verbs (explainable vs. *sneezable).
Language-specific asymmetries between prefixes and suffixes
in derivation
In most European languages, like English, French or Spanish, it has
been observed that prefixes and suffixes typically change different
pieces of the lexical entry of the base. Prefixes generally do not
change the grammatical category of the input, while suffixes typically
do this. If we contrast (2a) and (2b), we immediately observe that the
addition of the prefix to the base might change the semantics of the
base, but not its grammatical category (2a); but in (2b), the suffix
changes the grammatical category of the word, turning it into a noun.
(2)
a. estimate – underestimate
 
b. estimate – estimation
However, this correlation is not perfect. First, not all suffixes change
the grammatical category of the base. For instance, collective
suffixes take nouns as their input and produce nouns as their output,
as in the Spanish example in (3).
(3)
rosal ‘rose tree’ – rosaleda ‘group of rose trees, rose garden’

This is not entirely unexpected if the difference between prefixes and
suffixes is stated in the following terms: suffixes can change the
grammatical category of the base, but prefixes cannot.
Against this formulation, however, there is the fact that some
prefixes seem to change the grammatical category of the base.
Consider the following example, where the first word is an adjective
and the second is a verb:
(4) rich – enrich
The verb is, apparently, created by adding the prefix, without any
suffix, so it would seem that the prefix changes the grammatical
category of the input. Notice however, an alternative analysis: the
verb enrich is a case of parasynthesis (§3.3.5) involving an overt
affix and a zero suffix (§2.3.2); the segmentation would be en-rich-Ø.
However, as we have already seen, the status of zero morphemes is
not clear in morphological theory, as it is not easy to argue against
their existence or prove that they are present, and parasynthesis is
equally problematic.
Despite these problematic cases, it is generally the case that
prefixes can attach to words of different grammatical categories, and
keep these categorial differences in the output. By contrast, suffixes
generally take inputs of a particular grammatical category and
impose a particular grammatical category on their output. Consider
the examples in (5), from Spanish. The prefix contra- ‘counter-’ can
take adjectives, nouns and verbs, and produces words belonging to
these three classes as output.
(5)
a. ejemplo ‘example’ – contra-ejemplo ‘counterexample’
 
b. natural ‘nature-like’ – contra-natural ‘counter-natural’
 
c. decir ‘to say’ – contra-decir ‘to contradict’
Conversely, a suffix such as the one in (6) always takes verbs as its
input and always gives nouns as its output; thus, the words in (6b)
and (6c), where the suffix combines with an adjective or a noun, are
impossible in Spanish.

(6)
a. explica ‘to explain’ – explica-ción ‘explanation’
 
b. natural ‘natural’ – *natural-ción
 
c. papel ‘paper’ – *papel-ción
This contrast is normally accounted for in IA theories, where affixes
have their own lexical entries, by putting more information in the
entry for a suffix than in the entry associated with a prefix. More
specifically, in the entry for a suffix there is information about its
subcategorization frame – that is, the properties of the input category
it combines with – and the suffix itself is assigned a grammatical
category. In this particular case, for example, the suffix -ción could
be represented as in (7), where both the input and the output
category are specified.
(7) ]V -ción ]N
(7) reads like this: the suffix -ción takes verbs and turns them into
nouns. The idea that one suffix (or one word-formation process) only
takes words belonging to one grammatical category is known as the
UNITARY BASE HYPOTHESIS (Aronoff 1976).
It is generally the case that one suffix produces only members of
one category, which confirms the idea that derivational suffixes
belong to particular grammatical categories. There are exceptions,
though, which suggest that the correlation between suffixation and a
fixed grammatical category is more of a tendency than a general
principle. The English suffix -ly, for instance, produces both
adjectives (8a) and adverbs (8b). In Italian and Spanish some
suffixes that select verbs, such as the agentive suffixes -dor or -tore,
often produce both nouns (8a) and adjectives (8d).
(8)
a. This is a love-ly house.
 
b. Economical-ly speaking, this solution is unacceptable.
 
c. Esto es un seca-dor.
 
 This is a      dri-er.
 
d. Este hombre es muy vivi-dor.
 
 
This man     is very live-er

 
 
‘This man is very cheerful.’
There are also exceptions to the generalization that a given suffix
always selects words of a specific grammatical category. In order to
account for the many exceptions to the Unitary Base Hypothesis, the
Modified Unitary Base Hypothesis has been proposed (Scalise
1983), according to which a suffix selects either [+N] or [+V] units. A
suffix would select either nominal categories (adjectives and nouns),
which are defined as [+N] categories, or predicates (adjectives and
verbs), defined as [+V] categories, but it is predicted that no affix will
select nouns and verbs. However, even to this modified proposal
there are exceptions. For example, the agentive suffix -dor in
Spanish, or -er in English, combines productively with verbs, but
exceptionally it can also produce new words from nouns. Consider,
for instance, words like Londoner, six-packer, two-decker and others
in English.
5.2 CATEGORY CHANGES
In this section, we will address the derivational processes that
change the grammatical category of the input and imply some formal
change in the base, generally expressed by additive morphology.
Keep in mind that very frequently this change in grammatical
category also implies a change in the semantics of the base, but not
always. We will leave the discussion of the processes that change
the meaning of the base without altering its grammatical category for
§5.3.
5.2.1 NOMINALIZATIONS
Nominalizations are those derivational processes which produce
nouns from verbs or adjectives.
Event nominalizations
An event nominalization is a deverbal noun that, just like the original
verb, denotes an eventuality, be it an event or a state. For instance,
the nominalization assassination, related to the verb assassinate,
denotes the action of assassinating in sentences like ‘The

assassination of Lincoln took place in 1865.’ Given the fact that both
the nominalization and the verb denote the same kind of object, an
event, it has been claimed that this type of derived word is a different
categorial instantiation of a generally verbal concept. Morphologically
derived words of this type, where the semantics of the base are kept
almost intact, but where there has been a change in the grammatical
category of the word, are called TRANSPOSITIONS (Beard 1995).
There are different kinds of event nominalization, and they all have
in common the expression of an action or a state associated with the
meaning of the verbal base. Complex event nominalizations are
those that express an action, generally keeping the arguments of the
base and allowing for modifiers that mirror the adverbs and
prepositional phrases allowed by the verb. Consider the noun phrase
in (9), where the head noun is an event nominalization, explanation.
This noun is allowed to express all the arguments that the input verb
explain allows: a theme, the analysis, a goal, the students, and an
agent, Jane. They are expressed as noun modifiers, but the
semantic relation that they establish with the predicate is the same.
Also, the adjective quick is equivalent to an adverb quickly in the
verb phrase to explain quickly, which expresses the manner in which
the event of explaining took place.
(9)
The quick explanation of the analysis to the students by Jane
Other deverbal nominalizations denote states. These STATE
NOMINALIZATIONS can, as complex events do, have arguments; they
also allow being modified by adjectives or prepositional phrases that
require some temporal extension in the head noun, such as two
hours long or for several minutes; but they do not denote any action.
Consider two possible interpretations of the nominalization sedation,
from sedate.
(10) a. The sedation of the patient must take place before the
procedure.
 
b. The sedation of the patient for three hours is necessary
for this procedure.

In (10a), the nominalization expresses an action. We know this
because it can be the subject of the verb take place, which is
compatible only with nouns that denote events (*A book took place
yesterday); it means ‘the action of sedating the patient’. In (10b),
however, the interpretation is not that of an action, but of a state: the
state of the patient’s being sedated for some time.
Object nominalizations
Other deverbal nominalizations denote different participants related
to the event that the verbal base expresses.
Among these we find nominalizations that denote the RESULT
OBJECT produced as the result of performing an action, as when we
say that The explanation was written on the blackboard. Here, the
noun explanation does not refer to the action of explaining, but to the
product that resulted from the action.
Other nominalizations denote the entity affected by an action.
These PATIENT NOMINALIZATIONS are illustrated by many -ee nouns in
English, such as nominee, abandonee, addressee, employee or
coachee.
Nominalizations denoting the agent that performs an action are
also very frequent. AGENT NOMINALIZATIONS denote the entity that,
purposefully, initiates a particular action. Nominalizations such as
reader, attacker and driver belong to this class. As can be seen,
some of these nouns can be used to denote jobs or occupations
(driver, teacher), but they also stand for people characterized by
some frequent habits (smoker, drinker).
Frequently, the same affixes used to form agent nominalizations
are used for INSTRUMENTS (opener, packager, drier); in this second
case, the noun does not denote a human being that initiates an
event, but an object used by the agent to help perform an action.
Sometimes, object nominalizations can express the place where
an action typically takes place. For instance, the nominalizer -torio in
Spanish frequently forms these PLACE NOMINALIZATIONS, as illustrated
in (11a, b). Other Spanish deverbal nouns are TIME NOMINALIZATIONS,
denoting periods of time (11c, d). The typology of object
nominalizations can be very detailed and several other fine-grained
distinctions can be made in their denotations.

(11) a. lava-torio
 
 
wash-nom., ‘place to wash’
 
b. pari-torio
 
 
give.birth-nom., ‘place to give birth’
 
c.
reina-do
 
 
reign-nom., ‘time of a king’s rule’
 
d. preside-ncia
 
 
preside-nom., ‘presidency’
Quality nominalizations
Nominalizations coming from adjectives never denote an event or an
action, as the semantic information of their bases does not contain
this notion. These nominalizations denote the ABSTRACT QUALITY or
property denoted by the input, as in generosity (from generous),
which is interpreted as the property of ‘being generous’. In general,
these nouns express ‘the property of being X’, where X is the
denotation of the adjectival base.
When the property denoted is purely physical, like the size or the
weight of an entity, it is also possible that the nominalization denotes
the relevant PHYSICAL DIMENSION, as in depth (coming from deep).
It is possible too for a deadjectival nominalization to denote not
just the property, but a specific DEGREE of that property. If we
consider the meaning of the word criminality it cannot be
paraphrased as ‘the property of being a criminal’ (where it would
denote simply the abstract property), but rather as ‘the degree or the
extent to which criminal acts are found’. A similar interpretation is
associated with mortality in one of its readings (The mortality of
infants is too high in this country), the other one being a purely
abstract quality reading (Dorian Gray tried to escape mortality).
5.2.2 VERBALIZATIONS
Verbalizations are those derivational processes which turn nouns or
adjectives into verbs. It is customary to differentiate between verbs
which are derived from adjectives and those which are derived from

nouns, because it has been proven that the nature of the base plays
a role in determining the kind of verb which is obtained.
Changes of state
Verbs derived from adjectives very frequently denote changes of
state which lead the subject or the object to acquire the properties
expressed by the adjective. For example, to widen (using the suffix -
en and the adjective wide) denotes a process in which an entity
becomes wider. Frequently, change-of-state verbs coming from
adjectives allow two readings. The first reading, known as the
INCHOATIVE, is an intransitive version of the verb where the subject is
the entity that changes; for instance, The gap widened, meaning ‘the
gap became wider’. In the second reading, the CAUSATIVE one, the
verb is transitive, the changing entity is the object and the subject is
the agent or causer of that change, as in The crisis widened the gap
between the poor and the rich, meaning ‘the crisis caused the gap to
become wider’. Some verbalizers tend to be associated with the
causative reading, such as -ify. The verb electrify, for instance, only
has the causative reading (John electrified the fence vs. *The fence
electrified).
When the adjectives in the base express a degree, the semantics
of the verb frequently also reflect it. The adjective wide has this
property (wider, widest), but the adjective electric, in its normal
meaning, does not (#more electric). Consequently, the verb electrify
is interpreted as becoming electric, that is, as acquiring the property
of being electric, which the object previously lacked. If we electrify
the fence, it follows that the fence, before we performed the action,
was not electric. By contrast, if the adjective expresses a degree, the
verb allows for a reading in which the object attains a higher degree
of a property that the object already had. Consider the two possible
readings of The gap widened. In one of them, the gap was not wide
before and becomes wide as a result of the change. However, in the
second reading, the gap was already wide but becomes even wider
as a result of the transformation. Verbs that allow these two
readings, the pure change of state and the gradual change, are
known as DEGREE ACHIEVEMENTS.

Changes of place
One of the most frequent verb classes that are obtained when the
verb is derived from a noun has an interpretation in which the verb
denotes a change of location. Take, for instance, the verb imprison.
This transitive verb is interpreted as the action of putting someone in
a prison. Here, the base noun is interpreted as the place where the
object is located. The same meaning appears in the conversion verb
to box (‘to put something in a box’). Verbs where the base noun
denotes a place are known as LOCATION verbs. In some other cases,
though, the base noun denotes the object which is transferred to
another place, such as the conversion verb to saddle, which is ‘to put
a saddle on some entity’, generally a horse. These verbs where the
base noun denotes the object that changes its position are LOCATUM
verbs. In English, verbs denoting changes of place are frequently
obtained by conversion. In Spanish, almost systematically, there is a
prefix involved, as shown in (12).
(12) a. en-carcel-a
‘to put someone in jail’
 
 
in-jail-ThV
location
 
b. en-harin-a
‘to put flour on something’
 
 
in-flour-ThV
locatum
The verbs considered up to now denote putting something in a
place, but the inverse scenario (‘to remove something from some
place’) is also possible. These verbs are known as PRIVATIVE LOCATION
VERBS and PRIVATIVE LOCATUM VERBS. An example of the first class is to
mine ‘to remove something from a mine’, as in They mined the gold.
An example of the second class is to skin ‘to remove the skin from
something’, as in They skinned the rabbit.
Other readings
Deadjectival verbalizations are almost always change-of-state verbs,
but other interpretations are frequent with denominal verbalizations.
Considering 
examples 
from 
Spanish, 
the 
nouns 
inside 
a
verbalization can be understood as the INSTRUMENT to perform the
action (13a), the OBJECT GIVEN to something or someone (13b), the
OBJECT PRODUCED (13c), the CHARACTERISTIC WAY in which the subject

acts (13d) or the FUNCTION PERFORMED BY THE SUBJECT (13e), among
many other possibilities.
(13) a. a-cuchill-a
‘kill using a knife’
 
 
pref.-knife-
ThV
 
 
b. nombr-a
‘to give someone a title or a position’
 
 
name-ThV
 
 
c.
tos-e
‘to cough’
 
 
cough-ThV
 
 
d. payas-e-a
‘to act as a clown’
 
 
clown-ver.-
ThV
 
 
e. protagon-iz-a ‘to be the star of a story’
 
 
star-ver.-ThV  
5.2.3 ADJECTIVALIZATIONS
Derivational processes that build adjectives from nouns or verbs are
known as adjectivalizations. As in the other cases, we will
differentiate between those cases where the adjective is derived
from a noun and those where it comes from a verb.
Relational adjectives
Frequently, when an adjective is derived from a noun, the output is a
REFERENTIAL or RELATIONAL adjective, that is, an adjective that does
not express a gradable property or a quality of an individual, but
rather expresses the relationship that a noun establishes with a class
of objects. Consider, for example, the adjective morphological in
morphological compound. Here, morphological does not give us a
quality of the compound (in contrast with what interesting in
interesting compound or difficult in difficult compound does). This
adjective, derived from the noun morphology, tells us that the
compound is related to morphology in some way. Similarly, the
adjective presidential – derived from the noun president – does not
express any quality of an aeroplane in the presidential aeroplane,

but states that there is a particular kind of relationship – in this case,
POSSESSIVE – between the aeroplane and a president. The
possessive relation is frequent, but other relationships are possible:
in presidential candidate, the adjective denotes the GOAL of the
candidacy; in presidential system, it denotes one of the CONSTITUENT
PARTS – the main one – of the system. Some of these ambiguities in
the meaning of the same adjective can be formalized in some lexical
semantic frameworks, like Pustejovsky’s qualia structure (§8.5.1).
Some suffixes frequently give rise to relational adjectives: in
English, for instance, derived words ended in -ic or -ical (logical,
medical, economical, analytical, etc.) are often relational adjectives.
Qualitative adjectives
In other cases, adjectives derived from nouns denote qualities which,
normally, are prototypical of the noun used as input. For instance,
the adjective childish (childish behaviour) expresses properties that
are typically associated with a child. The adjective motherly similarly
expresses qualities generally assumed to be displayed by mothers.
Participles
Adjectives can also come from verbs. The participle of a verb is
frequently used to denote the state attained after undergoing a
process or action –exhausted, cooked, destroyed, etc. as in The
resources have already been exhausted – and then, by extension, it
can denote the properties associated with that state (as in I am
feeling exhausted). Participles are one of the paradigm forms of a
verb, and, therefore, are considered inflectional forms when they still
behave like verbs; their behaviour as adjectives constitutes a
morphological puzzle, related to HYBRID CATEGORIES, which we will
discuss in §5.7.2. It is customary to consider as adjectivalizations
only those participles that have lost all their verbal properties – for
example, the possibility of having agents and adverbs which refer to
the manner in which an event is performed. In turn, these participles
must be able to allow for degree modification and other adjectival
characteristics. Attending to these properties, the word cooked would
be a verbal participle from the verb to cook in (14a) – therefore, an

inflectional form – but the word worried would be an adjectivalization
from worry in (14b).
(14) a. a pie quickly cooked by one of the best chefs in the world
 
b. a very worried person
Modal and dispositional adjectives
Some deverbal adjectives involve a modal meaning. This is the case
with words ending in -able, such as expendable. Notice that this
derivational process, in addition to changing the grammatical
category, has two other relevant effects. The first is that the meaning
is passive. An expendable warrior is not a warrior that expends
things, but a warrior who can be expended. The second is that the
adjective has a MODAL MEANING, denoting either that the action can be
done or that it must be done. In expendable, the meaning is ‘can be
expended’, and thus it denotes the possibility of doing it. In payable,
by contrast, the meaning is ‘must be paid’, thus denoting the
obligation of performing the action.
A DISPOSITIONAL ADJECTIVE, by contrast, denotes the property of
being prone to performing a particular action, expressed by the input
verb. This happens frequently in Spanish with words that add -dizo
to the verbal stem:
(15) a. enamora-dizo
 
 
fall.in.love-suff., ‘someone who falls in love easily’
 
b. hui-dizo
 
 
escape-suff., ‘someone or something that escapes easily’
 
c.
enoja-dizo
 
 
get.angry-suff., ‘someone who gets angry easily’
5.3 SEMANTIC CHANGES
With the exception of transpositions, where the semantics of the
input is preserved in the output, generally processes that change the
grammatical category of the base also change their semantics. In

this section, however, we will concentrate on those cases where the
semantics has been altered without involving a category change.
Collective meaning
It is common to add some morphology to a noun in order to get a
COLLECTIVE noun, a noun that denotes a group of people or things.
This can be accomplished by a suffix, as in Spanish, where the suffix
-eda is used to form collective nouns from bases that denote trees,
plants or some substances, as in the examples in (16).
(16) a. álamo – alam-eda
 
 
cottonwood – group of cottonwoods
 
b. rosal – rosal-eda
 
 
rose tree – group of rose trees
The German prefix ge- plays a similar role in some complex words,
as in stein ‘rock’ –ge-stein ‘group of rocks’.
Temporal meaning
Sometimes, a morphological process can give temporal meaning to
the base, making it denote a period or an action previous or posterior
to a particular event or situation. This is frequently performed with
prefixes in European languages. Consider, for example, the cases in
(17). In (17a, b), the input is a noun that denotes a particular
situation, but the output is a noun that denotes a notion that
precedes or follows in time that event. In (17c), the input expresses
some action, and the output denotes that same action, only now
preceding another event (for example, an eviction) which is not
expressed by the word.
(17) a. war > pre-war
 
b. modernism > post-modernism
 
c.
warning > fore-warning
Spatial meaning

Sometimes a morphological process can take as input a word that
denotes an object and give a word that denotes another object,
place or area located with respect to that object. The examples in
(18), from Spanish, show that this is generally performed in this
language with prefixes:
(18) a. cámara > ante-cámara
 
 
chamber > ante-chamber
 
b. índice > super-índice
 
 
index > super-index
 
c.
suelo > sub-suelo
 
 
soil > sub-soil
Negation
It is also possible for a morphological process to express the
opposite property to the one denoted by the input, or the absence of
a particular notion. Denoting the opposite property by prefixation is
frequently possible when the input is a gradable adjective, as in
these Spanish examples (19):
(19) a. útil > in-útil
 
 
useful > useless
 
b. leal > des-leal
 
 
loyal > dis-loyal
When the input denotes an event, a morphological process
expressing negative meaning frequently gives as a result the
reversion of the event expressed by the input. For instance, codify
means to turn something into a code, but de-codify means the
reverse action: to recover the message by translating the code. Such
verbs are known as REVERSATIVE VERBS.
Attitudinal meanings
Other morphological processes change the meaning in a more
radical way. Many words starting with anti-, in English and Spanish,
denote a negative attitude towards the concept expressed by the

input. By contrast, those that start with pro- generally denote a
favourable attitude towards that concept:
(20) a. American > anti-American ~ pro-American
 
b. abortion > anti-abortion ~ pro-abortion
 
c.
catholic > anti-catholic ~ pro-catholic
Quantities and degrees
Frequently, a morphological process adds a quantity meaning to the
input. The following examples show this kind of process. What (21a)
expresses is that the noun associated with the input, colour, appears
in many different ways; (21b) has a distributive meaning (‘two every
year’); (21c) and (21d) express a particular fraction of the notion
denoted in the input.
(21) a. coloured > multi-coloured
 
b. annual > bi-annual
 
c.
circle > semi-circle
 
d. second > milli-second
When the notion quantified is a property, it is common to use the
term ‘degree’; some morphological processes also express the
degree to which a property appears, or the intensity with which a
process is done:
(22) a. cool > super-cool
 
b. perform > under-perform
Repetition
Other processes, when they operate over verbs, can denote that the
action denoted by the base is performed once again. For instance,
this is the meaning that is obtained when a verb is prefixed with re-
in English (rewrite, reconstruct, rephrase, etc.). This meaning of
repetition is sometimes interpreted as RESTITUTION, when the
meaning of the verb is such that one of the arguments has been
restored to a previous state, even if the action itself only takes place

once. For example, in the sentence They replanted a very old
sequoia, it is not necessary that the people involved had planted it
before; the only requisite is that the tree once got removed from the
soil and now is once again with its roots in the ground.
Other meaning changes
The variety of meanings that can be expressed with morphological
processes is very wide. In addition to the processes mentioned
before, there are many others, of which we will give just a few
examples. Some languages, like Spanish, can express different
kinds of BLOWS by deriving a word from the noun that expresses the
object or body part used to hit (23a) or from the noun expressing the
part of the body where someone is hit (23b).
(23) a. bastón > baston-azo
 
 
stick > blow with a stick
 
b. barriga > barrig-azo
 
 
belly > blow on the belly
It is also possible to find semi-productive processes which derive the
name of the OFFSPRING of an animal from the name of the animal, as
in ballena (Spanish for ‘whale’) and ballena-to (Spanish for ‘baby
whale’).
5.4 CATEGORY CHANGES WITHOUT FORMAL MARKING:
CONVERSION
Derivational processes reflect the change in the properties of the
base by some phonological change in it, frequently by adding an
affix to it. By contrast, CONVERSION alters the grammatical category of
the base without imposing any phonological change. Several
examples of conversion are given in (24); notice that the word that
undergoes conversion (underlined) is pronounced exactly the same
in both cases, that is, there has been no phonological change.
(24) a. the red apple (red is an adjective)
 
a′. I like dark red (red is a noun)

 
b. They always attack us (attack is a verb)
 
b′. We are under attack (attack is a noun)
 
c.
The screen will clear (clear is a verb).
 
c′. Everything is clear now (clear is an adjective).
As seen in (24), conversion can operate between any two of the
three major lexical categories noun, verb and adjective. Sometimes
these conversions also involve prepositions: down is a preposition in
down the hole, but it can be a verb (He downed a pint), an adjective
(I feel very down) or a noun (The Downs are beautiful) as well.
Conversion poses problems for DIRECTIONALITY. What is meant by
the directionality of a morphological process is that in a pair of
morphologically related words, one is the more basic form, the input,
and the other is the result of applying the operation, the output. In
general, it is the case that the morphologically simpler form is the
input and the output is the more complex word (with the exceptions
that come from backformations and subtractive morphology; §2.3.1).
The output form, also, frequently takes its semantics from the input
form, in such a way that its definition includes, in some sense, the
meaning of the input form. For example, in the pair of words read ~
reader, the directionality of the morphological process that relates
them is quite clearly from the form read to the form reader. This
second form, apart from being morphologically more complex,
entails the meaning of ‘read’ in its definition: ‘someone who reads’.
More often than not, this is not the case in conversion. The first
two criteria, that the output form is phonologically marked and is
morphologically more complex, are not applicable here, as by
definition, conversion involves change of grammatical category
without any marking. The semantic criterion does not give clear
results either and can be arbitrary. Consider, for instance, attack. We
could define the noun from the verb (‘the action of attacking’), but we
could equally well define the verb from the noun (‘to perform an
attack’); there is no clear direction involved in the semantic relation.
Identifying the direction of the conversion process that relates the
verb attack and the noun attack does not seem to follow from
general principles. The possibility of determining directionality in
conversion cases has attracted the attention of morphologists: works

like Allen (1978) and Don (1993, 2004) present some arguments for
directionality in such cases. In the reminder of this section we will
review the two major proposals that have been made in order to
account for conversion when the directionality is not obvious.
Conversion and lexical storage
The first proposal involves treating conversion as a process that
does not make a more complex form out of a simpler one, but relates
two equally complex words without deriving one from the other. This
relational view of conversion has Lieber (1981) as its main
proponent. The idea is that the lexicon stores two words with the
phonetic form attack, one listed as a noun and another one listed as
a verb, as in (25).
(25)
Some information will be common to the two words: their
phonological representation and the fact that they denote the same
concept. In order to avoid listing this shared information twice in the
lexicon, the relation is intermediated by REDUNDANCY RULES which
state that, unless specified otherwise, the two items are associated
with the same information. In this view, conversion is very different
from derivation; derivation builds new words from simpler objects,
while conversion relates words of equal complexity.
Conversion in a grammar with category-less roots
From a DM perspective, the solution for the directionality problem
comes from the proposal that both words are equally complex,
because they are both derived by a zero morpheme from a shared
base, a root without any category information (remember the special
status of roots in DM; §2.4.1). Consider the pair formed by the noun
attack and the verb attack (see (26), where nP = functional noun
projection and vP = functional verb projection). The proposal is that
both words involve derivation from the same root, √ATTACK, which
does not have any category information. The noun is formed by
adding a zero morpheme that turns the word into a noun (26a); the

verb is formed not by building on top of the noun, but by building
again on top of the root with the addition of a zero morpheme that
turns it into a verb (26b).
(26)
The verb does not come from the noun and the noun does not come
from the verb; hence the impossibility of establishing any
directionality between the two forms. The process is, however,
formally like derivation in that in both cases a new word is built from
a base by adding some structure.
5.5 ARGUMENT STRUCTURE CHANGES
Derivational processes may also alter the ARGUMENT STRUCTURE of the
base, that is, the set of complements and modifiers that a predicate
can or must take. Changes in the argument structure of the base can
be manifested in several ways, which we will consider in turn.
Changes in the number of arguments
Some processes change the number of arguments required by the
word. For example, the Spanish verb volar ‘to fly’ is intransitive and
only requires a single argument, the entity that flies (27a). However,
the derived verb sobre-volar (‘to fly over’) requires two arguments: in
addition to the first one, now it is also necessary to specify the place
where the flying event is happening (27b).
(27) a. El    pájaro vuela.
 
 
The bird flies.
 
b. El    pájaro sobrevuela *(la casa)
 
 
The bird over-flies         (the house)
 
 
‘The bird flies over the house’
Changes in the syntactic projection of the argument

Sometimes, the number of arguments is not altered, but the way in
which they are marked in the syntax is. For example, in Spanish
again, both the verb decir ‘to say’ and the verb des-decir ‘to go back
on something said’ require an argument which expresses, generally
with a subordinate clause, the thing said. However, with the first
verb, this argument is introduced without a preposition, as a direct
object; the second verb, derived from the first, introduces the same
argument with a preposition de:
(28) a. Juan dijo [que todo        estaba bien].
 
 
Juan said that everything was fine.
 
b. Juan se desdijo [de [que todo       estaba bien]].
 
 
Juan SE took.back of that everything was   fine
 
 
‘Juan went back on his saying that everything was fine.’
Changes in the selectional restrictions
A derivational process can keep the number of arguments and their
syntactic projection the same, but change the semantic restrictions
that the predicate imposes on the arguments. For example, in
Spanish, the verb callar ‘to silence’ can only take nouns which
denote human beings as its direct object, as in (29a), but not nouns
which denote a message which is not being transmitted (29b). By
contrast, the verb a-callar, derived from it by prefixation, can take
both human and non-human objects, as seen in (29c) and (29d).
(29) a. Juan calló al niño.
 
 
Juan silenced the child.
 
b. *Juan calló las noticias.
 
 
Juan silenced the news.
 
c.
Juan a-calló al niño.
 
 
Juan silenced the child.
 
d. Juan a-calló las noticias.
 
 
Juan silenced the news.
Changes in the relations between the arguments

Finally, a derivational process can also require that the different
arguments of a predicate must be related in some specific way.
Take, for instance, the process that adds self- to a verb. Verbs
derived with self- require that the subject and the object be the same
entity, that is, these verbs must be 
REFLEXIVE (30). As a
consequence, the argument that must be reflexive (the direct object
in (30a) and the prepositional object in (30b)) cannot be expressed
independently.
(30) a. destroy something > self-destroy (*something)
 
b. impose something on someone > self-impose something
(*on someone)
5.5.1 LEXICAL ALTERNATIONS
Processes that change the properties of the argument structure of a
verb without any morphological marking have been classified as
LEXICAL ALTERNATIONS. The concept of lexical alternation is used to
describe the situation in which, given a particular verb, its argument
structure is variable. Take, for instance, the verb boil (31). This verb
can be used in two ways: with a single argument playing the role of a
subject, expressing the entity that undergoes the boiling event (31a),
or with two arguments, one being the entity that undergoes the event
and another one being the agent of that event (31b).
(31) a. The milk boiled.
 
b. John boiled the milk.
In these cases, there is no morphological marking on the verb in
English. This is similar to conversion cases where the grammatical
category of the word is altered. There are a number of common
lexical alternations. The one illustrated in (31) is the CAUSATIVE–
INCHOATIVE alternation: a single verb, without modifying its
morphological shape, can express both a change of state undergone
by an entity (as in 31a) – which is the inchoative version – and the
causation of a change of state, involving an agent and an undergoer
(as in 31b).

Other lexical alternations do not change the number of arguments,
but do change the way in which they are projected in the syntax.
This is the case with the LOCATIVE alternation, illustrated in (32). In
the locative alternation the same verb can take as its direct object an
object that gets displaced to a location, and that location as a
prepositional phrase (PP) complement (32a) or, alternatively, the
direct object can be the location and the object displaced is then a
PP (32b).
(32) a. John loaded hay
on the truck.
 
b. John loaded the truck
with hay.
Lexical alternations in a Lexicalist theory
The analysis of lexical alternations depends on the assumptions that
a theory makes about the relation between syntax and the lexicon. In
a Lexicalist theory, the idea is that the lexical items have
grammatical properties previous to their insertion in the syntax, and
they project these properties once they are part of a syntactic
structure (PROJECTIONISM; see §7.1.1). From this perspective
(adopted by Levin and Rappaport Hovav 1995 among others), a verb
like boil must be associated with two (or more) different argument
structures in the lexicon. How is this performed? The idea is that the
lexicon, which under this theory is a generative component where
new forms are created, contains rules that can modify the lexical
entries of verbs. For instance, a possible rule would be the one in
(33), which increases the number of arguments of the base:
(33) boil
(Undergoer)    →
boil (Agent, Undergoer)
When there is more than one argument, underlining one of them is
the convention used to state that that one is the most salient
argument in the group and, thus, the one which will become the
subject of the sentence, once the verb projects its properties in a
syntactic structure. The lexical rules can also modify the syntactic
manifestation of an argument, as in the locative alternation. This is

performed on the assumption that the lexical entry can also
determine how an argument will be materialized in the structure.
(34) load 
(Agent, 
Undergoer,
Place) →
load 
(Agent, 
Undergoer,
Place)
 
undergoer: Direct Object
undergoer: PP
 
place: PP
place: Direct Object
See §7.1.2 for the treatment of lexical alternations in a
Constructionist theory.
5.6 QUESTIONS RAISED BY THE ANALYSIS OF DERIVATIONAL
PROCESSES IN A SINGLE LANGUAGE
In this chapter we have described as exhaustively as possible the
derivational processes found in the languages of the world and what
kind of properties they modify in their bases. However, it is also
useful to concentrate on a single language and see what kinds of
derivational process it allows and how they are formally marked in
the word. This makes it possible to address other important aspects
of derivational processes.
Table 5.1 Nominalizations
Category of the
base
Semantic notion
Affix
Example
From verbs
Agent or
-ar
brenne ‘burn’ >brenn-ar ‘burner’
 
instrument
-sel
brenne ‘burn’ >bren-sel ‘fuel’
 
Patient
-(l)ing
lære ‘teach’ >lær-ling ‘apprentice’
 
Product
-ning
bygge ‘build’ >byg-ning ‘building’
 
Eventuality
-else
lide ‘suffer’ >lid-else ‘suffering’
 
 
-eri
fri ‘propose’ >fri-eri ‘proposition’
 
 
-(n)ing
skyte ‘shoot’> skyt-ing ‘shooting’
 
 
-nad
lese ‘read’ >les-nad ‘reading’
 
 
-sel
føde ‘be born’ > fød-sel ‘birth’
From adjectives Quality
-d
høg ‘high’ > høg-d ‘height’

 
 
-dom
rik ‘rich’ >rik-dom ‘richness’
 
 
-eri
kokett ‘flirtatious’ >kokett-eri
‘coquetry’
 
 
-het
god ‘good’ >god-het ‘goodness’
 
Person
characterized by
a property
-(l)ing
gamle ‘old’ >gaml-ing ‘old person’
Table 5.2 Adjectivalizations
Category of the
base
Semantic notion
Affix
Example
From nouns
Similarity to
-aktig
barn ‘child’ >barn-aktig ‘childish’
or other
 
-en
gull ‘gold’ >gyll-en ‘golden’
nominal
 
-sam
ein ‘one’ >ein-sam ‘lonely’
category
Possession
-ig
blod ‘blood’ >blod-ig ‘bloody’
 
Predispositional
-al
frost ‘frost’ >frost-al ‘sensitive to the
cold’
 
 
-sam
arbeid ‘work’ >arbeid-sam
‘industrious’
 
Relational
-lig
dag ‘day’ >dag-lig ‘daily’
 
adjective
-
messig
regel ‘rule’ >regel-messig ‘regular’
 
 
-(i)sk
Island ‘Iceland’ >island-sk
‘Icelandic’
From verbs
Passive
-ande
ete ‘eat’ >et-ande ‘edible’
 
 
-bar
dyrke ‘cultivate’ >dyrk-bar
‘cultivable’
 
Predispositional
-ande
brenne ‘burn’ >brenn-ande
‘flammable’
In this section we will concentrate on Nynorsk, a variety of modern
Norwegian. Our data are taken mainly from Johannessen (1993).
We will restrict our discussion to productive processes that change

the grammatical category of the base and show phonological
marking. See Tables 5.1–5.3.
Even though this collection of processes is not exhaustive, we see
several problems that arise whenever one is trying to account for the
derivational properties of affixes. First of all, notice that the same
process uses different affixes. For instance, to build nouns denoting
actions from verbs, Nynorsk has five productive affixes that can be
used: -else, -eri, -(n)ing, -nad and -sel.
Table 5.3 Verbalizations
Semantic notion
Affix
Example
Causative
-ere
adress ‘address’ >adress-ere ‘send’
(typically 
from
nouns)
-isere
katalog ‘catalogue’ >katalog-isere
‘catalogue’
 
-fisere
eksempel ‘example’ >eksempl-ifisere
‘exemplify’
Change of state
-ne
sjuk ‘sick’ >sjuk-ne ‘to fall ill’
(typically 
from
adjectives)
 
 
The immediate question is how these five markers are distributed.
There are two main possible answers. The first is to find fine-grained
semantic or grammatical differences between the affixes (so that
nouns derived with each of them have slightly different properties
from nouns derived with the other four), or between the verbs that
combine with each of them (so that depending on subtle properties
of verbs they can be divided into classes, each class always
combining with the same affix). The alternative, which is the answer
authors generally adopt, is to list the possible combinations, marking
bases with some specific diacritic that states which one of the
available affixes that base takes when nominalizing. In this second
case, combinations of bases and affixes are viewed as idiosyncratic
in nature, and the speakers cannot derive by general rules which

one of the affixes will be used for a given process. Speakers will
have to store that knowledge in a lexical list.
Another problem is that sometimes the same affix is used for a
variety of processes. For instance, in Nynorsk the affix -(l)ing is used
both to derive patients from verbs and to derive names for classes of
human beings from adjectives based on their typical properties. In
each of these cases the affix takes a different category as its base,
and in both cases the meaning contribution seems to be different.
The question in this case is whether we want to assume that we
have only one affix, with very underspecified meaning and
selectional restrictions, or whether it is a better alternative to propose
that we have two different affixes that happen to be pronounced in
the same way.
5.7 THE BOUNDARIES BETWEEN INFLECTION AND
DERIVATION
We have already seen cases where inflection does not have the
prototypical characteristics that differentiate it from derivation or
compounding. For instance, inflection is expected to be maximally
productive, but some paradigms are defective (§4.4.2.). It is not true
that all nouns can take, for instance, plural; as we have seen, so-
called singularia tantum nouns are words, like hunger, thirst or
sincerity that are not attested in the plural.
Moreover, inflection is not expected to change the meaning of the
word. However, some nouns get a special meaning in the plural
form: looks, humanities, damages or spirits. In such cases, the
presence of plural morphology triggers a meaning which is not
available in the singular form.
These exceptions have been interpreted by some authors as
evidence that the distinction between inflection and derivation is
arbitrary and both processes are equal in nature, with the differences
having more the status of tendencies than of generalizations.
Authors like Marantz (2001) point out that the fact that a word is in
the plural (drivers) is just as syntactically relevant as its being a noun
(driver, not drives); from this perspective the information that
derivational morphology adds also interacts with the syntactic

context, even if it is not typically copied in agreement. Also, given the
fact that paradigms can have gaps, the choice of whether a process
is part of a paradigm or not is quite arbitrary: why not consider the
‘agentive’ form part of the paradigm?
In the next sections we will review two phenomena that fall
between inflection and derivation, since they have mixed properties.
5.7.1 APPRECIATIVE MORPHOLOGY
Appreciative morphology refers to the processes which add to the
base an evaluative meaning related to its size, intensity or degree or
to the opinion that the speaker has of it. Typically, the following are
classified as appreciative morphemes: DIMINUTIVE affixes, if they
suggest small size, intensity or degree, or, by extension,
endearment; AUGMENTATIVE affixes, if they suggest big size or
increased degree of something; and PEJORATIVE affixes, which are
used to connote that the entity denoted is evaluated negatively. A
language like Spanish has segments that reflect the three classes:
among the diminutive affixes, the most common are -it(o), -ill(o) and
-ic(o), depending on the dialect; -ón, -ot(e) and -az(o) are examples
of augmentative morphemes and -uch(o) is a case of a pejorative
affix (35).
(35) a. lejos – lej-it-os
 
 
far    – far-dim., ‘a bit far’
 
b. grande – grand-ot-e
 
 
big       – big-aug, ‘quite big’
 
c.
profesor – profesor-uch-o
 
 
teacher   – teacher-pejo., ‘bad teacher’
Appreciative morphology in Spanish has some inflectional
properties. For instance, it never changes the grammatical category
of the base. The word in (35a) is an adverb and remains an adverb
after the affix is added to it; (35b) is an adjective and remains an
adjective, and (35c) is a noun and remains a noun. Another property
of this process that makes it look inflectional is that it is very

productive, and can affect all classes of nouns, all gradable
adjectives and many adverbs. Words with appreciative morphology
are generally not listed in the Spanish dictionaries, as their meaning
and formal properties are easily predictable from those of the base.
Other properties of appreciative morphology, however, relate it to
derivational processes. As was said in §4.1., inflectional affixes
appear in the external layer of the word. However, appreciative
morphemes tend to appear in the internal layer of the word; in the
examples in (35) we see that desinences like -o are external to these
suffixes; this includes the number marking too, which is also always
external to them, as shown in the plural of (35c), profesor-uch-o-s,
‘bad teachers’. Other examples make it clear that the position of
appreciative morphemes is between the derivative morphemes that
can change the grammatical category of the base and these
inflectional markers (36):
(36) corre- dor-
cit-
o-
-s
 
run
er
dim.
des.
pl.
 
‘little runners’
Another derivational property of these affixes in Spanish is that
they are not copied in agreement processes; any adjective agreeing
with (35c) or (36) will have to copy the gender value associated with
the desinence -o and the number value associated with -s, but it will
not copy the diminutive value. Finally, in some cases the
appreciative morpheme gives the base an idiosyncratic meaning
which cannot be predicted by the speaker on the basis of her
knowledge of each separate morpheme. In consequence, these
cases have to be listed in the lexicon and are generally included in
dictionaries. An example of this is the noun man-ecill-a ‘watch hand’,
constructed over the word for hand, mano, with the allomorph -ecill-
and a desinence associated with feminine gender. Speakers cannot
guess from the meaning of the word ‘hand’ that this kind of ‘small
hand’ refers to a piece of a watch used to point to numbers, and thus
it is necessary to list this form in the lexicon and include it in
dictionaries.

5.7.2 HYBRID CATEGORIES
A different kind of phenomenon that casts doubt on the existence of
sharp boundaries between inflection and derivation is HYBRID
CATEGORIES, that is, words which display a behaviour that mixes
properties of two or more grammatical categories at the same time. If
we take the case of infinitives, constructed in Spanish by adding the
segment -r to the verb stem, we can see that in some cases they act
like verbs (37a): they can take a direct object and they can have
aspectual morphology. The same word in (37b) behaves like a noun,
and in this case it disallows direct objects and takes number
morphology. Both sets of properties, nominal and verbal, can show
up simultaneously in the same word, as in (37c). Notice that it
combines with determiners and adjectives, as nouns do, but at the
same time it allows for direct objects and aspectual auxiliaries.
(37) a. Juan prometió cantar-lo.
 
 
Juan promised sing-it
 
 
‘Juan promised to sing it.’
 
b. Los hermosos cantar-es de Juan
 
 
The beautiful song-s        by Juan
 
c.
El constante estar     cantando óperas de María
 
 
The constant to be     singing     operas of María
 
 
‘Maria’s constant singing operas’
In English, this kind of mixed behaviour is displayed by gerunds,
which allow for nominal (38a), verbal (38b), and mixed usages (38c),
in addition to an adjectival usage unavailable for the Spanish
infinitive (38d). Notice that in (38c) the gerund has a possessive, but
still keeps the verbal direct object, expressed as an of-phrase in
(38a).
(38) a. Everyone enjoyed his singing of the Exsultet.
 
b. Having sung the Exsultet, John knew the score by heart.
 
c.
John’s singing the Exsultet
 
d. John, the singing detective

Given this behaviour, the relevant question is what kind of affix
Spanish -r or English -ing is. If inflectional morphology does not
change the category of the base, -r and -ing behave like inflection
when the verb is still used as a verb, but like derivation in the other
cases. One potential solution is to claim the existence of two distinct,
but identical sounding, affixes -r and -ing; for each of them, one
would be inflectional and the other derivational. However, this does
not explain the mixed cases where the same word displays the
behaviour of two categories (37c, 38c); such cases seem to indicate
that the same affix (or process) is simultaneously associated with
two or more distinct grammatical categories.
Another relevant example is the case of participles, which can be
used as verbs (39a) or adjectives (39b). Only in the first case can
they accept manner modifiers and agents; only in the second case
can they accept degree modifiers (too). Notice that English
participles do not show clear instances of mixed behaviour where
adjectival and verbal properties cooccur.
(39) a. They served a chicken, wonderfully cooked by Mary.
 
b. He was too frightened.
From the perspective of productivity, these processes seem
inflectional because it is almost always the case that a verb has an
infinitive, gerund or a participle, with few language-specific
exceptions, like those mentioned in §4.4.2. The meaning of these
forms also tends to be predictable, which is another typical property
of inflection; if a speaker knows the meaning of a verb, she will also
be able to know the meaning of the infinitive, the participle or the
gerund in the vast majority of cases. There are exceptions, though.
Some Spanish infinitives that have a robust behaviour as nouns
have a special meaning that is not related to the meaning of the
verb, or sometimes the meaning is related to verbs that are no
longer used in contemporary Spanish. (40) shows some of these
words, which never have a verbal use in this reading and allow for
plural forms.
(40) poder ‘power’ (from ‘can’); haber ‘belongings’ (from the

auxiliary ‘to have’); sentir ‘opinion’ (from to feel); pesar ‘grief’
(from ‘to weigh’)
These cases seem to be the result of a derivational process, as
there is a category change (from verb to noun) and the necessity of
listing the meaning of the word in the lexicon (and the dictionary).
The tendency is, therefore, for the loss of the verbal properties in
these forms to be associated with unpredictable meanings that need
to be listed. This suggests another way of interpreting the relation
between inflection and derivation, more like two sets of prototypical
properties that are distributed along a continuum. Some processes
fall almost systematically to the inflectional end, such as person–
number agreement on the verb, while others fall to the derivational
end; many processes lie in the middle and have mixed properties
which are reflected in the changes that they produce on the
individual words they apply to. Hybrid categories would be such a
case; having mixed properties, the effects of these processes have
both derivational and inflectional characteristics, with individual uses
of words sometimes falling more clearly to one of the two ends of the
continuum.
EXERCISES
1.
In our discussion of prefixes and suffixes, we have mentioned
that, in languages like English and Spanish, it has been claimed
that prefixes do not change the grammatical category of the
base. This is not a universal property of prefixes; for instance, in
Malagasy (an Austronesian language spoken in Madagascar)
the prefix mp- derives agent nouns from verbs (anjaitra ‘sew’
>mp-anjaitra ‘tailor’). Pick a language of your choice and find
cases where it could be argued that some prefix is responsible
for a category change. Is it possible to argue that in such cases
we have parasynthesis with a zero suffix?
2.
In a language of your choice, make a list of the productive
processes that are available to produce nouns, adjectives and
verbs from other lexical categories (as we did in §5.6., Tables
5.1–5.3). Consider the result, and identify the cases where the

language has more than one productive affix for the particular
process. Do you think that, when several affixes are available
for the same process, it is possible to find generalizations on
their distribution, or is listing of idiosyncratic combinations
needed?
3.
Select a productive derivational process in a language of your
choice and produce a short account of how this process works.
In order to do this, you need to cover at least the following
points: (a) the meaning that the derivational process adds to the
base; (b) the grammatical category (or categories) of the words
produced by that process; (c) the grammatical category (or
categories) of the base words; and (d) the semantic restrictions
(human, animate, abstract, state, etc.) or syntactic restrictions
(transitive, ditransitive, etc.) that the process imposes on the
bases it can take as input.
4.
It is sometimes not easy to determine whether a process is a
case of conversion or a case of overt derivation. One instance of
this is found in languages that mark verbs with theme vowels
and nouns with desinences. Consider the following pair, taken
from Spanish.
    (i) a. descuent-o
 
 
discount-des., ‘discount’ (noun)
   
b. descont-a
 
 
discount-ThV, ‘discount’ (verb)
Consider now the next two examples. In what way do they help us
determine whether (i) is a case of conversion or overt derivation?
    (ii) a. person-ific-a
 
 
person-ify-ThV, ‘to personify’
    
b. caramel-iz-a
 
 
caramel-ize-ThV, ‘to cover with caramel’
5.
The formation of adverbs from adjectives (for example, in

English, happy ~ happily) has sometimes been understood as
an inflectional process and sometimes as a derivational
process. From an inflectional perspective, the adverb is taken to
be a non-agreeing form of the adjective, and as such has to be
used in cases where the adjective modifies a verb, an adjective
or some other category which cannot agree with it. Discuss
whether this approach is tenable from a morphological
perspective in a language of your choice. Are the properties of
adverb formation in your language those expected from
inflection (productivity, predictability of meaning, interaction with
syntactic processes, etc.)?
FURTHER READING
Most of the research on morphology has considered word-formation
processes, so the existing literature is enormous and we will be able
just to start scratching the surface here. In Lieber and Štekauer
(2005), the reader will be able to find specific chapters on different
theories of word formation, where different analyses for the main
processes discussed in this chapter are summarized. It will be
impossible in this short section to give a list of the papers, articles
and monographs that have studied specific processes in specific
languages.
Some analysis of conversion are developed in Clark and Clark
(1979), Aronoff (1980), Lieber (1981), Don (1993, 2004) and the
collection of recent papers in Bauer and Valera (2005). The analysis
of transpositions is discussed in Beard (1995) and Spencer (1999,
2005a). Papers and monographs on nominalizations include
Chomsky (1970), Grimshaw (1990) from a lexical perspective and
Alexiadou (2001) from a Constructionist perspective. Koptjevskaja-
Tamm (1993) offers a general overview of the topic. The study of
verbalizations is taken up in, among others, Rose (1973), Kiparsky
(1997), Arad (2003) and Harley (2005). There are fewer studies
about adjectivalizations, among them Sleeman and Verheugd (2000)
and Fábregas (2007). The Unitary Base Hypothesis, which we
mentioned briefly, was introduced in Aronoff (1976) and later
modified by Scalise (1983).

Specific studies on prefixation in the main European languages
and how it differs from suffixation include Lieber and Baayen (1993),
Gràcia and Azcarate (2000), Mateu (2001), Booij and Van
Kemenade (2003), Di Sciullo (1997, 2005) and Iacobini and Scalise
(2008).
The study of lexical alternations has also produced a wide variety
of papers and monographs. It is possible to find an overview of the
alternations in English in Levin (1993). The causative alternation has
been studied by, among many others, Hale and Keyser (1986);
Haspelmath (1993), which gives a crosslinguistic overview; Levin
and Rappaport Hovav (1994, 1995), from a Lexicalist perspective;
Härtl (2003); Kalluli (2007); and Koontz-Garboden (2009). There is
also a recent compilation of papers on the topic (Alexiadou,
Anagnostopoulou and Everaert 2004). Among the many studies on
the locative alternation, we can single out the recent contributions in
Mateu (2002) and Iwata (2008); the reader will find further
references in these works. See Dowty (2000) for a critique of the
notion of argument alternations.
The boundaries between inflection and derivation have been
explored recently in Scalise (1988a), Haspelmath (1996), Van Marle
(1996), Blevins (2001, 2005) discussing the specific case of gerunds,
Bauer (2004) and Janssen (2005). The study of participles as mixed
categories, which we have not discussed in depth, is discussed in
Wasow (1977), Levin and Rappaport (1986) and Kratzer (2000).
Among the works that study appreciative morphology, we find
Nieuwenhuis (1985); Dressler and Barbaresi (1994), which also
offers a typological perspective; Jurafsky (1996); Ferreira (2005);
and Wiltschko (2006). Grandi (2002) is a study of appreciative
morphology in several Mediterranean languages.

6
COMPOUNDING AND OTHER WORD-
FORMATION PROCESSES
6.1 PROPERTIES OF COMPOUNDS
Compounding is a word-formation process that combines two or
more roots inside the same word. The relation which is established
between the elements combined inside a compound is generally not
very different from the relations seen between phrases in syntax:
modification, coordination or subordination (as we will see in §6.2.).
Additionally, the distinction between phrases and words is not as
sharp in compounding as it is in inflection or derivation (see §6.3). All
of these characteristics invite a view of compounding as a
morphological operation which is close to syntax. Some authors
(Jackendoff 2007) have argued, even, that compounding might
reflect some kind of primitive syntax which is able to create a more
complex structure by combining units which are morphologically
independent, as in the cases in (1), without introducing functional
material, such as determiners (the, a) or prepositions (of).
(1)
a. police dog
 
b. apple pie
 
c. razor sharp
 
d. pick pocket
Nature of the units combined

Given the fact that police, dog, apple, and pie are not
morphologically bound forms, compounding – judging from (1) –
does not seem too far away from a protosyntax that assembles
words into more complex structures. However, this conclusion is not
uncontroversial, 
and 
if 
we 
examine 
morphologically 
richer
languages, we see that compounds do not always contain
syntactically independent objects. The cases in (1) are called ROOT
COMPOUNDS, because the objects combined within them are identical
to morphological roots. In English, the root and the word can be the
same, but in a language with stems (§2.4.1) and rich inflection, like
Spanish, a root compound does not involve the combination of
syntactically free objects. The examples in (2) combine stems, in one
case nominal (notice the desinence -o at the right of each root in
(2a)) and in one case verbal (notice the theme vowel -a at the right
of the first root in (2b)).
(2)
a. sord-o-mud-o
 
 
deaf-des.-mute-des., ‘deaf and mute’
 
b. par-a-sol
 
 
stop-ThV-sun, ‘parasol’
A closer examination shows that these stems are not words, as they
cannot show inflection independently of each other. The feminine
plural of (2a) is the one in (3a), where the whole word takes only one
inflection, not the one in (3b). The verb stem in (2b) does not allow
inflection either, as demonstrated by the ungrammaticality of (3c).
(3)
a. sord-o-mud-as
 
 
deaf-des.-mute-fem.pl.
 
b. *sord-as-mud-as
 
 
deaf-fem.pl.-mute-fem.pl.
 
c. *par-a-n-sol
 
 
stop-ThV-3rd pl.-sun
There are some exceptions where the internal parts of a
compound show CONTEXTUAL INFLECTION (§4.1) or where both stems

inside a compound can inflect at the same time. (4a) illustrates the
first case in Danish, from Bauer (1978); (4b) illustrates the second
case, from Spanish.
(4)
a. ny-t-år
 
 
new-neu.-year, ‘New Year’
 
b. poet-isa-s       pintor-a-s
 
 
poet-fem.-pl. painter-fem.-pl., ‘women who are poets and
painters’
In the first case, the adjective ny ‘new’ shows gender and number
agreement with the second constituent of the compound, år, which is
neuter. In the second case, the two members of the compound have
to exhibit feminine and plural inflection, so the same word has two
instances of inflection. These cases argue in favour of letting syntax
interact with compounding in some way, allowing its internal
members to show traces of agreement, an operation determined by
syntax.
Linking elements
Sometimes, morphological markers appear between the two units
combined inside the compound. These elements are called LINKING
ELEMENTS (LE) and, historically, they are frequently related to genitive
case markers. Diachronically, these genitive markers have become
fossilized and, despite the fact that they might be absent from the
modern syntax of the language, they remain inside compounds. The
examples in (5) illustrate LEs in Spanish and English.
(5)
a. pel-i-rroj-o
 
 
hair-LE-red-des., ‘red-haired’
 
b. guard-s-man
LEs help illustrate how compounds and syntactic phrases are
related: their origin is related to a need to mark the non-head of a
syntactic phrase with a special case. However, they are preserved in
many compounds despite the fact that modern English and Spanish

do not have this form of case marking any more. In so-called
NEOCLASSICAL COMPOUNDS, where at least one neoclassical stem is
involved, we find a clear distinction between those with a Latin stem
and those with a Greek stem: in the first case the LE is -i- (e.g. homo
+cide >hom-i-cide); in the second, it is -o- ( music + logy >music-o-
logy).
Positional freedom
As compounds are made by combining free forms, the same free
form can appear in different positions in different words. Notice that
the components apple and pie can exchange their positions (6). In
the first case we define a type of pie made with apples; in the
second, a type of apple specially used in pies.
(6)
a. apple pie
 
b. pie apple
This contrasts with any prefix or suffix, which must occur in a fixed
position inside the word, to the left and to the right of the root
respectively.
(7)
a. un-happy ~ *happy-un
 
b. happi-ness ~ *ness-happy
Given this property, words formed combining a root with a
neoclassical unit (§1.2) or two neoclassical stems are considered
compounds, NEOCLASSICAL COMPOUNDS. These stems also show
positional freedom.
(8)
a. log-o-graph-y
 
b. graph-o-log-y
The morpheme log- can appear to the right (8a) or to the left (8b),
and exchange its position with the morpheme graph- ((8b) vs. (8a)).
Given the positional independence of the elements that form these
two words, they are considered compounds.

6.2 BASIC CLASSES OF COMPOUNDS
In our discussion about morphological structures, we considered the
notion of head (§3.2.1) and we noticed that some words, particularly
some compounds, have been argued to be exocentric because none
of their internal constituents seems responsible for the grammatical
category or the semantics of the whole compound (§3.3.2). This is
the first division that has to be taken into account: compounds in
which one of the constituents can be claimed to be the head
(ENDOCENTRIC) and compounds whose properties do not follow from
any internal constituent (EXOCENTRIC). In a word like high school, the
second constituent (school) is claimed to be the head, because the
semantics of the whole word is derived from the meaning of this
constituent (‘a high school is a kind of school’) and because, just like
the constituent school, the whole word is a noun. This example is a
case of an endocentric compound: one of the constituents can be
singled out as the HEAD, while the other is the NON-HEAD. By contrast,
a noun like pick pocket can be argued to be exocentric. It denotes a
kind of person, but neither of the two elements denotes this semantic
notion; it is a noun, but the only noun present inside the compound
(pocket) is an unlikely candidate for head, because its meaning does
not provide the basis for the meaning of the whole word.
Remember that endocentric compounds can differ in the position
that the head occupies, to the right or to the left; we refer to §3.2.2
for discussion of this property.
6.2.1 CLASSES ACCORDING TO THE RELATION ESTABLISHED
BETWEEN THE TWO ELEMENTS
With respect to the relationship that the two roots establish inside the
compound, it is traditional to differentiate between SUBORDINATIVE and
COORDINATIVE compounds.
Subordinative compounds
In a subordinative compound the meaning of the word is a reflection
of the meaning of the head; the other constituent is a modifier of this
head. The relation established between the head and the non-head
in a subordinative compound is sometimes similar to the one

established between a predicate and its arguments or modifiers: the
non-head gets a semantic role assigned by the head. Consider the
following examples from Spanish (9).
(9)
a. tela-araña
 
 
web-spider, ‘spider web’
 
b. drog(a)-adicto
 
 
drug-addict
Here, the relationship between the two constituents is one of
subordination: araña ‘spider’ takes its semantic role from the noun
tela ‘web’, as shown by the gloss ‘a web made by a spider’; the
constituent droga ‘drug’ takes its semantic role from the noun adicto
‘addict’, ‘someone who is addicted to drugs’.
Coordinative compounds
By contrast, the two constituents of a coordinative compound
contribute equally to the meaning of the whole word and neither of
them determines the semantic role of the other. The relation is
similar to the one obtained in syntactic coordination. Consider the
Spanish examples in (10).
(10) a. filósofo economista
 
 
philosopher economist
 
b. bar pizzería
 
 
bar pizzeria
A philosopher economist is a person who is at the same time a
philosopher and an economist, and a bar pizzeria is a place which
functions both as a bar and as a pizzeria. These compounds are
also similar to syntactic coordination in the sense that the elements
combined generally need to have the same grammatical category. In
the cases in (10) we combine two nouns; we can also obtain these
compounds by combining two adjectives (bitter-sweet) or two verbs
(drink drive).

Given that inside a coordinative compound the grammatical
category of the two constituents is identical and the meaning
contribution of each constituent is equal, the identification of the
head in these cases is not trivial. One solution that can be imagined
is that in coordinative compounds both constituents act as heads, in
such a way that these compounds have two heads. One property of
coordinative compounds that might support this view is that
sometimes in this class each constituent must carry its own
inflection. This is expected if the two elements are heads in these
compounds, as words are generally inflected on their heads (§3.2.1):
(11) a. filósofo-s economista-s
 
 
philosopher-s economist-s
 
b. bar-es pizzería-s
 
 
bar-s pizzería-s
Attributive compounds
The distinction between coordinative and subordinative compounds
is relatively traditional, but the typology has been increased by the
addition of attributive compounds (Scalise and Bisetto 2005). In
these compounds, which would traditionally be classified as
subordinative, the non-head does not get a semantic role from the
head, but rather predicates some of its properties, acting like the
attribute inside a noun phrase (NP). Consider, for example, the
examples in (12), again from Spanish.
(12) a. hombre lobo
 
 
man wolf, ‘werewolf’
 
b. corbata mariposa
 
 
tie butterfly, ‘bow-tie’
In these cases, the constituents lobo ‘wolf’ and mariposa ‘butterfly’
modify the heads hombre ‘man’ and corbata ‘tie’ in the manner in
which an adjective would modify a head noun (a clever man): by
adding some special properties to its denotation and giving as a
result a specific kind of the object denoted by the head. A werewolf

is a man who has some properties similar to those of wolves, and a
bow-tie is a tie which has some properties (the shape) in common
with butterflies. Unlike coordinative compounds, these have the
meaning of the word – the type of object denoted –determined by the
head, but unlike subordinative compounds, they do not have a
semantic role assigned by the head to the non-head; rather, the non-
head adds some special properties to the head.
Depending on the grammatical category of the constituent which
expresses the properties that further specify the head, two classes
can be differentiated. The first one, APPOSITIVE, is that in which the
non-head is a noun (as in English snail mail); the second one, PURE
ATTRIBUTIVE, is that where the non-head is an adjective (as in English
pale face).
Grammatical differences between these three classes of
compounds
The three kinds of compounds may differ in their relative productivity
in a given language. In English and other Germanic languages
compounding is very productive and gives rise to subordinative,
attributive and coordinative compounds. However, in Romance
languages subordinative compounds are less productive than the
attributive and coordinative ones. An English attributive compound
such as pale face can be translated into Spanish by merely changing
the position of each component, as in rostro pálido. However, a
subordinative compound such as tree house (‘house in a tree’)
cannot be translated so easily to Spanish: casa árbol tends to be
interpreted as an attributive compound – namely, a house that has
some properties of trees, such as its ecological nature – or a
coordinative one – namely, a house which is at the same time a tree
– but it will not be interpreted as a house which is placed in a tree.
This subordinative meaning is conveyed by a syntactic phrase which
involves a preposition, as in casa del árbol, lit. ‘house of the tree’.
These classes of compounds also show different behaviour with
respect to recursion. A process is RECURSIVE when it can be applied
several times to the same object. Coordinative compounding is
recursive in Romance because, given a coordinative compound, it

can be made longer by adding a third constituent to it, provided it is
also interpreted as coordinative (13).
(13) a. bar pizzería
 
 
bar pizzeria
 
b. bar pizzería discoteca
 
 
bar pizzeria disco
In Romance languages, subordinative and attributive compounds are
not recursive. If we take the Italian attributive compound uomo lupo
‘man-wolf, werewolf’, the word cannot be made longer by adding a
third constituent interpreted as an attribute, as in (14), which should
mean, if possible, ‘a werewolf that has some properties of frogs’.
(14) *uomo lupo rana
 
man wolf frog
Subordinative compounds are highly recursive in Germanic
languages. Taking English as an example, the compound in (15a)
can be made longer by adding other constituents which are
subordinated to the non-head.
(15) a. [garden decoration]
 
b. [[rose garden] decoration]
 
c. [[[tea rose] garden] decoration]
In Romance languages, recursivity is not accepted in subordinative
compounds, and instead these languages need to use whole
syntactic phrases with prepositions to introduce the subordinate
constituents. (16) translates into Spanish the examples in (15). As
we see, in general compounding is less frequent in Romance
languages than in Germanic ones.
(16) a. decoración de jardín
 
 
decoration of garden
 
b. decoración de jardín de rosas

 
 
decoration of garden of roses
 
c. decoración de jardín de rosas de té
 
 
decoration of garden of roses of tea
6.2.2 SYNTHETIC COMPOUNDS
In languages like English the class of compounds of which truck
driver is an example has attracted special attention. The interesting
property of this kind of subordinative compound is that its head is a
word derived from a verb and the non-head typically plays the role
that the direct object would have played with the base verb (to drive
trucks). Other examples involve other derivational affixes, such as -al
(snow removal), -ing (house 
building) and 
-ment (system
management).
The combination of derivation and compounding in this kind of
compound has attracted the attention of morphologists, who have
tried to determine the order in which the structure is formed.
There are basically two options to consider. The first is that the
derivation process precedes compounding (following the order drive
> driver > truck driver); the second is that the compounding precedes
the derivation process (following the order truck drive > truck driver).
In a theory where words have internal structure, these two
sequences would be represented as the structures in (17): in (17a),
a compound contains a derived word; in (17b), a compound is the
input to a derivational rule.
(17) a. [[truck] [[driv]er]]
 
b. [[[truck] driv] er]
These two proposals have problems. The analysis in (17b) has the
immediate problem that the verb *to truck drive does not exist in
English, despite the fact that in this analysis it is the base of the
derivation process. By contrast, (17a) has the problem that the
constituent truck combines with the noun driver, not the verb to drive;
this makes it surprising that truck is interpreted as an argument of
the verb and not as a modifier of the noun. Synthetic compounds
have been the object of extensive work in morphology (see the

further reading section at the end of this chapter for a summary).
Ackema and Neeleman (2004) provide a recent example of an
analysis that argues for the structure in (17b). They explain the non-
existence of a compound like truck drive as a form of BLOCKING
(§1.1.3) between a syntactic and a morphological structure. The idea
is that the compound to truck drive does not exist because there is
already a syntactic structure (to drive trucks) which is identical in
meaning to the compound. This account presupposes that syntax
and morphology compete in such a way that syntax takes preference
in building a structure and morphology takes over when there is
some requirement that syntax cannot meet (as, for example, to be a
proper base for a derivational operation, which then requires a
compound).
Languages like French, Italian and Spanish do not have
productive synthetic compounds of the English type, although there
are some isolated cases which it has been claimed have been
borrowed from English (18).
(18) radio-transmis-or
 
‘radiotransmitter’
To express the same subordinative relation between a verb and one
of its arguments, these languages use a type of compound that
involves a bare verbal stem as first constituent and a noun as
second constituent.
(19) abre-cartas
 
open-letters, ‘letter opener’
It has been claimed that this compound is exocentric, because it is
interpreted as an agent or an instrument in the absence of any
explicit marking of this relation. Notice that, in contrast with the
English examples, the verb is not derived by -er or any similar
morpheme. Some analyses (Varela 1989) have argued that, despite
appearances, the verb is derived just like the English counterpart,
but with a null morpheme Ø (§2.3.2). Thus, the structure of (19)
would be the one in (20), which means that the compound contains a

derived constituent (as in 17a); the parallelism with English is almost
perfect, except for the position of the head.
(20) [[[abre]Ø] [cartas]]
 
open-er letters
6.2.3 PARASYNTHETIC COMPOUNDS
One of the properties of the English synthetic compounds is that the
two constituents cannot form a compound unless the second one is
derived. Parasynthetic compounds are those words which cannot be
derived unless the head combines first with another free morpheme.
Consider the contrast in (21):
(21) a. *[ey(e)]-ed
 
b. [blue-ey(e)]-ed
It is not possible to derive an adjective from eye as in (21a), but as
soon as this word forms a sequence with blue (or other forms, like
one, dark, etc.) the word becomes possible. The example in (22)
further illustrates this type of word in Spanish.
(22) a. *mund-ista
 
 
world-ist, ‘related to the world’
 
b. tercer-mund-ista
 
 
third world-ist, ‘related to the third world’
These 
compounds 
are 
called 
parasynthetic 
from 
their
resemblance 
to 
parasynthetic 
words 
that 
are 
derived 
by
simultaneously adding a prefix and a suffix (§3.3.5); in this case, the
complex word is also possible only when the base is simultaneously
modified by an element to its left and another to its right. The
difference is, however, that in these cases the element to the left is a
free form and not an affix. Moreover, frequently, the set formed by
the first element and the base is also a grammatical sequence in the
language (23).

(23) a. blue eye
 
b. tercer mundo
 
 
‘third world’
However, these sequences do not behave like compounds when
they appear outside the parasynthetic word; their behaviour is the
one expected from phrases. For example, it is possible to coordinate
the first member of the sequence with another constituent or
introduce other elements between the two constituents. See §6.3 for
other differences between compounds and phrases.
(24) a. big and blue eyes
 
b. primer y tercer mundo
 
 
first and third world
6.2.4 CO-COMPOUNDS
A subclass of coordinative compounds is CO-COMPOUNDS (Wälchli
2005). In a coordinative compound, the meaning of the word is
determined by adding the meaning of each of the two components;
the resulting meaning is the intersection between the meanings of
the individual words. In philosopher economist we combine the
meaning of philosopher and the meaning of economist, and use the
word to refer only to the individuals that belong to the two classes.
The result is a more specific class of entities than the one expressed
by either of the two words separately. By contrast, in a co-compound
the meaning is not a more specific class of entities, but a more
general class where both members can be included. Consider the
following co-compound, from Georgian:
(25) dá-dzma
 
brother-sister, ‘siblings’
There is a connection between this class of compounds and NATURAL
COORDINATION, that is, the coordination of semantically close words
that tend to be grouped together because they belong to the same

category. The coordination wife and children is natural, as these
notions are semantically related in the mind of most cultures, but not
children and turnips; relatedly, there is no co-compound, to the best
of our knowledge, which puts together these two constituents. Its
meaning would be unclear, as there is no obvious class which can
be defined by containing both children and turnips.
6.3 COMPOUNDING BETWEEN SYNTAX AND MORPHOLOGY
Compounds are a kind of complex word whose relation to syntax
deserves a specific section; compounding has been identified by
some with a protosyntax, as in many cases it involves putting
together morphologically free forms, and the possible relationships
established between its two constituents are generally similar to
those that are attested in syntax. Despite these similarities,
compounds are different from phrases in a variety of phenomena,
while at the same time there are structures which display an
intermediate behaviour between what we expect from a phrase and
what we expect from a word. Here we will explore the differences
between compounds and phrases and, then, consider these
intermediate cases.
6.3.1 SOME DIFFERENCES BETWEEN COMPOUNDS AND
PHRASES
Some empirical differences between compounds and phrases
suggest that the former are not built by syntactic rules. These
restrictions seem to be stronger in some languages than others. First
of all, consider coordination. Coordination is possible with a
constituent inside the syntactic phrase (26a), but in some languages,
like Spanish, not with one inside the compound (26b). Coordinating
constituents inside a compound seems to be possible in English, at
least in cases such as (26c).
(26) a. He drinks [tea and coffee].
 
b. *un [limpia [-botas y -ventanas]]
 
 
a polish [-boots and -windows]

 
c. a [[tea and coffee] drinker
There are also differences with respect to ellipsis. One of the
members of a phrase can undergo ellipsis, but not any of the internal
constituents of the compound. In (27) we use the kind of ellipsis
known as verb phrase replacement (VP replacement), which in
English requires the auxiliary to do: the sentence in (27a) allows it,
but not the compound in (27b). In other cases, ellipsis seems to be
possible, like (27c), where the sequence is likely interpreted as tea-
(cups) and coffee-cups.
(27) a. He drives trucks and he does it every day.
 
b. *He is a [truck driver] and he does it every day.
 
c. tea- and coffee-cups
Consider now the possibility of having an element modifying an
internal constituent of the structure (as opposed to modification of
the whole structure); this is, again, possible with phrases (28a) but
not always with compounds. The restriction seems, once more, to be
stronger in Romance languages: compare the grammatical English
example in (28b) to the ungrammatical Spanish example in (28c).
(28)
a. He sells [red balloons].
 
b. [red balloons] seller
 
c.
*un [limpia- [ventanas grandes]]
  a polish windows big (Intended: ‘a cleaner of big
windows’)
Finally, consider the possibility of displacing a constituent inside
the structure. This is possible in a syntactic phrase, but not in a
compound. In (29), the line shows the intended original position of
the unit truck inside the structure.
(29) a.*Truck is what he likes a [____ driver]
 
b. Trucks are what he [drives _____]

These contrasts suggest that compounds are not built by syntactic
rules. Therefore, the statement that compounds represent a
protosyntax is only valid if protosyntax is understood as a
grammatical component distinct from syntax in natural languages,
since the behaviour of compounds is distinct. Empirical differences
such as these have led morphologists to propose the GENERALIZED
LEXICALIST HYPOTHESIS, which argues that morphology and syntax are
two distinct grammatical components. This theory, along with other
phenomena, such as those just described, which involve systematic
grammatical differences between syntactic objects and complex
words, is studied again in §7.2.
There are other kinds of differences between phrases and
compounds. For instance, it has been claimed that the behaviour of
phonological stress is different in English for the two kinds of
structures. In a compound involving two nouns, stress is assigned to
the first constituent (30a); when the same two nouns form a phrase
(30b), stress falls on the rightmost element. In cases like this the
different stress pattern comes accompanied by other differences; for
instance, the fact that the structure with compound stress has a non-
compositional meaning, while the one that has the stress pattern
expected from phrases has a compositional interpretation (‘a board
which is black’).
(30)
a. bláck board
 
b. black bóard
6.3.2 INTERMEDIATE CASES
There are some grammatical objects which, given their empirical
behaviour, seem to fall into an intermediate position between syntax
and morphology. These are the topic of this section.
Phrasal compounds
Phrasal, or syntagmatic, compounds are structures with a non-
transparent meaning and low productivity formed by morphologically
free forms but which, unlike compounds, contain function words
inside them. Compare the two examples in (31).

(31)
a. apple pie
 
b. rock ’n’ roll
In (31b) there is a function word, a coordinate conjunction, while in
(31a) all the constituents of the compound are lexical elements, in
this case nouns. Remember that the reason for saying that
compounds reflect a protosyntax is that, among other things, they do
not contain markers of grammatical functions, such as conjunctions
or prepositions. From this perspective, (31b) cannot be considered a
compound. However, in its meaning of ‘a particular music style’, the
combination in (31b) is not semantically predictable and, moreover, it
is not possible to replace any of its constituents with another noun
(for instance, rock ’n’ slide does not denote a standard musical
style). The example in (31b) is a phrasal compound.
Sometimes a language has two words, both a proper compound
and a phrasal compound, which denote exactly the same object.
Consider these two Spanish examples:
(32)
a. tela-araña
 
 
fabric-spider
 
b. tela de araña
 
 
fabric of spider
Both words mean ‘spider web’. Notice that in both cases the
structure has to be stored in the lexicon, because the noun tela
‘fabric’ does not mean ‘web’ in isolation, and no speaker would use it
to refer to the substance produced by spiders. The relation between
the two members of the structure is the same, but the difference is
that only (32b) has a function word (the preposition de). (32b) is a
phrasal compound, but (32a) is not.
Phrasal verbs
A good question would be whether English phrasal verbs – for
example, throw up – could be considered compounds. The meaning
of these combinations of verbs and particles is not compositional and
has to be stored in the lexicon and learnt by speakers as a special,
non-productive combination of free forms; these are properties that

are generally identified with morphological units, although certainly
listing is not enough to classify something as a word (as we saw in
§1.1.3 and §2.2). Therefore, we would need additional criteria to
determine their status. Consider the possibility of displacing a
constituent out of the structure (see also §7.2.3.). The two
constituents of a compound are not grammatically independent of
each other and, in consequence, cannot be separated (contrast the
phrase Trucks are what he drives with *Truck is what he is a driver,
where we tried to displace the noun truck out of the compound truck
driver). Some phrasal verbs can be separated (33a), while others
resist it (33b).
(33)
a. John threw the spaghetti up.
 
b. *Mary gets with John along.
This contrast shows that some phrasal verbs behave more like
normal syntactic phrases and others behave in a way formally closer
to compounds.
Separable prefixes
In a related contrast, languages like German and Dutch differentiate
between two kinds of particle–verb combination. In the first kind, the
particle behaves as we expect from a bound form and can never be
separated from the base verb (cf. überlegen ‘deliberate’ in (34a, b)).
In the second case (aus-gehen ‘exit’), the particle must separate
from its base if the verb is in the so-called ‘verb second’ position in
German main clauses (34c, d), as opposed to what we see in
embedded clauses (34e). In this second case we have what has
been called a SEPARABLE PREFIX. In such cases, the separable unit
tends to correspond to a preposition and keeps its normal meaning
in the construction, which makes it difficult to treat it as something
different from the preposition aus ‘from’.
(34)
a. Ich über-lege mir        etwas.
 
 
I     ponder    myself   something
 
 
‘I think about something’.
 
b. *Ich  lege      mir       etwas        über-

 
 
I       ponder  myself  something  PART
 
c.
*Ich aus-gehe heute zum Essen.
 
 
I      out-go    today to    food
 
 
‘I go out for lunch’.
 
d. Ich gehe heute  aus zum Essen.
 
 
I    go     today out  to    food
 
 
‘I go out for lunch’.
 
e. Ich denke dass ich zum Essen aus-gehe.
 
 
I     think   that  I    to    food   out-go
In some cases, the same particle-plus-verb combination behaves
like a separable prefix or not depending on whether the meaning of
the whole is more or less predictable. For example, über-setzen (lit.
‘over-bring’), in the sense of ‘translate’, where the space meaning of
the particule über ‘over’ is not immediately present, behaves as a
non-separable construction (Ich über-setze das Buch ‘I translate the
book’), but in its compositional meaning, where it literally means ‘to
bring something over’, it behaves as a separable unit, as in Der
Fährmann -setzt das Boot über- ‘The ferryman brings the boat over’.
Contrasts like these illustrate the fact that the presence of lexical
idiosyncrasies, such as a non-compositional meaning, are often
accompanied by word properties, although being listed in the lexicon
does not automatically imply being a morphological unit (remember
§1.1.3) and being a separable verb does not automatically imply
having compositional meaning.
Separable verbs in Dutch have received a recent analysis in the
framework of CM (Booij 2010: 118–45). This author proposes that
separable verbs are syntactic objects which instantiate a
construction (§2.4.2). To the extent that they are syntactic objects, it
is expected that the particle and the verb can be separated. To the
extent that they are constructions, they are objects stored in the
lexicon and therefore they are expected to receive a non-transparent
meaning in some cases. Booij offers the following examples from
Dutch, all resulting from the combination of the verb vallen ‘to fall’
with different particles; unlike the previous German examples, these
separable verbs do not have compositional meaning.

(35) aan vallen ‘to attack’; af vallen ‘to lose weight’; bij vallen ‘to
applaud’; in vallen ‘to set in’; om vallen ‘to fall down’
Given their mixed properties, separable verbs constitute one
empirical domain which argues in favour of theories where the
division between syntax and morphology is not strict, and where a
certain gradient is allowed between the two levels.
Mismatches between stress assignment and other properties
In other cases, the syntactic and semantic criteria normally used to
identify something as a compound do not coincide with the
phonological criteria. In work by Giegerich (1992, 2004) it has been
shown that units which according to syntactic and semantic criteria
are classified as compounds can have the final stress characteristic
of phrases in English. This is typical, among other cases, for N-N
compounds whose first element denotes place, time or material.
(36)
a. Christmas oratório
 
b. morning cóffee
 
c.
London fóg
 
d. stone wáll
 
e. village shóp
As Giegerich notices, final stress is generally accompanied by more
transparency in meaning, although not always ((36e) is not just any
shop in a village, but a particular kind of shop). One way of
interpreting these data is that examples such as those in (36) have
an intermediate status between phrases and words: their stress is
determined by phrasal properties, while their syntactic behaviour and
the potential bleaching of meaning are lexical properties. As in the
case of separable verbs, an analysis in terms of constructions could
be conceived of.
6.4 COMPOUNDS AND GRAMMATICAL CATEGORIES:
JAPANESE AND ENGLISH

In this section we will address the question of how different
grammatical categories can combine inside a compound. Given a
single language, not all combinations of grammatical categories are
equally possible or equally productive. Here we will briefly compare
the main grammatical category combinations inside compounds in
two unrelated languages, Japanese and English. The data are taken
from the MorBoComp database.
Let us start with coordinative compounds (Table 6.1).
Table 6.1 Coordinative compounds
Language
Combination of
grammatical
categories
Grammatical
category of the
compound
Example
Japanese
A + A
A
atsu kurushi ‘hot strenuous, stuffy’
 
N + N
N
chichi haha ‘father mother, parents’
 
V + V
V
naki sakebu ‘cry shout, to cry and
shout’
English
A + A
A
deaf mute
 
N + N
N
king emperor
 
V + V
V
sleep walk
For this class of compounds, both Japanese and English allow for
combinations of the three major grammatical categories in order to
give a coordinated compound of the same category as the two
constituents. There are differences, though. The example chichi
haha ‘parents’ is a case of co-compound; in general, co-compounds
are more frequent in Japanese than in English; an N-N compound in
English, with very few exceptions, refers to a single individual who
displays properties of two objects, not a collective notion formed by
adding distinct objects, as with co-compounds: a king emperor is a
single person with both titles.
Another category combination that Japanese allows with more
freedom than English is verbs formed by two verbs. Examples such
as sleep walk are very rare in English; however, Japanese allows

this kind of combination more productively. As we will see in the
discussion of subordinative compounds, Japanese uses compound
verbs for notions that English expresses with syntactic combinations
involving a periphrasis, as in arai ageru ‘to wash to finish’, equivalent
in meaning to English to finish washing.
Consider now attributive compounds (Table 6.2).
Quite systematically for this class of compounds, both in English
and in Japanese, the rightmost element is the categorial head of the
word.
Table 6.2 Attributive compounds
Language
Combination of
grammatical
categories
Grammatical
category of the
compound
Example
Japanese
A + A
A
aka guroi ‘red black, reddish black’
 
A + N
N
aka hige ‘red beard, red-bearded
person’
 
N + N
N
hime yuri ‘princess lily, star lily’
 
V + N
N
kai neko ‘keep cat, house cat’
 
V + A
A
mushi atsui ‘steam hot, sultry’
English
A + N
A
barefoot
 
A + A
A
red hot
 
N + A
A
ice cold
 
N + N
N
iron curtain
 
A + N
N
red skin
In this category we find some minor differences between the two
languages; for instance, the fact that in English, but not in Japanese,
it is possible to form attributive compound adjectives where the non-
head is a noun, such as ice cold or razor sharp.
More interestingly, though, we see that Japanese can form
attributive compound adjectives and nouns where the non-head is a
verb, like kai neko ‘house cat’, where the form kai is the verb ‘to

keep’. This possibility is not available in English; in order to express
attributive relations, English would have to turn the verb into a
category that can function as a modifier, as in steaming hot (vs.
*steam hot, which is ungrammatical in English). An interesting
question is whether we have to accept that Japanese can use verbs
inside compounds in a way which is substantially different from
English or, on the other hand, whether the difference might just be
superficial. Perhaps Japanese is a language that uses conversion
(§5.4) more productively than English, and despite not reflecting it in
the overt morphology the verb has actually been turned into an
adjective. We will come back to this possibility after presenting the
third class of compounds, subordinative compounds (Table 6.3).
Here we see that English can combine almost any two
grammatical categories in subordinative compounds, although not all
of them are equally productive: for instance, N-A is generally only
possible when the adjective is derived from a verb (as washable,
from to wash). There are some combinations which are not attested,
though: the pattern V-A is not found in English, but it is found in
Japanese (hanashi nikui ‘difficult to say’). In contrast, MorBoComp
does not attest Japanese subordinate compounds of the form A-N or
A-V, which are possible in English (although cases like dry clean are
not very productive in English).
Table 6.3 Subordinative compounds
Language
Combination of
grammatical
categories
Grammatical
category of the
compound
Example
Japanese
N + N
N
aki zora ‘autumn sky’
 
N + V
N
ame furi ‘rain fall, precipitation’
 
V + N
N
cho kin, ‘save money, saving
money’
 
V + V
V
arai ageru ‘wash finish, to finish
washing’
 
N + V
V
awa datsu ‘bubble stand, to bubble’
 
N + A
A
gaman zuyoi ‘patience strong,
strong with respect to patience’

 
V + A
A
hanashi nikui ‘to say difficult, difficult
to say’
English
N + N
N
apron string
 
N + V
V
pan fry
 
A + V
V
dry clean
 
N + A
A
nationwide
 
A + N
N
high school
 
V + N
N
kill joy
In this class of compounds we find some cases of categorial
exocentricity. In all English cases the category of the compound
corresponds with that of the second constituent. However, in the
case of kill joy it is dubious whether the noun joy is the categorial
head of the word, as it is interpreted as an argument of the verb kill;
this case rather should be assimilated to the class of pick pocket (cf.
(1d) and §6.2) as an exocentric nominal compound that contains a
noun which cannot be considered the head of the word.
Categorial exocentricity is more dramatic and clear in Japanese.
The class of nominal compounds with the pattern N-V is quite
productive in this language, and they are equivalent in meaning to
English synthetic compounds where the head is a deverbal noun that
takes a non-head interpreted as its complement. Japanese ame furi
‘rain fall’ can be literally translated into English as rain fall, but other
similar cases cannot: house building is possible, but not *house
build.
These exocentric compounds could be analyzed as endocentric
compounds with the head to the right if the second element had
been turned into a member of another category before forming the
compound. This is Kageyama’s (2009) proposal for some apparent
cases of exocentricity involving the noun and verb categories. For
instance, in (37), the compound can be analyzed as endocentric
(and with its head to the right) if the verb yomi ‘read’ has been turned
into a noun without any morphological marking. English marks this
category change, but in this analysis Japanese does not.
(37)
[[hon]N- [yomi]V]N

 
book- read ‘book reading’
Notice, for instance, that the participle interpretation of the verb in
the compound yude-tamago ‘boil-egg’, translated into English as
boiled egg, is not morphologically marked either, so it is not
stipulative to propose that Japanese tends to leave category
changes involving verbs unmarked. Once we have made this
analytic assumption, it can be applied to other cases where
Japanese and English seemed to differ. For instance, the claim that
Japanese allows verbs to be the non-heads in attributive compounds
could be explained as a case where the verb, before becoming part
of the compound, was turned into an adjective (Japanese ‘steam-hot’
meaning steaming hot).
6.5 OTHER WORD-FORMATION PROCESSES
We have examined the two most common morphological processes
for creating new words, namely derivation and compounding. In the
remainder of this chapter we will examine other less common word-
formation processes that are used in languages across the world.
6.5.1 CLIPPING
Clipping is a process by which a word is phonologically reduced by
subtracting a segment from it. Examples in English are ad (from
advertisement) and gator (from alligator). As can be seen, clipping is
a process which operates on the phonological shape of the word; the
elements subtracted (-vertisement, alli-) do not correspond to
morphemes. In English, as can be seen from these two examples,
clipping does not always keep the initial segments of the word; in
other languages, like Italian or Spanish, there is a strong tendency to
keep the initial part of the word.
Clipping is a process that does not change the grammatical
category of the original word, and the meaning is also generally
preserved. A clipped word, though, has some usage differences with
respect to the non-clipped version: it frequently belongs to a more
colloquial style and is not used in formal settings. We do not expect

to find words such as doc (doctor), tec (detective) or jams (pyjamas)
in a formal text or a speech intended for a formal audience.
Clipping, being a process that operates on the phonological
representation of the word, conforms to some phonological
tendencies. Despite the fact that the resulting segment is not
necessarily a morpheme, it tends to contain only whole syllables.
The clipping of alligator is gator, corresponding to the two last
syllables of the word, and not *igator or *ator, which do not
correspond to the syllables found in the original word.
Another property of clipping is that the result very frequently
conforms to a phonologically typical word of the language. In
Spanish the unmarked phonological shape of a word tends to consist
of two syllables with stress falling on the first one (a TROCHEE, in
prosodic terms). Clippings normally correspond to trochees,
sometimes ignoring the position of stress in the original word.
Consider the cases in (38), which illustrate some pairs of clippings
and their source word.
(38)
a. universidad /u-ni-be -si-dád/ ~ uni /ú-ni/
 
 
university
 
b. facultad /fa-kul-tád/ ~ facu /fá-ku/
 
 
faculty
 
c.
profesor /p o-fe-só / ~ profe /p ó-fe/
 
 
teacher
The clipping of universidad ‘university’ is uni, a trochee with stress
on the first syllable, even though this syllable does not bear stress in
the original word; the same happens with the two other examples,
irrespective of the fact that stress fell on the last syllable in all these
cases.
6.5.2 REDUPLICATION
Another word-formation process that operates on the phonological
side of the word is REDUPLICATION. In a reduplicated word, the whole
original word or some of its phonological segments (generally

consisting of one or two syllables) are repeated. The reduplicant,
that is, the repeated segment added to the original word, can appear
to the left or to the right of the base. One of the clearest cases of
reduplication is found in Maori (see Bauer 2003), where the plural
form of some adjectives is performed by reduplicating the first two
segments of the first syllable of the word. In these cases, the
reduplicant is attached to the left of the base:
(39) a. nohoi
→nonohoi
 
 
small
 
small.pl.
 
b. pai
→papai
 
 
good
 
good.pl.
It has been frequently noted in the literature that reduplication tends
to have an iconic role; that is to say that the repetition of a part of the
base is semantically interpreted as some kind of collectivity, plurality
or intensification of the meaning of the base. However, the variety of
roles that reduplication can perform crosslinguistically is wider. In
Burmese, for example, some adjectives are turned into adverbs by
reduplicating separately each syllable of the word (here, in a
simplified phonological representation):
(40)
a. lapa ‘beautiful’
 
b. lala papa ‘beautifully’
In the languages of the world reduplication can be used not only for
inflection and grammatical category changes. It can be used to
express notions that in languages like English or Italian are normally
performed by appreciative morphemes, as in Malagasy aloka
‘shadow’ > alokaloka ‘small shadow’.
Although they are not reduplications in the strictest sense of the
term, in English and other European languages some words are
formed by repeating an almost identical sequence. The identity is not
perfect because sometimes different vowels are involved, and
sometimes the first segment of the two forms also differs: willy-nilly,
razzle-dazzle or knick-knack are examples of this. IDEOPHONES and

ONOMATOPOEIAS (that is, words that try to reproduce sounds made by
objects or actions in the real world, and sometimes also other
sensory emotions) frequently follow this pattern: chit-chat, ding-dong,
tic-tac, zig-zag, etc. In all these cases, the meaning is non-
compositional, and sometimes neither of the two components of the
word has a meaning in isolation.
6.5.3 ACRONYMY
Acronymy creates new words by combining the initials (or the initial
segments) of a sequence of words. For this reason it is also known
occasionally as INITIALISM. Examples of acronyms in English include
some common words that are not felt as such any more, like radar
(from radio detection and ranging) and scuba (from self-contained
underwater breathing apparatus). Other examples, such as NATO
(from 
the 
subordinative 
compound 
North 
Atlantic 
Treaty
Organization) and AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome),
are still felt as acronyms, since most speakers are still aware of the
origin of the acronym.
For a sequence of letters to be considered an acronym (and
therefore a word) it is necessary that it be pronounced by speakers
as a word, as opposed to spelling out each one of the initials
separately or reading instead the sequence of words that the initials
correspond to. In the second situation we have an ABBREVIATION, not
an acronym. Something like Mr is not considered a word, but an
orthographic convention, because speakers pronounce it as /mΙstər/.
By contrast, radar is not pronounced as ‘radio detection and
ranging’.
As can be seen in the case of radar, when the result of combining
the initials is not pronounceable in a particular language, other letters
of one or several of the words involved may be taken: as the
sequence *rdar, which would contain only the initials of each word,
does not comply with English phonology, the second sound of the
first word is also included in the acronym.
6.5.4 BLENDING

Blending takes two different roots or words, generally belonging to
the same category, and combines them into a single word. Each one
of the roots loses some of its segments in the combination, and they
are substituted by segments of the other root. For example, brunch
is a blend from the words breakfast and lunch. This blend contains a
segment of the first word (br-) and one from the second (-unch).
Similar examples of blending in English include motel (motor + hotel)
and chunnel (channel + tunnel).
The previous cases cannot be analyzed as compounds formed
with clipped words, because br- and -unch are not possible clippings
in English. Moreover, in other cases the combination inside the
blending is clearly non-linear and segments of the two roots overlap.
In the word foolosophy (fool + philosophy) the two consonants of fool
overlap with the two first consonants of the word philosophy (as,
despite the different orthography, they are identical sounds). For this
reason, words which have sound similarities – including not only
segments, but also the position of their stress and their number of
syllables – are more likely to combine in a blend.
Blends give rise to new meanings in a non-compositional way. In a
blend, the meaning of the word is not determined by combining
single units inside the same structure, but by combining the concepts
denoted by two different words in some novel way, sometimes with
an artistic or humorous goal. The particular contribution of each of
the words is not clear and, as the combination is not amenable to a
structure in any obvious way, no structural relation specifies the
relationship that is established between the two words. Someone
who uses the word foolosophy normally suggests that he or she
refers to a type of philosophy characteristic of foolish people, but this
meaning is not explicit in the structure of the word.
EXERCISES
1.
Determining whether a word is a compound or derived is not
easy when one of its constituents is identical to a preposition (or
a postposition) in a given language. Consider the following
words in English, formed by combining a lexeme with over,
which in principle could be an English preposition. Which words

could you consider compounds, and which ones could be
prefixed words, and why?
 
overabound, 
overachieve, 
overarch, 
overbed, 
overbuild,
overbuy
2.
It has been noticed that compounds frequently involve a
combination of two nouns (tablecloth) or two adjectives (blue-
green), but those that combine two verbs are much less
common and typically have a very lexicalized and unpredictable
meaning (cf. see-saw). Moreover, compounds consisting of two
nouns are generally nouns, and those with two adjectives are
adjectives, but those that combine two verbs are rarely verbs.
Check whether this statement is true in your own language.
3.
Consider a language of your choice and explore what kinds of
productive compound are found in this language (as we did in
§6.4). Classify those compounds with respect to (a) categories
combined and resulting category, (b) position of the head, (c)
presence or absence of an LE, and (d) semantic relation
between the constituents.
4.
One possible analysis of parasynthetic compounds (one-eyed)
would be to claim that the suffix attaches to a whole phrase (one
eye in our example) in order to form a derived word out of a
syntactic structure. Given the differences in behaviour between
compounds and phrases examined in §6.3.1, what would be the
advantages and disadvantages of this kind of analysis?
5.
Consider a language of your choice and explore what other
morphological wordformation processes are available in this
language, in addition to derivation and compounding (blending,
acronymy, reduplication, etc.). Are they general in the language
or are they restricted to specific styles and registers, as we have
seen in many cases in §6.5?
FURTHER READING
As was the case with derivation, the literature on compounding is so
extensive that we will be unable to give any kind of exhaustive list.
Some classic references in the study of compounds (especially N-N

compounds) include Allen (1978), Bauer (1978), Levi (1978), Roeper
and Siegel (1978), Lieber (1983) and DiSciullo (1992). There are two
recent and significant collections of papers covering an extensive set
of topics about compounding: Lieber and Štekauer (2009) and
Scalise and Vogel (2010). With respect to specific theoretical
treatments of compounding, syntactic treatments of compounding
include Lees (1960), Baker (1988), Roeper (1988) and Harley
(2009). From a construction grammar perspective, see Masini (2009)
and Booij (2010); Ryder (1994) proposes an analysis in terms of
cognitive linguistics compatible with these works. The relation of
morphology and syntax in compounding is explored in Borer (1988),
Shibatani and Kageyama (1988), Bauer (1998), Ralli and Stavrou
(1998), Bisetto and Scalise (1999), and Ackema and Neeleman
(2004). The interaction between compounding and stress is explored
in Bauer (1983), Cinque (1993), Nespor and Ralli (1996),
Peperkamp (1997), Giegerich (2004, 2009), Plag (2006b) and Vogel
(2010), among many others. There are also several works dealing
with the classification of compounds, including Olsen (2001), Bauer
(2008b) and Scalise and Bisetto (2009); see Wälchli (2005) for co-
compounds and coordinative compounds, Bisetto and Melloni (2008)
for the specific case of parasynthetic compounds, and Bresnan and
Mchombo (1995) and Wiese (1996) for phrasal compounds, among
many others. An interesting question which we have not touched on
is how compounds are acquired; this question is explored in Clark
and Berman (1987), Clahsen, Marcus, Bartke and Wiese (1996) and
Krott, Gagné and Nicoladis (2009). The universal properties of
compounds are explored in Guevara and Scalise (2008).
Clipping and reduplication have been studied from the perspective
of the interaction between phonology and morphology. See, for
clipping, Benua (1995), Ito and Mester (1997), Wiese (2001) and
Roca and Felíu (2003). For reduplication, see Marantz (1982),
McCarthy and Prince (1995), Inkelas and Zoll (2005), Caballero
(2006), Gouskova (2007) and the collection of papers in Hurch
(2005). There are fewer studies on acronymy (Algeo 1975) and
blending (Cannon 1986, Lehrer 1996, Kelly 1998).

7
MORPHOLOGY’S RELATION TO SYNTAX
7.1 THE PLACE OF MORPHOLOGY IN GRAMMAR: LEXICALISM
AND CONSTRUCTIONISM
One of the main controversies in modern morphology is the exact
nature of its relation to syntax. Theories dealing with the relation
between these two components fall into two main classes: those
which argue that morphology is a distinct generative component, and
those which claim that the only generative component in grammar is
syntax, and morphology either does not exist or is an interpretative
component that follows syntax. The first hypothesis is generally
called LEXICALISM or PROJECTIONISM, while the second has been
labelled CONSTRUCTIONISM.
7.1.1 LEXICALIST THEORIES
Lexicalism’s main claim is that grammar contains two distinct
components able to create new forms: syntax, which is responsible
for creating phrases and sentences, and the LEXICON, which creates
new words. The lexicon in this approach is a complex component
that contains both a list of forms (the mental dictionary) and a set of
rules which create new words. Thus, the component that generates
the phrase a person who writes is syntax, while the word writer is
built in the lexicon. As these two linguistic objects have been formed
in different components of the grammar, they are expected to be
different in nature: they would be affected by different processes and
have different properties. The architecture of grammar according to

Lexicalism is presented in (1). The first generative component is the
lexicon, which feeds units to syntax, the second generative
component. Once syntax has combined these units into phrases,
they are transferred to two further components, called interfaces: LF
(Logical Form), responsible for the semantic interpretation, and PF
(Phonological Form), which deals with its materialization as a
physical signal.
(1)
In Lexicalism, the lexicon is not just a list of stored units, but also
contains all morphological processes needed to create words.
Historically, modern Lexicalism was a reaction against theories
that explained the semantic properties of words and their relations
with syntactic phrases – for example, deriving writer from a structure
equivalent to a man that writes – by attributing the same basic
structure to both objects. In some approaches during the 1960s
(Katz and Postal 1964, McCawley 1968 or Lees 1960) a word is
analyzed as the manifestation of a complex structure, and processes
similar to those that apply to syntax have to apply to morphological
objects, as well. The following example is taken from Katz and
Postal (1964: 129–35), and shows the internal structure of the word
where.
(2)

This complex structure gives an account of the meaning of the word:
it is an adverb (adverbial phrase, AdvP) that asks (wh-) about the
identity (determiner phrase, DetP) of the place at (preposition, P)
which some entity is located (roughly equal to ‘at which place’). The
underlying structure is no different from the one underlying the
equivalent syntactic phrase, and is generated by the same kind of
rules. In order to surface as where, this structure has to undergo
various operations similar to those that related two different syntactic
phrases to one another (for example, an active and a passive
sentence). Chomsky (1970) is generally viewed as reacting to this
particular view of word formation and morphology. Chomsky shows
that there are empirical differences between words and phrases
which the Generative Semantics take on these issues cannot
explain. His three main points are presented now; the reader will
probably identify them as three topics that have already come up in
this book.
Productivity
Syntactic operations are assumed to apply without exception to each
phrase of a certain kind. However, it is not possible to claim, for
example, that all verbs of a certain kind allow for a nominalization;
that is, given a set of properties, it is not the case that a
morphological process applies to all bases displaying these
properties. A modal verb like must can turn into a noun (This is a
must), but shall cannot (*This is a shall). If morphological processes
are not productive in this sense, they cannot be assimilated to
syntactic processes.

Idiosyncrasies and unpredictability
Word formation is sensitive to idiosyncratic properties of the input
and can give an output that has unexpected characteristics.
Continuing with nominalizations, a few English verbs nominalize with
-th, like grow – growth; others, with -ation, as in explain –
explanation; others, with -ing, such as build – building; others do not
change their shape when they behave like nouns, such as kick –
kick, without any clear semantic, phonological or syntactic
generalization arising from the distribution. Notice, also, that the
output of these processes sometimes has unexpected properties,
such as the change in vowel quality in the noun explanation with
respect to explain, or the very specific meaning of the noun building.
In contrast, syntactic operations apply to all phrase structures that
share some relevant properties.
Inaccessibility to the internal structure of words
When a morphological process applies to an input, the output does
not show any memory of the previous properties of the input. The
result of nominalizing a verb is indistinguishable from a non-derived
noun in many respects. Nouns that come from verbs, such as
explanation, require a preposition to introduce an argument (the
explanation of the problem), just like morphologically simple nouns
such as father or dog (the father of philosophy). A noun derived from
a verb does not show any of the syntactic properties of verbs; the
fact that it came from a verb is obliterated as far as syntax is
concerned. Some verbs allow Exceptional Case Assignment, by
which the subject of a subordinate predicate formally becomes the
direct object of the main verb (3a). However, the nominalization
corresponding to these verbs does not allow the same process (3b),
showing that in syntax the noun does not keep traces of its verbal
origin.
(3)
a. Laura considered [him to be a genius].
 
b. *Laura’s consideration [of him to be a genius].
It is perhaps historically accurate to say that the way in which
Chomsky (1970) was understood at the time meant that it was

necessary to postulate a set of morphological rules to capture the
empirical differences between words and phrases. The first explicit
attempt to create this kind of device was Halle (1973), where it was
stated that the internal structure of words is constructed in an
independent generative module known as the Lexicon. The different
productivity of morphological processes is explained if they are
different in nature from the rules that build and manipulate phrases;
the 
unpredictable 
and 
idiosyncratic 
properties 
involved 
in
morphology are due to the fact that the units used by this component
are different from those used in syntax and are typically stored in a
list – the lexicon – where they can be paired with different sets of
information. Finally, the fact that syntax can only have access to the
result of morphological processes and does not access the internal
structure of words follows from the two previous properties: as the
processes and the units used in morphology are different to those
used in syntax, this second component is blind to them and can only
read the result of these processes, that is, the whole word.
Morphology takes priority over syntax: Projectionism
In the Lexicalist architecture, the lexicon feeds syntax. This means
that syntax will receive objects created by the lexicon as its input to
construct a syntactic structure, not the other way round. As a result,
when syntax puts together a syntactic phrase, it will have to satisfy
the properties that the lexicon associates with the units used to build
that phrase; for example, the lexicon dictates whether a verb
requires a direct object (devour) or not (fly); syntax has to satisfy this
requirement. Thus, the properties of a word determine the properties
of a well-formed syntactic construction which includes that particular
word: the lexicon determines the way in which units will be combined
in a syntactic structure. Words come out of the lexicon containing a
number of properties referring to their meaning, their grammatical
category and their possible and preferred combinations with other
units. When they become part of a syntactic structure, in a sense,
they project these properties to the whole structure and determine
what a well-formed phrase looks like. This metaphor, of a single
word projecting its lexical properties to the whole structure, explains
why Lexicalist approaches have also been called PROJECTIONIST.

Consider, for example, the verb devour, which must have a direct
object. In the lexical component, this word is paired to some
information relevant to syntax.
(4)
devour
Category: V
 
 
Subcategory: Transitive
These properties must be met by syntax, or else the sentence will be
ungrammatical. The fact that devour is listed as a verb determines
that the word can only be the head of a VP, and the fact that it is
transitive determines that in that VP, some other constituent must be
its direct object. In other words, the fact that devour has that
information in the lexicon determines that any syntactic construction
built with it must contain the phrase in (5), where the DetP is the
constituent that acts as its direct object.
(5)
One consequence of this view of grammar is that the lexicon can
be viewed as the place where all syntactic differences find their
origin. In the same language, using different verbs can entail
differences in the syntactic structure, to the extent that each verb can
be associated with potentially different lexical information. The same
reasoning can be extended to the differences between languages. If
two languages differ with respect to the properties of their words as
they are stored in the lexicon, the syntactic differences can also be
due to these lexical differences.
Strong and Weak Lexicalism
The division between Strong and Weak Lexicalist theories is based
on the way in which they view inflection. The place of inflection and
its relation to syntax is subject to discussion because inflectional
processes interact with syntax in a direct way. This is visible in
agreement: inflectional properties of a word can be copied under

agreement, but derivation is never copied (cf. §4.1). Thus, the
question is whether this tight connection means that inflection is
directly performed in the syntax.
In Strong Lexicalism, all morphological processes, including
inflection, are performed in the lexicon. Halle (1973) is the earliest
example of this view in the generative tradition. In that article, Halle
acknowledges that it is not possible to determine the specific
inflectional form of a word before its insertion in a syntactic structure.
Consider case, for example. In a language that inflects nouns for
case, the specific case that a noun requires is not identifiable until
the syntactic function of that word inside the sentence is determined.
The lexicon, being prior to syntax, cannot know this information.
Halle’s solution to this problem is to propose that in such cases, the
lexicon introduces in the syntax not a single noun form, but the
whole case paradigm, and leaves the work of choosing the
appropriate form that will surface to syntax, once the syntactic role of
the element has been determined in the context. Therefore, one
difference between inflectional and derivational processes is that the
latter are solely determined by the lexicon, which imposes all the
properties of the word on syntax; with inflection, by contrast, there is
a part of the specification of the word which is chosen by syntax, but
the choice has to be made out of the set of forms provided by the
lexicon.
The alternative view inside Lexicalism is to accept that inflection is
not performed in the lexicon. This is known as Weak Lexicalism. The
proposal in Chomsky (1965, 1970) is that words come out of the
lexicon with many specified properties, but their inflectional
properties are unspecified, in the sense that they do not have a
value. With respect to case marking, Chomsky proposes that the
noun is inserted in the syntax without any case value. The value that
case will adopt then depends on the syntactic context in which it
finds itself. Other Lexicalist researchers, including Siegel (1974),
have adopted the assumption that syntax determines the inflection of
words.
7.1.2 CONSTRUCTIONISM

The alternative to Lexicalism is CONSTRUCTIONISM, which argues that
the only generative component in grammar is syntax. There is a
lexicon, but it does not contain a word-formation component: it is just
a list of stored units associated with some idiosyncratic meanings. In
these frameworks, morphology has a purely interpretative role: it
interprets structures generated by syntax and modifies them to meet
some formal properties, but cannot create any new structures. Let us
take as an illustration DM (Halle and Marantz 1993). Consider its
architecture in (6).
(6)
The first difference from Lexicalism is that morphology and the
lexicon are now placed in separate components. DM considers the
lexicon to be a list of units which can only be combined through the
computational system, in practice normally called syntax. This
lexicon (‘narrow lexicon’) contains the pieces that syntax combines
to create structures. All structures, including those that underlie
words, are built in syntax and therefore have syntactic properties.
Notice, incidentally, that both Constructionism and Lexicalism need
to assume the existence of a lexicon as a list of stored items. The
term ‘Lexicalism’ can thus be misleading, because Constructionist
theories also have a ‘lexicon’ in this particular sense.
Syntax is prior to morphology
The operations of the component known as morphology take place
after syntax, the inverse precedence relation of that assumed in

traditional Lexicalism. If syntax feeds morphology like this, this
means that no morphological property can determine the well-
formedness conditions of a syntactic structure. Rather, it is the
opposite: the syntactic properties of a structure determine its
morphology. Instead of having a Projectionist theory where syntax
reads the properties of words, we have a Constructionist theory
where syntax builds the properties of words and morphology only
has to read them.
The place of the idiosyncratic properties of words and
morphemes: The postsyntactic vocabulary
One of the main tenets of Constructionism is that the lexical
properties of individual words are due to syntactic requisites. No verb
is, by itself, stored in the narrow lexicon as having a set of special
properties, like requiring human objects or belonging to an irregular
paradigm. All idiosyncratic properties of an item – that is, those
which cannot be derived from general rules or principles – are
absent from the syntactic computation and are only added to the
representation at a later stage, when syntax has been completed.
In a first step, syntax takes elements from the narrow lexicon (a
head with verbal features, a determiner, and so on) and builds a
structure such as the one we saw in (5). Then, when the syntactic
structure has been built and all of its syntactic properties have been
satisfied, the grammar goes to the PF branch and checks a second
list of stored units, the vocabulary. the difference between the
vocabulary and the narrow lexicon is that the latter contains just
syntactic features, but no phonological or morphological information;
this secondary information is stored in the vocabulary. A narrow
lexicon entry is just a bundle of abstract features (abstract in the
sense that no information is provided about how they will surface),
such as (7a). A vocabulary entry is more complex: it is a pair that
relates a set of abstract features with a morphophonological
representation, as in (7b). Notice that this entry contains
unpredictable information having to do not only with how something
sounds, but also, if the language requires it, with respect to
idiosyncratic morphological properties such as the declension or

conjugation class of that particular form. (7c) shows that kind of entry
for the Spanish roots cant- ‘sing’, beb- ‘drink’ and viv- ‘live’.
(7)
In Lexicalism, the specific word is present in the syntax from the
beginning, as it is taken from the lexicon. In DM, the specific form
used to spell out a set of features is selected after syntax and
introduced in a structure that is already built. This procedure is
known as LATE INSERTION, and has consequences for the relation
between morphology and phonology which we will explore in §8.2.3.
The proposal that syntax builds structures without information
about the morphological properties of specific words or morphemes
is reflected in several tenets of DM, for instance in the idea that the
grammatical category of a root is not specified in the lexicon, but is
determined by the syntactic structure where the root is introduced
(§2.4.1.). In other words, a root like English walk is not listed in the
lexicon as a noun or a verb; when it is inserted in a structure like
(8a), it is a noun (take a walk); when it is inserted in (8b), it is a verb
(to walk). The notations v and n represent the heads that, according
to DM, verbalize or nominalize a root inside the structure.
(8)
Restricting productivity: The licensing environment
In a system like this, where syntax does not have access to the
idiosyncratic information of items and where the basic units – roots –
do not even have a grammatical category, one of the main problems
is that syntactic rules and principles have a lot of power and can
overgenerate; that is, they allow us to produce structures which are

not well-formed in the language. DM, like other Constructionist
theories, avoids this problem by giving the post-syntactic component
the power of filtering the structures generated by syntax.
A vocabulary entry can determine the syntactic context where an
element is introduced. This is known as the licensing environment of
a root.
When the same root can be used in both a causative and an
inchoative configuration, the vocabulary entry will specify this.
Consider a verb like grow, which allows for a causative (transitive)
construal (John grows tomatoes) or an inchoative (and intransitive)
one (Tomatoes grow). The idea is that this root will have in the
vocabulary an entry like the one in (9) (Harley and Noyer 2000),
where the feature ‘cause’ allows for two values – positive and
negative.
(9)
Context for insertion of grow: [±cause]
This allows the root to be inserted into a transitive configuration, but
also into an intransitive one. In contrast to this, a root like arrive,
which is only possible in an intransitive configuration, will have an
entry like the one in (10), where the licensing environment
determines that it can only appear in the absence of a causative
verbal head (*John arrived Mary vs. John arrived).
(10) Context for insertion of arrive: [−cause]
This means that if, after syntax, the root arrive is introduced in a
causative configuration, the result will be ungrammatical because the
item is not licensed in that context. This is filtering: the transitive or
intransitive configurations themselves are grammatical in the syntax,
but some lexical items cannot be used to materialize them: arrive will
not be able to materialize a transitive configuration.
The 
storage 
room 
of 
non-predictable 
semantics: 
The
encyclopaedia
The context for the insertion of a vocabulary item is tightly connected
to its meaning. Intuitively, the fact that grow is possible both in a

causative and in an inchoative configuration is due to the fact that
grow can be interpreted both as an event caused by some external
agent and as a change of state undergone by some entity without
specific external causes; conversely, arrive is only possible in a non-
causative environment because this action is conceptualized as not
being caused by external forces.
This takes us to the third list that DM proposes: the encyclopaedia.
If the vocabulary is placed in the phonological branch of the
grammar (PF) component because it contains information about the
phonology of a lexical item, the encyclopaedia is placed in the
semantic component, because it contains information about the non-
predictable meaning that a lexical item contains. Encyclopaedic
entries are pairs that relate a morphophonological representation to
a specific meaning. (11) shows a simplified encyclopaedic entry for
the word dog, with its pairing of phonology and unpredictable
semantics (§8.6.2). No rule of grammar allows speakers to figure out
the meaning of the sequence of sounds that we write as dog; its
meaning has to be stored somewhere.
(11) /d g/ ↔ Animal with four legs that barks and likes bones
Idioms and words whose meaning is not predictable are stored in
this list as combinations of units denoting a special concept which
cannot be derived from the combination of their parts. An idiom like
kick the bucket (meaning ‘die’) will have an entry in the
encyclopaedia like the one in (12a); a semantically exocentric
compound like skinhead, whose meaning is not the combination of
the meanings of the two roots combined (skin and head), would have
an entry like (12b).
(12) a. kick-the-bucket ↔ die
 
b. skin-head ↔ supporter of Nazism
Remember that, unlike in Lexicalism, this stored information is
accessed after syntax. Therefore, Constructionism makes a
prediction that Lexicalism does not: only sets of units that form a
syntactic 
constituent 
can 
have 
unpredictable 
meanings.

Constructionism predicts that idioms must be formed only by
elements belonging to the same syntactic domain (cf. §7.2.3).
Currently it is believed that the verb forms a syntactic domain with its
internal argument(s), in the absence of the agent or causer of the
action. The prediction is that the set formed by the verb and the
internal arguments can have an idiomatic meaning, but not the one
formed by the verb and its agent or causer. Although most verbal
idioms involve the verb and some internal argument (e.g. (13)), there
are some idioms which include the agent (e.g. (14), where the bird is
the agent of an action); this case constitutes a counterexample to the
prediction made in DM.
(13) a. go bananas
 
b. bet one’s bottom dollar
 
c. bury the hatchet
 
d. eat one’s words
(14) A little bird told me that …
What is morphology in Distributed Morphology?
At this point it should be apparent that the name ‘Distributed
Morphology’ comes from the fact that this framework scatters the
notions that Lexicalism puts in the lexicon among different
components of the grammar. Word-formation processes of any kind
are handled by syntax, because they involve the combination of
units, and syntax is considered to be the only component able to
combine objects into structures. All idiosyncrasies and unpredictable
properties of structures are not caused by syntax, but by the
information contained in the vocabulary and the encyclopaedia,
which is subsequent to syntax. The declension and conjugation
classes of a word, the places where a morpheme can be inserted or
not, the special meaning acquired by a word and so forth are
handled by storing the forms in a list (just as in Lexicalism), but
crucially these pieces of information are not present in syntax, but
inserted late (unlike in Lexicalism).
But, if word formation is performed by syntax and idiosyncrasies
are explained by storing units in different lists, what then, is the role

of morphology in this framework? DM considers morphology to be a
set of operations that interpret the output of syntax and adapt it so
that several language-specific morphological principles are met
(Embick and Noyer 2001). Morphology gets a syntactic structure as
input 
and 
needs 
to map 
the syntactic constituents 
onto
morphological constituents in order to satisfy some formal conditions
that are specific to each particular language. This gives rise to a
series of post-syntactic morphological operations that modify a
syntactic structure in a variety of ways; these operations take place
between the phonology and the syntax, so they will be reviewed in
§8.2.4.
7.2 THE GENERALIZED LEXICALIST HYPOTHESIS: EMPIRICAL
DATA
The basic argument of Lexicalist theories is the following: if
morphology is not autonomous and properly belongs to syntax, then
it follows that morphological rules and syntactic rules are identical,
and also that the units that morphology operates on are identical to
the units that syntax can handle. As a consequence, the internal
structure of words must be visible for syntactic operations, and,
conversely, complex syntactic structures should be allowed inside a
word structure, for they are the same type of construction. However,
if morphology is distinct from syntax, as Lexicalism argues, the
prediction is in fact that the internal elements of morphological
structures will not be accessible to syntax and the internal elements
of syntactic structures will not be accessible to morphology. If the
internal structure of words is not visible to syntax, then distinct
morphological rules must be able to generate words, since it is a
property of syntactic rules that they are not blind to the internal
structure of syntactic objects.
The proposal that morphological structures are not visible to
syntax has received several formulations in Lexicalism. Here are
three of them:
a) the GENERALIZED LEXICALIST HYPOTHESIS (Lapointe 1980: 8). No
syntactic rule can refer to elements of morphological structure.

b) the WORD STRUCTURE AUTONOMY CONDITION (Selkirk 1982: 70).
No deletion or movement transformation may involve categories
of both M(orphological)-structure and S(yntactic)-structure.
c)
the ATOMICITY THESIS (DiSciullo and Williams 1987: 49). Words
have features or properties, but these features have no
structure, and the relation of these features to the internal
composition of the word cannot be relevant in syntax.
Let’s now take a look at the empirical evidence that has been
gathered to argue in favour of the distinctness of morphology and
syntax.
7.2.1 SYNTACTIC MATERIAL INSIDE WORDS: THE NO PHRASE
CONSTRAINT
If words are syntactic phrases, we expect other syntactic phrases to
be able to appear inside a word, just as a phrase can appear inside
another phrase ([the answer [to the question]]). Botha (1983) noticed
that this is generally not possible, an observation he dubbed the No
Phrase Constraint:
(15) a. truck driver
 
b. *[metal truck] driver
However, phrases are attested inside words. The compounds in (16)
(see Lieber 1992) contain constituents which are syntactic phrases,
and, yet, they belong to a bigger word. Even the name given by
Botha to this constraint violates the constraint itself, as it contains a
phrase (16d).
(16) a. a-pipe-and-slipper-husband
 
b. a-slept-all-day-look
 
c. bikini-girls-in-trouble genre
 
d. [[No Phrase] Constraint]

If phrases can be used inside words, then it is possible that syntax
and morphology are non-distinct. Some morphological analyses,
however, argue that these cases are not arguments against the
separation of morphology and syntax. These analyses propose that
the apparent phrases inside words have actually been fossilized and
stored in the lexicon. Frequently, the meaning of these phrases
involves concepts which represent typical situations which are
standardized enough to become part of a dictionary available for a
language. Nonetheless, as Lieber and Scalise (2006) point out,
these phrases are very frequently used as creative formations in the
oral language, which makes the suggestion that they are listed forms
in the lexicon somehow far-fetched. Remember, also, that the
lexicon 
contains 
LISTEMES (§2.2) 
which 
may 
be 
syntactic,
phonological or morphological objects, so belonging to the lexicon
does not automatically mean that something is a morphological
object.
Notice, however, that even if it is true that phrases can be used as
internal constituents of words, it does not follow that morphology is
non-distinct from syntax. The presence of phrases inside words
argues against a strict ordering between morphology and syntax,
that is, against the proposal that the lexicon does not act after it has
fed syntax with words (as in Lexicalism) or, conversely, that syntax
does not do anything once the morphology of a language is
accessed (as in DM). If morphology and syntax are two independent
modules which interact simultaneously at different points of the
grammar, then we expect phrases to be used inside words, because
in that case syntax could put together a phrase, then morphology
would use that phrase inside a word, and then syntax would take the
complex word again and construct a new phrase using it. This
particular view of morphology as an independent module that is not
ordered with respect to syntax has already been proposed as
Parallel Morphology (Borer 1993), as represented in (17).
(17)

The conclusion seems to be not only that the No Phrase Constraint
does not hold empirically, but also that the existence of phrases
internal to words does not per se provide evidence for or against the
autonomy of morphology.
7.2.2 NON-MORPHOLOGICAL PROCESSES AND THE INTERNAL
STRUCTURE OF WORDS
Consider the nouns in (18). The adjective hard does not refer to a
property of the individual that is said to be a worker, but rather
modifies the verb work which is inside the internal structure of the
noun. (18a) is used to refer to someone who works hard, not to a
worker that is hard; this means that the adjective must be able to
modify a part of the noun, namely the base verb. Similarly, beautiful
in (18b) can modify the verb dance, triggering the meaning ‘someone
who dances beautifully’ in addition to the meaning ‘a dancer who is
also beautiful’.
(18) a. hard worker
 
b. beautiful dancer
These examples, though, do not show by themselves that syntax
can access the internal structure of words. Booij (2009), among
other authors, has noticed that here we refer to semantic
modification, not to syntactic modification. Booij acknowledges that
semantics can see inside words, something which is independently
granted by the fact that semantics needs to process the internal
structure of words, but syntax does not necessarily play a role here.
One argument in favour of Booij’s take on this matter is that the
same semantic reading of the adjective as some sort of adverbial
modifier of an event arises in cases where there is no verb in the
internal morphological structure of the word. Consider (19), from
Spanish.
(19) mal profesor
 
bad teacher

Here, the adjective bad is interpreted as an adverbial modifier of an
event closely related to the semantics of the noun profesor: it
denotes a person that teaches badly, not a teacher who is bad or evil
as a person. However, the verb to teach, enseñar in Spanish, is not
represented in the morphological structure of the word. If the
interpretation is available in the absence of a constituent which
represents the verb, then, it is plausible that the reading does not
rely on a structural property of the word, but on a purely semantic
rule.
In similar cases, however, other languages show special
agreement effects, which suggests that semantics might not be
enough to account for them. In Dutch (Ackema and Neeleman 2004:
166–70), adjectives inside a definite NP display an agreement
marker -e (20a). This regular process is impossible in some cases
similar to (18), as shown by (20b). These authors propose that at
least in these cases the adjective forms a constituent with the base
of the derived noun, as shown in (20c), so it is not a modifier of the
definite noun.
(20) a. de beroemd-e gitarist
 
 
the famous-agr. guitarist
 
b. de klassiek(*-e) gitarist
 
 
the classical-agr. guitarist, ‘someone who plays classical
guitar’
 
c. de [[klassiek gitar] ist]
7.2.3 ABSENCE OF MOVEMENT AND THE THEORY OF
SYNTACTIC DOMAINS
It is well known that some syntactic constituents can be displaced
from the position that they occupy in a simple declarative sentence.
In the sentence in (21), we see that the object the boy occurs
immediately to the right of the verb. But in particular types of
sentences, the object can be placed in the first position of the
sentence instead. This can happen, for instance, when the object is
questioned (22a), focused (22b) or contrasted (‘topicalized’) (22c).

(21) We visited the boy at the hospital.
(22) a. Which boy did we visit ____ at the hospital?
 
b. What a (great) boy we visited ____ at the hospital!
 
c. The boy we visited ____ at the hospital, not the girl.
Internal constituents of words robustly resist this kind of
displacement. From the compound in (23), none of the structures in
(24), intended to be similar to those in (21), can be derived.
(23) John is a truck driver.
(24) a. *What does John like a ___ driver?
 
b. *What a (great) truck does John like a ____ driver!
 
c. *Truck- does John like ____ drivers, not train-.
This empirical difference clearly differentiates morphological from
syntactic structures. Some analyses have been proposed where
morphemes undergo movement to a position inside a word (as in the
incorporation of an object into a verb; Baker 1988), but even if these
analyses are correct, the fact remains that, once inside a word,
constituents cannot move out.
The answer from Constructionism: Islands
The reply offered from Constructionism to the data presented in (24)
is that by themselves, they do not show that words are not syntactic
phrases, simply because it is not true that it is possible to displace a
constituent out of any syntactic structure. The questions in (25) are
ungrammatical, despite the fact that the constituent from which the
interrogative comes is syntactic: a definite DetP in (25a), an
interrogative in (25b) and a conditional in (25c).
(25) a. *Who did [the dog of ____] eat that bone?
 
b. *What didn’t she know [who has read _____]?
 
c. *Who will Mary talk to John [if _____ asks her to do it]?
The standard analysis of these cases has always been to propose
that the constituents from which movement is impossible act in some

way as closed syntactic domains, descriptively called islands. The
problem with the sentences in (24) is that it is not possible to connect
the position that the moved element comes from with the one to
which it is displaced. When a syntactic domain is an island, elements
within that domain cannot be extracted from it. This is what happens
in cases like (25).
Words as closed syntactic domains
Imagine that we wish to use this last concept to explain the absence
of movement through syntactic principles. Imagine that we claim that
words are islands of some sort. This has in fact been suggested in
DM (Marantz 2001, Arad 2003). We will briefly illustrate how this
proposal can be used to explain the absence of movement and the
presence of idiosyncrasies.
Assume that the structure of truck driver is the syntactic tree in
(26), as proposed by Harley (2009).
(26)
Arad (2003) argues that a structure like this defines a closed
syntactic domain at the word level. Inside the framework of DM, the
categorizer n assigns a grammatical category to a root that
otherwise lacks this information (turning it into a noun), and as such
it creates a syntactically autonomous object that behaves as a
closed domain. If (26) is a closed domain, just like the syntactic
objects in (25), we predict precisely that it will be impossible to
replace ‘truck’ with an interrogative and successfully move it outside
the word to form an interrogative sentence.

7.2.4 ABSENCE OF COREFERENCE TO WORD-INTERNAL
CONSTITUENTS
We will see, however, that even if we accept that words are islands
there are phenomena which show that words do not have the
behaviour expected from syntactic constituents. This can be
illustrated with pronominal coreference. Nominal expressions can be
taken as antecedents of a pronoun. In (27), the pronoun it can be
coreferential with the NP the car that precedes it, although, of
course, other readings could be allowed. Coreference is frequently
represented as coindexation, as here.
(27) John bought the cari and then sold iti.
In sharp contrast with (27), if the same noun is inside a compound,
the coreference is no longer available (28).
(28) *John went to the [cari washer] and washed iti.
This suggests, again, that syntactic operations, such as the one that
involves determining the reference of a pronoun, cannot access the
internal structure of words, which would be straightforwardly
explained if morphology and syntax did not share the same
language.
This contrast cannot be explained by the proposal that words are
islands. Notice that there is no problem in a pronoun’s being
coreferential with something that is included inside an island closed
syntactic domain like those in (25). Even if words were islands, we
should expect them to allow coreference as in (29).
(29) a. [Maryi’s friend] saw heri.
 
b. John does know [who cooked the cakei], but he ate iti
nonetheless.
 
c. [If Mary finds Johni], she will have a fight with himi.
Thus, there seems to be a contrast between being coreferent with an
element in a syntactic constituent (even if that constituent is an

island) and coreferring with a word-internal element. This contrast
casts doubt on the kind of analysis of the absence of movement
presented in the previous section.
In this short overview of the phenomena used to argue in favour of
the Lexicalist Hypothesis, we have seen that some of them are
tendencies rather than generalizations, while others could be
explained by independent syntactic principles. However, at the very
least the absence of coreference to word-internal constituents still
shows that words do not behave as we would expect from syntactic
phrases. This empirical situation seems to confirm the main
hypothesis of Lexicalism: that the linguistic objects generated by
morphology are different in nature from those generated by syntax.
7.3 THE RELATION BETWEEN SYNTAX AND MORPHOLOGY IN
DIACHRONY: MORPHOLOGIZATION
Up to now, we have analyzed the relations between syntax and
morphology from a synchronic perspective, that is, within a particular
historical stage of the language. The two components also interact
when we consider the different historical stages of a language. This
is particularly noticeable in the fact that syntactic constructions in an
early stage of a language might become morphological objects at
later stages. This historical process that turns a free form into an
affix is called MORPHOLOGIZATION. Morphologization is part of a more
general phenomenon called GRAMMATICALIZATION, which, through
historical change, turns lexical words (like verbs) into grammatical
words (like auxiliary verbs) and can culminate in morphologization
when the grammatical word becomes a bound morpheme (for
instance, to mark a particular form inside a verbal paradigm, as we
will shortly see).
Inflectional and derivational morphologization
One famous example involves the formation of the morphological
future in Romance languages like Spanish, French and Italian. The
source of the future tense in these languages is a Latin periphrasis,
that is, a phrasal structure containing one or several auxiliary verbs
and a verb with lexical meaning and argument structure. The

particular periphrasis involved the verb habere ‘to have, must’, and
the infinitive form of any verb, as in (30).
(30) cantare habeo
 
sing.inf. have, ‘I have to sing’ > ‘I will sing’
The auxiliary verb habere evolved in Romance languages and gave
rise to an inflectional marker of future tense: in Spanish, the form in
(30) becomes the one in (31), where the affix that carries stress is
the result of different changes undergone by the form habeo.
(31) cantar-é
 
sing-fut., ‘I will sing’
It is generally agreed that a precondition for morphologization is
that the syntactic structure that turns into a single word must be a
frequent combination of words in the early stage. Therefore, the
structure must be highly productive and the word that becomes a
morpheme must be able to appear with most, if not all, words
belonging to a particular grammatical category before it can become
morphologized. Consequently, morphologization gives rise more
frequently to inflectional affixes than to derivational affixes, because
the productivity of inflectional processes is higher than that of
derivational 
ones 
(§4.1). 
However, 
some 
other 
cases 
of
morphologization involve derivations. Consider the examples in (32),
taken from English.
(32) anchorman, 
artilleryman, 
barman, 
businessman,
cameraman, 
cavalryman, 
chairman, 
congressman,
craftsman, 
doorman, 
ferryman, 
fireman, 
guardsman,
infantryman, juryman, kingsman, mailman, etc.
The origin of these words is a compound formed with the word man
as its head. However, a more accurate description of the common
properties of these words at the present stage of English would be to
analyze man as a morpheme that creates agent nouns by
attachment to a noun that denotes an institution or an object. In the

first case, the meaning contribution of -man is ‘person that belongs
to’, as in congressman or juryman; in the second case, the
contribution is ‘person whose job or occupation is related to’, as in
barman, doorman or mailman. Notice that this has become a
relatively productive way of forming agent nouns in English and that
frequently 
the 
female 
form 
involves 
the 
form 
-woman
(businesswoman, congresswoman).
Attrition
Apart from the fact that a free form becomes an affix, under
morphologization several other properties change. Morphologization
usually comes with a process, called by McMahon (1994) ATTRITION,
by which the morpheme becomes semantically and phonologically
reduced with respect to its syntactic counterpart. In the evolution of
the future, attrition is clearly visible. The form habeo had three
syllables in Latin (ha-be-o), but in the course of the change it
became a single stressed vowel -é. The meaning also became
reduced; from the obligation or intention meaning that habere had in
Latin, the suffix moved on to express just a notion of temporal
succession.
This is also visible in the case of -man. When used as a free form,
its vowel is pronounced as [æ], but inside the words in (32) it can be
reduced to a schwa [ə], showing that it has become phonologically
weaker.
The emergence of morphological properties
Other changes due to morphologization are expected given the
different properties of syntactic and morphological objects. The word
man does not have a fixed position inside a compound or a phrase
(33), but once it morphologizes, it must occur at the right edge of a
word, like any other suffix. POSITIONAL FIXATION is, thus, another effect
of morphologization.
(33) a. frog man
 
b. man power
 
c. A man’s obligations

 
d. The obligations of a man
Another expected effect of morphologization is that elements that
could occur between the two elements in the syntactic phrase stop
being allowed. This follows from the general principle that words are
closed domains inside which some syntactic processes cannot
occur. In the periphrasis cantare habeo, it was possible to insert the
negative marker between the two words, as in (34a). This was only
possible because that structure was syntactic, but in the Romance
equivalent, where the auxiliary became an inflectional morpheme,
the negation must occur before the whole word (33b):
(34) a. cantare non habeo
 
 
sing       not will, ‘I will not sing’
 
b. *cantar-no-é; no cantar-é
 
 
sing-not-fut.; not sing-fut., ‘I will not sing’
Morphologization as a cline
It must be kept in mind, though, that morphologization is a diachronic
phenomenon and, as such, at some stages of a language it might
not have arrived at its endpoint. In these cases we find constructions
which are morphological in nature but which, for instance, keep
some syntactic properties. The future in Portuguese illustrates this
situation where the evolution has not turned an object into a
morpheme in all respects. In this language, the future form comes
from the periphrasis that we have been discussing. Despite the fact
that the auxiliary has become an inflectional marker and it has
undergone attrition, it is still possible to insert some elements
between it and the verb (35). This phenomenon, in which it is
possible to introduce some elements between a base and an affix, is
known as TMESIS or MESOCLISIS. The introduction of the third person
pronoun in the position where the juncture between the two words
was in the original Latin expression is possible in Portuguese (35a),
but not in Spanish (35b). The idea is that the morphologization has
reached a later stage in the latter language.
(35) a. falar-lhe-ei

 
 
speak-3rd sg.-fut.1st, ‘I will speak to him/her’
 
b. le hablar-é
 
 
3rd sg. speak-fut.1st, ‘I will speak to him/her’
EXERCISES
1.
Lexicalism and Constructionism have different approaches to
how to account for idiosyncrasies, and as such they will explain
in different ways the fact that an affix only combines with
particular bases. Take a word-formation process in a language
of your choice and, following our presentation of the two models
in §7.1, explain how the restrictions on that process can be
explained.
2.
As we have seen (§7.2.), the set of phenomena used to argue in
favour of the Generalized Lexicalist Hypothesis might have
counterexamples. Taking data from your own language,
evaluate to what extent these phenomena are attested in your
language, and what possible counterexamples you can identify.
3.
Some grammaticalization cases are very typical across the
languages of the world: a verb becoming an auxiliary (such as
English go in John is going to get sick), an auxiliary becoming
an inflectional marker (as in the case we studied in the
Romance future), a noun becoming an expression to determine
a quantity (for example, cup in to drink a cup of tea), etc. Identify
one such case in your own language and describe it according
to the parameters that we have used in §7.3. From a
morphological perspective, in the case that you have chosen,
are there grounds to say that the item is becoming a
morpheme?
FURTHER READING
Since the early 1980s there has been a proliferation of studies and
monographs that discuss whether the lexicon has to be viewed as a
generative component or just as a list of items, and whether
morphology is an independent component or not. In the Lexicalist

field, the reader will find it useful to read Anderson (1992), Aronoff
(1994), Ackema and Neeleman (2004) and Williams (2007), the last
being a critique of DM. Some articles and monographs on DM
include Halle and Marantz (1993, 1994), Noyer (1997), Harley and
Noyer (1999), Harbour (2007) and Embick (2010). Other takes on
Constructionist theories include Lieber (1992), Borer (1998, 2005a,
2005b), Julien (2000) and Li (2005). There are also some mixed
approaches where the lexicon is an independent generative
component, but where idiosyncrasies are explained by structural
requisites, like Hale and Keyser (2002).
The Lexical Integrity Hypothesis has remained at the centre of this
debate. Lieber and Scalise (2006) constitutes a recent evaluation of
the relevant phenomena, summarizing the issues as they stand now.
Other recent studies evaluating these topics include Bresnan and
Mchombo (1995), Ackerman and LeSourd (1997), Kageyama
(2001), Kornfeld and Saab (2003), Booij (2005a) and Spencer
(2005b).
There are also a large number of recent works dealing with
grammaticalization. Recent collections of papers on the topic include
Traugott and Heine (1991), Giacalone Ramat and Hopper (1998),
Fischer, Rosenbach and Stein (2000) and López-Couso and Seoane
(2008). Recent monographs include Bybee, Perkins and Pagliuca
(1994), Lehmann (1995) and Hopper and Traugott (2003). Chapter 5
of Newmeyer (1998) offers a critique of the concept and argues for a
structural approach to the empirical phenomena, without the use of
changes driven by communicative requisites or frequency.

8
MORPHOLOGY’S RELATION TO PHONOLOGY
AND SEMANTICS
8.1 RESTRICTIONS IMPOSED BY PHONOLOGY ON
MORPHOLOGY
One immediate sign that phonology and morphology interact is that,
across languages, there are frequent cases where specific
morphological units, structures or processes are forced to meet
some phonological requirements. We start this chapter by reviewing
some of these cases.
Phonological restrictions in morphological units
The most basic way in which phonology influences morphology is by
imposing a particular phonological property on the units which
compose words. For example, in Spanish all desinences (§4.3.1)
must be unstressed.
(1)
a. cas-a (/ká.sa/)
 
 
house-des.
 
b. man-o (/má.no/)
 
 
hand-des.
 
c.
clas-e (/klá.se/) class-des.
This contrasts with theme vowels (§4.3.2), which can carry stress:
(2)
a. cant-a-r (/kan.tá /)

 
 
sing-ThV-inf.
 
b. com-e-mos (/ko.mé.mos/)
 
 
eat-ThV-1st pl.
The phonological weakness of desinences is also manifested in the
fact that they disappear when the noun is derived (3b); the theme
vowel, in contrast, remains after derivation even if another vowel
follows it (3d).
(3)
a. perr-o dog-des.
 
b. perr-era (not perr-o-era)
 
 
dog-place, ‘dog shelter’
 
c.
cant-a
 
 
sing-ThV
 
d. cant-a-or
 
 
sing-ThV-agent, ‘flamenco singer’
Another well-known case is roots in Semitic languages. In Hebrew
and Arabic, roots must have three consonants. In Arabic, for
example, when a word contains four or more consonants, the
additional consonants belong to affixes intertwined with the root
(remember transfixes in §1.2.1). Vowels in an Arabic word belong to
these affixes, not to the root, unless additional phonological
processes take place to materialize a consonant as a vowel. (4)
shows some of these roots.
(4)
a. √ktb ‘write’
 
b. √fqh ‘understand’
 
c. √hml ‘carry’
Phonological restrictions on morphological structures
Coordination of word-internal constituents is generally disallowed, as
we saw in §6.3.1. Some authors, however, have proposed that
coordination is generally impossible because of the phonological
properties of the resulting structure (Plag 2003). According to this

proposal, coordination is only possible if all the segments that are
coordinated are phonologically independent, that is, if they can be
treated by phonology as self-sufficient units. When two morphemes
can be coordinated, it is because neither of them forms a
phonological unit with the base (Plag 2003: 84).
(5)
a. [word and sentence] structure
 
b. [over- and under-]determination
 
c. [computer- and internet-]wise
 
d. *[feder- and loc-] al
The cases where coordination is impossible are those where the
element outside the conjoined constituent needs to get integrated
with its base. We can show that -al must integrate phonologically
with its base because it can change its pronunciation (6). We will
come back to the difference between suffixes that trigger
phonological changes in their bases and those that do not in §8.2.1.
(6) presiden[t] > presiden[∫]-al
Now, in the examples in (5), -al cannot have a conjoined element
because it does not combine directly with its base, but with the whole
conjoined constituent. This prevents the phonological integration
required by this affix.
Restrictions on morphological processes
It is common to find that a word-formation process is only possible
when the base or the resulting word meet some phonological
principle. For example, Marchand (1969:236–7) notices that the
English suffix -al, used to derive nouns from verbs, requires bases
which bear stress on the last syllable; compare (7a) to (7b).
(7)
a. arriv-al, committ-al, referr-al, refus-al
 
b. *abolish-al, *benefit-al, *develop-al, *examinal
The difference between the two groups in (7) is not semantic or
syntactic; what the verbs of each group have in common is a purely

phonological property, namely the position of stress.
Another well-known case of phonological restriction on a
morphological process is that of the English comparative and
superlative adjectives, which are restricted to bases with a particular
number of syllables – two or fewer. Therefore, from red it is possible
to get both redder and reddest, but with magenta it is not possible to
obtain *magent(a)-er and *magent(a)-est; the explanation does not
seem semantically or syntactically based, but due to the fact that red
has one syllable, while magenta has three.
Such constraints are also present in inflection. Carstairs-McCarthy
(1998: 145) reports that in Classical Greek (Attic dialect) the suffix -
ntai, corresponding to the third person plural perfect indicative
passive, could only be added to bases which ended in a vowel, as in
pe-paideu-ntai ‘they have been trained’. For bases which ended in a
consonant, such as tag- ‘draw up’, the suffix was unavailable. In
these cases, the suffix -mai was used. The form for ‘they have been
drawn up’ was te-tag-mai, not *te-tag-ntai.
Phonological independence inside compounds
Phonological constraints on word formation have rarely been
identified in compounding. This absence may be related to the fact
that, typically, the constituents of a compound remain phonologically
independent from each other.
For example, in some languages, such as Turkish, there is a
process of VOWEL HARMONY by which the phonological content of the
vowels of an affix must share some properties with the vowels of the
base. (8) shows that the vowel of the plural suffix -lVr (where V is a
wild card for several possible vowels) and that of the causative affix -
Vr share a phonological property with that of the base: the frontness
or backness of the vowel.
(8)
a. zil-ler
 
 
bell-s
 
b. çocuk-lar
 
 
boy-s
 
c.
bit-ir-mek

 
 
finish-caus.-inf., ‘to make finish’
 
d. doy-ur-mak
 
 
be.satisfied-caus,-inf., ‘to make satisfied, to satisfy’.
This process does not apply inside compounds. Each constituent in
the compound of (9) has vowels with different qualities: the first
constituent has front vowels, and the second, back vowels.
(9)
büyük-baba
 
big-     father, ‘grandfather’
However, some compounds also seem to be restricted by
phonological principles. Fábregas (2004) argues that a particular
type of N-A compound in Spanish is restricted in such a way that the
first member plus the LE must form a bisyllabic constituent, which
explains the ungrammaticality of (10b).
(10)
a. brac-i-largo (/bra.θi.la .go/)
 
 
arm-LE-long, ‘long-armed’
 
b. *naric-i-largo (*/na. i.θi.la .go/)
 
 
nose-LE-long, ‘long-nosed’
Since the segment narici- is trisyllabic, (10b) is ungrammatical, while
(10a) is licit because braci- only contains two syllables.
8.2 THE PHONOLOGICAL MATERIALIZATION OF MORPHEMES
Given the evidence that morphology and phonology interact, the
question of how this interaction takes place presents itself: how is
the phonological shape of a morpheme determined? To answer this
question, researchers have concentrated on two issues. The first is
the ordering between phonology and morphology: are they
components that act in tandem, feeding information to each other, or
are they strictly ordered, in such a way that all morphological
operations must take place before the phonological ones start? The
second issue is how the grammar determines which one of the

different allomorphs (§1.4.1) of a morpheme is used in a given
context. This section concentrates on the first issue, while the next
section (§8.3) discusses the case of allomorphs.
8.2.1 MORPHOLOGY AND PHONOLOGY FEED EACH OTHER:
LEXICAL STRATA
A theory that proposes that morphology and phonology feed
information to each other is LEXICAL STRATA THEORY (Siegel 1974,
Kiparsky 1982).
This proposal argues that the lexicon is divided into ordered levels
or STRATA. Different morphological operations are associated with
each of these levels. There is a set of morphological operations that
take place in a first round; these operations are then fed to
phonology. The result of these operations then returns to
morphology, where the morphological processes belonging to the
second level take place; then the result is again sent to phonology,
where the second-level phonological operations are applied to it.
This system, where phonology and morphology are divided into
levels that interact with each other in an ordered way, implies that
the lexicon is ordered in different strata. Each stratum contains a set
of affixes; an affix, thus, can belong to stratum 1 (the first level) or to
stratum 2 (the second level). Belonging to one stratum or the other
implies differences in the phonological behaviour of the affix and how
it interacts with its morphological base. Affixes in stratum 1 are
phonologically more cohesive and must form a single prosodic unit
with the base; consequently, they are likely to trigger idiosyncratic
phonological changes in the base. Affixes in stratum 2, in contrast,
have more phonological independence and are less cohesive with
the base, which manifests itself in their not triggering idiosyncratic
phonological changes in the base.
The ordering between levels determines that an affix belonging to
stratum 1 must always be closer to the base than an affix belonging
to stratum 2. This is forced by the proposal that morphological and
phonological operations on the first level precede those on the
second level. This ordering is, in principle, irreversible. For example,
the base person can combine with the suffix -al, which belongs to

stratum 1; its output personal can then combine with another stratum
1 suffix, -ity, to form personality. These words that come out of
stratum 1 can undergo processes associated with stratum 2, such as
the one that adds -less and forms personality-less. Any attempt to
reverse this order of operations gives an ungrammatical result:
despite the fact that -less forms adjectives and -ity takes adjectives
as its base, *person-less-ity is not a word of English. Lexical Strata
Theory argues that this ungrammaticality is caused by the operations
on the second level being applied before those on the first level.
Empirical motivation: Phonological differences
The proposal that affixes and processes are divided into levels
mainly finds its empirical basis in the different phonological
behaviour associated with the affixes in each stratum.
Affixes and processes on stratum 1 are able to change the
phonological properties of the base, such as the position of stress in
the base, the vowels and consonants, and so on. Consider the
affixes -ic and -ity, which belong to stratum 1. The base atom carries
stress on the first syllable, but in the word atom-ic stress has been
displaced to the second syllable. Also, the velar stop [k] that ends
the word atomic turns into [σ] when combined with -ity in atomic-ity;
this process is known as ‘spirantization’. The intuition – which goes
back at least to Jespersen (1933) – is that these changes are
possible because the process happens at a very early level and the
affix forms a very tight unit with the base. Stratum 1 affixes are also
known as COHESIVE AFFIXES, because they phonologically integrate
with the base.
In contrast, stratum 2 affixes tend to leave the phonological
properties of the base intact. Notice that the affix -less, classified as
stratum 2, does not displace the position of the stress in atom-less or
personality-less. It does not change the nature of the last consonant
of the base either.
Kiparsky (1982) differentiated between three different lexical
strata, represented in Table 8.1 with a non-exhaustive list of the
affixes associated with each level.
Other lexical strata proposals, such as Halle and Mohanan (1985),
split stratum 2, with compounding belonging to a specific third level

and, therefore, regular inflection being placed in a new stratum 4.
The general intuition is that the higher a stratum is, the more regular
it is, the less likely it is to alter the phonological or semantic
information contained in its base, and the more productive it is.
Regular inflection is highly productive, is semantically predictable
and generally does not trigger idiosyncratic changes in the
phonology of the base; irregular inflection, on the other hand, is non-
productive, is sometimes accompanied by semantic idiosyncrasies
(as in brother > brethren, where the second is semantically
specialized), and triggers unexpected changes in the base. With
respect to compounding, as we have noticed, it tends to keep the
phonological independence of each of the components to some
extent. For this reason, it is not situated in stratum 1.
Table 8.1 Morphological processes and affixes associated with three
lexical strata
Stratum
Morphological processes and affixes
1
Irregular inflection (oxen)
 
Derivation with:
 
(suffixes) -ion, -ity, -y, -al, -ic, -ate, -ous, -ive
 
(prefixes) be-, en-, in-, pre-, con-
2
Compounding (wolfman)
 
Derivation with:
 
(suffixes) -ness, -less, -ful, -hood, -ly, -like
 
(prefixes) un-, non-, semi-, anti-
3
Regular inflection
Technical implementation: Kinds of word-internal boundaries
The difference between the two strata is often implemented by
proposing that there are different kinds of boundaries between
morphological units, depending on the relative independence of
these units after derivation. The boundary usually represented as ‘+’
is a weak boundary that allows the affix to influence the phonological

shape of the base through a SANDHI RULE. A sandhi rule produces a
phonological change in the base triggered by the presence of a
particular morphological element. An example of this kind of rule is
spirantization, demonstrated above. Processes belonging to stratum
1 are associated with these weak, more transparent, boundaries.
In contrast, the boundary that separates a stratum 2 suffix such as
-less and its base is typically represented as ‘#’, a strong boundary
that does not allow phonological interactions because it isolates the
base from its context.
Other possible implementations of this distinction include a
syntactic account; so-called stratum 1 processes happen in the
same syntactic domain as the base, and thus are able to influence
the way in which the base is pronounced. In contrast, those
associated with stratum 2 take place external to the domain where
the base is included, and thus are unable to influence its shape.
More specifically, stratum 1 affixes attach at the root level, that is, to
a unit which is not independent; consequently, it is expected that the
set formed by the root and the affix will be very cohesive and that the
whole can have unexpected phonological and semantic properties
(11).
(11)
In contrast, stratum 2 affixes attach not to the root level, but to a
stem or a whole word (12). As the base contains more information, it
exhibits more independence from the affix, and thus we do not
expect the two units to integrate into a whole with idiosyncratic
semantic or phonological properties. In DM, where a root with a
functional projection (FP) forms an independent syntactic domain
(Arad 2003), the affix does not properly form a unit with the base.
(12)

Criticism of lexical strata
Lexical Strata Theory allows for three possible orderings of affixes. A
stratum 1 affix can be followed by another stratum 1 affix (as in ton-
ic-ity); a stratum 1 affix can be followed by a stratum 2 affix (as in the
technical term ton-ic-ness); finally, a stratum 2 affix can be followed
by another stratum 2 affix (as in care-less-ness), but never by a
stratum 1 affix (*care-less-ity). Problems appear when this last order
is found.
The suffix -able undergoes a phonological change in contact with
the affix -ity, belonging to stratum 1. Thus, Lexical Strata Theory has
to assume that -able also belongs to stratum 1. However, as Aronoff
(1976) shows, some cases of -able suggest the opposite conclusion,
namely that it belongs to stratum 2, and even in these cases it can
be followed by -ity, which then also triggers phonological changes. In
the forms in (13), -able behaves as a stratum 2 affix, as it does not
trigger any change in the phonology of the base, stress position and
nature of final segments included (notice that the absence of the final
-e is orthographic, as it is not pronounced in the verb).
(13) a. demonstrat-able
 
b. mutat-able
 
c. navigat-able
 
d. appreciat-able
If -able belongs to stratum 2 here, how can it be followed by -ity from
stratum 1, resulting in forms such as demonstrat-abil-ity or navigat-
abil-ity, attested English words? One solution (suggested in Siegel
1974 and Aronoff 1976) is to allow -able to belong to two strata at
the same time (so-called DUAL MEMBERSHIP). Indeed, Aronoff notices
that some adjectives in -able show phonological characteristics of

stratum 1. In the forms in (14), -able has forced the base to undergo
TRUNCATION.
(14) a. demonstr-able
 
b. mut-able
 
c. navig-able
 
d. appreci-able
The second option is to extend a proposal by Halle and Mohanan
(1985) and Mohanan (1986), which allows loops between the strata,
in such a way that after a stratum 2 operation it is possible to go
back to stratum 1. It has been noticed, though, that these solutions
have a considerable problem: by allowing loops or dual membership,
the proposal is unable to predict which sequences are impossible.
The same loop used to derive navigat-abil-ity should be available to
derive unattested forms such as *care-less-ity, but a complete
grammatical description of English should explain why this second
form is impossible. Dual membership has a similar problem, because
some affixes can be shown to have it while others do not, and
additionally it has the drawback that treating -ity as stratum 2 in a
word like navigatability does not give an account of the fact that even
in this case it triggers a phonological change in the base.
Faced with these empirical problems, many authors have given up
the standard view on strata and have proposed that processes do
not belong to any particular level (Giegerich 1999, Arad 2005). The
empirical differences are explained by these authors as differences
in the nature of the base with which an affix combines. No affix
belongs properly to any stratum. When the affix combines with a
base with root properties, the result has the properties of stratum 1
affixation. In contrast, when the same affix attaches to a base with
the properties of a word or stem, the result looks like a stratum 2
construct. In navigate > navigable, the base of -able, navig-, is a root
in the sense that it cannot form a word by itself and needs to
combine with -ate to become a verb; thus, navigable has stratum 1
properties. In navigate > navigatable, the base of -able is a well-
formed English verb, hence the stratum 2 properties.

8.2.2 MORPHOLOGY IS INDEPENDENT FROM PHONOLOGY:
THE SEPARATION HYPOTHESIS
In other theories, the morphological information is kept as separate
as possible from the phonological representation of morphemes.
According to the SEPARATION HYPOTHESIS (Ackema and Don 1992,
Beard 1995) two independent levels have to be differentiated when
analyzing morphemes: their morphosyntactic role – the grammatical
and semantic changes that they trigger in the base - and their
phonological representation. An operation can affect one level
without having consequences for the other level.
The English past tense morpheme is materialized in a number of
ways: as /d/ (15a), as zero (15b) or as a vocalic change in the root
(15c), among others.
(15)
a. live - lived
 
b. cut - cut
 
c. sing - sang
For IA theories, this example illustrates the dual nature of what we
call a ‘morpheme’. If we consider the grammatical and semantic
side, we do not want to say that we have three or more different
morphemes for past tense; the past tense forms in (15) all behave in
the same way as far as syntax and semantics are concerned.
However, if we consider the phonological materialization of the
property of being past tense, we must say that there are at least
three different ‘morphemes’ carrying that particular semantic and
grammatical information.
This apparent contradiction is resolved by introducing the
SEPARATION HYPOTHESIS. The main intuition is that there are two sides
to what we call a ‘morpheme’: a syntactic and semantic side, in
which the morpheme is a set of abstract grammatical features, and a
phonological side, in which the morpheme is spelled out or
materialized by some concrete formative. In the examples in (15), we
have only one abstract morpheme which gets a number of different
materializations, depending on idiosyncrasies which require, for
specific bases, that special forms be used. Thus, a complete

representation of any morpheme requires information on at least two
levels: a description of the grammatical features that the morpheme
carries when it is combined with a base, and a description of the
shape or shapes it adopts when it is spelled out (16):
(16) The past tense morpheme in English
 
Morphosyntactic
features
Phonological spell-out
 
[Past Tense]
Vocalic change in the root
 
 
Ø
 
 
/d/
The list of different materializations of the abstract morpheme can
come accompanied by the set of contexts where each form is used;
the less frequent and non-productive materializations normally
require a listing of the set of forms which contain the special variant
(in the case of the English past tense, when there is no phonological
change and when the change involves altering a vowel of the root).
Productive ways of spelling out a morpheme (in the past tense case,
/d/ and its phonologically conditioned allomorphs) do not require that
the context be specified. Instead, the ‘elsewhere’ form is generally
used, meaning that in contexts that have not been explicitly specified
in the lexical entry, that form is used by default.
The main idea is that the phonological materialization of a
morpheme is logically independent of the morphosyntactic features
that it carries, in such a way that one expects to find mismatches
between the two sets of information (mismatches such as those
presented in §2.3.2). This idea has been advocated by several
authors in different forms, among them Ackema and Don (1992),
Halle and Marantz (1993) and Beard (1995). A consequence of this
Separation Hypothesis is that the fact that a morphological process
is spelled out as a continuous segment, by discontinuous units (as in
transfixes) or by zero, does not tell us anything about the process
itself, the grammatical changes that it triggers in the base, or even
the internal structure of the word. One needs to find grammatical and
semantic arguments to determine these aspects of a morphological

operation, and the surface shape that the word adopts as a result of
this operation only provides us with direct information about its
phonology.
The separation hypothesis, in its strongest form, has another
interesting consequence. The proposal that the phonological
materialization of an operation is completely independent from its
semantic and grammatical effect implies that it is possible for
morphology to have processes that have an effect on only one of the
sides without changing the information on the other. The Separation
Hypothesis treats zero exponence as the result of an operation that
adds grammatical and semantic information, but without a
phonological representation, or has a phonological representation
only in some few specific cases. For instance, this would be the case
of the spell-out of the plural grammatical features in a word like fish:
(17) Morphosyntactic
representation
Phonological representation
 
[Plural]
Ø
The reverse may also happen; that is, we can find phonological
exponents which do not correspond to any set of morphosyntactic
features. In these situations, a particular phonological change in the
base appears without any effect on the grammatical or semantic
behaviour of the word. There is a particular class of INTERFIXES that
do not seem to be associated with any semantic or grammatical role
in Spanish. Consider the diminutive noun in (18a). It is derived from
the adjective in (18b), which lets us identify the shape of the base.
One of the extra segments in (18a), -ito, can be identified as the
phonological representation of the abstract morpheme that
corresponds to the diminutive semantics (18c). However, once we
have identified the shape of the base and the shape of the formant
associated with the extra diminutive semantics, we still have a
segment unaccounted for: -ec-. The grammatical and semantic
behaviour of (18a) is identical to that of (18c), which shows that -ec-
does not reflect any additional grammatical or semantic features; in
this sense, its contribution is vacuous. Rather, its presence seems
due to a phonological constraint: when it is present, there is an extra

syllable in the word, which allows the base to keep stress (or more
precisely, it preserves a rhythmic stress pattern every two syllables,
represented as ‘‘’ in 18a) in the diphthong -ue- exactly in the same
place where the non-derived form had a primary stress (18b).
(18) a. buen-ec-ito (/buè.ne.θí.to/)
 
 
good-infix-dim., ‘goody two-shoes’
 
b. buen-o (/bué.no/)
 
 
good-des
 
c.
gord-ito (/go .dí.to/)
 
 
fat-dim., ‘fatty’
The idea is that some segments are introduced in words, even
though they do not correspond to morphosyntactic or semantic
features, because their presence helps preserve some principle
which is favoured by phonology; in this case, the presence of -ec-
helps to keep stress in the same position in the derived and in the
non-derived form.
8.2.3 MORPHOLOGY PRECEDES PHONOLOGY: THE LATE
INSERTION HYPOTHESIS
An extension of the Separation Hypothesis is the idea that the two
sets of information (morphological and phonological) are not just
independent from each other, but also ordered: morphology
precedes phonology. Only morphology feeds phonology, never the
other way round.
The idea here is that the information about the morphosyntactic
and the phonological properties of the morpheme are introduced at
different stages, with the latter coming only after the former has
already been defined. In other words, according to this hypothesis,
morphemes are spelled out after the internal structure of the word
has been completed. DM is one of the theories that argues for this
idea, which is called the LATE INSERTION HYPOTHESIS.
The main idea of the analysis is that there is a component that
combines the abstract morphemes inside a structure attending only

to their grammatical and semantic properties, and only later, when
the word has been completed in this component, is the structure
transferred to the phonological component (PF), where phonological
information is added to the structure in order to spell it out.
Therefore, as far as the structure is concerned, morphemes carry
different types of information, but never phonological information,
which is added to the representation in a subsequent step. (19a)
gives us the representation of a word like reader as far as its internal
structure is concerned; depending on whether the approach is
Lexicalist or not, this structure is morphological or purely syntactic. In
contrast, (19b) gives us the same word as it would be represented at
a later stage, in PF; here the matrixes of features have been fleshed
out and paired with phonological information.
(19)
In addition to the presence of phonological information, we see that
there have been other changes between the structural and the
phonological representation of the word: namely, the order between
morphemes has been changed. In the structural representation, the
nominalizer is the head of the structure. If we assume that English
generally has the head to the left, as would be suggested by the fact
that inside a VP the verb precedes its complement (eat tomatoes,
not *tomatoes eat), then the relation in (19a) has to be inverted in
(19b), when the phonological representation is added, because -er is
a suffix. Of course, different assumptions would make this inversion
unnecessary.
For theories with late insertion, the morphosyntactic structure
might ignore the question of whether a morpheme is a suffix, a
prefix, an infix or a discontinuous morpheme; this fact becomes

relevant when the structure has to be pronounced, and as such is
only added as part of the phonological information (cf. §8.4 for more
information about how to account for morpheme order).
The most relevant point of the Late Insertion Hypothesis is that it
allows for a number of operations to happen in a morphological
component that is located between the component containing the
structural representation of a word and the component containing its
phonological representation. Let us briefly review what these
operations are in DM.
8.2.4 POST-SYNTACTIC MORPHOLOGICAL OPERATIONS IN
DISTRIBUTED MORPHOLOGY
The specifically morphological processes in DM are a set of
operations on the structural representation of the word once it is sent
to the phonological branch of the grammar. These operations
happen after the structure has been defined, but before specific
phonological information is introduced into it.
These operations have been used to account for cases where the
traditional notion of morpheme is challenged because there is no
one-to-one mapping between the morphosyntactic features of the
morpheme and its phonological representation (§2.3.2.). In a theory
with this kind of operation, the mismatches are explained because,
after the structure of the word is built, some processes that impose a
non-direct mapping between this structure and phonology have
taken place. Here we will consider those mismatches again from this
different perspective.
In this short exposition we will represent the morphophonological
properties 
of 
the 
morpheme 
as 
‘m(orpheme)’ 
and 
the
morphosyntactic properties as ‘M(ORPHEME)’. (20) is a case where
there is a one-to-one correspondence between these two levels of
representation: regular plural formation in English.
(20) m:
cat
s
 
 
 
 
 
M:
[Noun]
[Plural]

Null morphemes
The first kind of mismatch between the two sides of the morpheme is
a process that adds information in the M level but induces no change
in the m level. This mismatch is interpreted as a null morpheme in IA
theories. An example of it would be the plural number of the English
noun sheep.
(21) m:
sheep
 
 
 
 
M:
[Noun] [Plural]
In theories where there are post-syntactic operations, like DM, this
mismatch can be resolved by a post-syntactic operation. When the
features introduced at the M level are not reflected at the m level,
this can be accounted for if the features have been erased. For
instance, in Spanish the accusative pronouns differentiate gender: la
is used for feminine and lo for masculine. However, the dative
pronouns do not make gender distinctions: le is used for both
masculine and feminine. This can be accounted for if the features
that mark gender at the M level are erased before they can be
represented by exponents in the dative form. This operation which
eliminates features from the representation of the word is known as
IMPOVERISHMENT.
Empty morpheme
The opposite situation, where a morphophonological segment lacks
a corresponding set of grammatical properties associated with it,
would correspond to the representation in (22), which represents the
Spanish verbal form cant-a ‘sing’, formed by a verb and its theme
vowel.
(22) m:
cant-
-a-
 
 
 
 
 
M:
[Verb]  

DM has another post-syntactic operation to account for the
mismatch. There are language-specific rules that introduce extra
morphophonological positions, not corresponding to any set of
syntactically relevant features. These extra positions are known as
DISSOCIATED MORPHEMES (Oltra 1999). The idea is that, given a
structure like the one in (23a), a specific morphological operation
that takes place prior to vocabulary insertion introduces a morpheme
that was not present in the syntactic structure, the theme vowel
(23b).
(23)
Cumulative exponence
Cumulative (or overlapping) exponence, where a single unit in the
morphophonological level stands for two or more units in the
morphosyntactic level, is represented in (24). In Spanish, the
preterite form of the verb has, in the second singular form, a single
segment that corresponds simultaneously to past and second person
singular agreement.
(24) The-ste form in Spanish
 
DM captures this mismatch by proposing a post-syntactic rule that
has two or more heads in the structural representation of the word as
its input and unifies them into a single morphological position. This

operation is known as FUSION, and requires the two heads that are to
be fused to be adjacent to each other (Bobaljik 1994).
Extended exponence
The converse mismatch is known as extended exponence, where
two segments stand for the same set of grammatical features (25).
(25) German participle
 
The mismatch is explained, in DM terms, with yet another post-
syntactic operation; this time, it is one that takes a single head in the
structural representation of the word and maps it into two or more
morphological positions. This operation is known as FISSION (cf.
Noyer 1992).
8.3 ACCOUNTING FOR ALLOMORPHS: LOCALISM AND
GLOBALISM
Allomorphy (§1.4) is the second main phenomenon which has to do
with the relationship between morphology and phonology. From this
perspective, allomorphy is relevant because it allows us to consider
which aspects of the context are relevant for introducing one variant
of a morpheme or another. The different allomorphs of a morpheme
are the different phonological variants which can spell out one and
the same set of morphosyntactic features. Allomorphs are sensitive
to the context; phonological allomorphs (such as -ez and -eza in
Spanish, studied in §1.4.1) are sensitive to the phonological
properties of their context, while morphological allomorphs (for
instance, -able and -abil- in English) are sensitive to the adjacent
morphemes inside the word.
There is currently a debate (see especially Embick 2010) with
respect to how this context has to be defined. There are two takes

on the issue. On one side, LOCALIST THEORIES claim that an allomorph
is sensitive only to the units which are immediately adjacent to it; on
the other side, GLOBALIST THEORIES argue that the choice between
one allomorph and the other is determined considering the
information contained in the whole word.
Table 8.2 Comparison between jearra and veahkehea
Verbal form
Verb jearra ‘ask’ Verb veahkehea ‘help’
1st dual
je:r.re -Ø
veah.ke.he:-t.ne
2nd dual
jear.ra.-beah.ti
veah.ke.hea-hp.pi
2nd plural
jear.ra-beh.tet
veah.ke.he-h.pet
The case of the alternation between -able and -abil - is an instance
where the context considered by the allomorph is local and it is not
necessary to make reference to the word as a whole to explain the
alternation: quite simply, when the suffix -ity is immediately adjacent
to this adjectivizer, the morpheme is spelled out as -abil- (accept-
able > accept-abil-ity). However, in other cases the data suggest
that, in order to determine the allomorph used, the word as a whole
has to be considered, not just the morphemes surrounding the form
that undergoes allomorphy.
One such case where it has been claimed that the determination
of the allomorph is global is allomorph selection in the verbal
inflection of Sami (Hargus 1993). The relevant allomorphs are
presented together with the set of features that they spell out:
(26) Agreement 1st dual: -Ø or -tne
 
Agreement 2nd dual: -beahtti or -hppi
 
Agreement 2nd plural: -behtet or -hpet
 
Passive voice: -juvvo or -vvo
The distribution of these allomorphs is phonologically conditioned:
the allomorph is selected depending on the number of syllables of

the base, so that the resulting word has an even number of syllables.
Compare the verb jearra ‘ask’, with an even number of syllables, with
the verb veahkehea ‘help’, with an odd number (Table 8.2).
The resulting form always has an even number of syllables. The
allomorph is not sensitive to the number of syllables of the
immediate constituent it attaches to, but to the number of syllables of
the word as a whole. Notice the contrast in (27): the same form -
beahtti is attached to the verb in the passive form, despite the fact
that in one case the adjacent morpheme has two syllables (-juvvo,
27a) and in the other case, one (-vvo, 27b).
(27) a. je:rro-juvvo-beahti
 
 
ask-passive-2nd dual, ‘The two of you are asked’
 
b. veahkehu-vvo-beahti
 
 
help-passive-2nd dual, ‘The two of you are helped’
Theories where the choice of an allomorph is global are generally
theories where phonological constraints have to be satisfied by the
surface form of a word. In the phonological theory known as
Optimality Theory (in the form presented in Prince and Smolensky
1993), phonological operations are not applied sequentially to
different stages of the derivation, as was the case, for instance, in
Lexical Strata Theory, where phonology and morphology are divided
in ordered levels. In this version of Optimality Theory, different
phonological operations apply simultaneously to the same surface
form, without levels of application of different rules at different stages
in an abstract representation.
This case has illustrated allomorphy sensitivity to phonological
properties of the word. Remember also that part of the support for
the existence of templates (§2.4.3) was the fact that in some
situations an allomorph is chosen because of the presence of
another morpheme not immediately adjacent to it. These cases also
illustrate situations where the context to which allomorphs are
sensitive goes beyond their immediate local one.
Inward and outward sensitivity in allomorphy: Asymmetries

When allomorphy is triggered by the local context, there is a useful
distinction that has been made (Carstairs 1987) between inward and
outward sensitivity. Inward sensitivity takes place when the
allomorph is determined by some property of the element it attaches
to. For instance, in Spanish, the negative prefix that (typically)
combines with adjectives is spelled out as in- or i- depending on a
(phonological) property of the base: i- before liquid consonants like l-
and r-; in- otherwise.
(28) a. in-sensible
 
 
in-sensitive
 
b. i-lógico
 
 
i-logical
Outward sensitivity is the opposite situation: the allomorph is
triggered by an element which attaches to it, not by an element it
attaches to. The alternation between -able and -abil- illustrates this
case: it is triggered not by the properties of the base the morpheme
combines with, but by the properties of a morpheme that attaches to
a word with -able (namely -ity).
It has been claimed (see Bobaljik 2000) that these two kinds of
sensitivity are not identical. Inward sensitivity is sensitive both to the
phonological and to the morphological properties of the base; in
contrast, outward sensitivity is only sensitive to the morphological
properties of the context, and not to its phonological characteristics.
Thus, the claim is that there are no cases of phonologically
conditioned outward sensitive allomorphy. This is an empirical issue,
and testing it requires detailed work on a wide variety of languages.
8.4 THE LINEARIZATION OF MORPHOLOGICAL STRUCTURE:
MORPHEME ORDER
It is currently believed that the problem of how units are ordered in a
linear chain is mainly a phonological issue: structures –
representations like those we studied in Chapter 3 - are hierarchical
representations of items, but in order to pronounce them, it is
necessary to order each one of their constituents. Therefore, we

discuss the problem of how morpheme order is determined in our
discussion of phonology.
The question of how morphemes are ordered, however, has not
been answered in the same way by all authors. Here, we will review
the most influential current proposals about how morpheme order is
explained.
8.4.1 SYNTACTIC ACCOUNTS
A first group of theories argue that the order of morphemes reflects
the order in which syntactic operations have taken place in the word.
The arrangement of morphemes inside a word reflects the structure
that underlies a particular word: operations that take place first are
materialized by morphemes that are closer to the root; later
operations are reflected in morphemes external to those (Baker
1985, 1988, Brody 2000, Rice 2000, Julien 2002).
A way to test this theory is to show that the order in which
morphemes appear inside a word reflects the order of the syntactic
heads corresponding to these morphemes. Myers (1990) argues for
this specific situation in the domain of verbal inflection in Shona. In
his analysis, the order between the prefixes in (29) directly reflects
their hierarchy in the syntactic structure.
(29) -a
-í
-end
 
-past
-habitual -go
Leaving some technical details aside (Julien 2002: 192–201), the
order between these prefixes is coherent with some independent
proposals about how syntactic projections are ordered in the syntax.
It is standard (see Cinque 1999 for evidence of this kind of ordering)
to propose that aspectual projections are higher than verbs, and
tense projections higher than both. See (30), where AspP means
aspect phrase, and TP means tense phrase.
(30)

This coincidence between the ordering of morphemes and the way in
which projections are assumed to be ordered in syntax has been
used as an argument in favour of a syntactic analysis of
morphological structures, especially in the domain of inflection.
There is another possible ordering of the morphemes which is
compatible with the assumption that syntax determines morpheme
order. Imagine that for some reason the verbal head in (30) moves to
the aspectual head to form a complex head with the linear order V-
Asp. Assume that this kind of movement can repeat a number of
times (e.g. the complex head V-Asp now moves to the head T, to
form the complex head V-Asp-T, and so on) with the condition that
no head can be skipped by that movement. At the end, we have
attained a result in which we have reversed the order of morphemes
that we had in (29): verb–aspect–tense–agreement. Morphemes that
materialize features that are closer to the verb in the tree in (30) still
appear closer to the root, but now the order is inverted.
This MIRROR ORDER, where the morphemes reflect the inverse linear
ordering of the syntactic operations that affected the base, is
illustrated by Chichewa (Baker 1985). The two relevant affixes here
are -er- and -edw-. The first is an applicative (appl.) morpheme,
associated with a syntactic operation that turns the indirect object
into a direct object (see the gloss in 31b). The affix -edw- is a
passive morpheme, corresponding to the operation that turns the
direct object of an active sentence into a subject (31c). Now, notice
the ungrammaticality of (31e) as opposed to (31d).
(31) a. Mbidzi  zi-na-perek-a          mpiringidzo kwa mtsikana.
 
 zebras   agr.-past-hand-Asp crowbar     to    girl
 
 ‘The zebras handed the crowbar to the girl.’

 
b. Mbidzi  zi-na-perek-er-a             mtiskana mpiringidzo.
 
 zebras agr.-past-hand-appl.-Asp girl          crowbar
 
 ‘The zebras handed the girl the crowbar.’
 
c. Mpiringidzo u-na-perek-edw-a               kwa mtsikana (ndi
mbidzi).
 
 crowbar      agr.-past-hand-passive-Asp to    girl             by
zebras
 
 ‘The crowbar was handed to the girl by the zebras.’
 
d. Mtsikana a-na-perek-er-edw-a                     mpiringidzo ndi
mbidzi.
 
 girl           agr,-past-hand-appl,-passive-
Asp  crowbar     by   zebras
 
 ‘The girl was handed the crowbar by zebras.’
 
e. *Mtsikana a-na-perek-edw-er-a mpiringidzo ndi mbidzi
The contrast between (31d) and (31e) shows that the passive
morpheme cannot be closer to the verb perek than the applicative.
Baker’s explanation is the following: the order of morphemes mirrors
the order of syntactic operations. The order verb–applicative–
passive in (31d) means that the verb first turned the indirect object
‘the girl’ into a direct object, and then turned this direct object into a
subject. The order in (31e), however, means that in a first operation,
the direct object was turned into the subject and that then the indirect
object ‘the girl’ was turned into a direct object. This gives an
ungrammatical result, because the applicative transformation needs
another direct object to be present in the structure, and by the time it
is applied, the direct object has turned into the subject. Moreover, the
subject in (31e) could never be ‘the girl’, because when the passive
transformation applies, this argument is the indirect object.
The important point of the proposal is that the ungrammaticality of
the morpheme order in (31e) is not due to a purely morphological
principle, but derives from the unavailability of particular syntactic
operations in certain contexts: syntax explains the order of
morphemes.
Notice that in the purely syntactic account of affix ordering that we
have seen, whether an affix materializes as a prefix or as a suffix

depends on whether the base forms a complex head with it or not. In
the Shona case, no complex head is formed and the affix spells out
as a prefix; in Chichewa, it is assumed that movement has taken
place to allow the formation of complex heads. This reorders the
heads, so that the same kind of affixes now spell out as suffixes.
Counterexamples
Counterexamples to the Mirror Principle involve cases where the
order of morphemes inside a word is different from the order in which
operations are assumed to have taken place in the syntax. We have
already seen cases that suggest these kinds of mismatches exist,
among 
them parasynthesis 
(§3.3.5), double 
base 
(§3.3.4),
bracketing paradoxes (§3.3.3) and other situations where we find a
higher or lower number of affixes than the number of syntactic heads
we believe a language has (§2.3.2). Cases where affixes are
ordered in a syntactically unpredictable way have been noticed by
Beard (1995) and Hyman (2003), among others. The latter author, in
his study of the verbal morphology of Bantu, notices that the order of
affixes with respect to the verbal stem is pervasively the one in (32).
(32) stem – causative – applicative – reciprocal – passive
This order tends to be respected, even when the semantic and
grammatical behaviour of the verb shows that the order of affixes in
(32) cannot account for this behaviour. In a sentence such as ‘The
hare made the lion dance for the hyena’, the meaning makes us
expect that syntax first builds an applicative verb (‘dance for
someone’, with ‘someone’ behaving like a direct rather than an
indirect object), and to this complex form, it adds the causative to
produce the form ‘make someone dance for someone’. Given this
meaning, we expect the syntactic structure to be the one in (33), with
the causative operation happening after the applicative one. This can
be captured by the morpheme order in (32), but only if we assume
that the applicative and the causative morpheme have not formed a
complex head; if that was the case, we would expect the reverse
order, applicative - causative.

(33)
Yet, given the assumption that Bantu does not form complex heads,
the ordering between the reciprocal and the passive morpheme in
(32) should reflect the structure in (34):
(34)
We know independently, however, that (34) is impossible in syntax:
reciprocals (cf. John and Mary hate each other) can only be built on
top of transitive predicates (notice that *John and Mary arrived each
other is ungrammatical) – and for independent reasons which we will
not discuss, the reciprocal cannot be in subject position (*Each other
was liked by them). Passive sentences are intransitive predicates,
because they lack a proper direct object. It is therefore impossible to
build a reciprocal on top of a passive even when it does not appear
in subject position (*John was murdered each other by Paul);
therefore, the ordering between passive and reciprocal has to be
inverted in the structure, against what the morpheme order reflects.
8.4.2 SEMANTIC ACCOUNTS
Other proposals argue that the motivation for morpheme order is
mainly semantic. The most influential proposal in this line is Bybee’s
(1985) RELEVANCE HIERARCHY. The hierarchy states that those affixes
whose meaning is more relevant for the semantics of the base are
spelled out as close as possible to that base. Consider (35):
(35)
The relevance hierarchy in verbs
 
MOOD < TENSE < ASPECT < VOICE (< verb)

Voice morphemes (passive voice, for example) tend to occur closer
to the verb stem because they trigger a change in the argument
structure of that verb which implies suppressing an agent; this has a
clear effect on the way the verb is interpreted. The possibility of
being passive is dependent on core properties of the verb, like its
argument structure or its meaning; verbs that denote states, and not
actions, like ‘to have a fever’, generally reject the passive. These
tight interactions between the meaning of the affix and the meaning
of the base are reflected in the order of morphemes. The more
peripheral affixes tend to express notions that are more relevant for
the sentence than for the meaning of the verb. Whether a verb can
appear in realis or irrealis mood depends on the type of proposition
the verb occurs in (i.e. whether the sentence is a wish, a desire, a
certain statement, a guess and so on) and not on whether the verb
denotes an action or a state, or whether it has a subject and a direct
object.
8.4.3 PURELY MORPHOLOGICAL ACCOUNTS
Some authors have proposed that the order of morphemes has to be
stipulated in morphology: whether a morpheme precedes another
morpheme or not cannot be derived from the syntactic or semantic
behaviour of the processes spelled out by the affixes, but has to be
specified in the lexicon as part of the idiosyncratic information
associated with each unit. The case of morphological templates,
discussed in §2.4.3, is one example of how the order of affixes can
be posited as an independent morphological property.
Remember also that Lexical Strata Theory makes predictions
about the ordering of affixes: affixes in stratum 1 have to be closer to
the root than those in stratum 2. To the extent that strata are
morphological concepts that organize morphemes into levels, this is
also a morphological proposal. The name given in this framework to
the theory that accounts for the ordering of morphemes is the AFFIX
ORDERING GENERALIZATION (AOG; Selkirk 1982). Notice, however, that
the AOG explains the ordering between affixes belonging to different
strata, but cannot account for the ordering between the processes
and affixes inside the same stratum.

Another way of determining the affix ordering from a purely
morphological perspective is to use the selectional restrictions of
each affix. These idiosyncratic properties could force a particular
affix to combine only with bases which have very specific properties.
If these properties are provided by another affix, the selectional
properties would guarantee that the first affix will have to be external
to the second. Plag (1996) makes a specific proposal in this
direction.
8.4.4 PHONOLOGICAL ACCOUNTS
In this account, an affix occupies a particular position with respect to
the base because of some particular phonological property that the
word needs to satisfy; typically, conditions related to the position of
stress or to the preferred shape of syllables in that language.
Bermúdez-Otero (2007a, 2007b) argues that the position occupied
by the diminutive affix in Spanish has to do with the position of stress
inside the word. The generalization that he makes is that a
diminutive affix such as -it- needs to have a non-stressed vowel to its
right. This property explains its distribution. Consider the examples in
(36):
(36)
a.
nariz (/naríθ/)
vs.
naric-it-a
 
 
nose
 
nose-dim.-des.
 
b.
papel (/papél/) vs.
papel-it-o
 
 
paper
 
paper-dim.-des.
 
c.
casa (/kása/)
vs.
cas-it-a
 
 
house
 
house-dim.-des.
 
d.
Víctor
(/bíktor/)
vs.
Vict-it-or
 
 
Victor
 
Vict-dim.-or
 
e.
azúcar
(/aθúkar/)
vs.
azuqu-it-ar
 
 
sugar
 
sug-dim.-ar

In bases whose last syllable bears stress, -it- behaves as a suffix
and requires the addition of a desinence, which, as we have seen
(§8.1), is necessarily unstressed in Spanish. This accounts for (37a,
b). In contrast, if the last syllable of the base is non-stressed, -it-
behaves as an infix which is placed to the left of the desinence (37c).
The behaviour of -it- as an infix becomes apparent with paroxytone
words which do not end in a desinence, because in these cases it is
placed inside the root, leaving to its right the last vowel of the word
(37d, e).
8.4.5 PARSING-BASED ACCOUNTS
Hay (2000, 2002; see also Hay and Plag 2004) has related the
relative ordering of affixes to general psychological principles,
associated with the parsing of morphological information inside a
word. What determines the relative order of chains of affixes is how
difficult it is to parse out each one of these affixes; that is, whether a
speaker finds it easy to understand the word as a combination of
distinct morphemes or tends to view it as an underived form stored
as a word in the lexicon. Affixes that tend to be integrated with the
base in a stored form are internal to those that are easily parsed as
independent units. This proposal is known as COMPLEXITY-BASED
ORDERING.
The difficulty with which an affix can be isolated from its base is
related to its productivity: if an affix is very productive, speakers are
conscious that it can combine with many different bases and
therefore tend to perceive the words thus created as complex; on the
other hand, if the productivity of a suffix is low and there are not
many bases to which it can attach, speakers are more likely to
perceive these words as non-decomposable units already stored in
the lexicon, and thus will be unable to identify an underlying structure
within.
An affix such as -less illustrates the first group, as its productivity
is high in contemporary English; in consequence, speakers are likely
to perceive words such as sugar-less, sand-less or penni-less as
morphologically complex. The affix -th, on the other hand, has a low

productivity and the words that contain it are more difficult to be
perceived as morphologically complex, as in width or depth.
Complexity-based ordering predicts that the affixes which are
perceived as introducing more structure to the word are required to
be external to those that are perceived as not introducing that
amount of structure. In consequence, the word dep-th-less is
possible, while the word *limit-less-th is not, although the category
requirement of the affix -th (which takes adjectives as input) is met.
8.5 THE MEANING OF WORDS AND AFFIXES
There are two questions which stand out in the research on the
relation between morphology and semantics: in what way the
meaning of morphological units is decomposable and how the theory
copes with unpredictable meanings of complex words. In this section
we will address this first issue while the second will be addressed in
§8.6.
Authors such as Fodor and Lepore (e.g. Fodor and Lepore 1998)
have argued that the formal atomicity of words – remember the
GENERALIZED LEXICALIST HYPOTHESIS (§7.2) – is matched by a
semantic atomicity that makes it impossible to decompose the
meaning of a word into smaller bits. On the other hand, from different
perspectives, authors such as Hale and Keyser, Jackendoff, Lieber
and Pustejovsky have argued that lexical meaning is the result of
combining smaller primitives into different kinds of structures. The
debate is then between those who believe that words cannot be
decomposed into smaller meaning units and those who believe that
decompositionality is possible.
8.5.1 THE MEANING OF UNITS IS DECOMPOSABLE
Since the early 1990s, there have been two influential theories about
the decompositionality of meaning. The first theory decomposes the
meaning into a structure similar to those formed in syntax and
restricted by the same structural principles reviewed in Chapter 3,
while the second decomposes it only at the conceptual level.
The first is Hale and Keyser’s (1993, 2002) proposal of lexical
syntax. This proposal argues that each grammatical category

corresponds to a particular structural configuration which accounts
for its internal meaning. (37) represents the structure of a locative
verb, that is, a verb which denotes an event of placing an entity into
a space.
(37)
The structure of (37) corresponds to the way Hale and Keyser
represent the verb shelve in the lexicon. As can be seen, each one
of the nodes can be paired to a semantic notion, in such a way that
combination of each bit of meaning in the structure builds the
meaning of the verb: ‘to put something on a shelf’. This first way of
decomposing the semantics of a word makes the word correspond to
distinct (abstract) units in a structure. The hierarchical structure
builds that meaning in the same way as the meaning of phrases
results from the syntactic structure that words form.
The second theory in which the meaning of words and morphemes
is decomposable, but without a structural representation, is that of
Pustejovsky (1995). Pustejovsky understands the meaning of a word
as both its denotation and the INFERENCES that the denotation allows
– that is, the deductions that a speaker can make based on the
meaning of a word combined with the knowledge he or she has
about the world. For instance, a speaker who hears John finished
the novel understands the meaning of the words involved if she
knows that novel denotes an object which can be read and needs to
have been written, and if she can infer from this sentence that John
finished (writing) the novel or John finished (reading) the novel,
depending on her knowledge of John’s activities and occupation in
the real world. These two inferences are possible because the lexical
entry of the noun novel contains conceptual information that states
that this object is produced as a result of a particular action (‘writing’)

and can be used for a function (‘reading’). Pustejovsky calls these
bits of the denotation of a word QUALIA STRUCTURE; inferences take
place when these qualia are associated with other units inside a
sentence or a word. There are four classes of qualia.
a) The FORMAL QUALE provides the bits of denotation that single out
a particular word from others in a particular domain. For
example, the formal quale of the word banana differentiates its
denotation from other fruits by stating specific colours, shapes
and sizes, all of them specified in that quale. The suffix -ish in
the word yellow-ish operates over this quale: someone or
something that has properties similar to yellow.
b) The AGENTIVE QUALE denotes that there is something that creates
or produces the entity denoted by the word through some
action. A noun like cake would specify in its agentive quale that
the object is created by the action of baking. Not all words
contain an agentive quale; this depends on whether the concept
denoted forcefully needs to be caused by some previous
activity, and thus words such as rain, red, die or know normally
lack this specification in the lexicon.
c)
The TELIC QUALE denotes the function of a concept; it is present
in nouns which denote instruments for performing actions, such
as hammer, oven, umbrella or novel.
d) The CONSTITUTIVE QUALE denotes the parts that compose the
entity denoted by a word; the noun garden has a constitutive
quale which denotes the flowers, bushes and trees that are part
of its denotation. Collective nouns such as army or choir, which
denote groups of entities, also contain this quale.
Words establish meaning relations by making reference to specific
qualia. In the interpretation of John finished the novel as ‘John
finished reading the novel’, the telic quale of novel is picked up by
the verb to finish, and the activity associated with it is used to build
the inference; in the interpretation ‘John finished writing the novel’, it
is the agentive quale that is taken. It is possible for a sentence to be
semantically ill-formed precisely because the words lack the relevant
quale needed to establish the connection, as in?? Mary began the

rock (Pustejovsky 1995: 41); the noun rock is not defined in the
lexicon by a particular origin or function, so the verb to begin cannot
establish a meaningful relationship with it; hence the oddity of the
sentence, which could be saved in very specific contexts.
As opposed to lexical syntax, the qualia structure of a word does
not have correspondences with the structure of that word; strictu
sensu, it would be possible to have qualia structure even in theories
that do not accept that words have an internal structure in which
morphemes are arranged in a particular configuration.
8.5.2 SEMANTIC ATOMICITY
Not all authors believe that words – even when they seem to be
morphologically complex – can be semantically decomposed. Fodor
and Lepore (1998) have argued that words are atoms both in their
formal properties and in their semantics, and that their meaning
cannot be split into smaller, more basic units. Even if we can gloss
bachelor as a ‘not married man’, its meaning is simply ‘bachelor’,
and cannot be decomposed into ‘not’, ‘married’ and ‘man’. Similarly,
the meaning of civilization is ‘civilization’, not whatever civil means,
plus the meanings of -is(e) and -ation.
These 
authors 
give 
several 
arguments 
against 
the
decompositionality of meaning. The first one is known as the
ARGUMENT OF ANALICITY. If the meaning of a word is constructed by
adding different semantic bits, each of these bits is necessary to
understand the meaning of the word. That is, if bachelor can be
reduced to ‘not married man’, a speaker cannot know the meaning of
bachelor if he ignores what any of these three primitive means.
Fodor and Lepore argue that, given analicity, the meaning of two
should include the meaning of prime number, as it is necessarily true
that two is a prime number. However, many speakers know what two
means without having ever heard of prime numbers. If round meant
‘not square’, or vice versa, we would expect it to be impossible to
know the meaning of one without knowing the meaning of the other,
which again runs against our intuitions.
Another argument is MODIFICATION: if the meaning of a word is the
combination of smaller bits, it should be possible to modify each of

these pieces separately. If the meaning of to kill is ‘to cause to die’,
we would expect that we could have a modifier that only affects
‘cause’ and another that only affects ‘die’ in a sentence with that
verb. This is not true: *Mary killed her cat on Tuesday on Thursday is
ungrammatical, despite the possibility that Mary poisoned the cat on
Tuesday (hence, ‘on Tuesday’ modifies ‘cause’) but the poison only
had its deadly effect two days later (hence, ‘on Thursday’ modifies
‘die’). Notice that in On Thursday, Mary caused her cat to die on
Friday this separate modification is possible. This is surprising if kill
means literally ‘cause to die’; why would the meaning of the two
sentences be different if the elements combined are identical? The
reader has certainly realized by now that this argument of non-
modification has also been used to argue that compounds and
syntactic phrases are not equivalent to each other (§7.2.1).
Fodor and Lepore also argue that it is extremely problematic to
build a coherent notion of SEMANTIC WELL-FORMEDNESS or IMPOSSIBLE
WORD by trying to state that some semantic bits cannot combine
together. The theories of Pustejovsky and of Hale and Keyser are
examples where meaning is obtained by combining smaller units,
and where it is claimed that some combinations are impossible.
Pustejovsky proposes that Mary began the rock is impossible
because the relevant qualia are missing, and Hale and Keyser argue
that in no language is it possible to have a verb to cow which means
‘a cow has something’, due to restrictions about how structures can
be built: in order to become a verb, the noun cow has to function as
the object of the resulting verb, not as its subject. Fodor and Lepore
argue that these impossibilities, to the extent that they are true, have
not been shown to derive from any kind of underlying semantic
structure. In a context where Mary is an artist painting a landscape,
Mary began the rock may mean that Mary started painting the rock in
the landscape. This suggests for them that the oddity of
Pustejovsky’s sentence is due to the difficulty of conceiving an action
performed with a rock in the absence of relevant context. With
respect to the absence of a verb to cow meaning ‘a cow has
something’, the authors argue that Hale and Keyser only show that
the word could not be derived in a (syntactic) structure, but they
cannot explain why there is no primitive verb (which we could

pronounce, for instance, to ploffy) with precisely that meaning. Their
point is that these gaps cannot be explained by showing that the
structure does not allow it, because the meaning could have been
conceptualized in a single root.
8.5.3 DO AFFIXES HAVE A MEANING OF THEIR OWN?
Some theories are less interested in the meaning of units and more
in what semantic changes a morphological process triggers and how
to represent them. Lieber (2004) is a recent example of this. Her
proposal is that affixes, by themselves, do not have a fully specified
meaning; until they combine with other units inside a word, they do
not have a full semantic interpretation.
It is generally assumed that a morphological process adds a
particular piece of meaning to the base, in order to form a complex
form with more complex semantics. Lieber’s main idea, in contrast, is
that morphemes do not properly add a specific piece of meaning to
the complex word, but rather introduce underspecified semantic
relations between the base and some other notion. Consider, for
example, the analysis of the English suffix -er in Booij and Lieber
(2004). A traditional theory of the meaning of morphemes would
propose that the affix -er is associated with a specific piece of
meaning, [agent] (remember §5.2.1). Instead, these authors’
proposal is that the semantic relation established between the base
and the affix is not defined until they combine together. The relation
sometimes emerges as an AGENT (murder-er, where the suffix
introduces a relation between the verbal action and an individual that
executes it), but in other cases is non-agentive: the same suffix can
express ORIGIN (London-er) or quantity (tenn-er), or define an
individual by its relation to the concept expressed by the base (two-
decker, nine-grader, six-pounder, fourteener, etc.). Through the
proposal that affixes do not add specific meanings, Lieber is able to
address two frequently noticed problems in the characterization of
the meaning of affixes (already mentioned in §5.6). She identifies the
first one as the POLYSEMY PROBLEM, which refers to the fact that the
same affix may be associated with different meanings, like the suffix
-ize in (38); in (38a) -ize seems to mean ‘cause to become X’, X

being the base, while in (38b) the meaning seems to be ‘cause to go
into X’ and in (38c), ‘perform X’.
(38)
a. random-ize
 
b. container-ize
 
c.
anthropolog-ize
As in the previous example, these meaning differences are
unexpected if the suffix adds a single specific semantic notion to the
base.
Another problem that Lieber’s proposal addresses is the EXISTENCE
OF MULTIPLE AFFIXES to express the same notion in the same
language. For example, agent nouns can be made in English with -
er, but also with -ant (accountant); causative verbs can be made with
-ize, but also with -ify (classify). If each affix has a specific meaning,
this situation amounts to synonymy, as different units would have the
same meaning. However, synonymy is problematic, to the extent that
it is not expected that a speaker learn different units to express
exactly the same notions. In Lieber’s theory the problem disappears,
as the units are not associated with any particular piece of meaning.
Lieber’s proposal that morphological processes have a relational
meaning has antecedents in morphological studies, among them (as
she mentions herself) Marchand (1969) and, to some extent,
Jakobson (1956). Recently, Janda (2011) has proposed an
implementation of this view which relates the ideas to the notion of
metonymy: the relationships that morphological processes establish
between the inputs and the outputs are based on contiguity relations
such as ACTION–AGENT (break – breaker), ACTION–PRODUCT (establish
– establishment) or CHARACTERISTIC–ENTITY (sweet – sweets).
8.6 COMPOSITIONALITY AND SEMANTIC UNPREDICTABILITY
Throughout this book we have seen many cases of words whose
meaning cannot be predicted by the meaning of the units that
constitute them. This is known as LEXICALIZATION, or SEMANTIC
UNPREDICTABILITY. For example, a blackboard is not a board which is
black in colour; not any black board counts as a blackboard, nor

must a blackboard be black. Anyone trying to learn this word would
not be able to rely on his or her knowledge of the separate meaning
of black and board, and would need to learn the meaning of the word
separately.
Also relevant here is the case of the noun recital, which cannot
always be used to refer to the events which can be referred to by
using the verb recite; even though we can say He recited the Greek
alphabet, the recital of the Greek alphabet does not convey the
same meaning. It is also possible to use it to refer to events where
the verb recite does not describe the action: a piano recital.
Examples can be multiplied: blackmail, wheelchair, proposition, and
so on.
As can be seen, semantic unpredictability is a frequent process in
compounds and derived words. However, some combinations of
morphemes are more likely to adopt unpredictable meanings than
others. Morphological processes that change the phonology of the
base in idiosyncratic ways – those that Lexical Strata Theory
classifies as stratum 1 – are more likely to give rise to non-
transparent meanings than those that do not modify the phonology of
the base. In the same sense that a combination of morphemes,
when it is very cohesive, can change the phonology of each unit
combined, it can also change its semantics. Contrast the two
Spanish adjectives in (39), both related to the word leche ‘milk’
(39)
a. lech-oso ‘milky’
 
b. láct-eo ‘dairy’
In (39a), the meaning of the base leche is preserved in the whole
word: this adjective can only mean to contain real milk or to have
enough properties in common with milk for the object really to look
like milk (white, liquid, etc.). Correspondingly, the phonological
properties of the base are very similar to those of the word leche. In
(39b), on the other hand, the base is phonologically very different
from the form leche and, correspondingly, the meaning is only
remotely connected to that of milk. Products which are lácteos are
somehow related to milk (they are the result of treating milk in
different ways), but they do not contain actual milk (when we cut

cheese, we do not expect milk to flow from it) and they do not look
like milk (cheese is not necessarily white as milk, not expected to be
a liquid, etc.). It is generally the case that phonological
idiosyncrasies come accompanied by semantic unpredictability.
8.6.1 THE UNPREDICTABILITY OF MEANING
The question of whether a word has a non-transparent meaning or
not depends in part on the knowledge of the word that a speaker
has, because even in cases where there is demotivation of meaning,
very frequently it is possible to trace some relation between the
intended meaning of the word and the meaning of its units. Consider,
for example, the word somebody, which most speakers would
consider non-transparent. It is not accidental that the meaning of the
word, referring to human beings, is not very far from the meaning of
the morpheme body, contained in it, as prototypically when we think
about bodies we think of animate entities, and among them, humans
are the clearest examples. In this word, thus, the literal meaning of
the units cannot explain how speakers interpret the word, but a
simple extension of these meanings based on their prototypical
interpretation comes close to it. This kind of extension of meaning,
by associating one concept with another, is called METONYMY, and is
relevant to many cases of lexicalized words. For instance, among
these cases we have compounds which have a component that
denotes a concept that can be related by association to the meaning
of the word. Compounds like skinhead or paleface denote human
beings, not heads and faces, but the head and the face are the most
salient body parts of humans.
Another situation where idiosyncratic meanings can still be
connected in some way with the meaning of the units involved is
when metaphorical uses are at play. A metaphor is an implicit
comparison between two entities, such that one stands for another,
which it resembles. For example, a crybaby is not a baby, but
denotes a person whose character can be compared to that of a
baby that cries frequently. A swordfish is not literally a fish with a
sword, but a fish whose shape contains a part which looks like a
sword. Metaphors play an important role in the theories of the

lexicon connected to the framework known as cognitive linguistics
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980). The main tenet of the framework is that
not only the lexicon but also other components of language get their
meaning by association with more basic concepts. Among the typical
metaphors used by the lexicon, the use of spatial notions to convey
time and emotions plays a significant role. This is, according to this
theory, due to the fact that space is deeply grounded in the human
mind and can be exploited to frame more abstract notions, such as
time and psychological states. For instance, the verb to fly refers to a
movement through space, but can be extended metaphorically in
some expressions to convey movement through time, such as Time
flies; the particle down refers to a particular location, but it can be
used to refer to sadness – as in to be down – because normally
people lie down when they are tired, are ill or have injuries.
Notice that all these cases have to be differentiated from the
situation where the complex word is not entirely compositional
because it only denotes one of several meanings allowed by its
base. In these situations, the word is SPECIALIZED to denote one
particular notion, but we cannot talk about lexicalization. In Spanish,
the verb esperar can be translated both as ‘hope’ and as ‘wait’. The
derived noun espera-nza, however, is related only to the former
meaning.
Sometimes the specialization of meaning is visible in the use of
different affixes. The Spanish verb recoger ‘to collect’ has several
different meanings, among them a psychological one – usually
expressed in the reflexive form, recoger-se ‘to collect oneself, to be
quiet’ – and a physical one, ‘to gather things together’. The deverbal
noun recogi-miento specializes in the first meaning, while the noun
recogi-da specializes in the second meaning.
8.6.2 DIVIDING STRUCTURES AND CONCEPTS: TWO TYPES OF
MEANING
One way of reducing the impact of semantic exocentricity in
morphology is to establish differences between two classes of
meanings, one dependent on the structural properties of the word –
on the combinations of units and the way in which they compose a

structure – and another which does not have any direct reflex in the
structure and is, in itself, purely idiosyncratic. This division can
preserve the internal structure of a word even when the concept
denoted is not identical to any of the units that it contains. Several
authors, among them Lieber (2004), Borer (2005a, 2005b) and those
working in DM (Harley and Noyer 1998), have proposed this kind of
division.
From one side, STRUCTURAL SEMANTICS – the SKELETON, in Lieber’s
theory – is the part of the meaning of an expression which can be
derived from the structure that underlies it. From the other side,
CONCEPTUAL SEMANTICS – also known as ENCYCLOPAEDIC SEMANTICS in
DM, or the BODY in Lieber’s theory – is the idiosyncratic part of
meaning that cannot be derived from the properties of the structure
and is perforce listed somewhere. If we go back to the structure in
(37), according to this theory, the meaning of shelve can be
decomposed into two parts. On one side are the aspects of meaning
that derive from the structure in (37), the way in which the units
combine and which one is the head of the structure. From here it
follows that the word denotes an action, because the head is a verb,
and that this action involves two participants: those related to each
other by the abstract preposition. This is the structural semantics of
the verb. The encyclopaedic semantics is that associated with each
of the units inside the structure: the fact that one of the participants is
what we normally call shelf and the fact that the relation between the
two participants is the one normally expressed by the preposition
‘on’. As can be seen, the encyclopaedic semantics gives ‘flesh’ to
the skeleton built by the structure; the conceptual semantics
depends on the concept expressed by each particular lexical item
inside the structure. In LATE INSERTION Theories (§8.2.3) this
information is associated with the morphophonological exponents
that spell out morphosyntactic features, and not with the
morphosyntactic features themselves.
In deciding which bits of meaning belong to the structural
semantics and which are due to encyclopaedic semantics, several
parameters are generally followed. As structural semantics is a
reflection of the structure, it is expected to have effects in the
grammatical properties of the construction. For this reason, the

difference between the words cat and dog is assumed to be
encyclopaedic, as the grammatical behaviour of the two words is not
different: both are nouns, both can take plural, both may occur in the
same kind of contexts, and so on. In contrast, the difference between
a verb such as die and one such as kill involves structural semantics
(for authors who make the distinction), because their grammatical
behaviour is different. Notice, for example, that die cannot be used
as a transitive (*Mary died her cat), while kill can be (Mary killed her
cat).
Another 
difference 
between 
structural 
and 
encyclopaedic
semantics is the fact that encyclopaedic meaning is idiosyncratic and
may be different for two speakers of the same language. Speakers
of one language may have differences in the encyclopaedic
information associated with each lexical item, but they are not
expected to have differences in the structural meaning, because
their grammars should be basically identical. Two speakers may
disagree on what they consider a proper cat, how they define the
word problem or whether the colour of something is green or blue,
but we do not expect a group of speakers of English to interpret the
subject in Mary killed her cat as something other than the agent of
the action, because this part of meaning is assumed to be derived
from the structure.
The pieces of meaning associated with encyclopaedic semantics
can also be adapted to a particular communicative context, and
change as a result of that. The effect is that some combinations of
morphemes which are discarded because they result in a meaning
which does not denote anything that exists in our world could
actually be possible if the context gave them a meaning which was
compatible with what we know about reality. A compound such as
dream broadcasting would not be coined in our present society
because it suggests a system which can communicate dreams.
However, in a science fiction movie, or any other piece of narrative
fiction, the rules of reality change, and this compound could be used.
In contrast, the bits of meaning that depend on structural semantics
are not expected to be affected by the communicative context.
8.6.3 HOW TO REPRESENT DEMOTIVATION

There are several proposals about how to represent demotivation of
meaning in the grammar, but they all involve in some way or another
listing the special meaning in some place. The differences depend
on what exactly is listed and where that list is placed.
In Lexicalism a word with a special meaning is listed in the
presyntactic lexicon together with the non-predictable bits of
semantics, in the same way that irregular forms or their combination
with particular allomorphs of a morpheme are listed. The same list
exists in DM, only in this framework it is accessed after syntax and is
placed in the LF interface (the ENCYCLOPAEDIA; cf. §7.1.2). The
encyclopaedia contains the information which is not predictable from
the structure and the operations that took place in that structure. This
includes not only the meaning of each separate vocabulary item –
such as read, work, cat, -less – but also complex units which have a
demotivated meaning, including words like blackmail and phrasal
idioms like to kick the bucket. There are restrictions on how big the
structures with demotivated meaning can be. In particular, all the
units that are listed as part of an idiom or a demotivated construction
need to belong to the same domain or phase (remember Chapter
§7). This captures the intuition that units which combine into a
lexicalized word are somehow more tightly linked to each other, as
Lexical Strata Theory predicts.
In CONSTRUCTION GRAMMAR, the units paired with meanings are
constructions – that is, preassembled structures – not individual
morphemes. These constructions are signs in the classic sense, or
pairings of form and meaning. As the meaning is carried by the
construction, and not by the units that are components of the
construction, compositionality is not expected because the separate
units themselves do not carry meaning. The meaning of the
construction is listed, and thus it does not derive from the meaning of
its components. For instance, consider the Spanish compounds
formed by a verb and a noun and carrying agentive or instrumental
meaning (40; cf. Booij 2010).
(40)
a. limpia-botas
 
 
shine-shoes, ‘shoe polisher’
 
b. aparca-coches

 
 
park-cars, ‘parking valet’
 
c.
para-(a)guas
 
 
stop-waters, ‘umbrella’
For CM these words constitute evidence that the meaning of words
does not derive from the combination of single units, here a verb and
a noun. The reason is that in this structure there is no unit
corresponding to the meaning of ‘agent’ or ‘instrument’. It is not
useful to list the compounds as exceptions and claim that these
words are idiomatic, because this contribution of meaning is almost
systematically obtained when Spanish makes a compound with a
verb and a noun. In situations like this, when a morphological
process is productive and its meaning is systematic but
unpredictable from the combinations of units, construction grammar
uses the term COMPOSITIONAL IDIOM. The proposal is that the paradox
is solved if the meaning of the construction is listed as a unit in the
lexicon, as shown in (41).
(41) [[V] N] ↔ ‘V-er of Ns’
In this sense, none of the morphemes involved in word formation
would have meaning, as any morpheme has meaning only to the
extent that it is part of a construction. The constructions they take
part in, on the other hand, would carry the meaning of the word.
Construction Grammar, thus, accepts that words have internal
structure, but denies that the structure can be used to derive their
meaning.
EXERCISES
1.
Select three cases of allomorphy in a language you are familiar
with and determine (a) whether the allomorphy is local or needs
to be accounted for globally; (b) if it is local, whether it has
inward or outward sensitivity; and (c) whether the trigger is
phonological or morphological.
2.
In a language of your choice, describe the phonological
properties of the morphemes used for verb inflection. Do you

see any generalizations that allow you to say that this
language’s phonology imposes some phonological properties in
inflectional affixes?
3.
Take a language where morphemes can be segmented and
consider the verbal inflectional system. Explore the way in which
morphemes are ordered in this system and determine (a)
whether the ordering between morphemes is stable or changes
in some cases; (b) whether this ordering corresponds to the way
in which it has been claimed that syntactic heads are ordered in
the language; (c) whether this ordering makes sense from a
semantic perspective, with properties that affect verb semantics
more directly being closer to the verb; and (d) whether there are
some phonological generalizations to be made about the
ordering, such as affixes that attract stress being closer to the
root.
4.
With the introduction of the Separation Hypothesis, some of the
arguments given in Chapter 2 against the existence of
morphemes no longer stand, while others do. Which arguments
still stand?
5.
It is frequently the case that affixes used in nominalizations and
adjectivalizations (§5.2.1, §5.2.3) are polysemic. In a language
of your choice, select some of these affixes and determine how
many meanings they can have. Do these meanings depend on
properties of the base or are they idiosyncratically distributed?
FURTHER READING
The reader interested in the presentation of lexical strata and the
problems associated with this theory will find some recent studies on
these topics in Gussman (1988), McMahon (1990), Booij (1994),
Wiese (1996) and Giegerich (1999), the last of which offers a critical
reassessment of the facts and proposes an alternative to lexical
strata analyses.
The Separation Hypothesis has been developed in, among others,
Ackema and Don (1992), Don (1993) and Beard (1995). Recent
analyses that develop late insertion include Bonet (1991), Halle
(1997), Noyer (1997) – which the reader can also take as an

illustration of how post-syntactic operations are performed in DM –
Branigan and MacKenzie (2000), Embick (2000, 2006) and Emonds
(2000).
With respect to allomorphy, the distinction between allomoprhy
with inward and with outward sensitivity is originally due to Carstairs
(1987), and has been studied in some recent works, like Bobaljik
(2000), Carstairs-McCarthy (2001, 2003), Adger, Béjar and Harbour
(2003), Embick (2003, 2010; the latter argues that allomorphy is
always local and never global) and Wolf (2008). Among the works
that argue for a global computation for allomorph selection we can
mention McCarthy and Prince (1993), Kager (1996), Mascaró
(1996), Yip (1998), Lapointe (1999), Rubach (2003) and Bonet
(2004).
In addition to the works that we have mentioned in the relevant
sections, the problems associated with the decomposition of words
into semantic primitives are discussed in Rappaport Hovav and
Levin (1988, 1998), Jackendoff (1990), Levin and Rappaport Hovav
(1995, 2005), Pustejovsky (1995) and Lieber (2004); all these
theories concentrate on the level called ‘lexical conceptual structure’,
which is a semantic representation of the unit which is autonomous
from its formal instantiation. With respect to theories, like that in Hale
and Keyser (2002), which match the structural properties of the word
with a semantic decomposition, see also Travis (2000) and Mateu
(2002). With respect to theories where meaning is atomic, see also
Fodor and Lepore’s (1998) critique of Pustejovsky (which has a reply
in Pustejovsky 1998 and Harley 2004).

ANSWERS TO THE EXERCISES
CHAPTER 1
1. expect-s. The first morpheme is a lexeme (a verb) and the second
is an inflectional affix marking person and number.
runn-ing. The first morpheme is a lexeme (a verb) and the second is
an affix. This affix can be seen as inflectional (marking aspect, as in
John is running) or derivational (turning the verb into a noun, as in
John’s running was fast). See §5.7 for more on these cases,
ambiguous between derivation and inflection.
read-er. The first morpheme is a lexeme (a verb) and the second a
derivational affix turning the verb into an agent noun (someone who
reads).
book-read-ing. The last morpheme is a derivational affix which turns
the verb read into a noun; notice that in this case -ing cannot be
seen as inflection (*John is book reading). The resulting form reading
combines with another lexeme (book) in order to make a compound.
child-ish. The first morpheme is a lexeme (a noun) and the second is
a derivational affix turning the noun into an adjective.
small-ish. The first morpheme is a lexeme (an adjective) and the
second is an affix which expresses the degree of the property
denoted by the adjective. This affix is an appreciative morpheme
(§5.7.1), which has characteristics of both inflection and derivation.
As we see, the same morpheme can be derivational or inflectional
depending on where it appears.
im-perfect. The first morpheme is a derivational prefix (with a
negative meaning) and the second is a lexeme (an adjective).

un-explain-able. The first morpheme is an affix, a derivational prefix
with a negative meaning; the second is a lexeme (a verb); and the
third is an affix, a derivational suffix that derives an adjective from the
verb.
4. The case in (c) illustrates phonological allomorphy: with bases
starting with a vowel, the morpheme surfaces as an-, and when the
base starts with a consonant, it emerges as a-. The case in (a) is not
allomorphy in its traditional sense because the two forms cannot be
related phonologically by any plausible rule: they are rather two
morphemes with similar meaning and function, each of them
combining with different roots. The case in (b) is what is traditionally
classified as suppletion: they are forms of the same word, but in
contemporary English neither is phonologically derivable from the
other.
CHAPTER 2
3. The sequence in (a) is a word with respect to the phonological
criterion (it constitutes a single unit of pronunciation, [d nz]), but is
not stored in the lexicon because its meaning and form are
predictable and its internal constituents clearly allow for syntactic
operations (for instance, they can be expanded into whole phrases,
as in [John’s mother]’s hat). The sequence in (b) is not a
phonological word, but is stored in the lexicon due to its
unpredictable meaning; its constituents allow for some independent
morphological operations, like past tense formation (John went
bananas), but not others (??How did John go? – Bananas), showing
that the form is a syntactic atom. The sequence in (c) is a
phonological word (its stress pattern is clearly different from the one
assigned to a phrase composed of a verb and a noun, like eat
meatballs), a syntactic atom (John is a pick pocket → *What is John
a pick____?) and needs to be listed in the lexicon due to its
unpredictable meaning, but it does not seem to have a head, as
neither pocket nor pick is a likely candidate for explaining the
properties of the word. (d) is a clear case of a morphological word
according to this last criterion; it is also a phonological word, and it
behaves as a syntactic atom. The behaviour of the prefix un- shows

that this object cannot apply Delayed Resolution, as the prefix must
necessarily negate its base and never an external element.
However, it does not need to be listed in the lexicon, as its meaning
is predictable. Finally, (e) is phonologically a word (its stress pattern
is different from the phrase a black bird), a morphological word with
its head to the right, a syntactic atom, and additionally must be listed
in the lexicon, as a blackbird is not just any bird of black colour. The
sequences in (a), (b) and (c) are not orthographic words, but (d) and
(e) are.
CHAPTER 3
1. Considering the three kinds of exocentricity that we have
presented here, namely (a) semantic exocentricity, (b) categorial
exocentricity and (c) morphological or formal exocentricity, these are
the results.
The word know-nothing is exocentric according to (a), because it
does not mean the state of not knowing anything – it is a person who
does not know anything – and (b), because it is a noun but neither of
its constituents is a noun (one is a verb, the other a pronoun). It is
also exocentric with respect to (c), as it can take plural – like most
nouns – despite the fact that the word nothing does not allow it:
several know-nothings. In white-collar, the word is exocentric
according to (a) – it means a particular class of job – and also with
respect to (b) for most speakers, as for most speakers it cannot be
used as a noun (??several white-collars); some speakers, however,
allow the noun use of this word and in that case the word is not
exocentric with respect to its grammatical category (collar is also a
noun). In see-saw, there is clear exocentricity according to the
criterion in (a) – it means a kind of board to play with, not an action –
and (b) – it is a noun, but it is built with two verbs. It is also
exocentric with respect to (c), as the word does not allow verbal
morphology (the form saw is frozen inside the compound) whereas it
does allow nominal (plural) morphology. Bacon ’n’ eggs is not
exocentric according to (b) – it is a noun built with two nouns – but
could be exocentric according to (a), unless the IS A rule is given up
and the semantics is explained in the same way as it is accounted

for in co-compounds – the word does not denote a kind of egg or a
kind of bacon, but a kind of breakfast combining both things–. It is
exocentric with respect to (c) to the extent that the plural form on
eggs remains even if the word is used in a singular context (That
table ordered one omelette and one bacon ’n’ eggs).
2. In order to be parasynthetic, the base must not be able to combine
with only one of the two other morphemes alone. The following
words from the list do not meet this condition: impoverishment
(impoverish exists, and it is not even clear that this word should be
segmented into a prefix plus a base), dishearten (hearten exists),
aerodynamics (dynamics exists) and disembowelled (disembowel
exists). Despite the fact that kind heart is a possible combination in
English, it is a phrase and not a compound, so we cannot say that
the base can combine with only one of the two morphemes alone;
kind-hearted is, therefore, a case of parasynthesis. With respect to
outstanding, in spite of the existence of standing, it could be argued
that the word is not derived by adding the morpheme out to this
complex word, because the meaning of outstanding is clearly related
to the phrasal verb stand out. In order to capture the relation
between outstanding and stand out, therefore, outstanding would
also be considered parasynthetic. See §6.3.2 for the relation
between compounds and phrasal verbs.
3. Here we give an answer which is neutral between a structural
account and an a-morphous morphology approach. The word
molecular biologist requires the following relations between words to
account for the property that the suffix -ist attaches to a word and not
to a whole phrase: biology > biologist > molecular biologist.
However, this derivation suggests that its meaning would be a
biologist who is molecular. To capture the right meaning (someone
who studies molecular biology) the relation has to be biology >
molecular biology > molecular biologist.
With respect to supernatural, in order to account for the fact that
the word supernature does not exist, the word is built following the
sequence nature > natural > supernatural. However, as the meaning
of the word is ‘the property of being beyond nature’ (that is, the
property of things which cannot be explained by natural laws), and
not ‘beyond the property of being natural’ (what would something

beyond a property be?), the sequence that accounts for the meaning
is nature > supernature > supernatural.
As for unluckier, the fact that the morphological comparative
cannot be built over bases of more than two syllables is captured if
the sequence of operations is lucky > luckier > unluckier. This does
not explain the meaning of the word, which is ‘having a higher
degree of the property of being unlucky’, not ‘not having a higher
degree of the property of being lucky’. To capture the meaning, then,
the series has to be lucky > unlucky > unluckier.
4. The structure in (a) explains that the word personal exists, but not
the word imperson. The structure also explains that the meaning of
impersonal is ’not personal’. The structure in (b) is wrong because it
predicts that the word imperson exists. The structure predicts the
wrong meaning: the property of being related to something which is
not a person. As for (c), it does not make any predictions about
which possible combinations of morphemes are allowed in English or
what the meaning of the word would be.
CHAPTER 4
3. The problem with this approach is that it does not capture the fact
that the two forms are variants of the same verb, something that any
morphological theory should be able to account for. Two
homophonous words are words which happen to share – by accident
– the same phonology, but which are not connected by any means in
the rest of their grammatical properties. The two words can have
different grammatical categories and different semantics, without it
being possible to derive one from the other, but the second person
plural and the first person plural of a verb are clearly connected in
grammatical category and meaning.
A different approach would be to treat are as a single form which
is underspecified in person and number and as such can be used in
a variety of contexts provided that it does not compete with more
specified forms, like am or is. In this way, the form are would be, in a
sense, polysemic – that is, a single form with several meanings –
something that would capture the obvious relation between all the
uses of are inside the paradigm. Unlike standard cases of polysemy,

though, the word would have several grammatical uses instead of
several different conceptual meanings.
4. This proposal has several problems. The first set of problems is
methodological: as discussed in §2.3, zero morphemes are
problematic to the extent that their existence cannot be proved
directly and that there is no direct evidence for them in the
acquisition of a language. But the particular proposal presented here
would have additional problems. One of them is that there would be
a series of zero affixes that contrast in their feature specification;
however, this set of affixes would be identical in shape
(homophonous, all of them being pronounced as zero), giving rise to
the same problems that we saw in the previous exercise. Another
problem would be to identify what the feature specification of the
morpheme are would be in this approach: if the number and person
features are spelled out by a zero affix, what would those remaining
features be? Notice that answering that are is the root will only give
you more trouble: then you will be forced to say that am and is are
suppletive forms of the root, with the effect that then each of them
will have to be accompanied by more zero morphemes for person
and number. Not only will you have increased these affixes, but
moreover now you will have to say that the suppletion is conditioned
by different zero affixes, running into the same kind of trouble
noticed by Nida (1948) for go ~ went, which we discussed in §2.3.
CHAPTER 5
4. What the examples in (ii) show is that the -a that appears in the
form (ib) cannot be a verbalizer. If it were, it would not be able to co-
occur with an overt verbalizer, the equivalents of -ify and -ize in our
examples, because these morphemes already define the word as a
verb and another verbalizer would be unnecessary. For this reason, -
a has to be considered a segment that marks a verbal base. Indeed,
this segment is a theme vowel in Spanish. A possible alternative
would be to say that the -a is different in the examples in (ib) and (ii):
a verbalizer in (ib) and a theme vowel in (ii). This proposal would be
stipulative, because the -a behaves in the same way in both cases: it
attracts stress (descont[á]; personific [á]) and in both cases marks

the verb as belonging to the same conjugation class – the one that
takes -ba for the imperfective and -e to mark subjunctive.
CHAPTER 6
1. In some of these words, the morpheme over- has a locative
meaning identical to the canonical use of the preposition over. These
words are overarch, overbed and overbuild. In some other cases, the
morpheme has a degree meaning, denoting an excessive quantity or
intensity in a particular property or action: overabound, overachieve
and overbuy. The presence of this metaphorical meaning, and not
the standard locative one, has been taken as evidence for the fact
that in this second set of cases over- is not a free form, but has
become an affix distinct from the preposition. Thus, according to this
criterion the second set of words would be prefixed, while the first set
would be compounds combining a preposition with a verb or noun.
However, things are not so simple, as the ultimate analysis depends
on whether losing its canonical meaning automatically implies that a
word has become a morpheme.
4. There are some automatic advantages to proposing that the
participle form in -ed has been built over the phrase one eye. Given
that the adjective eyed does not exist, a derivation like eye > eyed >
one eyed is not possible, and on top of this, this series of steps
would not explain the meaning of the word, which is not one person
who has eyes, but someone who has one eye. Allowing for the
sequence eye > one eye > one eyed solves both problems at the
same time without giving rise to ternary branching (as the derivation
eye > one eyed would do). However, this proposal also has some
serious disadvantages in the form of wrong empirical predictions.
One is that, despite the fact that one eye is a syntactic phrase
according to the tests presented in §6.3.1, as soon as it becomes
part of the word one-eyed, it stops behaving as a syntactic phrase. If
the participle is built over a syntactic phrase, it comes as a mystery
that this syntactic phrase does not behave as such once it is inside
the word and, for instance, does not allow coordination, movement
or further modification. See Bisetto and Melloni (2008) for a recent

analysis that solves these problems, following Ackema and
Neeleman (2004).
