The SAGE Handbook of 
Sociolinguistics
Edited by 
Ruth Wodak 
Barbara Johnstone
and Paul Kerswill

The SAGE Handbook of 
Sociolinguistics

SAGE has been part of the global academic community since 1965, support-
ing high quality research and learning that transforms society and our under-
standing of individuals, groups and cultures. SAGE is the independent, 
innovative, natural home for authors, editors and societies who share our 
commitment and passion for the social sciences.
Find out more at: www.sagepublications.com

Edited by
Ruth Wodak, 
Barbara Johnstone 
and Paul Kerswill
The SAGE Handbook of 
Sociolinguistics

Editorial arrangement © Ruth Wodak, Barbara Johnstone and Paul Kerswill 2011
Chapter 1 © Bernard Spolsky 2011
Chapter 2 © Kirk Hazen 2011
Chapter 3 © Gabrielle Ivinson 2011
Chapter 4 © Barbara Johnstone and 
 William M. Marcellino 2011
Chapter 5 © Cynthia Gordon 2011
Chapter 6 © Christine Mallinson 2011
Chapter 7 © Anthea Irwin 2011
Chapter 8 © Shari Kendall 2011
Chapter 9 © Robert Garot and Tim Berard 2011
Chapter 10 © José Antonio Flores Farfán and 
 Anna Holzscheiter 2011
Chapter 11 © Stef Slembrouck 2011
Chapter 12 © Paul Kockelman 2011
Chapter 13 © Norma Mendoza-Denton 2011
Chapter 14 © Robin Dodsworth 2011
Chapter 15 © Eva Vetter 2011
Chapter 16 © Paul Kerswill 2011
Chapter 17 © Peter Trudgill 2011
Chapter 18 © Gregory R. Guy 2011
Chapter 19 © Tore Kristiansen 2011
Chapter 20 © Terttu Nevalainen 2011
Chapter 21 © Walt Wolfram 2011
Chapter 22 © Helga Kotthoff 2011
Chapter 23 © Florian Menz 2011
Chapter 24 © Luisa Martín Rojo 2011
Chapter 25 © Susan Ehrlich 2011
Chapter 26 © Christian M. I. M. Matthiessen and 
 Diana Slade 2011
Chapter 27 © Alexandra Georgakopoulou 2011
Chapter 28 © Theodossia-Soula Pavlidou 2011
Chapter 29 © Brigitta Busch and Petra Pﬁ sterer 2011
Chapter 30 © Mark Sebba 2011
Chapter 31 © Peter Auer 2011
Chapter 32 © Anne-Claude Berthoud and 
 Georges Lüdi 2011
Chapter 33 © Julia Sallabank 2011
Chapter 34 © Alastair Pennycook 2011
Chapter 35 © Malcolm Coulthard, Tim Grant and 
 Krzysztof Kredens 2011
Chapter 36 © Constant Leung 2011
Chapter 37 © Marlis Hellinger 2011
Chapter 38 © Ingrid Piller and Kimie Takahashi 2011
Chapter 39 © David Barton and Carmen Lee 2011
First published 2011
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review, as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, this publication 
may be reproduced, stored or transmitted in any form, or by any means, only with the 
prior permission in writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction, 
in accordance with the terms of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. 
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those terms should be sent to the publishers.
SAGE Publications Ltd
1 Oliver’s Yard
55 City Road
London EC1Y 1SP
SAGE Publications Inc.
2455 Teller Road
Thousand Oaks, California 91320
SAGE Publications India Pvt Ltd 
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative Industrial Area
Mathura Road, Post Bag 7 
New Delhi 110 044
SAGE Publications Asia-Paciﬁ c Pte Ltd
33 Pekin Street #02-01 
Far East Square 
Singapore 048763
Library of Congress Control Number 2009939335 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN 978-1-84787-095-7
Typeset by Glyph International, Bangalore, India 
Printed in Great Britain by MPG Books Group, Bodmin, Cornwall 
Printed on paper from sustainable resources

List of Contributors 
ix
INTRODUCTION 
1
Ruth Wodak, Barbara Johnstone and Paul Kerswill
Part 1 HISTORY OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
9
 1 Ferguson and Fishman: Sociolinguistics and the Sociology of Language 
11
Bernard Spolsky
 2 Labov: Language Variation and Change 
24
Kirk Hazen
 3 Bernstein: Codes and Social Class 
40
Gabrielle Ivinson
 4 Dell Hymes and the Ethnography of Communication 
57
Barbara Johnstone and William M. Marcellino
 5 Gumperz and Interactional Sociolinguistics 
67
Cynthia Gordon
Part 2 SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND SOCIAL THEORY 
85
 6 Social Stratiﬁ cation 
87
Christine Mallinson
 7 Social Constructionism 
100
Anthea Irwin
 8 Symbolic Interactionism, Erving Goffman, and Sociolinguistics 
113
Shari Kendall
 9 Ethnomethodology and Membership Categorization Analysis 
125
Robert Garot and Tim Berard
10 The Power of Discourse and the Discourse of Power 
139
José Antonio Flores Farfán and Anna Holzscheiter
11 Globalization Theory and Migration 
153
Stef Slembrouck
Contents

vi
CONTENTS
12 Semiotics: Interpretants, Inference, and Intersubjectivity 
165
Paul Kockelman
Part 3 LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE 
179
13 Individuals and Communities 
181
Norma Mendoza-Denton
14 Social Class 
192
Robin Dodsworth
15 Social Network 
208
Eva Vetter
16 Sociolinguistic Approaches to Language Change: Phonology 
219
Paul Kerswill
17 Social Structure, Language Contact and Language Change 
236
Peter Trudgill
18 Sociolinguistics and Formal Linguistics 
249
Gregory R. Guy
19 Attitudes, Ideology and Awareness 
265
Tore Kristiansen
20 Historical Sociolinguistics 
279
Terttu Nevalainen
21 Fieldwork Methods in Language Variation 
296
Walt Wolfram
Part 4 INTERACTION 
313
22 Sociolinguistic Potentials of Face-to-Face Interaction 
315
Helga Kotthoff
23 Doctor–Patient Communication 
330
Florian Menz
24 Discourse and Schools 
345
Luisa Martín Rojo
25 Courtroom Discourse 
361
Susan Ehrlich
26 Analysing Conversation 
375
Christian M. I. M. Matthiessen and Diana Slade
27 Narrative Analysis 
396
Alexandra Georgakopoulou
28 Gender and Interaction 
412
Theodossia-Soula Pavlidou

vii
CONTENTS
29 Interaction and the Media 
428
Brigitta Busch and Petra Pﬁ sterer
Part 5 MULTILINGUALISM AND CONTACT 
443
30 Societal Bilingualism 
445
Mark Sebba
31 Code-switching/mixing 
460
Peter Auer
32 Language Policy and Planning 
479
Anne-Claude Berthoud and Georges Lüdi
33 Language Endangerment 
496
Julia Sallabank
34 Global Englishes 
513
Alastair Pennycook
Part 6 APPLICATIONS 
527
35 Forensic Linguistics 
529
Malcolm Coulthard, Tim Grant and Krzysztof Kredens
36 Language Teaching and Language Assessment 
545
Constant Leung
37 Guidelines for Non-Discriminatory Language Use 
565
Marlis Hellinger
38 Language, Migration and Human Rights 
583
Ingrid Piller and Kimie Takahashi
39 Literacy Studies 
598
David Barton and Carmen Lee
Name Index 
612
Subject Index 
620


List of Contributors
Peter Auer received his academic training at the universities of Cologne, Manchester and Constance, 
where he also worked as an Assistant Professor of General Linguistics. From 1992 to 1998, he was 
Professor of German Linguistics at the University of Hamburg. Since 1998, he has held a Chair of 
German Linguistics at the University of Freiburg (Germany). He is currently one of the directors of the 
Freiburg Institute for Advanced Studies. Auer has done extensive research on bilingualism, phonology 
and dialectology, prosody, interaction and spoken language from a syntactic point of view. With Li Wei, 
he is joint editor of The Handbook of Multilingualism and Multilingual Communication (de Gruyter, 
2007). Among his recent publications on bilingualism are ‘Bilingual conversation’, in Nikolas Coupland 
and Adam Jaworski (eds), The New Sociolinguistics Reader (Palgrave Macmillan, 2009) and ‘The mono-
lingual bias in bilingualism research, or: why bilingualism is (still) a challenge for linguistics’, in Monica 
Heller (ed.), Bilingualism: A Social Approach (Palgrave Macmillan, 2007).
David Barton is Professor of Language and Literacy in the Department of Linguistics at Lancaster 
University and Director of the Lancaster Literacy Research Centre. Current interests include the changing 
nature of literacy in contemporary society, literacy and social justice, research methodologies, and reading 
and writing. His main publications have been concerned with rethinking the nature of literacy (e.g. 
Literacy, Blackwell, The Anthropology of Writing, Continuum), carrying out detailed studies of everyday 
literacies (Local Literacies, Routledge; Situated Literacies, Routledge; Letter Writing as a Social Practice, 
John Benjamins) and the relations of literacy and learning (Beyond Communities of Practice, Cambridge 
University Press; Literacy, Lives and Learning, Routledge; Improving Learning in College, Routledge).
Tim Berard is Associate Professor of Sociology at Kent State University, Ohio, USA. His research draws 
on ethnomethodology and membership categorization analysis, and addresses a constellation of issues 
including relations between micro practices and macro social structures, group relations such 
as race relations and gender relations, and substantive issues of crime and law including hate crimes, 
racial/ethnic profiling, and institutions’ disparate impact on minorities. His publications include: ‘From 
concepts to methods: on the observability of inequality’, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 35(3): 
236–56 (2006); ‘Rethinking practices and structures’, Journal for the Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 
35(2): 196–230 (2005); and ‘On multiple identities and educational contexts: remarks on the study of 
inequalities and discrimination’, Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 4(1): 67–76 (2005).
Anne-Claude Berthoud is Full Professor of Linguistics, Head of the Linguistics Department, and Chair 
of the Language Policy Committee at the University of Lausanne. She is coordinator of the European 
DYLAN project (2006–11), President of the Swiss Academy of Humanities, Vice-president of the Swiss 
Research Foundation and Vice-president of the European Language Council. Her main research fields are 
pragmatics, interactional linguistics, second language learning and multi lingualism. She has conducted 
several research projects on interaction and second language learning and acted as an expert for national 
research programmes. Her publications include ‘Le projet DYLAN “Dynamiques des langues et gestion 
de la diversité”: Un aperçu’, Sociolinguistica, 22: 171–85 (2008); ‘Regards croisés sur un plurilinguisme 
à inventer’, Cahiers de l’ILSL, 23 (Université de Lausanne, 2008); ‘Mehrsprachigkeit als Kaleidoskop des 
Wissens’, in Georges Lüdi, Kurt Seelmann and Beat Sitter-Liver (eds), Sprachminderheit – Einsprachigkeit – 
Mehrsprachigkeit; and Probleme und Chancen sprachlicher Vielfalt (Freiburg: Paulus-Verlag/Academic 
Press, and Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag).

x
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Brigitta Busch is Professor for Applied Linguistics in the Institute of Linguistics at the University of 
Vienna. She is also a researcher and teacher in the PRAESA Centre at the University of Cape Town. From 
1999 to 2003, she was head of the Centre for Intercultural Studies at the University of Klagenfurt. During 
her work as an expert for the Council of Europe’s Confidence-Building Measures Programme, she was 
involved in a number of intercultural projects in Eastern and South-Eastern Europe. Her main research 
interests focus on sociolinguistics (multilingualism), discourse analysis, media policies and intercultural 
communication. Recent publications include ‘Reflecting social heteroglossia and accommodating diverse 
audiences: a challenge to the media’, in Michal Krzyz. anowski and Aleksandra Galasin´ ska (eds), Discourse 
and Transformation in Central and Eastern Europe. Basingstoke: Palgrave. pp. 43–59 (2009); ‘Changing 
media spaces: the transformative power of heteroglossic practices’, in Clare Mar-Molinero and Patrick 
Stevenson (eds), Language Ideologies, Policies and Practices: Language and the Future of Europe. pp. 
206–20 (Basingstoke: Palgrave, 2006); and Sprachen im Disput. Medien und Öffentlichkeit in multilin-
gualen Gesellschaften. (Klagenfurt, Celovec: Drava, 2004).
Malcolm Coulthard is Professor of Forensic Linguistics and Director of the Centre for Forensic 
Linguistics at the University of Aston in Birmingham, England. He is probably still best known for his 
work on the analysis of spoken and written discourse, but since the late 1980s he has become increasingly 
involved with forensic applications of linguistics. He has written expert reports in over 200 cases and 
given evidence on author identification three times in the Courts of Appeal in London, as well as in lower 
courts in England, Germany, Hong Kong and Northern Ireland. Recent publications include (with Alison 
Johnson) An Introduction to Forensic Linguistics: Language in Evidence (2007); and A Handbook of 
Forensic Linguistics (2010). 
Robin Dodsworth is Assistant Professor of English at North Carolina State University. She received a 
PhD in Linguistics from the Ohio State University in 2005, and held the position of Assistant Research 
Scientist at the University of Maryland before moving to NC State in 2007. Her research focuses on lin-
guistic variation, social class, networks and sociophonetics. She is currently investigating front vowel 
systems in Raleigh, NC. Publications include ‘Modeling social class in variationist sociolinguistics’, 
Language and Linguistics Compass (forthcoming); and (with Christine Mallinson) ‘Revisiting the need 
for new approaches to social class in variationist sociolinguistics’, Special issue of Sociolinguistic 
Studies, ‘Analysing language to understand social phenomena’ (2009).
Susan Ehrlich is a Professor of Linguistics at York University, Toronto, Canada. She works in the areas 
of discourse analysis, language and gender, and language and the law. She is the author of Representing 
Rape: Language and Sexual Consent (London: Routledge 2001) and is the editor of Language and 
Gender: Major Themes in English Studies. (London: Routledge 2008) and (with Alice Freed) ‘Why Do You 
Ask?’: The Function of Questions in Institutional Discourse. (New York: Oxford University Press 2009).
José Antonio Flores Farfán studied linguistics at the University of Amsterdam, where he defended his 
dissertation on Nahuatl-Spanish contact sociolinguistics. His research interests include the pragmatics of 
indigenous languages, discourse analysis, language ideologies, language planning and educational lin-
guistics, and especially the revitalization of endangered languages. Together with local speakers he has 
produced materials in different formats, especially for children, including DVDs, videos, audio and 
books, which are disseminated at the community level in workshops oriented to empowering the use of 
endangered languages and their speakers. His publications include: Variación, Ideologías y Purismo 
Lingüístico. El caso del mexicano o náhuatl. (forthcoming); ‘Sociolinguistics in Mexico: defining new 
agendas’, in Martin Ball (ed.), Sociolinguistics Around the World. A Handbook (forthcoming); and ‘Early 
and contemporary Nahuatl texts in sociolinguistic perspective’, Sociolinguistic Studies, (1–3): 415–33 
(2007). 
Robert Garot is an Assistant Professor of Sociology at John Jay College in New York. His research 
focuses on the dilemmas of the poor and those who funnel their access to needed goods and services. 
Currently he is studying how undocumented immigrants in Italy cope with living outside the law. He was 
the recipient of a Calandra Institute Fellowship for the study of Italian society for autumn, 2009. His book 
Who You Claim: Performing Gang Identity in School and on the Streets, has been recently published by 
New York University Press. 
Alexandra Georgakopoulou is Professor of Discourse Analysis & Sociolinguistics at King’s College 
London. She has (co-)authored 8 books in the areas of conversational storytelling, language and identities, 

xi
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
and language and new media. She has recently developed small stories research as a new way of doing 
narrative analysis, a detailed discussion of which can be found in her monograph Small Stories, Interaction 
and Identities (2007, John Benjamins).
Cynthia Gordon is Assistant Professor of Communication and Rhetorical Studies at Syracuse University. 
She uses theories and methods of discourse analysis, especially of interactional sociolinguistics, to inves-
tigate how meanings, relationships, and identities are created in everyday family talk. Her current research 
interests include family-based reality television programmes and everyday family health communication. 
She is the author of Making Meanings, Creating Family: Intertextuality and Framing in Family Interaction 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2009) and (with Deborah Tannen and Shari Kendall) editor of Family 
Talk: Discourse and Identity in Four American Families (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007).
Tim Grant is Deputy Director of the Centre for Forensic Linguistics at Aston University. His consultancy 
primarily involves authorship analysis and he has worked in many different contexts including investiga-
tions into sexual assault, murder and terrorist offences. His research into text messaging analysis was 
awarded the 2008 Joseph Lister Prize by the British Science Association. He publishes on forensic 
linguistics and forensic psychology. 
Gregory R. Guy has been Professor of Linguistics at New York University since 2001, following previ-
ous appointments at Sydney, Cornell, Stanford and York. His research interests include language variation 
and change, language and social class, and theoretical models of linguistic variation. He has done original 
sociolinguistic research in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, the Dominican Republic, New Zealand 
and the United States. Publications include (co-author) Sociolingüística Quantitativa (São Paulo: 
Parábola), (lead editor) Towards a Social Science of Language (Amsterdam: Benjamins), and a series of 
papers in Language Variation and Change dealing with formal models of sociolinguistic variation.
Kirk Hazen is Professor in the Department of English at West Virginia University. He focuses his 
research on language variation in American English, primarily writing about Southern US varieties and 
English in Appalachia. He promotes sociolinguistic goals by presenting dialect diversity programs to 
numerous communities, including future health professionals, social workers, and service organizations.  
Recent publications include a history of variationist sociolinguistics (in Bayley and Lucas (2007) 
Sociolinguistic Variation: Theory, Methods, and Application), an analysis of (ING) variation in Appalachia 
(American Speech 83:2), and an overview of sociolinguistics in the United States of America (in Ball 
(2010), Sociolinguistics Around the World).
Marlis Hellinger is Professor Emerita of English Linguistics at Johann Wolfgang Goethe University, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. Her main research interests are in language and gender, contrastive linguis-
tics, contact linguistics, applied linguistics and pidgin and creole linguistics. Among her publications are 
three volumes (with Hadumod Bussmann) on Gender Across Languages: The Linguistic Representation 
of Women and Men (Amsterdam: Benjamins 2001, 2002, 2003) and (with Anne Pauwels) Language and 
Communication: Diversity and Change (Berlin: de Gruyter, 2007).
Anna Holzscheiter is a Postdoctoral Fellow at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, 
carrying out a research project on the power of discourses in global HIV/AIDS policymaking. She is 
also Lecturer in International Relations at Freie Universität Berlin, where she is currently on study leave. 
Her research interests include discourse analysis in international political studies, multi-dimensional 
power theories and discourse, the role of non-state actors in world politics, global childhood politics 
and children’s rights, and HIV/AIDS. She is author of ‘Discourse as capability: non-state actors’
capital in global governance’, Millennium, 33(3): 723–46 (2005) and The Transformative Power of 
Transnational Discourse: Children’s Rights in International Politics (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
forthcoming).
Anthea Irwin is Programme Leader of the BA (Hons.) Media & Communication degree at Glasgow 
Caledonian University. She researches discourse reproduction and identity construction in both conversa-
tional and media data. Her publications include ‘London adolescents reproducing power/knowledge: “you 
know” and “I know”’, Language in Society, 35:4 (2006); ‘Now you see me, now you don’t: adolescents 
exploring deviant positions’, in P. Pichler and E. Eppler (eds), Gender and Spoken Interaction (Palgrave 
Macmillan 2009) and ‘Race and ethnicity’, in N. Blain and D. Hutchison (eds), The Media in Scotland 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press 2008).

xii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Gabrielle Ivinson is a Senior Lecturer in the School of Social Sciences, Cardiff University. Her doctoral 
thesis brought together Bernstein’s sociology of pedagogy with Moscovici’s theory of social representa-
tions. With Gerard Duveen, she has written a number of papers on Bernstein’s work as it applies to the 
primary school classroom, including ‘Classroom structuration and the development of representations of 
the curriculum’, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 26(5): 627–42, (2005); and ‘Children’s recon-
textualisations of pedagogy’, in R. Moore et al., (eds), Knowledge, Power and Educational Reform: 
Applying the Sociology of Basil Bernstein (London, New York: Routledge Taylor Francis Group, 2006). 
With Patricia Murphy, she wrote Rethinking Single Sex Teaching (McGraw Hill, Open University, 2007), 
which uses a socio-cultural approach to investigate how gender emerges in everyday classroom practice.
Barbara Johnstone is Professor of Rhetoric and Linguistics at Carnegie Mellon University and editor of 
Language in Society. Her recurrent interests have to do with how people evoke and shape places in talk and 
with what can be learned by taking the perspective of the individual on language and discourse. Her current 
work is about dialect and locality in the Pittsburgh (USA) area. She is the author of Repetition in Arabic 
Discourse (Benjamins 1990); Stories, Community, and Place: Narratives from Middle America (Indiana 
UP 1990); The Linguistic Individual (Oxford 1996); two textbooks, Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics 
(Oxford 2001) and Discourse Analysis (Blackwell 2008) and many articles and book chapters. 
Shari Kendall is Associate Professor of Linguistics in the Department of English at Texas A&M 
University. Her research addresses the discursive construction of gendered, professional and parental 
identities in work and family discourse; the constitution of gender and sexuality in legal contexts, the 
media, and everyday contexts; and the theoretical frameworks of framing, positioning and interactional 
sociolinguistics. Recent publications include ‘The balancing act: framing gendered parental identities at 
dinnertime’ in Language in Society and ‘Father as breadwinner/mother as worker: Discursively position-
ing parental and professional identities’ in Family Talk: The Discourse of Four American Families.
Paul Kerswill is Professor of Sociolinguistics at Lancaster University, and has a special interest in dialect 
contact and new dialect formation. He became interested in dialectology while working on a farm in 
Norway, and subsequently directed projects in Bergen, Durham, Cambridge, Milton Keynes, Reading and 
Hull. His current and most recent projects are on the emergence of new varieties among young people in 
inner-city London: Linguistic Innovators: The English of Adolescents in London and Multicultural 
London English: The Emergence, Acquisition and Diffusion of a New Variety, both funded by the 
Economic and Social Research Council and with Jenny Cheshire as Co-Investigator. Recent publications 
include the edited volume (with Peter Auer and Frans Hinskens) Dialect Change: Convergence and 
Divergence in European Languages (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2005) and (with Eivind 
Torgersen and Sue Fox) ‘Reversing ‘drift’: innovation and diffusion in the London diphthong system’, 
Language Variation and Change (2008). 
Paul Kockelman is Assistant Professor of Anthropology at Barnard College, Columbia University, New York. 
Recent publications include: ‘Meaning and time: translation and exegesis of a Q’eqchi’-Maya Myth’, 
Anthropological Linguistics, 49(3/4): 308–87 (2009), ‘Inalienable possession as grammatical category 
and discourse pattern’, Studies in Language, 31(1): 25–68 (2009) and ‘A semiotic ontology of the 
commodity’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 16(1): 76–102 (2006).
Helga Kotthoff is Professor in the Department of German Linguistics at Freiburg University in Germany. 
She has worked in the fields of applied, German and anthropological linguistics, primarily on questions 
of interaction analysis, gender studies, sociolinguistics and ethnography of communication. Her current 
research includes interactional sociolinguistics, German as a foreign language, conversational humour 
and irony, second language acquisition and gender and intercultural communication studies. She teaches 
and publishes on all these subjects. 
Krzysztof Kredens received his MA in English Studies and PhD in English Linguistics from the 
University of Łódz´, Poland. He is a Lecturer in Applied Linguistics in the School of Languages and Social 
Sciences at Aston University, UK. His academic interests include corpus linguistics, translation studies 
and social applications of linguistics, particularly in legal and forensic contexts. His main interest lies 
with the linguistics of the individual speaker and its implications for forensic authorship analysis. He is a 
practising public service interpreter. Recent publications include the edited volume (with Stanisław 
Goz´dz´-Roszkowski) Language and the Law: International Outlooks (Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang 

xiii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
2007) and (with Ruth Morris) “A Shattered Mirror?” Interpreting in legal contexts outside the courtrooom', 
in M. Coulthard and A. Johnson (eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics.
Tore Kristiansen is Professor of Sociolinguistics at Copenhagen University’s Department of Scandinavian 
Research, Section of Dialectology, and its Centre for Studies of Language Change in Real Time 
(LANCHART). His main research interest lies in the ideological and social psychological aspects of 
language contact situations (dialects or accents vs standards in particular, but also national languages vs 
English). His most recent work in this field is ‘The macro-social meanings of late-modern Danish 
accents’, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 41 (2009). His (co-)edited books and journal issues include (with 
Peter Garrett and Nikolas Coupland) ‘Subjective processes in language variation and change’, Acta 
Linguistica Hafniensia, 37 (2005) and (with Lars Vikør) Nordiske språkhaldningar: Ei meiningsmåling 
[Nordic Language Attitudes: An Opinion Poll] (Oslo: Novus, 2006).
Carmen Lee is Assistant Professor in the Department of English at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. 
Her research interests include social aspects of language and literacy, linguistic practices on the Internet, 
and multilingual identities. Over the past few years, she has published book chapters and journal articles 
on literacy practices in various digital media, including electronic mail, instant messaging and mobile 
phone texting. She is currently carrying out a research project on the literacies in Web 2.0 writing spaces 
such as weblogs and Facebook.
Constant Leung is Professor of Educational Linguistics in the Department of Education and Professional 
Studies at King’s College London. He is Director of two MA programmes: MA English Language 
Teaching and Applied Linguistics, and MA Assessment in Education. He is also Deputy Head of Department. 
His research interests include additional/second language education in ethnically and linguistically 
diverse societies, English as an Additional Language in school contexts, content and language integration, 
language assessment, language policy and teacher professional development. Recent publications include 
‘Convivial communication: recontextualizing communicative competence’, International Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 15(2), 119–44; ‘Integrating school-aged ESL learners into the mainstream curricu-
lum’, in J. Cummins and C. Davison (eds), The International Handbook of English Language Teaching. 
pp. 249–69 (New York: Springer, 2007) and (with J. Lewkowicz) ‘Expanding horizons and unresolved 
conundrums: language testing and assessment’, TESOL Quarterly, 40(1), 211–34 (2006).
Georges Lüdi is Full Professor of French Linguistics, Head of the French Department and past Dean of 
the Faculty of Arts at Basel University. He has conducted several third-party financed research projects 
with a focus on forms of (emergent) multilingualism and language contact in Switzerland, using both 
qualitative and quantitative methods; currently he acts as deputy coordinator of the European DYLAN 
project (2006–11). He has chaired a group of experts mandated to propose a whole language policy for 
Switzerland (1997–8), the Swiss Linguistic Society, and the Swiss Association for Applied Linguistics; 
he has also served as a Member of the Executive Board of the International Association for Applied 
Linguistics, AILA, and been awarded the distinction of Officer in the Ordre National du Mérite, by 
the French Government. He has authored numerous scientific publications on linguistic aspects of 
migration, multilingualism, second language teaching and learning, and workplace communication, 
including ‘Multilingual repertoires and the consequences for linguistic theory’, in Kristin Bührig and 
Jan D. ten Thije (eds), Beyond Misunderstanding: Linguistic Analyses of Intercultural Communication, 
pp. 11–42 (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2006), ‘The Swiss model of plurilingual communication’, in Jan 
D. ten Thije and Ludger Zeevaert (eds), Receptive Multilingualism: Linguistic Analyses, Language 
Policies and Didactic Concepts pp. 159–78 (Amsterdam: John Benjamins, 2007) and (with Bernard Py) 
‘To be or not to be ... a plurilingual speaker’, International Journal of Multilingualism, 6(2):154–67 
(2009).
Christine Mallinson is Assistant Professor in the Language, Literacy and Culture Program and Affiliate 
Assistant Professor in the Gender and Women’s Studies Program at the University of Maryland, Baltimore 
County. Her research investigates English language variation, region, class, race/ethnicity, gender and 
education, focusing in particular on how these factors intersect in the lives and experiences of speakers of 
African American English and Southern US English. Her recent publications include ‘Sociolinguistics 
and sociology: Current directions, future partnerships’, in Language and Linguistics Compass (2009). She 
is also the co-author (with Anne H. Charity Hudley) of a forthcoming book on language variation for K-12 
educators (Multicultural Education Series, Teachers College Press).

xiv
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
William M. Marcellino is a PhD student in Rhetoric at Carnegie Mellon University. He is interested in 
military discourse, in particular how US military members make use of discourse in ways different from 
civilians. His work combines ethnographic method with theoretical models of the emergence of grammar 
and culture.
Luisa Martín Rojo is Full Professor of Linguistics at the Universidad Autónoma (Madrid, Spain), 
Member of the International Pragmatic Association Consultation Board (2006–11), and Member of the 
Scientific Board of the CRITICS Foundation (Centre for Research into Text/Talk, Information, and 
Communication in Society). Her current work is focused on the management of cultural and linguistic 
diversity in Madrid schools, analysing how inequality is constructed, naturalized and legitimized through 
discursive practices. In this field, she heads the following projects: ‘A socio-pragmatic analysis of inter-
cultural communication in education: towards integration in schools’ and ‘Multilingualism in schools: a 
critical sociolinguistic analysis of educational linguistics programs in the Madrid region’. Dr. Martín Rojo 
is also a member of the editorial boards of Discourse & Society and Spanish in Context, among other 
international academic journals. Recent publications include Constructing inequality in multilingual 
classrooms (Mouton de Gruyter 2010).
Christian M. I. M. Matthiessen is Chair Professor and Head of the Department of English and Associate 
Dean of the Faculty of Humanities at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University. He has degrees in linguistics 
from Lund University (BA) and UCLA (MA, PhD), where he became familiar with ethnomethodology 
and conversation analysis, and he has been involved in major text-based research projects since 1980. His 
research has covered a wide range of areas, including analysis of many kinds of discourse, register analy-
sis and description, the development of Rhetorical Structure Theory (with Bill Mann and Sandy 
Thompson), the description of English and other languages spoken around the world, language typology 
and comparison, translation studies, ‘institutional linguistics’, computational linguistics, the evolution of 
language, and systemic functional theory. His books include (with John Bateman) Systemic Linguistics 
and Text Generation: Experiences from Japanese and English (1991), Lexicogrammatical Cartography: 
English Systems (1995); (with J. R. Martin and Clare Painter) Working with Functional Grammar (1997), 
(with M. A. K. Halliday) Construing Experience: A Language-Based Approach to Cognition (1999), 
(with M. A. K. Halliday) Introduction to Functional Grammar (revised version of Halliday’s book, 2004), 
and (with M. A. K. Halliday) Systemic Functional Grammar: A First Step into the Theory (2009). Edited 
volumes include (with Alice Caffarel and J. R. Martin) Functional Typology (2004) and (with Ruqaiya 
Hasan and Jonathan Webster,) Continuing Discourse on Language (2005 and 2007).
Norma Mendoza-Denton is Associate Professor of Linguistic Anthropology at the University of 
Arizona-Tucson in the Departments of Anthropology and Linguistics. Her research interests include 
sociophonetics, language and ethnicity, language and gender, language and gesture, migration, youth 
subcultures and video ethnography. Recent publications include: Homegirls: Language and Cultural 
Practice among Latina Youth Gangs (Wiley-Blackwell, 2008) and ‘Sociolinguistic extensions of exem-
plar theory’, in J. Cole and J. Hualde (eds), Laboratory Phonology 9 (Mouton de Gruyter, 2007).
Florian Menz is Professor of Applied Linguistics and Sociolinguistics at the University of Vienna. 
Combining CDA with sociological systemic approaches, his main research interests include organiza-
tional language use, with a focus on medical and business institutions, gender and power-related aspects 
of interaction, and interactional representations of pain. Recent publications include (with Johanna 
Lalouschek) “I just can’t tell you how much it hurts.” Gender-relevant differences in the description of 
chest pain’, in Françoise Salager-Meyer and Maurizio Gotti (eds), Medical discourse. Lang 2006. 
pp. 135–54, (with Johanna Lalouschek and Andreas Gstettner) Effiziente ärztliche Gesprächsführung. 
Optimierung kommunikativer Kompetenz in der ambulanten medizinischen Versorgung. Ein gesprächs-
analytisches Trainingskonzept (Münster: Lit-Verlag, 2008) and (with Ali Al-Roubaie) ‘Interruptions, 
status, and gender in medical interviews: the harder you brake, the longer it takes’, Discourse & Society, 
19(5): 645–66 (2008).
Terttu Nevalainen is Professor and Chair of English Philology at the University of Helsinki and the 
Director of the Research Unit for Variation, Contacts and Change in English, a National Centre of 
Excellence funded by the Academy of Finland. Her research interests include historical sociolinguistics, 
corpus linguistics and language change. She is the author (with H. Raumolin-Brunberg) of Historical 
Sociolinguistics: Language Change in Tudor and Stuart England Published by Pearson Education, (2003) 
and a co-editor of Types of Variation Published by Benjamins, (2006) and The Dynamics of Linguistic 

xv
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Variation Published by Benjamins, (2008). Dr. Nevalainen is one of the compilers of the Helsinki Corpus 
of English Texts and the director of the project ‘Sociolinguistics and Language History’, which has pro-
duced the Corpus of Early English Correspondence. She also has some eighty publications on English 
historical sociolinguistics.
Theodossia-Soula Pavlidou is Professor of Linguistics (with specialization in pragmatics and sociolin-
guistics) at the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, where she has held numerous offices, including a 
long-standing directorship of the Post-Graduate Studies Programme of the School of Philology. Her inter-
est in language and gender, and women/gender studies, goes back to the late 1970s. Her research also 
focuses on telephone talk, classroom interaction, politeness and other topics in cross-cultural pragmatics 
and conversation analysis. She is one of the editors of the Journal of Pragmatics. Recent publications 
pertaining to gender include two edited volumes (in Greek) Language-Grammatical Gender-Social 
Gender, 2nd edn. (2006) and Gender Studies: Trends/Tensions in Greece and Other European Countries 
(2006); also the chapter (in Greek) ‘ “We” and the construction of (gendered) collectivities’, in 
M. Theodoropoulou (ed.), Light and Warmth: In Memory of A.-Ph. Christidis. pp. 437–53 (2008).
Alastair Pennycook is Professor of Language Studies at the University of Technology, Sydney. He is 
interested in how we understand language in relation to globalization, colonial history, identity, popular 
culture and pedagogy. Publications include The Cultural Politics of English as an International Language 
(Longman, 1994), English and the Discourses of Colonialism (Routledge, 1998), Critical Applied 
Linguistics: A Critical Introduction (Lawrence Erlbaum, 2001), and Global Englishes and Transcultural 
Flows (Routledge, 2007). Two recent edited books are (with Sinfree Makoni) Disinventing and 
Reconstituting Languages. (Multilingual Matters, 2007) and (with Samy Alim and Awad Ibrahim) Global 
Linguistic Flows: Hip Hop Cultures, Youth Identities, and the Politics of Language (Routledge, 2009). 
His most recent book, Language as a Local Practice, was published by Routledge in 2010.
Petra Pfisterer is currently a PhD candidate and works as a researcher at the Institute of Applied 
Linguistics at the University of Vienna. Her research interests concern sociolinguistics and the media; she 
has conducted research on minority language media, community radio and multilingualism. Recent pub-
lications include (with Judith Purkarthofer and Brigitta Busch) ‘10 Jahre Freies Radio in Österreich. 
Offener Zugang, Meinungsvielfalt und soziale Kohäsion – Eine explorative Studie’, in RTR (ed.), 
Nichtkommerzieller Rundfunk in Österreich und Europa, pp. 111–13 (Vienna: Schriftenreihe der 
Rundfunk und Telekom Regulierungs-GmbH 2009), and (with Sabine Humer) ‘Médias en contexte 
plurilingue’, in Zohra Bouchentouf-Siagh and Peter Cichon (eds), Le Sénégal - Un Modèle de gestion et 
de Promotion des Langues Nationales, Pour l’Afrique? Quo Vadis Romania. Schriften für eine moderne 
Romanistik. pp. 52–63 (Vienna, University of Vienna, 2003).
Ingrid Piller (PhD, Dresden 1995) is Professor of Applied Linguistics at Macquarie University, Sydney, 
Australia, where she directed the Adult Migrant English Program Research Centre (AMEP RC) from 
2007 to 2008. She is also affiliated with the languages programme at Zayed University, Abu Dhabi, UAE. 
Her research interests are in intercultural communication, language learning, multilingualism, and how 
they intersect with social inclusion and justice. She is currently writing a textbook on intercultural 
communication for Edinburgh University Press, which aims to provide a critical introduction to the field 
from a sociolinguistic and discourse-analytic perspective. She is the co-founder, together with Kimie 
Takahashi, of the sociolinguistics portal Language on the Move at www.languageonthemove.org.
Julia Sallabank is Lecturer in Language Support and Revitalisation in the Endangered Languages 
Academic Programme at the School of Oriental and African Studies, University of London. She has been 
conducting language documentation and sociolinguistic research in Guernsey, Channel Islands since 
2000, and is currently comparing language policies in small island states. Her research interests focus 
on language policy for endangered and minority languages, language pedagogy for endangered 
languages and language revitalisation. Her publications include: ‘Guernsey French, identity issues and 
language endangerment’, in Tope Ominiyi and Goodith White (eds), The Sociolinguistics of 
Identity (Continuum, 2006) and ‘Prestige from the bottom up: a review of language planning in Guernsey’, 
in A. J. Liddicoat and R. B. Baldauf Jr. (eds), Language Planning in Local Contexts (Multilingual 
Matters, 2008). She is co-editor (with Peter Austin) of The Cambridge Handbook of Endangered 
Languages (2011).

xvi
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Mark Sebba is Reader in Sociolinguistics and Language Contact in the Department of Linguistics 
and English Language at Lancaster University. His research interests are in bilingualism, language contact 
and multilingual literacies, in particular in language mixing in written media. He has written on code-
switching from both a societal and syntactic point of view. His recent book Spelling and Society: The 
Culture and Politics of Orthography Around the World (Cambridge University Press, 2007) develops a 
view of orthography as social practice, in which bilingualism and language contact are also centrally 
involved. Recent publications include ‘Discourses in transit’, in Adam Jaworski and Crispin Thurlow 
(eds), Semiotic Landscapes: Language, Image, Space (Continuum, 2010), ‘Spelling as a social practice’, 
in Janet Maybin and Joan Swann (eds), Routledge Companion to the English Language (Routledge, 2009) 
and ‘On the notions of congruence and convergence in code-switching’, in Barbara E. Bullock and 
Almeida Jacqueline Toribio (eds). The Cambridge Handbook of Linguistic Code-Switching (Cambridge 
University Press, 2009).
Diana Slade is Professor of Applied Linguistics at the University of Technology, Sydney (UTS). Her PhD 
research was on the analysis of English casual conversation. Diana has over 20 years experience in 
researching, teaching and publishing in applied linguistics, linguistics and organizational communication. 
Her major research focus now is on developing and extending theoretical work in these three areas, 
with a particular focus on the analysis and description of spoken English. Her current research is on 
emergency communication, describing clinician/patient communication in hospital emergency departments. 
Her books include (with Scott Thornbury) Conversation: From Description to Pedagogy (Cambridge 
University Press, 2006), (with Suzanne Eggins) Analysing Casual Conversation (Equinox, UK, 1997) and 
(with Kalantzis and Cope) Minority Languages and Dominant Culture: Issues of Equity, Education and 
Assessment (Falmer Press, 1990). She has published extensively in the area of discourse analysis of con-
versational English and spoken communication in workplace contexts.
Stef Slembrouck is Professor of English Linguistics and Discourse Analysis at Ghent University. With 
Mike Baynham, he co-convenes the AILA Research Network on Language and Migration. He has published 
mainly on the role of socio-discursive processes in the construction of institutional identities (bureauc-
racy, child protection and health), including the implications of migration-connected multilingualism on 
the working of institutions. Slembrouck’s publications include (with J. Collins and M. Baynham), 
Globalization and Language in Contact: Scale, Migration, and Communicative Practices (Continuum, 
2009), (with C. Hall and S. Sarangi) Language Practices in Social Work: Categorisation and 
Accountability in Child Welfare (Routledge, 2006) and (with S. Sarangi) Language, Bureaucracy and 
Social Control (Longman, 1996).
Bernard Spolsky is Professor Emeritus in the English Department at Bar-Ilan University. Since his retire-
ment in 2000, he has published two monographs, Language policy (2004) and Language Management 
(2009), both with Cambridge University Press, for whom he is currently editing a 32-chapter Handbook 
of Language Policy. With Francis Hult, he has also published an edited collection, The Blackwell 
Handbook of Educational Linguistics (2008). He also edited the 2009 volume of Annual Review of 
Applied Linguistics, on the topic of ‘Language Policy and Language Assessment’. He received an 
Honorary Doctorate of Literature from Victoria University of Wellington in 2008.
Kimie Takahashi is a Postdoctoral Research Fellow in Linguistics Department at Macquarie University, 
Australia. Her research examines the relationship between bilingualism, second language learning and 
gender, particularly in the contexts of study overseas, migration and employment. She is currently 
involved in a multi-site ethnography of the role of multilingualism and language learning in tourism 
between Australia and Japan (funded by Macquarie University and directed by Ingrid Piller). Her work 
has appeared in edited volumes and she is the author of Language Desire (Multilingual Matters, forth-
coming). She is the co-founder, together with Ingrid, Piller, of the socio linguistics portal Language on the 
Move at www.languageonthemove.org. 
Peter Trudgill is Adjunct Professor of Sociolinguistics at the University of Agder, Kristiansand, Norway. 
He has carried out research on dialects of English, Norwegian, Greek, Albanian and Spanish and has 
published more than 30 books on sociolinguistics and dialectology. Recent publications include 
‘Sociolinguistic typology and complexification’, in G. Sampson, D. Gil and P. Trudgill (eds), Language 
Complexity as an Evolving Variable (Oxford) and ‘Contact and sociolinguistic typology’, in R. Hickey 
(ed.). Handbook of Language Contact (Blackwell). He is currently writing a book entitled Language in 
Contact and Isolation: On the Social Determinants of Linguistic Structure.

xvii
LIST OF CONTRIBUTORS
Eva Vetter currently works in research and teaching at the University of Vienna (applied linguistics, 
language didactics and francophone civilisation) and in the EU-funded multilingualism Network LINEE 
(Languages in a Network of European Excellence). Her research in social networks relates to her interest 
in linguistic minorities. She critically reflects on and applies the network approach in her doctoral thesis: 
Nicht mehr Bretonisch? Sprachkonflikt in der ländlichen Bretagne (Frankfurt: Lang, 1997), in French 
Plus de Breton? Conflit linguistique en Bretagne rurale (Brest: An Here, 1999). Beyond the focus on 
regional minorities, her research concerns language teaching and learning, discourse analysis, multilin-
gualism and language policy. Recent publications include (with Rindler Schjerve) ‘Linguistic diversity in 
Habsburg Austria as a model for modern European language policy’, in ten Thije, Zeevaert (eds.) (2007) 
Receptive Multilingualism: Linguistic Analyses, Language Policies and Didactic Concepts. Benjamins, 
pp. 49–70; (with Frings) (eds.) (2008) Mehrsprachigkeit als Schlüsselkompetenz. ibidem and forthcom-
ing: Sprachenbewusstheit von FremdsprachenlehrerInnen: Chance oder Hindernis für einen mehrspra-
chigkeitsorientierten Unterricht? Schneider.
Ruth Wodak is Distinguished Professor of Discourse Studies at Lancaster University and has remained 
affiliated with the University of Vienna, where she became Full Professor of Applied Linguistics in 1991. 
Besides various other prizes, she was awarded the Wittgenstein Prize for Elite Researchers in 1996. 
Her research interests focus on discourse studies, gender studies, language and/in politics, prejudice and 
discrimination, and ethnographic methods in linguistic field work. She is a member of the editorial board 
of a range of linguistics journals, co-editor of the journals Discourse and Society, Critical Discourse 
Studies, and Language and Politics, and co-editor of the book series Discourse Approaches to Politics, 
Society and Culture (DAPSAC). Recent book publications include (with R. de Cillia) Ist Österreich ein 
‘deutsches’ Land? (2006), (with M. Krzyz. anowski), Qualitative Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences 
(2008), (with G. Delanty and P. Jones), Migration, Identity and Belonging (2008), (with H. Heer, 
W. Manoschek and A. Pollak) The Discursive Construction of History: Remembering the Wehrmacht’s 
War of Annihilation (2008), (with M. Krzyz. anowski) The Politics of Exclusion: Debating Migration in 
Austria (2009), (with R. de Cillia) Gedenken im Gedankenjahr (2009) and The Discourse of Politics in 
Action: ‘Politics as Usual’ (2009).
Walt Wolfram is William C. Friday Distinguished University Professor at North Carolina State 
University, where he also directs the North Carolina Language and Life Project. He has pioneered 
research on social and ethnic dialects since the 1960s, and he and his staff have conducted more than 3000 
sociolinguistic interviews in more than 20 different research communities. Professor Wolfram is particu-
larly interested in the practice of linguistic gratuity, which requires linguists to give back to the communi-
ties that fuel their research. He is also concerned with the dissemination of knowledge about language 
diversity to the public, including the production of television documentaries, the construction of museum 
exhibits and the development of dialect awareness curricula. Significant publications on fieldwork include 
(with Reaser and Vaughn) ‘Operationalizing linguistic gratuity: from principle to practice’, Linguistic and 
Language Compass 3 pp.1109–34 (2008) and (with R. Fasold) The Study of Social Dialects in American 
English (1974).


(RE)DEFINING THE FIELD
Editing a new handbook for an established field 
like sociolinguistics presents a huge challenge. 
Such a handbook should contribute novel perspec-
tives on present knowledge; and – possibly – add 
new knowledge and new insights. But many excel-
lent handbooks already exist;1 moreover, sociolin-
guistics has had an enormous impact on linguistics 
and its neighbouring fields and has become an 
integral part of almost every curriculum in linguis-
tics. Thus, one might be justifiably sceptical 
whether anything innovative could be found.
We confronted this challenge with much reflec-
tion. Of course, we are aware that we cannot cover 
this enormous field in all its complexity. We have 
decided to start by situating sociolinguistics in its 
historical and theoretical contexts, introducing the 
founders of the discipline and focusing on major 
theoretical themes which have influenced socio-
linguistic research at both the macro and micro 
levels. We then present major foundational issues 
and approaches which, while being constitutive of 
sociolinguistic research, frequently remain implicit 
and unspecified or even naive (such as theories of 
power, interaction, social practice, and so forth). 
Finally, we are concerned with the application of 
sociolinguistics in language teaching, forensics, 
the struggle for human rights, and so on.
Because sociolinguistics has become such a 
large field in its own right (the Sociolinguistics 
Symposium started out in 1976 in Birmingham 
with fewer than 50 participants, whereas recent 
conferences have gathered around 800, with up to 
15 parallel sessions), boundaries between it and 
other subdomains in linguistics have become 
blurred. Do gender studies belong within sociolin-
guistics? What about aspects of discourse analysis 
or pragmatics (such as research on organizations)? 
How much sociological theory is necessarily part 
of sociolinguistic research? And what about the 
traditional dichotomy between quantitative and 
qualitative research? Apart from these salient 
questions, new important themes have emerged 
due to recent socio-political developments which 
we necessarily cover in this handbook, such as 
research on discursive practices resulting from 
new streams of migration and other impacts of 
globalization.
In inviting contributions, we have also attempted 
to transcend the Anglo-American bias that can 
be seen in some handbooks,2 although we were, 
unfortunately, not as successful as we would have 
wished in getting authors from all continents on 
board. Nevertheless, authors were strongly encour-
aged to discuss research published in languages 
other than English and from beyond the anglo-
phone world. As editors originating from three 
different countries, we ourselves represent a vari-
ety of research traditions in sociolinguistics, and 
have different areas of expertise. Inclusiveness 
and the acknowledgement of difference therefore 
became important principles for this book.
SOCIOLINGUISTICS AS WE SEE IT
The field of sociolinguistics started in the 1960s, 
arising out of the work particularly of the American 
scholars William Labov, Joshua Fishman, Charles 
Ferguson, John Gumperz and Dell Hymes, and the 
British scholar Basil Bernstein. This new linguis-
tic paradigm endorsed the view that language 
could not be adequately understood without taking 
many layers of social context into account, be it 
the situational context of utterances, the geo-
graphical origin of the speakers, their age, gender, 
Introduction
R u t h  W o d a k ,  B a r b a r a  J o h n s t o n e 
a n d  P a u l  K e r s w i l l

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
2
social class, ethnicity, and so forth. The funda-
mental framing question which was asked is the 
following:3 ‘Who speaks where, in what way, why 
and with what kind of impact, and how do these 
aspects of context shape the linguistic resources 
available to speakers?’
Sociolinguistics could be seen as having its 
roots in Ludwig Wittgenstein’s (1967) ‘language 
games’ notion and his theory of meaning as ‘con-
stantly created in use’, as well as in the anthropol-
ogy, symbolic interactionism and dialectology of 
the 1950s. By the 1930s, anthropologists such as 
Bronislav Malinowski recognized that language 
was not only a tool for referring to the world but 
also had functions relating to social rituals and 
other aspects of social life in every culture they 
had investigated. Erving Goffman and other quali-
tative sociologists had started studying language 
in context without having at their disposal the 
linguistic theories, methodologies and tools to 
analyse language in use in detail. Dialectologists 
such as Kurath, Bloch and Hansen (1939), Allen 
(1973), McDavid (1976), McDavid and O’Cain 
(1980) and Pederson, McDavid and Leas (1986) 
in the USA and Orton, Sanderson and Widdowson 
(1962–78) in England investigated regional 
dialects and, to a certain extent, situational 
styles using interviews and other kinds of field-
work. These dialectologists and others laid the 
groundwork for subsequent, sometimes more 
theoretically sophisticated, work in variationist 
sociolinguistics.
One of the most important triggers for a ‘different’ 
linguistics was the conflict between Chomskyan 
transformational grammar and other views of 
language and meaning (Chomsky, 1957, 1965). 
The linguistic ‘competence’ studied by transfor-
mational, and later generative grammarians 
involves the ability of idealized speaker-hearers to 
produce isolated sentences, and their data often 
consist of hypothetical sentences constructed to 
test their model. Beginning in the 1960s and 
1970s, Jürgen Habermas, Dell Hymes, and other 
critics proposed a different approach. With their 
interest in language in use and viewing language 
as social practice, they proposed the concepts of 
language as action and communicative compe-
tence (following John Austin’s (1962) and John 
Searle’s (1969) Speech Act Theory4). Thus, they 
re-imagined linguists’ object of study as verbal 
utterances in context, be they oral conversations or 
written documents (e.g. Habermas, 1981). 
‘Language in use’ was labelled as (mere) ‘per-
formance’ by Chomsky and perceived as unsys-
tematic and irrelevant for scientific investigation. 
Sociolinguists, on the other hand, hold the contrary 
view: conversations and everyday interactions are 
to be studied for their inherent rules and norms; 
they also have their own systems and rules, and 
are predictably shaped by social variables, on all 
levels of language, from phonetics and phonology 
to syntax and discourse/text (Panagl and Wodak, 
2004; van Dijk, 2008, 2009).
Because of their roots in the social sciences and 
in empirical research, sociolinguists deal with dif-
ferent data sets and apply different methods of 
analysis from those of formal linguists, studying a 
range of genres and using quantitative and qualita-
tive methods, ethnography, and so on (Johnstone, 
2008; Gobo, 2008). Their aim is to uncover sys-
tematic relationships between language, often in 
the context of language change or language shift, 
and social phenomena. Language in use can 
manifest social phenomena, but language in use 
can also produce and reproduce social phenom-
ena. Attention to this fundamental dialectic is a 
central characteristic of sociolinguistics.
By the 1970s, several different objects of inves-
tigation and levels of analysis were being devel-
oped. On the one hand, issues of language 
planning, diglossia and bilingualism were at the 
centre of attention (e.g. Charles Ferguson, Joshua 
Fishman; see chapters by Auer, Berthoud and 
Lüdi, Sallabank, Sebba and Spolsky); on the other 
hand, two theoretical approaches at the micro 
level dominated the scientific debate. The code 
theory put forward by Basil Bernstein in 1960 
claimed that children from the working class in 
the United Kingdom were discriminated against 
because of the way they were socialized into lan-
guage use, which resulted in a different linguistic 
‘code’. He coined the term restricted code for this. 
Middle class children, by contrast, were socialized 
differently and acquired an elaborated code which 
enabled them to succeed much better in schools 
and also in other socially relevant institutions. 
Bernstein, coming from education, integrated 
theoretical approaches from pedagogy with soci-
ology (such as the Systems Theory of Talcott 
Parsons) and linguistics (see chapters by Ivinson 
and Martín Rojo).
The variationist school of sociolinguistics typi-
fied by William Labov is centrally concerned with 
linguistic structure (and thus shares an agenda 
with structural/generative linguistics) and, more 
specifically still, language change. For example, 
in his seminal research on linguistic variation in 
New York City, published in 1966, Labov demon-
strated that patterns of variation leading to lan-
guage change (on the phonological level) were 
correlated with the age and social class of the 
speakers, as well as how self-consciously they 
were speaking. Applying his notion of the ‘linguis-
tic variable’, his statistical results from stratified 
random samples of speakers enabled him to draw up 
an explicit, testable model of how linguistic change 
moves through a speech community. Labov’s 
work in the realm of education is a manifestation 

INTRODUCTION
3
of difference theory. Using the methods he had 
developed for studying language change, he was 
able to show that speakers of non-standard English 
were just as systematic in their use of language for 
the expression of rational thought as speakers of 
standard English, provided the context was right. 
Thus, an African-American interviewer was able 
to use features of Bernstein’s elaborated code with 
African-American children, while the latter 
remained almost totally silent when a white inter-
viewer asked questions. Labov was therefore 
able to refute the deficit theory (see chapters by 
Dodsworth, Hazen and Mallinson). 
Variation studies developed quickly, mostly in 
the USA and UK, but also in central and northern 
Europe (e.g. Dittmar, 1973; Nordberg, 1970; 
Dressler and Wodak, 1982). Difference theory had 
implications for social practice as well. Labov and 
others were asked officially for their expertise in 
issues of language education in the USA. Labov 
was an expert witness in a key court case which 
allowed for the recognition of, and support 
for, African-American children’s vernacular 
(Whiteman, 1980). The ‘Ebonics’ controversy of 
the mid-1990s is another example of the applica-
tion of variationist sociolinguistics to educational 
debates (Baugh, 2000). 
From the outset of sociolinguistics, we can 
discern a distinction between macro- and micro-
sociolinguistics. Macro-sociolinguists study issues 
of language planning, languages in contact, diglos-
sia and bilingualism, intercultural communication 
and language policies. The practical application of 
results is a major goal of such investigations. 
Thus, language planning in countries such as 
Israel and South Africa, and in transnational enti-
ties such as the European Union, was and is 
hugely influenced by sociolinguists (see chapters 
by Spolsky, Berthoud and Lüdi, and Sallabank). 
Micro-sociolinguists, on the other hand, focus 
on the study of conversations, narratives, language 
use in everyday life and institutions, as well as the 
linguistic variable in variationist sociolinguistics 
(see chapters by Hazen, Johnstone and Marcellino, 
Ivinson, Gordon, Kotthoff, Matthiessen and Slade, 
Georgakopolou, Ehrlich, Menz, Martin Rojo and 
Kerswill). Much empirical research has succeeded 
in illustrating basic differences between institu-
tional, formal contexts, and everyday life. In addi-
tion, linguistic variables were found to be 
important in indexing specific codes, registers, 
styles and variants, such as gender, ‘belonging’ (in 
the sense of group membership), local and regional 
identities and ethnicity (see chapters by Pavlidou, 
Hellinger and Slembrouck). Variationist sociolin-
guistics started to take into account this expanded 
set of explanatory variables (so-called third-wave 
variationist sociolinguistics – see Eckert (2005) 
and Kerswill, this volume), though sometimes 
(but usually with good reason) viewing them as 
static, presupposed at the outset without taking a 
specific setting or context into account (second-
wave, represented by, e.g., Milroy (1987)). 
More recent theoretical approaches propose 
units of investigation other than the speech com-
munity, such as communities of practice and 
social networks, and view social variables such as 
gender and ethnicity as flexible and constructed in 
interaction. Communities of practice are defined 
by similar socialization modes and social prac-
tices. Social networks represent the frequency and 
quality of interactions in groups or larger com-
munities, as well as the structural properties of a 
person’s network (key authors are Penelope 
Eckert, Sally McConnell-Ginet, James Milroy and 
Lesley Milroy; see chapters by Vetter and 
Mendoza-Denton). Research applying these con-
cepts takes the view that interaction modes and 
dynamics as well as individual speaker differences 
are more relevant to an understanding of language 
use than are the above-mentioned static variables. 
Gender studies is now a field in its own right, but 
it is always represented at major conferences on 
sociolinguistics (see chapters by Hellinger and 
Pavlidou). 
Micro-sociolinguistics has added to the micro 
level of phonology, morphology, syntax, and the 
conversational turn in the level of texts: conversa-
tions and narratives are analysed while focusing 
on gender-specific or class-specific differences. 
Labov and Waletzky proposed a model of the 
structure of conversational narratives, in 1967, 
which is still highly regarded. Another influential 
strand of work focusing on how understanding is 
negotiated in conversation is interactional socio-
linguistics, associated with anthropologist John J. 
Gumperz (see chapters by Gordon and Kendall). 
Conversation analysis, arising from ethnometh-
odological theory in sociology, has also been 
widely adopted in studies of how meaning and 
form emerge in interaction (see chapters by Garot 
and Berard, Kotthoff, and Matthiessen and Slade). 
The methods of interactional sociolinguistics and 
conversation analysis have been used in studies of 
institutional discourse such as doctor–patient 
communication, therapeutic communication, com-
munication in business, and so on (e.g. Wodak, 
1996; see chapters by Martín Rojo, Menz, Ehrlich, 
and Georgakopolou). Often enough, the macro 
and micro levels overlap: for example, intercul-
tural communication can be studied in organiza-
tional settings; language planning for educational 
purposes has to consider many different genres 
(see chapter by Leung).
In the 21st century, new challenges confront 
sociolinguistics: new media, new technologies of 
communication, and new social issues, such as the 
impact of globalization, the fluidity of borders and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
4
mobility as well as migration. All these new and 
very complex issues demand more interdiscipli-
nary research in sociolinguistics and the develop-
ment of new methodologies and new tools for 
language analysis (see, in this volume, chapters by 
Slembrouck; Piller and Takahashi; Busch and 
Pfisterer; Barton and Lee; Coulthard, Grant and 
Kredens; Pennycook).
OUTLINE OF VOLUME
History of sociolinguistics 
Sociolinguistics originated in the 1960s and 1970s, 
when linguists, anthropologists and sociologists 
became interested in how the structure of lan-
guage was shaped by the contexts of its use, and 
how language use shaped social relations and 
culture. In the USA, many of the key figures came 
together at the American Anthropological 
Association’s 1963 Annual Meeting and the 1964 
Linguistic Society of America Summer Institute. 
Through detailed treatments of the early work of 
some of the founders of the field and sketches of 
its subsequent influence, chapters in this section  
(Part I) trace the historical development of five 
subfields that emerged from this period of innova-
tion and point to the subsequent influence of each. 
Chapters 1–5, respectively, thus examine: Joshua 
Fishman, Charles Ferguson and other important 
early figures in sociolinguistics and the sociology 
of language (Spolsky); William Labov and his 
variationist approach to the study of language 
change (Hazen); Basil Bernstein’s work on social 
class and linguistic ‘codes’ in the context of edu-
cational research (Ivinson); Dell Hymes and the 
development of the ethnography of communica-
tion and ethnopoetics (Johnstone and Marcellino); 
and John J. Gumperz and interactional sociolin-
guistics (Gordon).
Sociolinguistics and social theory
The chapters in this section (Part II) treat theories 
of social identity and interaction, and the methods 
for their study, that are drawn on in contemporary 
sociolinguistic research. 
Chapter 6 on social stratification (Mallinson) 
treats the theories of social class and social hierar-
chy that underpin much early work in sociolin-
guistics. Beginning in the 1960s, under the 
influence of Foucault, Rorty and others, the social 
phenomena shaping language, such as class, 
gender and ethnicity, were increasingly seen as 
constructed in social interaction. The body of 
theory known as social constructionism (also 
sometimes called social constructivism) is the 
topic of Chapter 7 (Irwin). Sociologist Erving 
Goffman, working in the sociological framework 
known as symbolic interactionism, proposed that 
interactants draw on cultural ‘frames’ and adopt 
interactional ‘footings’ to shape understandings of 
what is going on as they talk. Kendall discusses 
framing in Chapter 8. Chapter 9 (Garot and 
Berard) deals with ethnomethodology and conver-
sation analysis, focusing in particular on member-
ship categorization analysis, which has been taken 
up by many sociolinguists. They provide an over-
view of the work of Garfinkel, Sacks and others 
concerning how meaning and social order are 
created in interaction. Chapter 10 (Farfán and 
Holzscheiter) deals with a variety of ways of theo-
rizing power and its relationships with talk and 
with patterns of variation in language. Theorists 
examined include Habermas, Foucault and 
Bourdieu, and topics include domination, resist-
ance, agency and hegemony. Chapter 11 on glo-
balization and migration (Slembrouck) deals with 
theorists such as Anthony Giddens, Arjun 
Appadurai, Scott Lash and John Urry, David 
Harvey, Immanuel Wallerstein and others, and 
raises issues such as speech community in multi-
lingual settings, geographical mobility and lan-
guage change, and ethnolinguistic identity in 
cyberspace. In Chapter 12, Paul Kockelman dis-
cusses semiotic theory in the tradition of Charles 
Sanders Peirce, and how his work has been taken 
up in sociolinguistics.
Language variation and change 
‘Language variation and change’ (LVC) is usually 
taken to be synonymous with ‘variationist socio-
linguistics’; it deals with variation within a lan-
guage as opposed to the alternation of codes 
(bilingualism/code-switching). Variation is seen 
as inextricably linked to language change; hence, 
much work in LVC is on the linguistics of varia-
tion. The linguistic model espoused is broadly 
structuralist (and not, say, generative – notwith-
standing the initial use of Chomsky and Halle-
style rule notation), because the unit of analysis, 
the ‘linguistic variable’, is most easily reconcila-
ble with this model. Social factors are brought to 
bear to account for variation and patterns of 
change. At the same time, social correlations 
potentially tell us something about society: lin-
guistic variation, to the extent that it is socially 
governed, should mirror in some way the social 
parameters (class, gender, etc.) which have been 
marshalled. 
It is then only a short step to claiming that lin-
guistic variation, as manifested by speakers in 
particular interactions, is actually constitutive of 

INTRODUCTION
5
those social parameters and also serves to define 
the context of speech. Exploring this dialectic is, 
however, not usually seen as falling within the 
domain of LVC. From the point of view of lan-
guage in use (rather than the language change 
agenda), the focus that LVC places on macroso-
cial structure and on quantitative variation means 
that it deals with the language–society relation-
ship at a different level of abstraction from inter-
actional sociolinguistics, with the ability of 
language use to construct social reality being 
backgrounded. However, as noted, ‘third-wave’ 
variationist sociolinguistics bridges this divide.  
This Section (Part III) starts with Chapter 14, 
which addresses a central concern for LVC: how 
to characterize the relationship between the indi-
vidual and society, so as to enable the analyst to 
model the patterns of variation (Mendoza-Denton). 
This leads directly to Chapters 14 and 15 by 
Dodsworth and Vetter, who deal with social class 
and social networks, respectively. Chapter 16 by 
Kerswill deals with the central concern of LVC: 
language change. The manner in which macro-
social structures affect language change is singled 
out by Trudgill in Chapter 17. In Chapter 18 
Guy situates the field within formal linguistics, 
finding the latter wanting because of its insistence 
on invariant categories, while noting a new will-
ingness in both the ‘variationist’ and ‘theoretical’ 
camps to engage with each other’s concerns. 
Chapter 19 by Kristiansen deconstructs the 
notions of awareness, attitude and ideology in 
LVC, particularly the notion ‘change from 
below’. In Chapter 20 Nevalainen shows how the 
sociolinguistic understandings of contemporary 
speech communities can be projected onto 
historical data. 
Finally in this section, in Chapter 21, Wolfram 
critically outlines the range of methodologies 
which are available to variationists and other 
sociolinguists, showing how the orientation of 
a particular study is reflected in the fieldwork 
methods adopted. Methods are located along 
several dimensions, especially perhaps qualita-
tive/quantitative, micro/macro and interactional/
non-interactional. Usually more than one method 
is used, allowing different insights to be gained 
(triangulation).
Interaction
This section (Part IV) summarizes the most impor-
tant research on everyday and organizational inter-
actions. Studies in this field draw mainly on 
symbolic interactionism (Erving Goffman) and 
ethnomethodology (Harold Garfinkel). In addi-
tion, the sociological traditions of phenomenology 
(Alfred Schütz), anthropological approaches 
(Raymond William Firth, Bronislaw Malinowski, 
George Herbert Mead, and others) and cultural 
studies frameworks (Stuart Hall, Raymond 
Williams) have also been influential. 
Chapter 22 (Kotthoff) is dedicated to spontane-
ous interaction and conversation (e.g. research 
into everyday interactions among friends, dinner 
table conversations, family interactions). There 
are various theoretical and methodological 
approaches involved in such studies, ranging from 
more discourse-analytical and conversation-
analytical investigations to interactive, sociolin-
guistically informed ones. Cross-cultural aspects 
come into play as well as explicit and latent 
conventions and rules which exist in various 
subgroups, communities of practice, public 
spheres, cultures or even countries. Research to 
date includes communication in hospitals, schools, 
courtrooms, bureaucracies and international 
organizations, and these are covered in Chapters 
23–25 by Menz, Martín Rojo, and Ehrlich. Chapter 
26 addresses registers and conversational styles 
which are chosen in relation to the specific context 
of interaction. Styles can be analysed on multiple 
linguistic dimensions, ranging from prosody and 
intonation to semantics, text-grammar and dis-
course (Matthiessen and Slade). 
Chapter 27 on narratives in various interac-
tional settings is included (Georgakopolou), as 
narrative analysis offers a unique way to study 
beliefs and experiences of individuals as well as 
the construction of identities. Examples include 
both formal and informal settings, spontaneous 
and interview data. In Chapter 28, aspects of gender 
and social class are salient when studying micro-
interactions (Pavlidou); and finally, Chapter 29, 
which considers the representations of interac-
tions in the (new) media (Busch and Pfisterer) 
points to the impact of the field of media for all 
domains of our society.
Multilingualism and contact
Multilingualism and language contact have been 
investigated from three main perspectives: the 
descriptive/theoretical linguistic (for example, 
the work of Sarah G. Thomason and Terrence 
Kaufman, or Shana Poplack, on the consequences 
of contact for the linguistic system); the functional 
(Susan Gal, Peter Auer); and the sociological 
(Joshua Fishman). Here, we deal mainly but not 
exclusively with the functional and sociological 
strands. Unlike in LVC, there is no unifying 
theory, due to the disparate nature of the phenom-
ena and the approaches taken. Several major 
themes emerge, however, often in conjunction: 
interaction, function, power, ideology, interven-
tion and globalization. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
6
Societal bilingualism refers to the functional 
distribution of languages or language varieties 
across a given population, usually along ethnic lines 
and often reflecting past migrations. Functional 
divisions may also reflect differences in power 
among social groups (social classes, or religious or 
aristocratic oligarchies), with the dominant variety 
sometimes 
becoming 
highly 
differentiated 
(diglossia). This is the subject matter of Chapter 30 
(Sebba), the first chapter in this section (Part V). 
Code-switching, the individual reflection of soci-
etal bilingualism and a strategic resource in conver-
sation, is dealt with in Chapter 31 (Auer). 
Chapters 32 and 33 (Berthoud and Lüdi, 
Sallabank) deal with public and private ideologies 
and their links with language policy, planning and 
endangerment. Berthoud and Lüdi, writing on 
policy and planning, consider the what, how and 
why of deliberate intervention through educa-
tional policy, language choice in government and 
commerce, and corpus and status planning. 
Languages come to be endangered for a variety of 
reasons. These are considered in the chapter by 
Sallabank, as are the effects of intervention on the 
revitalization and revival of languages. Finally, in 
Chapter 34, Pennycook deals with the unique 
position that English has in the world (for good or 
ill), critically considering notions such as ‘World 
Englishes’ and the ‘circles’ of English.
Applications 
This section (Part VI) presents some applications 
of sociolinguistic research. We have selected four 
areas where sociolinguists have already been 
successful in their work in collaboration with 
practitioners or when informing practitioners. 
Forensic (socio)linguistics is a relatively new 
area of application and has helped solve major 
court cases where voice recognition, for example, 
played a significant role. Detecting authors of 
anonymous letters or leaflets and providing expert 
opinions on implicitly discriminatory texts and 
discourses have recently become areas of sociolin-
guistic expertise. This field has been institutional-
ized through conferences and journals as well as 
MA modules and programmes. Interdisciplinary 
teams (sociolinguists and legal experts) have also 
reformulated legal texts (laws) and provided crite-
ria for improving the comprehensibility of texts. 
Questions of multilingualism and translation need 
to be integrated as recent research on the drafting 
of European Union (EU) legislation has illustrated 
(Coulthard, Grant and Kredens, in Chapter 35).
Although language teaching and language test-
ing belong to a much more broadly defined 
Applied Linguistics, some specific issues are 
inherently of a sociolinguistic nature. These relate 
to language teaching for migrants or the develop-
ment of sociolinguistic criteria for the recently 
introduced citizenship tests in EU member states. 
Tests are frequently developed without taking 
relevant sociolinguistic research on gender, class, 
communities of practice or ethnicity into account 
(Leung, Chapter 36). Moreover, in many areas, 
guidelines for non-discriminatory language use 
have been or are being developed. For example, 
these have been introduced in many languages and 
countries to ensure the visibility of women in 
formal contexts such as the media, bureaucracies, 
publishing and so forth. Without taking sociolin-
guistic research on gender, race, ethnicity, age and 
social class into account, such guidelines cannot 
be adequately formulated (Hellinger; Piller and 
Takahashi, Chapter 37 and 38). 
Finally, we focus on literacy, one of the most 
important skills in modern times to gain access to 
relevant domains in our complex societies. 
Through the rapid development of new media and 
related genres (email, synchronous online chat, 
text messaging, and so on), new forms of social 
inclusion and exclusion have been created. Access 
to literacy in the new media makes participation in 
many organizations and contribution to important 
debates (via, for instance, the Internet, instant 
messaging and blogs) possible. New forms of 
‘gate-keeping’, which can be observed worldwide, 
are addressed throughout this section (Barton and 
Lee, Chapter 39). The authors contend that school 
education has to address related forms of inclu-
sion and exclusion in new and creative ways.
NOTES
1 See, for example: Ammon et al., 2006/7; 
Chambers et al., 2002/4; Coulmas, 1999; Llamas 
et al., 2007; Mesthrie, 2001.
2 For example, of the 29 chapters in the Blackwell 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change, only 
three are written by authors originating from non-
anglophone countries.
3 The development of Communication Studies 
after World War II was first in posing the ‘famous’ 6 
W Question: ‘Who speaks to whom, when, where, 
and why, and with which effect?’ (e.g. Lasswell and 
Leites, 1949).
4 See Schiffrin (1994), Renkema (2004) for 
extensive summaries.
REFERENCES
Allen, H. B. (1973–76). The Linguistic Atlas of the Upper 
Midwest. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

INTRODUCTION
7
Ammon, U., Dittmar, N., Mattheier, K. J. and Trudgill, P. (eds) 
(2004–6) Sociolinguistics/Soziolinguistik. 3 vols. 2nd edn. 
Berlin: De Gruyter.
Austin, J. L. (1962) How to Do Things with Words: The William 
James Lectures Delivered at Harvard University in 1955. 
London: Clarendon.
Baugh, J. (2000) Beyond Ebonics: Linguistic Pride and Racial 
Prejudice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Chambers, J. K., Trudgill, P. and Schilling-Estes, N. (eds) 
(2002) The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. (1957) Syntactic Structures. Berlin, New York: 
Mouton.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of a Theory of Syntax. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Coulmas, F. (ed.) (1999) Handbook of Sociolinguistics. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Dittmar, N. (1973) Soziolinguistik. Frankfurt, Main: Fischer 
Verlag.
Dressler, W. and Wodak, R. (1982) ‘Sociophonological meth-
ods in the study of sociolinguistic variation in Viennese 
German’, Language in Society, 11, 239–70. 
Eckert, Penelope (2005) ‘Variation, convention, and social 
meaning’. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
Linguistic Society of America, Oakland, California. Accessed 
22 April 2009 at http://www.stanford.edu/~eckert/
EckertLSA2005.pdf.
Gobo, G. (2008) Doing Ethnography. London: Sage.
Habermas, J. (1981) Theorie des kommunikativen Handelns. 
Frankfurt, Main: Suhrkamp.
Johnstone, B. (2008). Discourse Analysis. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Kurath, H., Bloch, B. and Hansen, M. L. (1939) Linguistic Atlas 
of New England. Providence, RI: Brown University Press. 
Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis: Oral 
versions of personal experience’, in J. Helms (ed.), Essays 
on the Verbal and Visual Arts. Seattle: University of 
Washington Press. pp. 12–44.
Lasswell, H. D. and Leites, N. C. (1949) Language of Politics: 
Studies in Quantitative Semantics. New York: G. W. Stewart.
Llamas, C., Mullany, L. and Stockwell, P. (eds) (2007) Routledge 
Companion to Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge.
McDavid, R. I. (1976) The Linguistic Atlas of the North-Central 
States: Basic Materials. Chicago: Joseph Regenstein Library, 
University of Chicago.
McDavid, R. I. and O’Cain, R. K. (1980) Linguistic Atlas of the 
Middle and South Atlantic States. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
Mesthrie, R. (ed.) (2001) Concise Encyclopedia of Socio-
linguistics. New York: Pergamon Press. 
Milroy, L. (1987) Language and Social Networks. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Nordberg, B. (1970) ‘The urban dialect of Eskilstuna: methods 
and problems’, in Benediktsson, H. (ed.), The Nordic 
Languages and Modern Linguistics. Reykjavík: Vísindafélag 
Íslendinga. pp. 426–43.
Orton, H., Sanderson, S. and Widdowson, J. D. A. (1978) The 
Linguistic Atlas of England. London: Croom Helm.
Panagl, O. and Wodak, R. (eds) (2004) Text und Kontext: 
Theoriemodelle und methodische Verfahren im trans-
disziplinären Vergleich. Würzburg: Königshausen und 
Neumann.
Pederson, L., McDavid, R. I. and Leas, S. (1986–92) Linguistic 
Atlas of the Gulf States. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University of 
Alabama Press.
Renkema, J. (2004). Introduction to Discourse Studies. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Schiffrin, D. (1994). Approaches to Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell.
Searle, J. R. (1969) Speech Acts: an Essay in the Philosophy of 
Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2008) Discourse and Context: a Sociocognitive 
Approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. (2009) Society and Discourse: How Social 
Contexts Influence Text and Talk. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1967) Philosophische Untersuchungen. 
Philosophical Investigations, 2nd edn. Tr. G. E. M. Anscombe. 
Oxford: Blackwell. 
Whiteman, M. F. (1980) Reactions to Ann Arbor: Vernacular 
Black English and Education. Arlington, VA: Center for 
Applied Linguistics.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. London: Longman.


PART 1
History of 
Sociolinguistics


1
1.1 INTRODUCTION
To introduce this handbook, the editors map out 
the gestation of sociolinguistics by focusing on six 
of the ‘founding fathers’: William Labov, who 
pioneered a school devoted to showing the rele-
vance of social determinants of variation for 
linguistic theory; Basil Bernstein, the British 
sociologist whose work on class-related ‘codes’ 
led to a brief flirtation with American sociolin-
guists; Dell Hymes, whose adaptation of Roman 
Jakobson’s theory of communication (Jakobson, 
1960) shaped the ethnography of communication 
and educational linguistics and who molded soci-
olinguistics by editing several pioneering volumes 
and the flagship journal Language in Society; 
John Gumperz, founder of interactional sociolin-
guistics; and Charles Ferguson and Joshua 
Fishman. All except Bernstein (although he was 
invited) attended the Linguistic Institute in 
Bloomington in the summer of 1964, the land-
mark event that launched the field. All (except 
Bernstein again) served on the Committee on 
Sociolinguistics of the Social Sciences Research 
Council, established in 1963 to plan the 1964 
seminar and that operated until the early 1970s. 
All participated in the many conferences and 
publications which fashioned sociolinguistics in 
those years, and each continued to publish for 
the next 30 years, expanding their own interpre-
tations of the field. My task in this chapter is to 
describe and assess the specific contribution of 
Ferguson and Fishman to the ‘study of language in 
its social context’, and to explore the nature of the 
discipline that emerged, trying to explain why it is 
sometimes called ‘sociolinguistics’ and sometimes 
‘the sociology of language’, terms occasionally 
used interchangeably (Paulston and Tucker, 1997)1 
though elsewhere (Bright, 1992; Gumperz, 1971) 
clearly distinguished.
I shall also mention founders omitted from the 
selected six, such as William Bright, Allen 
Grimshaw, Einar Haugen, Uriel Weinreich and 
Sue Ervin-Tripp2 who were also pioneers. Haugen 
was, by 1963, a senior scholar: after 30 years as 
chair of Scandinavian Studies at the University of 
Wisconsin, he was about to take up a chair in 
Scandinavian and Linguistics at Harvard. He had 
taught a course on bilingualism at the 1948 
Linguistic Institute, and his book on the Norwegian 
language in America (Haugen, 1953) established 
him as the leading authority on bilingualism and 
language shift. He was the first linguist to write 
about the ecology of language, the title of his 1972 
collected papers (Haugen, 1972). His study of 
Norwegian language planning (Haugen, 1966) 
was a groundbreaking work.
A second major publication in 1953 was that of 
Uriel Weinreich (1953a), a seminal work that is 
still regularly cited as the basis for understanding 
language contact. Fishman (1997c), a friend of 
his3 from Yiddish youth movement days, summa-
rizes his work in sociolinguistics, starting with an 
undergraduate paper in Yiddish on Welsh lan-
guage revival (U. Weinreich, 1944), his doctoral 
dissertation on Swiss bilingualism, a study of 
Ferguson and Fishman: 
Sociolinguistics and the 
Sociology of Language
B e r n a r d  S p o l s k y

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
12
the Russian treatment of minority languages 
(U. Weinreich, 1953b), and the beginning of the 
language and culture atlas of Ashkenazic Jewry 
published a quarter of a century after his prema-
ture death. Fishman recalls a paper that the two of 
them did not write in 1954 on the societal nature 
of language; Weinreich’s draft was too linguistic 
and Fishman’s too sociological to negotiate a 
common version. Weinreich visited the 1964 
Linguistic Institute, delivering four lectures on 
semantic theory (U. Weinreich, 1966). His theory 
of semantics, Fishman suggested, was ‘profoundly 
cultural and socio-situational’, and so a comfort-
ing antidote to the anti-sociolinguistic theory that 
Chomsky was establishing.4 Weinreich had a 
strong influence on many of the founders, not least 
on his student William Labov. Labov (1997: 147) 
stresses the contribution to his own development 
made by a teacher not much older than him and 
especially the importance of Weinreich’s part in 
writing a paper which explained the relevance of 
sociolinguistics to the understanding of language 
change (U. Weinreich, Labov and Herzog, 1968).
A third founder was Susan Ervin-Tripp who 
joined the Committee on Psycholinguistics as a 
graduate assistant. Her distinction between com-
pound and coordinate bilingualism (Osgood, 
1954) led to much research and controversy. 
Based at Berkeley after 1958, her interest in child 
language acquisition cross-culturally brought her 
naturally into sociolinguistics (Ervin-Tripp, 1973). 
She also joined the Committee on Sociolinguistics 
in 1966 (Ervin-Tripp, 1997).
The task I have been set in this chapter is made 
more complex by the need to distinguish individ-
ual contributions from joint work and both from 
the working of the Zeitgeist,5 the difficultly to 
document formation of a consensus on next steps 
in a scientific field. All of the scholars I have 
named were already actively engaged in what is 
now describable as sociolinguistic research and 
publication before 1964. Shuy (1997) notes that 
Fishman first taught a course called ‘Sociology of 
Language’ at the University of Pennsylvania in 
1956 and continued to teach it at Yeshiva 
University. Huebner (1996) believes that the term 
‘sociolinguistics’ was first used by Currie (1952) 
and picked up by Weinreich (U. Weinreich 1953a: 
99) and in articles in Word which Weinreich edit-
ed.6 The classic paper on diglossia (Ferguson, 
1959) appeared there. At the 1962 LSA Linguistic 
Institute, Ferguson taught a course with the simple 
title ‘Sociolinguistics’ and repeated it the follow-
ing summer and in the 1965 academic year at 
Georgetown University. In 1964, Fishman had just 
completed his pioneering study of language loyalty 
in the USA (Fishman, 1966).7 Labov had published 
his Martha’s Vineyard study (Labov, 1962) and 
was completing the New York dissertation 
(Labov, 1966) that continues to encourage 
study of socially-explainable language variation. 
Gumperz and Hymes were editing the papers from 
the 1963 American Association of Anthropology 
meeting (Gumperz and Hymes, 1972), which 
remains a foundation text. Even without the 
seminar, research and publication in the field 
were by then well underway. Bloomington 1964 
was a milestone rather than a starting point, but 
a significant one.
1.2 FISHMAN MEETS FERGUSON
In his introduction to the festschrift for Ferguson’s 
65th birthday (Fishman, Tabouret-Keller, Clyne, 
Krishnamurti and Abdulaziz 1986: v), Fishman8 
recalls his first contact with Ferguson: ‘It took 
almost a month for Charles Ferguson and me to 
realize that we were living next door to each other 
during the Summer Linguistic Institute of 1964 
at Indiana University.’ They had communicated 
briefly before that; during the summer, both in 
the seminar that Ferguson chaired ‘primus inter 
pares’, and with Fishman taking Ferguson’s 
course (101 Introduction to Linguistics), and they 
became ‘neighbors, colleagues, students (each 
acknowledging the other as teacher) and close 
friends, roles we have enacted, either repeatedly 
or continuously …’
In May 1963, Fishman was not on the original 
list of scholars to be invited to Bloomington, 
which included Gumperz, Haugen, Immanuel 
Wallerstein9 or Paul Friedrich, Steven E. Deutsch10 
and Dell Hymes. In December, William Labov 
and William Stewart,11 both about to finish their 
degrees, were added; a month later, Fishman was 
also invited (as were Heinz Kloss12 and Basil 
Bernstein, all three considered sociologists rather 
than linguists) (Committee on Sociolinguistics 
1963–). Fishman had not been sure that he would 
be included – his only relevant publication was an 
article on the Whorfian hypothesis (Fishman, 
1960), although he had earlier published articles 
on Yiddish bilingualism, pluralism and minorities, 
and was just finishing his first major opus 
(Fishman, 1966) which was to set the path for the 
host of studies of minority language maintenance 
and loss that now dominate the sociolinguistic 
research field. He later (Fishman, 1997a) recalled 
that he was at Stanford rewriting Fishman (1966) 
when he first heard about the 1964 seminar and 
was encouraged to apply by Einar Haugen, also a 
fellow at the Center for Advanced Studies in the 
Behavioral Sciences. He phoned Ferguson whose 
article on diglossia he knew; Ferguson ‘seemed a 
little cool on the phone’ but accepted the appli-
cation. Ferguson quickly came to appreciate 

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
13
Fishman’s potential contribution: in a letter written 
in 1965 trying unsuccessfully to persuade Fishman 
to stay on the Committee of Sociolinguistics, he 
wrote, ‘Of all the members, you are most probably 
the only one whose primary interest is in the field 
of sociolinguistics, and your publications in the 
field have been the most extensive. You are con-
cerned with both “macro” and “micro” and with 
relating the two’ (Committee on Sociolinguistics 
1963–) (letter from Ferguson in Ethiopia dated 
25 November 1965).
Fishman did not know what the seminar was 
going to be like, but he was willing to put up with 
a hot uncomfortable summer in Bloomington in 
order to be with ‘a community of like-minded 
scholars’. When the seminar began, Fishman 
found the sociologists – including himself, 
‘a refurbished social psychologist’ as he noted 
(Fishman, 1997a: 88) – to be in a weak position 
because they did not know each other and did not 
have strong interests in common. Only Fishman, 
Kloss and Lieberson had published or were ready 
to publish about language. The anthropologists 
and linguists had met before, most recently at 
the 1963 AAA meeting and at the May UCLA 
meeting. There was a major gap between the 
two groups and, partly because of that, Fishman 
returned to his earlier preference for calling 
the field the sociology of language.13 He com-
plained that social problems were not emphasized 
in Bloomington, and that only annoyance greeted 
his reference to ‘the fact that people were willing 
to kill and be killed for their beloved language 
was being completely overlooked’ (Fishman, 
1997a: 93).14
At Bloomington and after, a close personal 
and academic relationship quickly developed 
between Ferguson and Fishman. Fishman’s state-
ment about their friendship has been cited: 
Ferguson (1997: 80) respected not just Fishman’s 
extensive empirical studies but his potential for 
theory-building: 
I tend to be pessimistic about formulating a basic 
theory of sociolinguistics; possibly I am unduly pes-
simistic. I would think that if Fishman put his mind 
to it, he could probably come up with a kind of 
theory. Of course, it would tend to focus on mac-
rosociolinguistics (sociology of language), like the 
books he has written on ethnicity and nationalism 
and so forth …
For Fishman, Ferguson remained his main 
teacher of linguistics.15 While their research paths 
diverged, with Ferguson firmly on the linguistic 
and Fishman firmly on the sociological side, their 
early conversations and continuing association 
had a major influence on the growth and shape of 
the field.
1.3 ORGANIZING A NEW FIELD
Left to work alone, there is little doubt that the 
founders of sociolinguistics would have continued 
their individual scholarly paths investigating the 
complex relations between language and society, 
and the structure and interplay of the two systems 
evolved to deal with the evolutionary inadequacies 
of human physiology, rejecting the ideology estab-
lished in mainstream linguistics by Chomsky’s 
lack of interest in meaning and his focus on the 
competence of an ‘idealized monolingual’. Each 
of them had come with a different goal and was 
attracted by a different inspiration. William Bright, 
for instance, had been trained in American Indian 
linguistics by M. B. Emeneau and Mary Haas, 
both of whom continued the interest of Edward 
Sapir in language in culture; he was thus open to 
influence in writing his first published paper on 
lexical innovation in Karuk by a lecture on bilin-
gualism from Einar Haugen in 1949 (Bright, 
1997: 53). In India on a two-year post-doctoral 
Rockefeller fellowship, in the course of conversa-
tions with Ferguson and John Gumperz, he 
‘became aware that a field of sociolinguistics 
might be developed’ (Bright, 1997: 54). In her 
obituary of Bright in Language, Jane Hill (2007) 
cites Murray (1998) as believing that Bright, 
Gumperz and Ferguson were all influenced by the 
multilingual patterns they discovered in India 
when visiting Deccan College in Pune in the 
mid-1950s. John Gumperz (1997) had been trained 
in dialectology, wrote a dissertation on the 
Swabian dialects of Michigan, and then spent two 
years studying village dialects in a Northern 
Indian community. There, he worked with many 
Indian linguists and an interdisciplinary team. He 
taught at the Indian summer Linguistic Institutes 
in Pune in 1955 and 1956 alongside American 
structural linguists and South Asia scholars, some 
trained by J. R. Firth of the School of Oriental and 
African Studies (Gumperz, 1997). This combina-
tion of fieldwork in complex multilingual com-
munities and the opportunity to discuss his work 
with a diverse group of scholars was, he believes, 
critical.16
There were further discussions at the Foreign 
Service Institute of the US Department of State 
where both Ferguson and Bright worked in the 
1950s. But it was in the early 1960s that formal 
activity began. In the late 1950s, the Association 
of Asian Studies formed a Committee on South 
Asian Languages, which brought together at 
various meetings Ferguson, Bright, Gumperz 
and Uriel Weinreich and produced a 1960 special 
issue of the International Journal of American 
Linguistics on linguistic diversity in South Asia 
(Ferguson and Gumperz, 1960). In 1959, Ferguson 
became a full-time organizer17 when he was 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
14
appointed director of the new Center for Applied 
Linguistics, a position he held for seven years. 
With support from several foundations, the Ford 
Foundation leading (Fox, 2007; Fox and Harris, 
1964), the Center made major contributions to the 
development of the International Association of 
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages (Alatis and LeClair, 1993), the Test of 
English as a Foreign Language (Spolsky, 1995), 
and American Indian education. It also organized 
several linguistic surveys (Ohannessian, Ferguson 
and Polomé, 1975), including the Ethiopian study 
(Bender, Bowen, Cooper and Ferguson, 1976) 
which Ferguson directed, spending two periods of 
four months each in the field in 1968–69.
Impressed by the successful model of the 
SSRC Committee on Psycholinguistics (Osgood, 
1954), Ferguson proposed in early 1963 holding a 
seminar on sociolinguistics at the summer 
Linguistic Institute planned for Indiana University. 
Through the SSRC, he obtained a grant of $54,800 
from the National Science Foundation to help pay 
the salaries of senior and junior participants. The 
summer seminar, building on an earlier May 1964 
UCLA meeting to which Bright had invited “the 
usual suspects”: Haugen, Ferguson, Gumperz, 
Hymes, Labov and others’ (Bright, 1997: 55) and 
whose papers were later published (Bright, 1966), 
pinpointed according to Shuy18 (1997: 30) ‘the 
creation of modern sociolinguistics’.
Thom Huebner (1996)19 summarizes the major 
activities of the Committee after 1964. In 1966, 
there was a conference on the language problems 
of developing nations which established language 
policy and management as a major component of 
sociolinguistics (Fishman, Ferguson and Das 
Gupta, 1968). In the opening paper, Fishman 
starts with a discussion of ‘sociolinguistics’: 
‘Interest in the sociology of language can be 
traced back quite far … ’. Modern sociolinguistics 
was not the direct heir, but ‘a byproduct of very 
recent and still ongoing developments in its two 
parent disciplines, linguistics and sociology’ 
(Fishman, 1968b: 3). The stronger interest had 
come from linguistics. Fishman’s own approach 
becomes clear in the concluding essay (Fishman, 
1968a) in which he explored the relationship 
between such issues as selection of a national 
language, adoption of a language of wider com-
munication, language planning concerns, and 
goals for bilingualism and biculturalism. In his 
own contribution, Ferguson recognized that many 
of the topics discussed could be dealt with ‘by the 
conceptual frameworks used in the study of social 
organization, political systems, or economic pro-
cesses’ (Ferguson, 1968: 27), but they depended 
on understanding of language, such as the ques-
tionable belief that a language is backward or 
needs purifying or modernizing.
In 1966, the Committee supported a workshop 
on teaching sociolinguistics and a project on the 
acquisition of communicative competence. The 
manual for cross-cultural study of child language 
(Slobin, 1967) that resulted has guided much 
international research (Ervin-Tripp, 1997: 73). 
In 1968, Dell Hymes organized a conference 
on pidginization and later published a collection 
of papers on pidgins and creoles (Hymes, 1971). 
The following year, Grimshaw (1969) arranged 
a meeting to look at language as sociological data 
as an obstacle in cross-cultural sociological 
research. Continuing work on child language, in 
1974 the Committee sponsored a conference on 
language input and acquisition (Snow and 
Ferguson, 1977) which led to extensive and 
continuing research on language socialization 
(Ervin-Tripp, 1997: 74).
The Committee and Ferguson also supported 
the foundation of the journal Language in Society 
edited by Dell Hymes in 1972; he was succeeded 
as editor by William Bright. Ferguson (1997: 86) 
confessed that he had opposed Fishman’s plan to 
start his own journal, but admitted he was wrong, 
as Language in Society and The International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language have both 
been productive but different. Ferguson did not 
found a new organization for sociolinguists,20 and 
the two major annual conferences NWAV21 and 
the Sociolinguistics Symposium22 came later; but 
his organizational work in the 1960s played a 
major role in forming, consolidating and publiciz-
ing what is clearly one of the more fruitful fields 
for the study of language.
Fishman too was an organizer, but one who did 
not like meetings: his main managerial activities 
were the planning, direction and interpretation of 
major research projects, and the encouragement of 
an impressive body of publication by scholars 
throughout the world. I have already mentioned 
the language loyalty study whose publication par-
alleled the burst of research in the early 1960s. 
Shortly after, he started work (with funding from 
the US Office of Education) on the equally influ-
ential study of bilingualism in a New Jersey barrio 
completed in 1968 and published three years later 
(Fishman, Cooper and Ma, 1971); among his col-
leagues were Robert L. Cooper and for a year 
John Gumperz. In the 1970s, while he was in 
Jerusalem, he conducted a study of bilingual edu-
cation for the US Office of Education (Fishman, 
1976). Also while he was in Israel, with a Ford 
grant and the help of Robert Cooper and others, he 
prepared his pioneering study of the spread of 
English (Fishman, Cooper and Conrad, 1977). 
During this time, in cooperation with Charles 
Ferguson and a number of international scholars, 
he was working on what is still the only major 
empirical study of the effectiveness of language 

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
15
planning processes (Rubin, Jernudd, Das Gupta, 
Fishman and Ferguson, 1977).
Apart from significant funded research proj-
ects, Fishman’s most important organizational 
activity has been as an editor. The first venture 
was a collection of readings on the sociology of 
language (Fishman, 1968c) which marked out his 
claim to be the prime exponent and arbiter of the 
field. Noting the success of this volume, a leading 
European linguistics publishing house, Mouton of 
The Hague (now Mouton de Gruyter of Berlin), 
invited him to start a journal and an associated 
book series. The International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language (IJSL) first appeared in 
1973, celebrated its centenary issue 20 years later, 
and has reached 194 issues in 2009. While about 
one out of six are ‘singles’ issues, the main feature 
of the journal is the breadth of its internationally 
edited thematic issues, ranging from the sociology 
of language in Israel (the first issue celebrating 
Fishman’s time in Jerusalem) to the latest, a 
double issue on the sociolinguistics of Spanish. 
IJSL has served as a powerful instrument for 
encouraging international study of sociolinguistic 
issues, and constitutes an unmatched library of 
descriptions of sociolinguistic situations all around 
the world. There have been innovative approaches, 
including the ‘focus’ issues in which a scholar is 
invited to present a long paper on a controversial 
topic, such as bilingualism and schooling in the 
USA or the origin of Yiddish, and a number of 
other scholars are invited to write comments.23 
The journal, like all the other journals in the field 
is publisher-sponsored and susceptible to market-
ing pressure: Fishman (1997b: 239) interprets the 
absence of organizational support as evidence of 
the ‘professional marginalization and tentative-
ness of the field’ although one may hope that as a 
result of technological developments, producing 
the ‘long tail’ that Anderson (2004, 2006) 
described, if publishers were to drop the journals, 
there would be web-based alternatives to fill the 
gaps. Paralleling the enormous contribution of 
IJSL to sociolinguistics has been the related book 
series edited by Fishman: some 96 volumes pub-
lished by Mouton now carry the ‘Contributions to 
the Sociology of Language’ imprimatur.
In addition to these two major projects, Fishman 
has planned and edited a distinguished body of 
edited collections. Macnamara (1997: 175) testifies 
that the special issue of The Journal of Social Issues 
that he edited on ‘Problems of Bilingualism’ in 
1967 was largely the work of Fishman, who asked 
him to be editor ‘mainly to give a beginner a leg 
up’. There are many other volumes giving evidence 
of Fishman’s work as organizer and developer: two 
follow-up volumes to the Readings (Fishman, 
1968c, 1971) and its companion Fishman (1972b); 
one on language planning (Fishman, 1974); another 
on writing systems (Fishman, 1978a); one on soci-
etal multilingualism (Fishman, 1978b); a bilingual 
volume on Yiddish (Fishman, 1981); a second on 
language planning (again shared with a more junior 
colleague) (Cobarrubias and Fishman, 1983); an 
innovative collection of papers on the first con-
gresses of language revival movements (Fishman, 
1993b); a significant collection dealing with post-
imperial English (Fishman, Rubal-Lopez and 
Conrad, 1996); and, most recently, a collection on 
the sociology of language and religion24 (Omoniyi 
and Fishman, 2006).
While their contributions to the field were 
different, it is easy to see how impoverished socio-
linguistics would have been without the organiza-
tional work of Charles Ferguson and Joshua 
Fishman. If each of them had been willing to sit 
quietly in his office, conduct and publish his indi-
vidual research, and ignore the challenges and 
efforts of providing leadership and encourage-
ment to others, their individual scholarship would 
still have had a considerable effect, but their 
extensive work as organizers of meetings and 
publishers of other people’s research played a 
major role in shaping the field as we know it.
1.4  SEEKING A COMMUNITY OF 
LIKE-MINDED SCHOLARS
The terms sociolinguistics and sociology of 
language both suggest a bidisciplinary approach, 
a blending of sociologists and linguists in a com-
bined effort to see how language and society 
are related. In spite of his early failure to write a 
joint paper with Uriel Weinreich, Fishman still 
believed in the ‘community of like-minded schol-
ars’ (Fishman, 1997a: 88) that he hoped to find in 
Bloomington who could rescue him from the iso-
lation he had felt working between the disciplines. 
He was soon disappointed. He knew only two 
participants from before, Einar Haugen and 
Leonard Savitz, a sociologist he had known at the 
University of Pennsylvania. He knew of Kloss 
(whose address he was able to give to Ferguson), 
Gumperz (whom he had met and read), Labov 
(whose papers Uriel Weinreich had given him), 
and Stewart (he had read his paper on multilingual 
typology – a 1962 paper he reprinted as Stewart 
(1968)). The sociologists were not just outnum-
bered (eight to five), but, except for Kloss, had not 
yet published anything that could be considered 
sociolinguistics, hardly knew each other, and did 
not have strong interests in common; the anthro-
pologists25 and the linguists had interacted before 
and were more at home in a seminar conducted as 
part of a major linguistics event. All knew linguis-
tic theory, while none of the sociologists did. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
16
The two groups thus formed ‘two cultures’; 
Fishman (1997a: 91) refers specifically to meth-
odological gaps, as when he was asked for his 
corpus (and quipped in return that you don’t need 
phonology to explain the causes of World War II), 
and Gumperz, presenting his pioneering paper 
on code switching (Blom and Gumperz, 1972) in 
Hemnesberget that highlighted a conversation he 
had heard at a party, was asked why he had not 
carried out statistical tests.
Of the sociologists, Lieberson, who was about 
to publish a paper on a bilingual city (Lieberson, 
1965, 1997), edited an early journal issue with 
important papers on sociolinguistics (Lieberson, 
1966) and continued to carry out research and 
publish in sociolinguistics for some years 
(Lieberson, 1981). He writes (Lieberson, 1997: 
164) that he was particularly influenced by 
Ferguson, who had ‘a passionate commitment to 
the field … labels were irrelevant’. He believes 
that ‘few could match Ferguson in the breath of 
this overview’. Eventually, he ‘drifted away’ from 
sociolinguistics which he felt unlikely to be of 
much interest to sociology. He suspected that 
the work of Joshua Fishman was having less 
influence on American sociologists than on 
sociologists overseas or on other disciplines.
Leonard Savitz had been a fellow-student of 
Allen Grimshaw at the University of Pennsylvania, 
and Fishman (1997a) reports he met him there and 
suggested to him that they produce a set of ‘socio-
logical readings’ concerned with language. His 
field was criminology and the sociology of crime, 
so that the suggestion was not taken up.26 Chester 
L. Hunt was a sociologist who had carried out 
research in the Philippines and who wrote a paper 
at the seminar (Hunt, 1966). Neither continued to 
work in sociolinguistics.
Heinz Kloss considered himself not as a socio-
linguist but rather an ‘authority on ethnic law’ 
(Mackey and McConnell, 1997: 301). Fishman, 
who found his interest in language, nationality 
and minorities very appealing, included a chapter 
(Kloss, 1966) in his book, and was a member of 
the board that recommended appointing him to the 
staff of the International Center for Research on 
Bilingualism at the University of Laval. Many of 
his proposals, such as the distinction between 
status and corpus planning, have become key con-
cepts in sociolinguistics.
There was another sociologist who must have 
provided Fishman with more support. He refers to 
Allen Grimshaw as ‘in a special category by him-
self’, not a member of the seminar but attending 
it regularly. Grimshaw (1997) says that his initia-
tion to language science was through Savitz. 
Grimshaw had become interested in language and 
social contexts during a visit to India in 1961. He 
writes: ‘I was an informal participant in many of 
the activities of the seminar and gave a talk to the 
group about ways in which knowledge about lan-
guage might eliminate sociological questions; it 
was not long before I became more closely 
involved’ (1997: 101). This involvement included 
membership and later chairmanship of the 
Committee on Sociolinguistics, organization of a 
conference (Grimshaw, 1969), and publication of 
a number of papers that were later collected by 
Dill (Grimshaw, 1981).
Ferguson (1997: 78) acknowledges that the 
sociologists made important contributions to the 
Bloomington seminar but on the whole left it to 
anthropologists and linguists to develop the field. 
The participants each had different points of view: 
Labov wanted to make linguistics more relevant 
while Fishman wanted to improve sociology. For 
Ferguson himself, ‘sociolinguistics was just a 
loose label for phenomena relating language to 
society’. Over the years, most did not change their 
opinions.
Looking back, one can speculate that it was not 
just lack of knowledge of each other’s methodolo-
gies that kept the fields apart, but a fundamental 
gap between the issues that concerned them. 
I recall that in the 1960s, Noam Chomsky would 
regularly dismiss an argument as ‘not interesting’. 
With rare exceptions, the topics that interested the 
linguists did not interest the sociologists, and vice 
versa. One solution was to train ‘real’ sociolinguists. 
In his analysis of the interdisciplinary problem, 
Shuy (1997: 18) notes the problem of training new 
scholars in two fields: ‘Social scientists did not 
want to give up anything to get linguistics. Nor did 
linguists want to give up anything to get social 
science’. Appended to two of Fishman’s edited 
volumes (Fishman, 1978a; 1978b), there is a 
description of ‘A graduate program in the sociol-
ogy of language’, with equal number of courses 
and credit in linguistics, sociology of language, 
and sociology. It describes the kind of programme 
he hoped to build at Yeshiva University and pro-
posed at the Hebrew University, combining the 
new field with a solid basis in the two parent dis-
ciplines. It just didn’t happen – at Yeshiva, the 
Language Behavior Program chaired by Vera 
John-Steiner lasted 10 years, and at the Hebrew 
University it never started – and in a later paper, 
Fishman (1991b)27 once again makes a convincing 
case for the need for sociolinguists to know sociol-
ogy and sociologists to respect the significance 
of language. He puts it strikingly: ‘Sociology, too, 
although far less messianic in its promise, is 
chained and waiting, somewhere in its own disci-
plinary provincialism, waiting to come to sociolin-
guistics, to broaden and deepen it somewhat and to 
enable it to live up to its name’ (1991b: 67).
One sociologist who did appreciate Fishman’s 
work was Kjolseth (1997: 145) who reports that 

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
17
Fishman, in 1966, organized a one-day meeting 
on sociolinguistics after the sixth World Congress 
of Sociology, which led to the formation of the 
Research Committee on Sociolinguistics of the 
International Sociological Association.28 Kjolseth 
was president until 1974 and other members of the 
board were Fishman and Kloss, ‘If I had to select 
one outstanding figure from among the several 
true giants in our field, I would point to Joshua 
Fishman’. The 1992 conference was to discuss the 
‘interface between sociology and linguistics’.
But the gap between sociology and linguistics 
has remained much as noted by Fishman at a 
meeting in Bright’s home in the summer of 1966: 
sociologists were interested in linguistic variables, 
but not linguistics, while linguists were interested 
in broad social contextualization, but not in soci-
ology. Shuy (1997: 15) cites this from Hymes 
(1966) and remarks that it was still true. Fishman 
(1992: viii) characterized sociolinguistics after 
three decades as ‘a province of linguistics and 
anthropology, and a rather provincial province as 
well’. In spite of this, Mallinson (2009), who was 
trained in both sociolinguistics and sociology, 
has traced parallels between studies in the two 
disciplines and outlined ways in which they might 
collaborate.
How should we define the field that has 
emerged? One approach might be a content analy-
sis of the more than 300 papers and posters 
accepted for the 2008 Sociolinguistics Symposium 
in Amsterdam, but the great variety makes clear 
the wisdom of Ferguson’s belief that no single 
theory is likely to emerge. There is not even a 
clear distinction possible between the macro and 
the micro – in fact, SS17 set its theme as ‘micro 
and macro connections’.
The lines were already drawn at Bloomington 
in 1964: Labov trying to explore what social ele-
ments needed to be added to linguistic theory to 
account for variation and language change; 
Gumperz seeking to analyse discourse in social 
contexts to establish the nature of social interac-
tion; Hymes and his followers exploring commu-
nicative competence and sociolinguistic ecology 
and its educational implications. Where do 
Ferguson and Fishman fit into this picture?
1.5  FERGUSON AND FISHMAN AS 
SOCIOLINGUISTS/SOCIOLOGISTS 
OF LANGUAGE
Ferguson was a brilliant linguist, applying his 
keen analytical abilities to discover and explore a 
variety of systematic connections of language to 
society. In an autobiographical sketch (Ferguson, 
1995), he explained how he came into linguistics 
and the ‘constructive tension between academic 
and activist activities’. He grew up with a strong 
interest in languages, encouraged in part by his 
German-speaking grandmother who lived with 
his family, the various languages associated with 
his religious upbringing, and his school teachers. 
He learned Latin, French and German at high 
school. At the University of Pennsylvania, he 
added Greek, Modern Hebrew and Old English. 
Completing a BA in philosophy, his graduate 
major was Oriental Studies; he studied Moroccan 
Arabic verbs and the phonology and morphology 
of Bengali. Zellig Harris was his graduate adviser. 
With support from the Intensive Language 
Program of the American Council of Learned 
Societies, he continued to study Moroccan Arabic 
and developed teaching materials for spoken 
Arabic. Inspired by a visit of Roman Jakobson, he 
saw the value of uniting psychological and lin-
guistic approaches to the study of child language. 
In 1947, he accepted a position at the Foreign 
Service Institute working with Henry Lee Smith. 
While there, he wrote an unpublished paper on 
Arabic politeness formulas in 1955 and published 
an article on Arabic baby talk (Ferguson, 1956). 
However, it was his classic paper on diglossia 
(Ferguson, 1959) that was his first major contribu-
tion to sociolinguistics, and, according to Huebner 
(1999), his best-known work. There have been 
several reprints and translations into Italian, 
Spanish, Romanian, German and Portuguese. In 
the article, he suggested that a full explanation of 
these special situations would help ‘in dealing 
with problems in linguistic description, in histori-
cal linguistics, and in language typology’ 
(Ferguson, 1956: 2). Since then, a retrospective 
paper (Ferguson, 1991) notes, there have been 
hundreds of articles and a score of books on the 
topic, most of them referring directly to the paper; 
a review (Hudson, 1992) lists over 1000 items. In 
revisiting that classic work after some 3000 items 
had been published (Fernández, 1993), illustrating 
and applying and manipulating and modifying and 
confirming the original model, Ferguson (1991) 
clarified his original intention: his goal was to 
describe a particular language situation that was 
just one slot in a fairly elaborate taxonomy of 
language situations. From that taxonomy, princi-
ples and a theory would emerge. He could have 
chosen other ‘clear cases’ such as the creole con-
tinuum or the standard language with dialects but 
chose diglossia. In confessing weaknesses in the 
paper, the first that he mentions is his failure to 
specify that he was talking about speech commu-
nities. He could have been more precise in explain-
ing what the term variety meant. Nor did he 
explain fully the notion of linguistic distance. He 
should also have recognized that these cases of 
diglossia existed in a larger situation, as described 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
18
by Stewart (1968). He did not describe the exist-
ence of attitudes to intermediate varieties, nor did 
he clarify the importance of the power differential 
in the choice of varieties. This first major paper 
and the clarification 30 years later help us to 
understand Ferguson’s view of sociolinguistics: 
namely, the identification of mutually-illuminating 
aspects of language and society.
In later papers, he studied other language situ-
ations: he identified and analysed genres such as 
baby talk and sports announcer talk and polite-
ness; he studied variation and change in a number 
of languages; and he wrote on important aspects 
of language planning. Thus, while his primary 
concern was with the micro, linguistic end of the 
continuum, his involvement with social concerns 
led to work relevant to language management 
concerns. As Huebner (1996: 7) notes, he was not 
constrained by a single theory but open to con-
stant revision on the basis of new data and was 
eclectic in data collection and analysis. Huebner 
describes Ferguson’s favourite approach as start-
ing with a small piece of language in a social 
context, or with a small case study, and building 
gradually with additional examples a more com-
prehensive theory. His special quality was a con-
sistent search for relationships between language 
change and language development, between lan-
guage universals and individual differences, and a 
study of the process of conventionalization that 
build language systems. All this tends to place him 
at the micro or sociolinguistic end of the contin-
uum, but he recognized and worked at the macro 
end too: his work on the Ethiopian survey (Bender 
et al., 1976) involved him in the study of sociolin-
guistic situations, and his papers on language and 
religion and on language policy and planning 
clearly could be defined as sociology of language.
By his own account, Fishman’s motivation was 
narrower than Ferguson’s although the way he 
pursued his goals led him into wider areas and 
encouraged a broad range of research. His lan-
guage loyalty volume (Fishman et al., 1964) was 
completed before the Bloomington seminar. He 
discussed the ideas behind it with Haugen, who 
wrote the introduction to the printed version 
(Fishman, 1966) and praised the book for its posi-
tive approach to the immigrant, welcomed the 
introduction of the concept of ethnicity, and hoped 
that there would continue to be studies of ‘lan-
guage shifts and resistance to them’ in other parts 
of the world. In the preface to a book (Fishman, 
1991c) a quarter of a century later whose title 
echoes Haugen’s words and ably meets his chal-
lenge, Fishman recalls a conversation in which 
Haugen asked if he did not find working with 
minority languages to be ‘full of sadness’. Fishman 
replied by referring to the job of doctors, who treat 
patients even though they understand all will 
eventually die. Now, after a decade of teaching 
medical anthropology, he recognized that his 
answer to Haugen had been inadequate: modern 
medicine aims not just to combat illness, but to 
cultivate ‘wellness’, and to do this with the under-
standing that it depends on the patient’s cultural 
view of wellness; in the same way, he had come to 
believe that a sociology of language must aim at 
ethnolinguistic wellness, depending for this on 
theoretical knowledge based on the preferences of 
specific ethnolinguistic speech communities.
Minority and endangered languages were at the 
core of his work. In an autobiographical essay, 
Fishman (1991a) notes that he grew up in a typical 
sociolinguistic setting in Philadelphia, the elder 
child of Yiddish-speaking immigrants.29 What was 
not typical was that his parents were language 
activists deeply committed to Yiddish and suc-
cessful in transferring their zeal to Fishman and to 
his sister.30 He started writing for Yiddish youth 
journals, publishing his first story at the age of 12; 
two years later he became editor and publisher of 
his own journal. At school, he learned Spanish and 
became a passionate stamp-collector which stimu-
lated his interest in other countries. He had been, 
he claims, a sociolinguist ‘unwittingly’ for 30 
years before he went to Indiana, and suggested the 
term, on the model of psycholinguistics, as early 
as 1953–54. Roger Brown rejected the term, so he 
continued to refer to his work as the sociology of 
language: he taught a course with that name in 
1960. At Pennsylvania, he majored in history with 
a minor in Spanish; at Columbia, he was per-
suaded to complete a doctorate in social psychol-
ogy. He returned to teach at the University of 
Pennsylvania in 1958 as an associate professor of 
psychology and human relations. Two years later, 
he was awarded a long-term research grant by the 
Office of Education to study the ‘Non-English 
Language Resources of the United States’; he 
took the grant with him to Yeshiva University, his 
lifetime academic home. His personal goal, at the 
‘supra-rational level’, was to find out if any lan-
guages were in a stronger state of preservation 
than Yiddish. He feels his work in sociolinguistics 
to be peripheral: it is ‘either macro-sociological, 
historical or quantitative’ and with no concern for 
‘corpus (phonology, syntax, discourse etc.)’. It is 
at the same time ‘Yiddish-centric’ with conscious 
efforts to maintain a scientific perspective by 
studying other cases and languages. Apart from 
Yiddish, his main topical centres have been minor-
ity communities and languages, ideological, emo-
tional and political expressions of ethnolinguistic 
cultures, and applied aspects of language mainte-
nance and ideology, concentrating mainly on 
status planning, although he has recently reiter-
ated strong support of efforts to maintain the 
purity of a language (Fishman, 2006).

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
19
Conscious all the time of a possible bias that 
his love for Yiddish might produce, he spent his 
career learning about other languages and their 
situations, whether by visits which took him 
(commonly supported by his wife, Gella Schweid 
Fishman, a scholar of Yiddish education in her 
own right) from the Arctic31 to the Antipodes,32 
lecturing and establishing close personal relations 
with the language activists whose languages 
he wanted to see preserved, or by his extensive 
career of editing. Thus, he endeavoured to avoid 
‘a Yiddish-centric view of the sociolinguistic 
enterprise’ (Fishman, 1991a).
1.6 CONCLUSION
Summing up, in addition to their unmatched 
organizational contributions to the development of 
sociolinguistics and the sociology of language, 
Charles Ferguson and Joshua Fishman have each 
staked out pioneering claims to major sectors 
of the study of language in its social context. 
How important are they to contemporary sociolin-
guistics? A citation search using Google Scholar 
shows that Fishman has many more hits than 
Ferguson, mainly for books (Reversing Language 
Shift tops the list; among his papers, a 2007 paper 
on Whorf is the most cited, with over 100 hits). 
Most of Ferguson’s hits are papers, starting with 
over 1000 for diglossia, followed by 260 for baby 
talk, 140 for foreigner talk, and 100 for politeness. 
Fishman’s topics and methods have perhaps pro-
duced more followers, in particular with the 
political relevance of language loyalty and loss. 
Many scholars working on these topics are in the 
field of education, while Ferguson’s followers are 
more strictly in the narrower field of sociolinguis-
tics. Additionally, the strength of Fishman’s fol-
lowing is shown in the large number of tributes in 
festschrifts and birthday celebratory conferences. 
Perhaps this is a mark of his longer publication 
list; it also reflects the fact that he has conti-
nued to develop his ideas and approach, while 
Ferguson’s strength was in innovative recognition 
of topics of sociolinguistic relevance. Obviously, 
there is no point in trying to award grades; each 
has made (and Fishman continues to make) major 
contributions to studies of language in society. 
Without their scholarship and leadership, the field 
would have been thinner and weaker.
NOTES
1 Paulston and Tucker (1997) is a wonderful 
treasure for students of sociolinguistics, preserving 
the ‘memories and reflections’ of the scholars who 
were involved in the early years.
 2 One founding mother at least then; Paulston 
(1997: 3) called attention to the ‘appalling dearth of 
women in the early days of sociolinguistics’ which 
has now been rectified, in part in language and 
gender studies. She also recognized that most of the 
scholars involved in the first years were American; 
this too has changed, as could be seen by anyone 
attending the 2008 Sociolinguistics Symposium in 
Amsterdam.
 3 Fishman was also a student of Uriel’s father, 
Max Weinreich, and translated his major study of the 
Yiddish language (M. Weinreich, 1980).
 4 I recall Weinreich’s presentation as the most 
polished of the half dozen sets of plenary lectures 
given at Bloomington. Fishman (1997a,b: 310) 
recounts that Weinreich met the members of the 
sociolinguistic seminar and remarked on their variety 
of approaches: he believed the new field would 
“have to contend with at least as great a diversity of 
topics as he and I had unsuccessfully tried to contend 
with a decade earlier.”
 5 Tucker (1997: 320) uses this term and notes 
two characteristics of the climate of the period which 
contributed to the growth of sociolinguistics: a sense 
of the social justice aspect, and a view of its relevance 
to politics and government. Both led to an insistence 
on the importance of language in use.
 6 Paulston and Tucker (2003: 1) reports that 
Nida (1949:152) was the first linguist to use the term 
‘sociolinguistics’.
 7 The Preface to Fishman (1966) was written by 
Einar Haugen in July 1964 and dated at Bloomington 
Indiana. The report was first available as Fishman, 
Nahirny, Hofman and Hayden (1964). 
 8 Fishman is one scholar who has not hidden 
his personal views or the personal history that lay 
behind his research, as will become clear.
 9 Then a professor of sociology at McGill 
University.
10 A sociologist at the University of Oregon.
11 Stewart (1930–2002) worked at the Center 
for Applied Linguistics in the 1960s, when his major 
contribution to sociolinguistics was a study of Gullah, 
an Afro-American variety of English, which estab-
lished the Creole base for Afro-American vernacular 
English. He was on the faculty of the City University 
of New York for 25 years, and continued studies of 
Creoles and the implications of his findings for the 
teaching of reading to black children.
12 Kloss (1924–87) was a regularly-cited German 
scholar, the knowledge of whose Nazi past, recently 
disclosed (Hutton, 1999), shocked those who had 
known him and admired his work: see the loose-leaf 
addendum to The Early Days of Sociolinguistics 
(Paulston and Tucker, 1997) written by the editors 
and by Fishman and also the footnote (1) to Fishman 
(2008): 25. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
20
13 He published two introductory readers with 
the same publisher, one with ‘sociolinguistics’ in the 
title (Fishman, 1970) and two years later, a revision 
with the ‘sociology of language’ (Fishman, 1972a). In 
later correspondence with Eldridge Sibley, SSRC staff 
for the committee, he said he’d rather it be named 
‘committee on language and behavior in social con-
texts’ (Committee on Sociolinguistics 1963–). The 
program he set up at Yeshiva University with Vera 
John-Steiner and Vivian Horner was called the 
Language and Behavior Program.
14 A contrasting view was presented by Friedrich 
(1997: 98), for whom a strong memory is the accept-
ance by sociolinguists of the fact that ‘language 
forms and patterns are always politically charged and 
are always ensconced in sociopolitical contexts that 
should not be avoided by a scientific fiction’, in con-
trast to the ironic fact that Chomsky’s ‘linguistics and 
that of his immediate followers has remained by and 
large deaf and mute to the political’.
15 The other two significant teachers he men-
tions are Irving Lorge for quantitative studies and 
Max Weinreich for Jewish folklore.
16 Allen Grimshaw (1997) also reports that his 
interest in sociolinguistics dates from a visit to India 
in 1961.
17 Fishman (2001a: 864) notes Ferguson’s ‘unu-
sually broad range of well-developed interests and a 
highly significant number of organizational accom-
plishments’.
18 Roger Shuy (like me) was at Bloomington in a 
post-doctoral seminar on Computation in Linguistics 
directed by Paul Garvin (Garvin and Spolsky, 1966), 
but because he had been trained in dialectology was, 
I am confident, aware of the sociolinguistic seminar; 
he later directed the first major sociolinguistic pro-
gram at Georgetown University.
19 Ferguson’s articles are easily available thanks 
to the work of two scholars who edited collections, 
Anwar Dil (Ferguson, 1971) and Thomas Huebner 
(Ferguson, 1996). 
20 He was President of the Linguistic Society 
of America in 1970 and of the International 
Association for the Study of Child Language from 
1973 to 1975.
21 The 36th annual conference of NWAV 
(New Ways of Analyzing Variation) was in Philadelphia 
in 2007.
22 The first meeting of the Sociolinguistics 
Symposium in the 1970s in the UK marks the growth 
of sociolinguistics in Europe; after 2002, the Symposium 
began to meet elsewhere in Europe and met in 
Amsterdam in 2008, with over 300 contributors.
23 Fishman is singularly open to inviting com-
ments on his own work too. In one book (Fishman, 
1991c), he presented a complex and original theory 
of language maintenance and loss that has been 
widely discussed; 10 years later, he updated his own 
theory (Fishman, 2001b) and published comments 
and criticisms from 16 scholars with knowledge of 
the cases he had studied in the 1991 book.
24 The important place religion plays in their 
work and their lives is another connection between 
Ferguson and Fishman, distinguishing them from the 
secularism common in Western scholars.
25 American anthropology, it should be noted, 
included linguistics as one of its four main fields 
alongside ethnography, archaeology and physical 
anthropology, which meant that anthropologists 
were trained in general linguistics.
26 His obituary notes: 
At times, however, his consuming intellectual 
curiosity led him far afield. To note only one 
example, he was a pioneer in sociological inter-
est in language and in what came to be called 
sociolinguistics. He gave a paper on the sociol-
ogy of language in 1963; the following year he 
was a participant in the SSRC-sponsored semi-
nar held in conjunction with the Summer 
Linguistic Institute of the Linguistic Society of 
America. (emphasis added)
27 The paper is reprinted in Hornberger and 
Pütz (2006).
28 This continues and was renamed as the RS25 
Language and Society of the ISA in 2007. Jenny 
Perry, current secretary of the RC wrote to me 
(personal communication): 
We decided on a change of name because we 
felt that ‘Sociolinguistics’ might sound a bit 
limiting as far as prospective new members 
were concerned. We conducted an online vote 
on the five most popular suggested names 
for change from all our members. Since the 
name change we have captured a more diverse 
membership.
29 Ferguson was also born in Philadelphia. His 
maternal grandparents were German speakers, and 
he would hear his grandmother speaking a variety of 
it with an elderly neighbour (Ferguson, 1995).
30 In turn, Joshua Fishman and his wife Gella 
have devoted much time and effort to passing on 
their enthusiasm for Yiddish to their children and 
grandchildren.
31 One paper (Fishman, 1993a) was presented 
at a conference in Tromsø.
32 His book (Fishman, 1991c) includes a chapter 
on Ma–ori.
REFERENCES
Alatis, J. E. and LeClair, C. (1993) ‘Building an association: 
TESOL’s first quarter century’, in S. Silberstein (ed.), State 
of the Art TESOL Essays: Celebrating 25 Years of the 

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
21
Discipline: Alexandria VA: Teachers of English to Speakers 
of Other Languages. pp. 382–413.
Anderson, C. (2004) ‘The long tail’, Wired, October. Available 
at http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/12.10/tail.html
Anderson, C. (2006) The Long Tail: Why the Future of Business 
is Selling Less of More. New York: Hyperion.
Bender, M. L., Bowen, J. D., Cooper, R. L. and Ferguson, C. A. 
(eds) (1976) Language in Ethiopia. London: Oxford 
University Press.
Blom, J.-P. and Gumperz, J. J. (1972) ‘Social meaning in 
linguistic structures: Code switching in Northern Norway’, 
in J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes (eds), Directions in 
Sociolinguistics. New York: Holt Rinehart and Winston. 
pp. 407–34.
Bright, W. (1997) ‘Reminiscences: beginnings of sociolinguis-
tics’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early 
Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, 
TX: The Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 53–60.
Bright, W. (ed.) (1966) Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the 
UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 1964. The Hague: 
Mouton.
Bright, W. (ed.) (1992) International Encyclopedia of Linguistics. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Cobarrubias, J. and Fishman, J. A. (eds) (1983) Progress in 
Language Planning: International Perspectives. The Hague: 
Mouton.
Committee on Sociolinguistics (1963–1973) Archives. 
Tarrytown, NY: Social Sciences Research Council.
Currie, H. C. (1952) ‘A projection of sociolinguistics: the rela-
tionship of speech to social status’, Southern Speech 
Journal, 18: 28–37.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1973) Language Acquisition and Communicative 
Choice; essays by Susan M. Ervin-Tripp. Selected and intro-
duced by Anwar S. Dil. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.
Ervin-Tripp, S. (1997) ‘The development of sociolinguistics’, in 
C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 61–76.
Ferguson, C. A. (1956) ‘Arabic baby talk’, in M. Halle (ed.), For 
Roman Jakobson. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 121–8.
Ferguson, C. A. (1959) ‘Diglossia’, Word, 15: 325–40.
Ferguson, C. A. (1968) ‘Language development’, in J. A. 
Fishman, C. A. Ferguson and J. D. Gupta (eds), Language 
Problems of Developing Nations. New York: John Wiley 
and Sons. pp. 27–35.
Ferguson, C. A. (1971) Language Structure and Use: Essays by 
Charles A. Ferguson, in Anwar S. Dil (ed.), Stanford, CA: 
Stanford, University Press. p. 328.
Ferguson, C. A. (1991) ‘Epilogue: diglossia revisited’, 
Southwest Journal of Linguistics, 10(1): 214–34.
Ferguson, C. A. (1995) ‘Long-term commitment and lucky 
events’, in J. E. Alatis (ed.), Linguistics and the Education of 
Language Teachers: Ethnolinguistic, Psycholinguistic, and 
Sociolinguistic Aspects (GURT 1995). Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. pp. 10–24.
Ferguson, C. A. (1996) ‘Sociolinguistic perspectives: Papers on 
language in society, 1959–1994’, in T. Huebner (ed.), 
New York: Oxford University Press. p. 348.
Ferguson, C. A. (1997) ‘History of sociolinguistics’, in 
C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 77–95.
Ferguson, C. A. and Gumperz, J. J. (eds) (1960) Linguistic 
Diversity in South Asia. Bloomington, IN: Research Center in 
Anthropology, Folklore and Linguistics, Indiana University.
Fernández, M. (1993) Diglossia: A Comprehensive Bibliography 
1960–1990. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Fishman, J. A. (1960) A systematization of the Whorfian 
hypothesis. Behavioral Science, 5: 323–39.
Fishman, J. A. (1968a) ‘Language problems and types of 
political and sociocultural integration: a conceptual post-
script’, in J. A. Fishman, C. A. Ferguson and J. D. Gupta 
(eds), Language Problems of Developing Nations. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons. pp. 491–8.
Fishman, J. A. (1968b) ‘Sociolinguistics and the language 
problems of the developing countries’, in J. A. Fishman, 
C. A. Ferguson and J. D. Gupta (eds), Language Problems 
of Developing Nations. New York: John Wiley and Sons. 
pp. 3–16.
Fishman, J. A. (1970) Sociolinguistics: A Brief Introduction. 
Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Fishman, J. A. (1972a) The Sociology of Language: An 
Interdisciplinary Social Science Approach to Language in 
Society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Fishman, J. A. (1976) Bilingual Education: An International 
Sociological Perspective. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Fishman, J. A. (1991a) ‘My life through my work; my work 
through my life’, in K. Koerner (ed.), First Person Singular: 
Autobiographies by North American Scholars in the 
Language Sciences. Vol. 2. Amsterdam and Philadelphia: 
John Benjamins. pp. 105–24.
Fishman, J. A. (1991b) ‘Putting the “socio” back into the 
sociolinguistic enterprise’, International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language, 92: 127–38.
Fishman, J. A. (1991c) Reversing Language Shift: Theoretical 
and Empirical Foundations of Assistance to Threatened 
Languages. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Fishman, J. A. (1992) ‘Foreword’, in G. Williams (ed.), 
Sociolinguistics: A Sociological Critique. London: Routledge. 
pp. vii–ix.
Fishman, J. A. (1993a) ‘Reversing language shift: successes, 
failures, doubts and dilemmas’, in Ernst H. Jahr (ed.), 
Language Conflict and Language Planning. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter. pp. 69–81.
Fishman, J. A. (1997a) ‘Bloomington, summer 1964: the birth 
of American sociolinguistics’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. 
Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories 
and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. pp. 87–100.
Fishman, J. A. (1997b) ‘Reflection about (or prompted by) 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language (IJSL)’, 
in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 237–41.
Fishman, J. A. (1997c) ‘Uriel Weinreich (1926–1967): A socio-
linguistic appreciation’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker 
(eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
22
and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. pp. 307–13.
Fishman, J. A. (2001a) ‘Ferguson, Charles A. (1921–98)’, in 
R. Mesthrie (ed.), Concise Encyclopedia of Sociolinguistics. 
Amsterdam: Elsevier. pp. 864–5.
Fishman, J. A. (2006) Do Not Leave Your Language Alone: The 
Hidden Status Agendas Within Corpus Planning in 
Language Policy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Fishman, J. A. (2008) ‘Rethinking the Ausbau–Abstand 
dichotomy into a continuous and multivariate system’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 
191: 17–26.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1966) Language Loyalty in the United 
States: The Maintenance and Perpetuation of Non-English 
Mother Tongues by American Ethnic and Religious Groups. 
The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1968c) Readings in the Sociology of 
Language. The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1971) Advances in the Sociology of 
Language. Vol. 1. The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1972b) Advances in the Sociology of 
Language. Vol. 2. The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1974) Advances in Language Planning. 
The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1978a) Advances in the Creation and 
Revision of Writing Systems. The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1978b) Advances in the Study of Societal 
Multilingualism. The Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1981) Never Say Die! A Thousand Years 
of Yiddish in Jewish Life and Letters. Hague: Mouton.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1993b) The Earliest Stage of Language 
Planning: the “First Congress” Phenomenon. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (2001b) Can Threatened Languages be 
Saved? Reversing Language Shift, Revisited: a 21st century 
perspective. Clevedon, Avon: Multilingual Matters.
Fishman, J. A., Cooper, R. L. and Conrad, A. W. (1977) The 
Spread of English: the Sociology of English as an Additional 
Language. Rowley, MA.: Newbury House.
Fishman, J. A., Cooper, R. L. and Ma, R. (1971) Bilingualism 
in the Barrio. Bloomington, IN: Research Center for the 
Language Sciences, Indiana University.
Fishman, J. A., Ferguson, C. A. and Das Gupta, J. (eds) (1968) 
Language Problems of Developing Nations. New York: 
John Wiley and Sons.
Fishman, J. A., Nahirny, V. C., Hofman, J. E. and Hayden, R. G. 
(1964) Language Loyalty in the United States. Mimeographed 
report in 3 volumes. New York: Yeshiva University.
Fishman, J. A., Rubal-Lopez, A. and Conrad, A. W. (eds) 
(1996) Post-Imperial English. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Fishman, J. A., Tabouret-Keller, A., Clyne, M., Krishnamurti, B. 
and Abdulaziz, M. H. (eds) (1986) The Fergusonian Impact: 
in Honor of Charles A. Ferguson on the occasion of his 
65th Birthday. Vol. 2, Sociolinguistics and the Sociology of 
Language. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Fox, M. J. (2007) ‘Ford Foundation: personal reflection’, in 
C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. pp. 271–2.
Fox, M. J. and Harris, D. (1964) English as a Second Language: 
Development and Testing. New York: Ford Foundation.
Friedrich, P. (1997) ‘Memories’, in C. B. Paulston and 
G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: 
Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute 
of Linguistics. pp. 97–100.
Garvin, P. and Spolsky, B. (eds) (1966) Computation in 
Linguistics: A Case Book. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press.
Grimshaw, A. D. (1969) ‘Language as obstacle and as data in 
sociological research’, Items, 23(2): 17–21.
Grimshaw, A. D. (1981) Language as Social Resource: Essays 
by Allen D. Grimshaw; Selected and Introduced by Anwar 
S. Dil. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Grimshaw, A. D. (1997) ‘Origins and milestones’, in 
C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 101–12.
Gumperz, J. J. (1971) Language in Social Groups. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
Gumperz, J. J. (1997) ‘Some comments on the origin and 
development of sociolinguistics: conversation with John 
Gumperz’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), 
The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories and 
Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of Linguistics. 
pp. 113–20.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hymes, D. (eds) (1972) Directions in 
Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Communication. 
New York: Holt.
Haugen, E. (1953) The Norwegian Language in America: a 
Study in Bilingual Behavior. Philadelphia, PA: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Haugen, E. (1966) Language Conflict and Language Planning: 
the Case of Modern Norwegian. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Haugen, E. (1972) The Ecology of Language: Essays by Einar 
Haugen Edited by Anwar S. Dil. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Hill, J. H. (2007) ‘Obituary: William Oliver Bright’, Language, 
83(3): 628–41.
Hornberger, N. and Pütz, M. (eds) (2006) Language Loyalty, 
Language Planning and Language Revitalization: Recent 
Writings and Reflections from Joshua A. Fishman. Clevedon, 
Avon: Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Hudson, A. (1992) ‘Diglossia: a bibliographic review’, 
Language in Society, 21: 611–74.
Huebner, T. (1996) ‘Introduction’, in T. Huebner (ed.), 
Sociolinguistic Perspectives: Papers on Language in Society 
by Charles A. Ferguson, 1959–1994. New York: Oxford 
University Press. pp. 3–15.
Huebner, T. (1999) ‘Obituary: Charles Albert Ferguson’, 
Language and Society, 28(3): 431–7.
Hunt, C. L. (1966) ‘Language choice in a multilingual society’, 
Sociological Inquiry, 36(2): 240–53.
Hutton, C. M. (1999) Linguistics and the Third Reich: Mother-
Tongue Fascism, Race and the Science of Language. 
London: Routledge.
Hymes, D. (1966) ‘Teaching and training in sociolinguistics’, 
report to Social Science Research Council.

FERGUSON AND FISHMAN: THE SOCIOLOGY OF LANGUAGE
23
Hymes, D. (ed.) (1971) Pidginisation and Creolization of 
Languages: Proceedings of a Conference Held at the 
University of the West Indies, April 1968. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Jakobson, R. (1960) ‘Closing statement: linguistics and 
poetics’, in T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Style in Language. 
Cambridge, MA: The Technology Press of MIT and John 
Wiley and Sons. pp. 350–77.
Kjolseth, R. (1997) ‘Sociolinguistics: birth of a revolution’, in 
C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections Dallas TX: 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 139–46.
Kloss, H. (1966) ‘German-American language maintenance 
efforts’, in J. Fishman (ed.), Language Loyalty in the United 
States. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 206–52.
Labov, W. (1962) ‘The social motivation of a sound change’, 
Word, 19: 273–309.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1997) ‘Sociolinguistic patterns’, in C. B. Paulston 
and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: 
Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute 
of Linguistics. pp. 147–58.
Lieberson, S. J. (1965) ‘Bilingualism in Montreal: a social 
demographic analysis’, American Journal of Sociology, 
71: 10–25.
Lieberson, S. J. (1981) Language Diversity and Language 
Contact: Essays by Stanley Lieberson; Selected and 
Introduced by Anwar S. Dil. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.
Lieberson, S. J. (1997) ‘Early developments in sociolinguistics’, 
in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 159–69.
Lieberson, S. J. (ed.) (1966) ‘Explorations in Sociolingustics’, 
Special Issue of Sociolinguistic Inquiry.
Mackey, W. and McConnell, G. D. (1997) ‘Heinz Kloss and the 
study of language in society’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. 
Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories 
and Reflection. Dallas TX: The Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. pp. 301–6.
Macnamara, J. (1997) ‘Early developments in sociolinguistics’, 
in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of 
Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The 
Summer Institute of Linguistics. pp. 171–6.
Mallinson, C. (2009) ‘Sociolinguistics and Sociology: Current 
directions, future partnerships.’ Language and Linguistics 
Compass, 3(4), 1034–51.
Murray, S. O. (1998) American Sociolinguistics: Theorists and 
Theory Groups. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Nida, Eugene (1949) Morphology: The Descriptive Analysis of 
Words. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Ohannessian, S., Ferguson, C. A. and Polomé, E. C. (eds) 
(1975) Language Surveys in Developing Nations: Papers 
and Reports on Sociolinguistic Surveys. Arlington, VA: 
Center for Applied Linguistics.
Omoniyi, T. and Fishman, J. A. (eds) (2006) Explorations in the 
Sociology of Language and Religion. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. 
Osgood, C. E. (ed.) (1954) Psycholinguistics: a Survey of 
Theory and Research Problems; Report of the 1953 
Summer Seminar Sponsored by the Committee on 
Linguistics and Psychology of the Social Science Research 
Council. Baltimore: Waverly Press.
Paulston, C. B. (1997) ‘Introduction’, in C. B. Paulston and 
G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: 
Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute 
of Linguistics. pp. 3–9.
Paulston, C. B. and Tucker, G. R. (eds) (1997) The Early Days 
of Sociolinguistics: Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: 
The Summer Institute of Linguistics.
Paulston, C. B. and Tucker, G. R. (2003) Sociolinguistics: The 
Essential Readings. Malden MA and Oxford UK: Blackwell 
Publishing.
Rubin, J., Jernudd, B., Das Gupta, J., Fishman, J. A. and 
Ferguson, C. A. (1977) Language Planning Processes. The 
Hague: Mouton.
Shuy, R. W. (1997) ‘A brief history of American Sociolinguistics: 
1949–1989’, in C. B. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), 
The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: Memories and 
Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute of Linguistics. 
pp. 11–32.
Slobin, D. I. (ed.) (1967) A Field Manual for Cross-Cultural 
Study of the Acquisition of Communicative Competence. 
Berkeley, CA: Institute of Human Learning.
Snow, C. A. and Ferguson, C. A. (eds) (1977) Talking to 
Children: Language Input and Acquisition. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Spolsky, B. (1995) Measured Words: The Development of 
Objective Language Testing. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Stewart, W. (1968) ‘A sociolinguistic typology for describing 
national multilingualism’, in Joshua A. Fishman (ed.), 
Readings in the Sociology of Language. The Hague: 
Mouton. pp. 531–45.
Tucker, G. R. (1997) ‘The development of sociolinguistics as a 
field of study: Concluding observations’, in Paulston, C. B.  
and G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: 
Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: The Summer Institute 
of Linguistics. pp. 317–24.
Weinreich, M. (1980) History of the Yiddish language. 
Tr. J. A. Fishman and N. Shlomo. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Weinreich, U. (1944) ‘Di velshishe shprakh in kampf far ir 
kiyem’, Yivo-bletter, 23: 225–48.
Weinreich, U. (1953a) Languages in Contact: Findings and 
Problems. New York: Linguistic Circle of New York.
Weinreich, U. (1953b) ‘The Russification of Soviet minority 
languages’, Problems of Communism, 2: 46–57.
Weinreich, U. (1966) ‘Explorations in semantic theory’, in 
T. A. Sebeok (ed.), Current Trends in Linguistics. Vol. 3: 
Theoretical Foundations. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 395–477.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. I. (1968) ‘Empirical 
foundations for a theory of language change’, in 
W. P. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for 
Historical Linguistics: A Symposium. Austin, TX: University 
Press pp. 95–195.

Labov: Language Variation 
and Change
K i r k  H a z e n
2
2.1 INTRODUCTION
The full impact of a scholar like William Labov 
(pronounced [l@bov]) is beyond the scope of 
a handbook chapter. The entire Handbook of 
Language Variation and Change (Chambers, 
Trudgill and Schilling-Estes, 2002) should be seen 
as part of Labov’s scholarly impact, and even that 
one volume does not comprehensively capture 
every aspect of his work. His publications are 
voluminous, their range is broad, and their effects 
on current scholars continue. This chapter focuses 
primarily, although not exclusively, on the early 
works of Labov. At points, I also trace the connec-
tions of Labov’s scholarship to that of his intellec-
tual predecessors, illustrating his motivations for 
scholarship. The chapter is divided into sections on 
Labov’s education and personal background, the 
intellectual influences on his scholarship, the con-
fluence of academic fields around the beginnings 
of sociolinguistics, an overview of Labov’s work, 
and a conclusion.1
2.2  LABOV’S TRAJECTORY TO 
GRADUATE SCHOOL
William Labov was born 4 December 1927 in 
Rutherford, NJ (USA). When he was 12 years old, 
he moved to Fort Lee, NJ, where he encountered 
a different dialect area and all kinds of conflict 
(Labov, 1997): he recounts getting into verbal and 
physical fights with local kids. From these encoun-
ters, he sharpened his argumentative skills, learned 
to take note of what was around him, and kept 
swinging at what he was good at – winning verbal 
arguments. He later studied at Harvard and 
majored in English and philosophy, graduating in 
1948. In ‘How I got into linguistics’, Labov 
(1997) writes about his advisor’s comments at 
Harvard: ‘When he learned that I was taking one 
course in chemistry (inorganic), he sucked on his 
pipe, smoothed out his cord trousers, and said, 
“Just where did you get this idolatry of science?” ’ 
These scientific leanings fostered Labov’s efforts 
to make language study an empirical enterprise.
Labov (1997) reports that he held several writ-
ing jobs after college, then went to work as an 
industrial chemist and ink-maker in the laboratory 
of the Union Ink Co. in Ridgefield, NJ, between 
1949 and 1960. There he interacted with a wide 
diversity of company workers, from millhands to 
truck drivers and sales crew, figuring out how 
much everyone knew, learning how they argued, 
and studying their narratives years before he 
thought of writing about them.
In 1961, aged 34, he went back to graduate 
school at Columbia University in New York City 
with an idea to study English. Allen Walker Read 
was Labov’s first linguistics teacher, and Labov 
argues (2006: 16) that Read’s papers on OK 
(Read, 2002) ‘stand as a progenitor of socio-
historical work’. He was intrigued with linguistics 
because of the vibrancy of the field and linguists’ 
propensity for open argument. What dismayed 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
25
Labov was that the ‘evidence’ for linguistics at the 
time came from the linguists’ self-generated sen-
tences, which restricted both the educational and 
class range of the data. He figured he could up the 
ante and produce studies based on richer data. 
With this turn towards more diverse data, he also 
fostered study of the working class. He earned his 
MA in 1963 and his PhD in 1964, both from 
Columbia University. He taught at Columbia 
(1964–70) before becoming a professor of linguis-
tics at the University of Pennsylvania (1971), 
where he has remained ever since.
2.3  THE INTELLECTUAL CLIMATE: 
LABOV AS A LINGUIST
As Labov remembers (Gordon, 2006), there were 
two substantial roadblocks in linguistics when he 
entered graduate school to his intended field of 
study. First, synchronic linguistics held that a 
speaker’s idiolect was sufficient to account for the 
qualities of a language. Second, since the method-
ology of the time went no further than the study of 
a few idiolects, diachronic linguistics was not able 
to account for how people used language if it was 
continually changing. In Gordon (2006), Labov 
discloses that he was never interested in categoric-
ity (Chambers, 2003); his professional career has 
focused on principles underwritten by probabili-
ties and swayed by social pressures.
The relationship between the speech commu-
nity and the individual has been in question 
throughout the modern linguistic period (see also 
Kerswill, this volume). Since the middle of the 
twentieth century, this distinction has been cast 
often in the terms ‘idiolect’2 (the grammar of an 
individual) and ‘dialect’ (the grammar of a speech 
community). In order to position himself as a lin-
guistic researcher, yet study speech communities, 
Labov had to establish theoretically the relation 
between language, the individual and the commu-
nity. He writes (Labov, 1966a: 6):
It is generally considered that the most consistent 
and coherent system is that of an idiolect ... . We 
find an increasing number of alternations which 
are due to stylistic or cultural factors, or changes in 
time – and these are external to language, not a 
part of linguistic structure.
 The present study adopts an entirely opposite 
view of the relative consistency of idiolect and 
dialect in the structure of New York City English.
The clearest statement Labov provides concerning 
the relation of idiolects and dialects would be in the 
new chapter in the second edition of his dissertation, 
where Labov (2006: 380) writes: ‘Drawing upon the 
larger perspective set forth by Weinreich, Labov, 
and Herzog (1968), we can say that the linguistic 
behavior of individuals cannot be understood 
without knowledge of the communities that they 
belong to’. Labov acknowledges the abstract nature 
of speech communities and dialects but finds the 
data provided by idiolects to be insufficient to accu-
rately describe, let alone explain, language change: 
The idea is that language is an abstract object, and 
it has to be treated with abstractions. So the ques-
tion is, on what database do you form your con-
clusions? How do you know when you’re right and 
how do you know when you’re wrong? ... So 
I thought that it was possible to move this field into 
a more scientific basis by grounding it on the use 
of language in everyday life (Gordon, 2006: 333).
Labov has stated his argument on this issue 
repeatedly for over four decades: ‘We study indi-
viduals because they give us the data to describe 
the community, but the individual is not really a 
linguistic unit’ (Gordon, 2006: 341). Labov real-
izes that many people in sociolinguistics disagree 
with him on this point; they argue instead that the 
‘reality’ is best found in the individual speaker. He 
takes the inverse position, that there are ‘no indi-
viduals from the linguistic point of view’ (Gordon, 
2006: 341).
Although he did not accept the linguistics of 
idiolects, Labov did not forsake all theoretical 
linguistic concerns of the 1960s. Instead, he devel-
oped them as part of the foundation of his studies. 
For example, he writes (1966a: 5): ‘The one point 
of view which would probably meet with general 
approval from all linguists today, is that the prime 
object of linguistics is the structure of language, 
not its elements ... ’. However, despite such points 
of agreement, Labov did critique contemporary 
linguistics on several grounds.
To establish where his own work fell in linguistic 
history and to emphasize the theoretical issues he 
was critiquing, in the publication of his disserta-
tion, Labov (1966a) lists four assumptions of lin-
guistics which he found problematic: synchronic 
language systems must be studied separately 
from diachronic systems; sound change cannot be 
directly observed; feelings about language are 
inaccessible; and the use of non-linguistic data 
to explain linguistic change is prohibited. Labov 
lays the theoretical foundation for his empirical 
work by attacking the first two assumptions. He 
attributes the privileging of synchronic systems 
over diachronic systems to Saussure and instead 
argues that each synchronic state is marked as to 
its direction and rate of change, and thus the two 
areas of study are not so cleanly separable.
As for the second assumption, Labov deemed 
Bloomfield’s statement about the unobservability 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
26
of language change (1933: 347) as supporting the 
Neo-Grammarian argument for the absolute regu-
larity of sound change (see also Labov, 1994). 
Bloomfield supposed that irregular linguistic proc-
esses, such as borrowing or analogy, would always 
disrupt, in the synchronic view, any possible 
observation of sound change. The data would 
always be too messy to draw reasonable conclu-
sions about directions and rates of change. Labov 
viewed this intellectual step as ‘... remov[ing] the 
empirical study of linguistic change from the 
program of twentieth-century linguistics’ (Labov, 
1966a: 11). Labov put empirical study back on the 
programme for the study of language change. 
Labov found the explanatory power of empirical 
synchronic observations in the correlations between 
social structures and linguistic structures.3
With regard to the third assumption, Bloch and 
Trager (1942) argued that the speakers’ feelings 
about sounds should remain off limits to linguists 
because that is not what linguists do, and although 
such psychological correlates may be important, 
the linguist (as linguist) has no methodology for 
assessing them. Labov counters (1966a: 12) that 
such purism gets in the way of ‘... one’s view of 
language as it is spoken’. The fourth basic assump-
tion in linguistics at the time was that linguists 
should not use non-linguistic information to solve 
linguistic problems. The intent was to strengthen 
linguistic argument by excluding such explana-
tions for language change as climate or inherited 
differences in physiology (cf. Hock and Joseph, 
1996; Labov, 2001). Labov critiques Antoine 
Martinet’s stringent adherence to this prohibition, 
especially since Martinet himself had identified the 
potential for the study of language in social context. 
Martinet argued that the linguist could be excused 
‘... if, in his capacity as a linguist, he declines the 
invitation to investigate sociological conditioning’ 
(Labov 1966a: 13). Labov argues instead that the 
role of language in self-identification4 is important 
for phonological change.
Labov was not alone in his critiques of the 
canonical linguistics of the late 1950s and 1960s. 
William Bright (1966) had criticized linguists’ 
classifications of intralanguage diversity as ‘free 
variation’. Labov successfully argued that most 
‘free variation’ has systematic linguistic and social 
constraints. In the same vein, Labov (1969c: 15) 
cites Edward Klima’s (1964) analysis of differ-
ences between dialects and asserts that under-
lying grammatical differences, such as the ordering 
of rules, cannot account for the differences 
between standard and nonstandard dialects in a 
systematic manner. Labov has argued that much 
of modern linguistics, since the Chomskyan revo-
lution (e.g. Chomsky, 1965), concerns those 
aspects of language which are stable. In contrast, 
‘We’ve been involved in a complementary study 
of everything that does and can change’ (Gordon, 
2006: 338).
To describe correlations between patterns of 
linguistic behaviour and social identities in as 
objective a way as possible, Labov focuses on 
phonological variation involving variants that are 
(or are treated as) discrete and thus quantifiable, 
and borrows from Parsonian sociology a way of 
describing social facts about speakers in quantifi-
able terms. In a pioneering study of variation from 
classroom to playground, Fischer (1958) had intro-
duced the quantification of language data and the 
range of social variation to be found in that data. 
Fischer studied a variable – the velar vs alveolar 
pronunciations of the English suffix –ing – which 
sociolinguistics have continued to study for 50 
years, in part because its variants are discrete 
rather than scalar (Campbell-Kibler, 2007; Hazen, 
2008). However, not all language traits are as open 
to quantification. As Labov notes:
In many areas of generative syntax, quantifications 
of everyday speech may not be appropriate – the 
data are not frequent enough. It’s not as if every 
aspect of our field is open to quantification. Your 
concepts have to become clear and solid and 
countable. There are areas, not only abstract 
arenas of grammar but areas of discourse analysis, 
where the attempts at quantification may be quite 
premature (Gordon, 2006: 334).
Some syntactic variables are open to Labovian 
exploration, however, and Labov has also been part 
of the effort to quantify previously unquantifiable 
areas of grammar. For example, Labov directed 
Lavandera’s 1975 University of Pennsylvania dis-
sertation on si-clauses in Buenos Aires, which 
employed a database of 1587 tokens gathered 
from spontaneous speech.5 Lavandera was able to 
elicit this many tokens through carefully directing 
the casual conversation towards the syntactic con-
texts most favourable to producing the si-clauses.
Another previous assumption Labov reassessed 
is the independence of variation based on social 
stratification and variation based on situational 
style. Labov (1969c: 22) draws upon John 
Kenyon’s (1948) ‘... distinction between cultural 
levels and functional varieties of English’. Kenyon 
argued that ‘... style and class stratification of lan-
guage are actually independent’. Labov counters 
that this arrangement would be convenient for 
identifying speakers, but it is not true, since the 
same variables are used for both style and social 
stratification, as demonstrated in his work in 
New York City. This issue would recur in Labov’s 
work and that of other sociolinguists (Rickford 
and Eckert, 2001). Such research topics have been 
investigated repeatedly over the last four decades, 
including by Labov himself. Labov demonstrates 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
27
consistency in his research topics over the decades 
of his work: for example, Labov (2008) is an 
enhanced and revised version of the questions first 
raised and explored in Labov (1966a, 1966b).
Along with these critiques of basic assump-
tions, Labov took note of the changing theoretical 
positions motivating linguistic study. In The Study 
of Nonstandard English, he writes (1969c: 40):
Not many years ago, linguists tended to emphasize 
the differences among the languages of the world 
and to assert that there was almost no limit to the 
ways in which languages could differ from each 
other. Dialectologists concentrated upon the fea-
tures which differentiated their dialects – naturally, 
for these are the features which define their object 
of study.
 However, the opposing trend is strong in linguis-
tics today – there is a greater interest in the ways 
in which languages resemble each other and how 
they carry out the same functions with similar 
rules.
In line with this trend, in his outreach work with 
minority dialects in schools, Labov emphasized 
the similarities between vernacular varieties and 
standard varieties. He intended to convince educa-
tional professionals to accept the legitimacy of the 
vernacular varieties. But Labov’s underlying inter-
est in diversity resonates with the work of anthro-
pological linguists in the earlier periods of the 
twentieth century, when descriptive work on 
Native American languages revealed tremendous 
diversity, and scholars celebrated this diversity.
With increasing awareness of diversity in lan-
guage, scholars throughout the twentieth century 
had noted social correlates of language usage. 
Studies working towards the aims of sociolinguistics 
existed decades before the term ‘sociolinguistics’ 
appeared.6 For example, Gesinus Gerardus 
Kloecke published De Hollandsche Expansie in 
1927 where he combines language geography, 
sociology and history. Leonard Bloomfield (1933) 
relied on this work when crafting his chapter on 
dialectology. Koerner (1991) presents several 
other early works that touch upon both language 
change and society (e.g. Joseph Vendryes, 1925).
But while knowledge from anthropological 
linguistics has certainly influenced the field of 
linguistics, and sociolinguistics in particular, 
Labov does not describe anthropological linguis-
tics as one of the sources of his approach to lan-
guage change. Labov recognizes the impact and 
influence of anthropologists like John J. Gumperz 
(1958) and Dell Hymes (1962), but he identifies 
his work with linguistics proper.
Clearly, William Labov has worked as a lin-
guist in linguistics. In his publications, he did not 
attempt to forge a new field. Rather, a new field 
emerged around him as a result of the political 
pressures internal to the linguistics at that time. 
The formalist methodology of syntacticians led to 
ever more esoteric writings and a continued reli-
ance on extremely small data sets, mostly drawn 
from data derived by intuitions (Labov, 1996a). 
These data sets were subject to a linguistic calcu-
lus (cf. Port and Leary, 2005) that did not allow 
for discussion about changes to methodology in 
data collection or analysis. For this reason, Labov’s 
approach to language change – long a key compo-
nent of disciplinary linguistics – has come to be 
known as ‘sociolinguistics’ rather than simply 
‘linguistics’, as Labov would have preferred.
2.4  THE INTELLECTUAL CLIMATE: 
LABOV AS A SOCIOLINGUIST
The debate about ‘sociolinguistics’ as a term was 
not about the label, but rather about the data, 
theory and goals to be reached. In the preface to 
Labov (1966a: v–vi), he writes:
In the past few years, there has been considerable 
programmatic discussion of sociolinguistics at vari-
ous meetings and symposia. If this term refers to 
the use of data from the speech community to 
solve problems of linguistic theory, then I would 
agree that it applies to the research described 
here. But sociolinguistics is more frequently used 
to suggest a new interdisciplinary field – the com-
prehensive description of the relations of language 
and society. This seems to me an unfortunate 
notion, foreshadowing a long series of purely 
descriptive studies with little bearing on the central 
theoretical problems of linguistics or of sociology. 
My own intention was to solve linguistic problems, 
bearing in mind that these are ultimately problems 
in the analysis of social behavior: the description of 
continuous variation, of overlapping and multi-
layered phonemic systems; the subjective corre-
lates of linguistic variation; the causes of linguistic 
differentiation and the mechanism of linguistic 
change.
Two problems arose in the 1960s related to the 
term ‘sociolinguistics’. First, scholars debated 
whether the study of language and society should 
be primarily cast as a field of anthropology, soci-
ology or linguistics. Labov took a clear and une-
quivocal stance: he studied linguistics, and the 
term ‘sociolinguistics’ was not necessary to label 
the kind of work he did. The second issue with 
sociolinguistics in the 1960s was that, if it were to 
be an interdisciplinary field, then how would future 
students be trained for it? Would anthropology and 
sociology departments be willing to sacrifice the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
28
graduate hours needed to train students in linguis-
tics to produce the scholars required to follow in 
the footsteps of Dell Hymes, John Gumperz, 
Emmanuel Schegloff and Erving Goffman (Shuy, 
1990: 187)? The divide between academic disci-
plines can be seen in the names the sociology of 
language and sociolinguistics, where the sociol-
ogy of language denoted sociology done through 
the means of language and sociolinguistics 
denoted linguistics done while maintaining a 
focus on social factors. Such distinctions were 
present at the time Labov was entering graduate 
school: For example, Shuy (1990: 188) reports 
that Joshua Fishman first taught a Sociology of 
Language course in 1956 at the University of 
Pennsylvania.
Labov originally argued against the name 
‘sociolinguistics’, but he recognizes the utility of 
the term today (Gordon, 2006: 335): ‘... it turns 
out that it’s useful to approach the field through a 
subfield; most linguists want to have some form of 
sociolinguistics taught in their department’. 
Although the term ‘sociolinguistics’ is no longer a 
point of objection for Labov, he reserves the label 
‘variation and change’ for the type of linguistics 
he practices:
But today, it seems the actual field we’re talking 
about is best called the study of variation and 
change. Sociolinguistics is a large and unformed 
area with many different ways of approaching the 
subject that aren’t necessarily linguistic, whereas 
the study of variation and change describes pretty 
well the enterprise we’re engaged in. 
This differentiation can at times be seen in the 
subjects of study for summary reference works: 
the contrast between Blackwell’s The Handbook 
of Sociolinguistics and Blackwell’s The Handbook 
of Language Variation and Change reveals not 
only different authors but also different topics and 
different foci, even within the same topics.
Trudgill (1978: 1) takes the opinion that ‘… 
whether you call something sociolinguistics or not 
does not, in the last analysis, matter very much.’ 
He notes that sociolinguistics ‘... means many dif-
ferent things to many different people.’ For 
Trudgill, the term sociolinguistics applies to three 
different disciplines, each containing different 
methodologies and objectives (1978: 2): ‘... those 
where the objectives are purely sociological or 
social-scientific; those where they are partly soci-
ological and partly linguistic; and those where the 
objectives are wholly linguistic.’ For Labov and 
Trudgill (1978: 11), sociolinguistics is ‘... a way 
of doing linguistics.’
Shuy (1990: 195) pinpoints the creation of 
sociolinguistics as a scholarly field to 1964 
(see, e.g., Bright, 1966; Spolsky this volume). 
However, Malkiel (1976: 80 fn. 11) puts the date 
a decade earlier, arguing for the early 1950s. In 
any case, the confluence of sociology, anthropol-
ogy and linguistics, along with realms such as 
language and education (Hazen, 2007a), devel-
oped the topics and methodologies which have 
now become common for sociolinguistics. For 
modern sociolinguists who might be dismayed by 
the unreconciling diversity of sociolinguistic goals, 
methodologies and cliques, the intellectual atmos-
phere of this earlier time should be juxtaposed 
with the scholarly background of the participants. 
These were scholars from distinct fields who 
wanted to learn from each other but not become 
each other. From the beginning of the term ‘socio-
linguistics’, the field has not been unified and was 
mostly likely at the time not a single field but 
instead a set of subfields of separate disciplines.
As a named discipline, sociolinguistics was new 
at the time Labov was conducting his dissertation 
as a linguist on language change in New York City. 
The selected proceedings and discussions from a 
1964 Conference on Sociolinguistics were pub-
lished with William Bright as editor (1966). In it, 
a wide range of language scholars came together 
from fields including folklore, anthropology, lin-
guistics, dialectology and sociology. The confer-
ence showcased renowned scholars such as Henry 
Hoenigswald, John J. Gumperz, Raven I. McDavid 
Jr., Dell Hymes, John L. Fischer, William Samarin 
and Charles Ferguson. Included in this august 
group was one graduate student, a linguist, William 
Labov. In editing the proceedings, and as a confer-
ence participant, William Bright sets the scene 
for sociolinguistic research and characterizes sev-
eral areas still relevant today. Bright (1966: 11) 
remarks that the term ‘sociolinguistics’ is not new 
and that it is hard to precisely define. Bright 
argues that it is ‘excessively vague’ to cast the 
field as dealing with language and society, but that 
in light of ‘modern’ linguistics, researchers do 
view language as well as society to be a structure: 
‘The sociolinguist’s task is then to show the sys-
tematic covariance of linguistic structure and 
social structure – and perhaps even to show a 
causal relationship in one direction or the other’. 
Bright also cites as ‘pernicious’ the traditional 
linguistic emphasis on the homogeneity of lan-
guage, opting instead for diversity as the subject 
matter of sociolinguistics. He reflects on the appli-
cations of sociolinguistic work, one of these being 
within historical linguistics, which is where Bright 
put Labov’s work (Labov, 1966b). Hence, Bright 
sees Labov’s earliest work as the study of lan-
guage variation and change drawn from descrip-
tive sociolinguistic accounts. At the conclusion of 
his introduction, Bright (1966: 15) optimistically 
forecasts that, ‘It seems likely that sociolinguistics 
is entering an era of rapid developments; we may 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
29
expect that linguistics, sociology, and anthropol-
ogy will all show the effects’. It is a safe assess-
ment to note that linguistics has had significant 
programmatic effects from this rapid develop-
ment. For example, it is now common for major 
review panels to include a sociolinguist: the advi-
sory panel for the National Science Foundation 
linguistics programme has a sociolinguistic seat, 
as does the editorial panel for the Linguistic 
Society of America’s journal Language.
At the 1964 Sociolinguistics Conference, 
McDavid also presented on dialect differences in 
urban society in general, and Greenville, SC, and 
Chicago, IL, specifically. A perusal of McDavid’s 
paper and Labov’s paper of the same volume pro-
vides a succinct comparison of the methodologi-
cal and rhetorical changes made in the transition 
from traditional dialectology to variationist socio-
linguistics. McDavid’s paper is a dialectological 
narrative, highlighting his own personal judg-
ments of the varieties in question; Labov’s paper 
is based on an empirically-driven statistical analy-
sis. Even though they appear adjacent to each 
other in print, the two papers seem to be from dif-
ferent decades. Like McDavid, others were con-
cerned with urban dialects before Labov. Pederson 
(1964) had investigated Chicago using dialectolo-
gist methods as used by Kurath and McDavid, but 
Labov’s method for integrating social information 
and linguistic analysis ultimately resonated more 
deeply with a wider scholarly audience.
Early commentators noted that Labov’s 
approaches covered numerous fields. In regard to 
his work with English in the schools, A. Hood 
Roberts comments that ‘his work combines the 
insights offered by linguistics as well as sociol-
ogy, pedagogy, and psychology’ (Labov, 1969c: 
iii). Linguists interested in the language of ‘real 
people’ and the accountability of theory to data 
hailed Labov’s work and followed suit. The intel-
lectual environment in which Labov presented his 
version of linguistics was ready for change. Labov 
comments: 
I found that there were many people who were 
ready for this approach, not only the quantitative 
approach but were ready to take social context 
into effect. That doesn’t mean that it suddenly 
became the mainstream of linguistics, far from it. 
The approach that we follow in NWAV is still only 
a part and not at all the dominant part of linguistic 
studies (Gordon, 2006: 335).
In 1972, the first NWAVE (‘New Ways of 
Analyzing Variation in English’) colloquium was 
held at Georgetown University, in conjunction 
with the eighth Southeastern Conference on 
Linguistics, and 64 papers were presented. The 
resulting volume is dedicated to William Labov: 
‘who freed us from static analysis’ (Bailey and 
Shuy, 1973). From the early NWAVE proceedings 
(later changed to NWAV as languages other than 
English came to be studied), it is clear the varia-
tionist enterprise was a call for all linguists inter-
ested in variation to come together around a 
common approach to empirical data, and not neces-
sarily a common area of linguistics. These linguists 
included semanticians, syntacticians, phonologists, 
creolists and dialectologists. A separate linguistic 
profession of ‘variationist’ does not appear to have 
been a goal, although it was a term from the 
outset.
Modern students in linguistics may view 
Labov’s early works as creating sociolinguistics. It 
would be better to characterize Labov as a linguist 
whose revision of the study of language change 
coalesced well with the institutionalization of 
sociolinguistics into academic organizations such 
as journals and departments. Sociolinguistics has 
never been a discrete field of study with a coherent 
methodology, but instead an academic place to 
meet, where scholars gather to have worthwhile 
conversations about society and language. Labov 
has presented numerous papers to diverse audi-
ences where he made intriguing observations 
about society. However, for Labov himself, these 
were by-products of his research on language 
change.
2.5  LABOV’S PREDECESSORS IN 
THE STUDY OF VARIATION 
AND CHANGE
Labov’s connection to past scholars who studied 
language change is strong since he views the 
problems and solutions of his work as being an 
organic component of this scholarly history (2001: 
10). When he cites Edward Sapir, Franz Bopp and 
Max Müller, Labov places himself in the tradition 
of the scholarship they established. In a more con-
nected genealogy, Konrad Koerner (1991) eluci-
dates a lineage between William Dwight Whitney 
(1827–1894) who influenced Ferdinand de 
Saussure (1857–1913), who taught Antoine 
Meillet (1866–1936), who taught André Martinet 
(1908–1999), who directed at Columbia the MA 
and PhD theses of Uriel Weinreich (1926–1967), 
who did the same for William Labov (1927–) at 
Columbia.
Although Whitney may seem far removed from 
Labov, Whitney became the major proponent of 
the uniformitarian principle in linguistics. 
Borrowed from geology, where it had been influ-
ential since 1833, the uniformitarian principle 
basically states that ‘knowledge of processes that 
operated in the past can be inferred by observing 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
30
ongoing processes in the present’ (from Christy, 
1983 cited in Labov, 2001: 21). Whitney, whose 
brother was a geologist, had argued for the princi-
ple in Language and the Study of Language 
(1867), and it is this principle which allowed 
Labov to study language synchronically and derive 
diachronic inferences from the data.
Perhaps the best scholarly work to explore 
Labov’s academic roots openly is the coauthored 
work by Uriel Weinreich, William Labov and 
Marvin Herzog (1968), Empirical Foundations 
for a Theory of Language Change. In it, the 
authors project the foundational problems of 
constraints on language change, transitions of 
the change through older to younger speakers, 
embedding of the change in linguistic and social 
structure, evaluation of social awareness of the 
change, and the actuation of the change. To tackle 
language change and move its study towards 
scientifically-processed empirical foundations, 
Weinreich, Labov and Herzog had to overthrow 
revered assumptions of renowned linguists, such 
as Hermann Paul (1891) and Ferdinand de 
Saussure (1916 [1972]). Paul had argued for the 
language of the individual to be the basis for 
analysis;7 Paul himself was reacting against 
Völkerpsychologie which took up an ethos of com-
munity to be the controlling entity for social 
action, including language change. Saussure 
argued for a strict dichotomy between synchronic 
and diachronic linguistics, with the purpose of 
establishing synchronic study as the centrepiece 
of language scholarship. Saussure was reacting 
against his Neogrammarian predecessors, such as 
Paul, in an attempt to turn the focus of scholars to 
language structures as exemplified in the commu-
nity of speakers. Weinreich, Labov and Herzog 
argued that these assumptions, especially Paul’s 
isolation of the individual from the group, created 
paradoxes in the twentieth century about language 
change.
In this foundational essay, Weinreich, Labov 
and Herzog also react against the foundational 
work of generative phonology, e.g. Morris Halle 
(1962), and argue that ‘... the generative model for 
the description of language as a homogenous 
object is needlessly unrealistic, and we contend 
that it is quite pointless to construct a theory of 
change which accepts as input descriptions of 
language states that are contrary to fact and 
unnecessarily idealized’. While Noam Chomsky 
and Halle were publishing The Sound Pattern of 
English in 1968, the branches of linguistics were 
advancingly rapidly and in quantum leaps; how-
ever, the expanding technical machinery of 
Chomsky and Halle’s work did not address the 
arguments of Weinreich, Labov and Herzog. 
Scholars in these branches of linguistics made 
little attempt to reconcile for years to come.
Labov has demonstrated, since this early period, 
the connection between social factors and lan-
guage change, but he was not the first to propose 
this link. Meillet (1905, 1921) had explicated the 
idea of motivation of language change through 
social factors, although he and his contemporaries 
were unable to provide empirical proof of such 
effects on language change. Shuy (1990: 185) 
argues that the actual theoretical context of lin-
guistics during the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries hampered the investigation of 
social influences. With the advent of linguistic 
structuralism, the development of systems for 
linguistic structure allowed for the inclusion of 
social factors in linguistic analysis, as a place to 
attach the social meaning found so important in 
even the most casual of social studies. Labov 
(1966a: 14) positions Meillet as presenting the 
right goals for an empirical linguistics in 1905, 
before others adopted Saussure’s exclusive focus 
on synchronic abstractions after 1913.8 Koerner 
(1991: 64) argues that 
Labov’s work constitutes a synthesis of earlier 
attempts at a sociological approach to questions of 
language change, beginning with Meillet’s paper 
of 1905 (if not much earlier) and dialectological 
research done in the United States since the 1930s, 
which in turn goes back to European traditions 
established during the last quarter of nineteenth 
century.
Labov also was not the first to combine dialect 
geography with diachronic analysis: Yakov Malkiel 
(1976) points out that Jakob Jud, in 1914, wrote of 
the diffusion of the Latin lexicon, and Ramón 
Menéndez Pidal, in 1926, combined archival-
paleographic research with spatial analysis to inves-
tigate primarily phonological and morphological 
data. Malkiel (1976: 60) also notes that a ‘gradual 
rapprochement’ between dialectology and ethnog-
raphy occurred throughout the twentieth century. 
Labov does takes his scholarship into one area 
where Malkiel (1976: 61) criticizes early ‘cultural 
history’ language scholars: Labov avoids theoreti-
cal weakness and participates in the scholarly 
‘... discussion of what advanced historical research 
is or should be ... ’. Methodological topics were 
debated between 1920–1950 and became regular 
benchmarks in Labov’s work: the desire for ver-
nacular spontaneity, the value of urban dialects, the 
network required to capture dialect nuances, the 
value of different types of speakers (e.g. other than 
‘pure’ dialect speakers), and the expectation of 
gruelling and time-consuming extensive data 
collection for the language scholar.
Other linguists who influenced Labov worked 
on connections between dialectology and structural 
linguistics. Martinet (1952, 1955) worked towards 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
31
a programme of structural dialectology. Weinreich 
(1954) questioned this effort since such a system 
arrayed discrete structures over an empirical base 
with much more fluid data (see Port and Leary 
(2005) for a modern comparison). However, 
Moulton (1960, 1962) enacted this programme in 
the description of the geographic distribution of 
structural variations in the dialects of Swiss 
German. Moulton’s use of structural-dialect geog-
raphy employed the structures of the phonology, 
such as phonological gaps, to explain language 
changes. However, some scholars treated dialec-
tology as if it were exempt from this trend in 
empirical science: Labov criticizes (1966a: 27) 
Herbert Pilch (1955) for his lack of empirical 
data, an ‘a-historical’ approach, in the historical 
account of the American vowel system.
From such critiques, the range of ideas and 
effort needed to drive forward the cross-sectional 
study of language change became wider as the 
twentieth century progressed. In reference to 
Romance language scholarship, Malkiel (1976: 
68–9) writes: 
Reconciling large-scale dialectology with the 
sweeping scope of a full-bodied historical 
grammar ... and, at the same time, with the tenets 
of structuralism would, by 1950, have involved a 
three-way venture far too complex and far too 
demanding to be undertaken by any individual of 
lesser status than a genius. Unfortunately, no 
genius from the ranks of Romance scholars appeared 
on the scene when one was so desperately 
needed. 
When Labov began his graduate work, in 1961, he 
faced the kind of triangulation of fields Malkiel 
notes was so daunting. His success in concur-
rently tackling academic debates in dialectology, 
synchronic linguistics and diachronic linguistics 
is a testament to his genius and determination.
As with other early scholars associated with the 
foundation of sociolinguistics, such as Roger 
Shuy for the USA and John Gumperz for India,9 
Labov commanded extensive knowledge of dia-
lectology. His mentor, Uriel Weinreich, directed 
the project on the Language and Culture Atlas of 
Ashkenazic Jewry.10 Weinreich (1953, 1954) had 
also wrestled with how to integrate traditional 
dialectology with structural linguistics, where he 
argued that the chasm between structural and dia-
lectological studies was deeper than it ever had 
been. Yet, Weinreich sees them both as compo-
nents of linguistics. It is not clear that formal 
generative grammarians in the next decade would 
have made the same assumption of the shared 
basis for those two fields.11 Labov adopted and 
modified dialectological interview techniques for 
his master’s thesis about Martha’s Vineyard and 
his dissertation on the Lower East Side of New 
York City. Labov states:
There’s no question that the sociolinguistic inter-
view as we practice it today comes out of dialect 
geography and dialectology. As I listen to the early 
interviews in Martha’s Vineyard, I find a lot of 
emphasis upon individual words and asking people 
direct questions about language which came from 
dialect geography. That’s true of the New York 
City study too. A lot of time was wasted asking 
people about crullers and pot cheese and other 
local terms (Gordon, 2006: 336).
Labov’s renunciation of some dialectological 
techniques, while not abandoning dialectology 
overall, resulted in a changed discipline (see also 
Labov, 1984). Weinreich himself (1951), in his 
Columbia dissertation a decade earlier, had initi-
ated his own set of changes in methods which 
Labov adopted. These changes involved the direct 
observation of synchronic language and interac-
tions with native experts for Romance, German 
and Swiss dialects, in order better to understand 
language change in this area.
Milroy (1980, 1987) argues that Labov’s modi-
fications of traditional twentieth century dialectol-
ogy do not go far enough to document accurately 
the social influences on language variation pat-
terns (see Vetter, this volume). Specifically, she 
incorporates social network analysis to study 
maintenance of vernacular features, demonstrat-
ing strong correlations of network quality and 
vernacular language variation patterns. Embracing 
the value of this approach, Labov (2001) incorpo-
rates these social network analyses into his 
description of the effects of social factors on lan-
guage variation.
2.6 LABOV’S CONTRIBUTIONS
Variation, social identity 
and language change
Labov’s 1963 publication of The social motivation 
of a sound change, based on his MA thesis, 
marked a turning point in the study of language 
change. Labov began with Sturtevant’s (1907) 
argument that sound change starts in a few words 
and may then spread by analogy to others of the 
same class. The change may progress slowly and 
only end up appearing as a regular process. Labov 
investigated the variation of the vowels /ay/ and  
/aw/ and their raised and centralized variants, [∂y] 
and [∂w], on Martha’s Vineyard, an island off the 
coast of Massachusetts, USA. Labov knew about 
the history of these vowels and other features of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
32
the area from the Linguistic Atlas of New England 
(LANE), and a previous study of some families on 
the island, hence incorporating dialect study into 
the study of language change. On this island, the 
rapidly-changing local economy, from fishing to 
tourism, strengthened the differentiation of pre-
existing social divisions. The native up-islanders 
resented the outsiders for overshadowing the 
traditional industry of fishing, in contrast to 
the down-islanders, who supported the tourists. 
Labov implemented the apparent-time construct, 
assessing the percentage of raised, centralized 
vowels variants against age groups, finding that 
centralization corresponded with certain age 
groups. As importantly, he found that positive 
orientation towards Martha’s Vineyard corre-
sponded strongly with centralization: those with 
positive orientation had a rate of centralized vowel 
nuclei over 50 per cent higher than those with a 
negative orientation to the island.
The import from this study was at least two-
fold: first, Labov demonstrated that sound change, 
long assumed to be either cataclysmic or glacially 
slow, was observable in synchronic variation; 
second, sound changes were connected to the 
social forces in a community. These were concep-
tual turning points in the scientific study of lan-
guage. These issues continue to resonate with 
researchers and later studies have re-evaluated the 
progress of language change on Martha’s Vineyard 
(Blake and Josey, 2003; Pope, Meyerhoff and 
Ladd, 2007).
Because Labov’s doctoral dissertation about 
variation and change in the Lower East Side of 
New York City (NYC) (1966a, 2006) was so well 
designed, it continues to yield a series of compel-
ling arguments about the nature of language vari-
ation and change, as well as the methodology for 
studying it. It marked a turning point in the study 
of dialects (Becker and Coggshall, 2009). A tre-
mendous wealth of material unfolds from the 
NYC study. For one thing, it operationalized 
social categories in new ways. For example, social 
class is treated in this study as a composite of 
education and occupation. As a result of this 
study, the bar for planning a dialect study was set 
higher than it had ever been before. The NYC 
study demonstrates how to research linguistic pat-
terns rigorously through empirical observation 
and analysis. It shows how social factors, such as 
social class and style shifting, affect language pat-
terns in structured ways. It is characterized by 
rigorous systematicity in the definition of every 
variable under study: the phonological variables 
and their variants; careful delineation of socioeco-
nomic class and the use of information from the 
Mobilization For Youth survey on education, 
income and occupation; and the exacting delinea-
tion of style, whereby different portions of the 
interview are labelled according to channel cues 
of the speakers. Labov is also concerned with the 
best representation of his findings in tables and 
graphs.
The NYC study established the theoretical 
concept of the ‘linguistic variable’ (Wolfram, 
1991), although the term had been used in Labov 
(1963). The linguistic variable was originally con-
ceived as a set of semantically-equivalent variants 
which alternated with each other in the production 
of a variable context: a variable such as (r) could 
have two variants, constricted and unconstricted 
[r], which would be in competition with each 
other. The benefit of the linguistic variable as a 
conceptual entity was that variation could be 
handled in a systematic manner by quantitatively 
tracking the production of variants in different 
social and linguistic contexts. The linguistic vari-
able as a theoretical innovation also permitted 
multivariate quantitative models of language vari-
ation, first implemented by Cedergren (1973) (see 
Tagliamonte (2006) for further discussion).
In the NYC study, Labov attended both to the 
speech community and to individuals whose lin-
guistic behaviour departed from that of the group. 
In fact, Labov writes (2006: 157) that one effect 
that he has hoped for from the NYC study was the 
inclusion of individuals (such as Nathan B. and 
Josephine P., both subjects of analysis in the 
study) in other sociolinguistic analyses. However, 
most sociolinguistic studies have shied away from 
thorough studies of individuals. Following his 
own advice, in Labov (2001) he searched for the 
leaders of language change (2001: 500) as one 
approach to understanding the causes and motiva-
tions for language change. Of these leaders, he 
writes, ‘The history of our leaders of linguistic 
change is a history of nonconformity, and their 
sociolinguistic position is a display of noncon-
formity’ (2001: 410).
The thoroughness of Labov’s work is reflected 
in the appendices to his published dissertation. For 
most sociolinguists, if potential subjects say they 
do not want to be interviewed, that is the end of 
their role in the study. Labov persisted beyond 
these initial rejections. Under a different guise, he 
conducted telephone interviews with 33 subjects 
who had refused to be interviewed in person: Out 
of a total of 195 potential subjects for the American 
Language Survey (ALS) study,12 122 were inter-
viewed; of the 73 refusals, 33 were called on the 
telephone and surveyed about their TV reception 
in the area, gathering data on the variables in 
question. Labov presents the results from an 
analysis of these 33 speakers’ language in 
Appendix D (Labov, 2006). In another appendix, 
Labov presents results from 37 ALS interviews 
with non-native New Yorkers. For Labov, they 
were another opportunity to view the speech 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
33
community, and hence language, from a new per-
spective. Additionally, Labov provides the results 
from experiments designed to assess the social 
evaluation of language by NYC residents. Labov 
emphasizes that experiments are needed to study 
normative behaviour, necessary to understand the 
grammar of the speech community in an effort to 
study language change.
The linguistic variable and the 
variable rule
The variable rule was officially introduced in 
Labov (1969a), but the machinery for it, the lin-
guistic variable,13 was theoretically integrated into 
the study of language in Weinreich, Labov and 
Herzog (1968: 167).14 Earlier scholars (e.g. Harris, 
1951) had discussed ‘variants’, but these were not 
seen as part of a coherent system regulated by a 
linguistic module in the mental grammar (i.e. a 
variable). In the NYC study, Labov (1966a) ana-
lyzed five variables, orthographically distinguished 
from phonemes via parentheses: (r), (æh), (oh), 
(th), (dh). Although the term ‘linguistic variable’ 
was used in Labov (1963), the notations for it 
were still represented as phonemes (e.g. /ay/) and 
the variants as allophones [ay].
Labov’s 1969a article on copula deletion used 
the formal logic of contemporary generative gram-
mar and helped to bring variable rules into main-
stream linguistics. Labov (1969a: 737 fn. 20) 
describes the advantage of variable rules over the 
concept of free variation. Hazen (2007b), Green 
(2007) and Guy (2007) highlight a few of the 
areas of more traditional linguistic fields where 
quantitative formalizations of empirical observa-
tions have become a standard for evaluating the 
validity of scholarship. Labov (1969a) applied the 
concept of the variable rule to the copula absence 
described in Labov et al. (1968). Notably, social 
factors did not play a role but were separately 
considered in Labov (1969a), in contrast to 
Weinreich et al. (1968: 170) where the formula for 
the linguistic variable included ‘... linguistic or 
extralinguistic ... ’ factors. Fasold (1991) argues 
that Labov’s theoretical choice to consider linguis-
tic factors separately from social factors is the 
most productive manner for analyzing linguistic 
variation. In addition, one of the initial stipulations 
of variable rules was that categorical application of 
a regular linguistic rule was constrained by varia-
ble input (1969a: 738). However, the variable rule 
has fallen out of favour since that time. Fasold 
(1991) notes that scholars have largely abandoned 
variable rules as a descriptive mechanism, although 
the construct of the variable is widely used.
Perhaps the most accepted and lasting import of 
the variable rule is the principle of accountability 
(Labov 1969). Labov (1969a: fn20; 1972b: 72) 
states (small caps removed): 
That any variable form (a member of a set of alter-
native ways of ‘saying the same thing’) should be 
reported with the proportion of cases in which the 
form did occur in the relevant environment, com-
pared to the total number of cases in which it 
might have occurred.
This principle is a basic, and unquestioned, part of 
variationist methodology today, but at the time, 
Labov was guarding against scholars picking 
and choosing data to conveniently (retro)fit their 
theories.
Another significant work in this regard, and 
one of the ones which placed nonstandard dialects 
in the focus of linguistic analysis, was Labov’s 
work on negation. Labov (1972d) compares the 
standard English negation of any with three kinds 
of negative transfer in Black English: negative 
attraction to subject any (e.g. *Anybody doesn’t 
go Æ Nobody goes), negative postposing to inde-
terminates (e.g. She doesn’t like anything Æ He 
likes nothing), and negative concord (e.g. They 
don’t like anything Æ They don’t like nothing). 
Labov’s paper is an analysis of data drawn from 
Labov et al. (1968),15 working from contemporary 
assumptions about deep and surface structure, and 
even incorporating the formal linguistic methods 
of abstracted intuitions and grammaticality judg-
ments with variationist methodology: ‘In this and 
other studies, we combine the abstract analysis of 
our intuitive data with naturalistic observation of 
language in use, and supplement this with experi-
mental tests of well-defined variables’ (Labov, 
1972d: 775). Although he does bring some dia-
chronic concerns into play, his main focus is the 
morphological realm of the synchronic state of 
Black English. Buchstaller (2009) discusses 
updates and current debates about Labov’s meth-
ods for quantifying the variable with variation 
beyond phonology: ‘In variationist sociolinguis-
tics, this procedure is referred to as ‘clos[ing] the 
set that defines the variable’ (Labov 1996a: 78), 
which is especially important when working with 
more complex variables, which (morpho-) syntac-
tic variables and discourse variables often are.
After Labov (1966a), scholars empirically 
studying language variation and change have con-
ceptualized variation in terms of sociolinguistic 
variables. For Labov, the search for variables was 
not the cumulative goal, however. Labov (2006: 
32) decries the ‘peculiar practice’ of dissertating 
students searching for a variable to study, rather 
than attempting to study the synchronic variation 
and ongoing diachronic variation of a speech 
community. For Labov, the exacting empirical 
description of the speech community’s linguistic 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
34
system was the main point. The variables were 
only means to that end.
Labov’s work in education
Reflecting the educational concerns and larger 
social troubles of the 1960s, A. Hood Roberts, in 
Labov (1969c: iii), notes that ‘... the urgency of 
the need for a new research approach and solu-
tions became prominent during the last decade as 
a result of massive social problems’. The motiva-
tion for defending minority varieties of English 
came from attacks on these varieties by educa-
tional scholars who promoted ‘... the explicit 
assumption that ‘the language of culturally 
deprived children ... is not merely an underdevel-
oped version of standard English, but is basically 
a non-logical mode of expressive behavior’ (Labov 
1969c: 47). The subtlety of Labov’s linguistic 
assessment combined with his sociopolitical cri-
tique established him as the linguist with the final 
word: minority dialects are both logical and fully 
developed forms of language.
Much of Labov’s educational writing was 
based on work done in Harlem by a collaborative 
team he directed. This work was one of the first 
scholarly efforts to describe minority speech com-
munities in the USA. As Lavandera (1989: 4) 
notes, numerous scholars, including Dell Hymes 
(see Johnstone and Marcellino, this volume), were 
calling for a socially-realistic linguistics at the 
time. The research team of William Labov, Paul 
Cohen, Clarence Robins and John Lewis under-
took such a project between 1965 and 1967 with 
the goals being 
... to determine (1) differences in the structure of 
non-standard Negro English (NNE) and standard 
English (SE), and (2) differences in the ways in 
which speakers of these dialects use language, 
with emphasis on the speech events, verbal skills, 
and social controls which govern the development 
of the vernacular (Labov et al., 1968).
With this study, they were directly providing an 
empirical argument against the widespread educa-
tional belief in the ‘culturally deprived’ child. 
The basic premise was that children who did not 
receive cultural enrichment similar to (white) 
middle-class families were not able to handle the 
requirements of school and therefore were des-
tined to failure. For example, Fred M. Hechinger, 
the Education Editor of the New York Times, 
wrote, ‘All the evidence today indicates that chil-
dren from a home background that not only is 
economically and socially at the lowest level but 
lacks family orientation toward formal learning 
are virtually excluded from success in school’ 
(1966: 2).
The main area of deprivation on which scholars 
focused was language. Scholars in education did 
not believe that either the language or the social 
environment fostering language worked well or 
at all: ‘... the slum home is a place of little oppor-
tunity for infants to talk, question, and seek 
answers’ (Hechinger, 1966). Carl Bereiter, 
Siegfried Engelman, Jean Osborn and Philip A. 
Reidford presented a study, based on assumptions 
from two works – Negro Intelligence and Selective 
Migration (Lee, 1951) and Early Education of the 
Mentally Retarded (Kirk, 1958) – where they 
argue that ‘culturally deprived’ children did not 
think because their language was so deprived 
that they could not think. Their solution was for 
the preschool to lay the foundations of language 
logic directly. They write (Hechinger, 1966: 105), 
‘... culturally deprived children do not just think at 
an immature level: many of them do not think at 
all’. It is clear, in Bereiter et al.’s article, that the 
narrative categorization of speech is essential to 
distinguish thought from ‘non-thought’ (Hechinger, 
1966: 107): 
They are oblivious of even the most extreme dis-
crepancies between their actions and statements 
as they follow one another in a series. They do not 
just give bad explanations. They can not give 
explanations at all, nor do they seem to have any 
idea of what it is to explain an event. The question 
and answer process which is the core of orderly 
thinking is completely foreign to most of them.
In reaction to such opinions, Labov, Cohen, 
Robins and Lewis (1968) presented a two-volume 
report (732 pages) empirically refuting the foun-
dational assumptions of the culturally-deprived 
view of language. From this work came Labov’s 
Logic of Nonstandard English (1969b; see also 
Labov, 1972a), which presented Labov’s view to a 
greatly expanded audience.
Labov’s interest in narrative was fuelled in part 
by educational scholars’ ignorance about the sys-
tematic nature of spontaneous, vernacular talk.16 
In Labov and Waletsky (1967), republished in 
1997, Labov set out to provide a formal charac-
terization of personal experience narratives, using 
narratives collected on Martha’s Vineyard and in 
New York in the course of his sociolinguistic 
interviews. Labov’s study of narrative tried to 
understand vernacular speakers in context. In a 
very influential paper called ‘The Logic of Non-
Standard English’, Labov (1969b: 54) describes 
narrative interactions between students and teach-
ers. The narratives of the non-standard speakers, 
often seen by educators as illogical or incoherent, 

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
35
are recast by Labov as clear expressions in a 
rule-governed system. Using the logical formali-
zations of the linguistics of the time, he argues for 
the legitimacy of non-standard English, by show-
ing that African-American students’ narratives are 
in some ways more logical than those of White 
adults (Labov 1969b: 55).
2.7 REFINING HIS RESEARCH
Since 1994, Labov has published two tomes in the 
three-volume set entitled Principles of Linguistic 
Change (Labov 1994, 2001). Volume I17 deals 
with internal factors, predominantly drawing from 
work begun for Labov, Yaeger and Steiner (1972), 
the Linguistic Change and Variation project con-
ducted in Philadelphia and eastern Pennsylvania 
from 1973 to 1979, and the work of Herold (1990) 
and Poplack (1979, 1980a, 1980b). Volume I pre-
dominantly explores the linguistic mechanics of 
vowel mergers and chain shifts. Volume II18 deals 
with social factors, incorporating the findings of 
the internal factors developed in Volume I. Volume 
II explores stable and changing linguistic varia-
bles, neighbourhoods and ethnicity, gender, age 
and social class, while portraying the leaders of 
linguistic change and charting their defining char-
acteristics. It also explores how scholars solve the 
problems of transmission, incrementation and 
continuation of linguistic change.19
In 2006, Labov, Sharon Ash and Charles Boberg 
published The Atlas of North American English.20 
The authors and a team of researchers collected 
data from 762 speakers over the telephone in read-
ing passages, word lists and more casual inter-
views. Four hundred and thirty-nine of the 
interviews underwent acoustic analysis. Their 
major goals were to delimit the dialect areas of 
North America, primarily on the basis of speakers’ 
vowel systems, and to take account of the ‘mecha-
nism, the causes, and the consequences of linguis-
tic change’ (Labov et al., 2006: v). This atlas takes 
up boundaries of perception as well as production 
in its search for sound changes in progress. Vowels 
had been part of traditional dialectology’s reper-
toire of tools for deciding dialect boundaries, but 
Labov and his colleagues have greatly enhanced 
the acoustic analysis of vowel systems in dialecto-
logical work.21 By analysing the entire orchestra 
of vowels, their movements and pressures, Labov, 
Ash and Boberg describe fine linguistic distinc-
tions amongst large geographic regions. Their 
work represents a comprehensive sketch of English 
in North America, and they encourage other schol-
ars to complete their sketch with studies of local 
communities.
2.8 CONCLUSION
As seen in his most recent interview (Gordon, 
2006: 338), Labov continues to search for the 
comprehensive principles he can find for lan-
guage: for example, principles of chain shifting 
(Labov, 1994: 116) or social principles such as 
the Nonconformity Principle (Labov, 2001: 516). 
The impact of Labov’s efforts should also be 
assessed by their effect on how linguistic scholar-
ship is conducted. Perhaps the most rewarding 
component of his legacy has been his impact on 
his students at the University of Pennsylvania 
and the many students he has assisted from around 
the world. Labov’s former students are them-
selves highly productive and innovative language 
scholars.
Despite his sweeping influence as teacher and 
scholar, the conglomerate field of sociolinguistics 
is not uniformly a Labovian field. In the introduc-
tion to Volume I of the Principles of Linguistic 
Change, Labov remarks that his view of theoriz-
ing may not be in line with that of other students 
of sociolinguistics who argue for a ‘sociolinguistic 
theory’. Labov (1994: 4) does not attempt to model 
all possible relations between past and present 
language systems, but leans towards approaches 
in sciences like biology and geology, proceeding 
‘... steadily from the known to the unknown, 
enlarging the sphere of our knowledge on the foun-
dation of observation and experiment in a cumula-
tive manner’ (1994: 5). This approach is in contrast 
to making more general statements (theories) and 
then deducing from them expectations of what 
can be found in certain communities. Labov 
instead works towards finding an explanation 
based on internal factors of linguistic change, an 
explanation which must ultimately ‘... find its 
causes in a domain outside of linguistics: in 
physiology, acoustic phonetics, social relations, 
perceptual or cognitive capacities’ (1994: 5). It is 
towards this end of explanation that Labov has 
guided his work for over four decades.
NOTES
1 As with any historical view of an ongoing aca-
demic endeavor (Hazen, 2007a, 2007b), this chapter 
is one scholar’s perspective. It should therefore be 
read as an interpretation and, accordingly, part of a 
larger conversation about how the fields analyzing 
language in society have developed.
2 Labov cites for the ‘precise statement’ con-
cerning ‘idiolects’ Zellig Harris’s (1951: 9) Methods 
in Structural Linguistics: ‘These investigations are 
carried out for the speech of one particular person, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
36
or one community of dialectally identical persons, 
at a time ... ’.
 3 As part of this debate, Uriel Weinreich wrote 
a review of Hockett’s (1958) A Course in Modern 
Linguistics where Hockett creatively reiterated 
Bloomfield’s view. Weinreich argued that a view 
which holds up changes in the past as theoretically 
interesting in contrast to current change is neither 
sufficient nor necessary (Weinreich, 1959).
 4 Although perhaps not a direct influence, the 
work of Kenneth Burke (1969) on identification 
should be part of future scholarship on the history of 
the study of language and self since that work has 
connections with Labov’s on several levels.
 5 Lavandera (1988) asserts that Labov (1969a) 
and (1972g) focus on the systematicity of perform-
ance in contrast to the systematicity of competence. 
I disagree with that assertion.  I suspect Labov viewed 
the boundary between the two as illusory and as 
simply a fabrication to allow for weak data.  Labov’s 
search for robust data in the speech community 
(abstracted from the grammar of the individual and 
hence not the grammar of an idiolect) does not fit 
the profile of performance as Chomsky (1965) 
describes it (cf. also Jackendoff 2002 for a critique of 
Chomskyan performance). 
 6 Most assessors of linguistic history (e.g. 
Koerner, 1991: 65) put the first use of the English 
term sociolinguistics at 1952 by Haver C. Curie 
(1952).
 7 Weinreich, Labov and Herzog use the term 
‘idiolect’ throughout the chapter, but the term ‘idi-
olect’ was not in print until 1948 (Hazen, 2006).
 8 Labov at times contextualizes previous 
scholars in his own line of thought through his 
translations of their work. For example, he translates 
(2006: 11) the following line to have variables as 
the noun whereas Meillet has variable conditions: 
‘car il resterait à découvrir les conditions variables qui 
permettent ou provoquent la réalization des possib-
lités ainsi reconnues’ (Meillet, 1921: 16–17).
 9 Although Gumperz is renowned for his work 
with dialects of India, his dissertation focused on a 
Swabian dialect (German) of third-generation farm-
ers in Michigan. Hence, Gumperz, who studied at 
the University of Michigan, has his roots, in part, in 
American dialectology.
10 Labov, in Gordon (2006: 334), argues that ‘If 
Weinreich had lived, I think two things would have 
happened. Studies of languages in contact would be 
pursued much more vigorously as a part of sociolin-
guistics. And, most important, dialect geography 
would have advanced much more strongly in the 
past forty years’.
11 Although the contrast between ‘generative 
grammarians’ and sociolinguists is sometimes made, 
many scholars of language variation and change 
also assume that a mental grammar generates a 
potentially infinite set of utterances. Variationists just 
contest the assumptions of categoricity and the result-
ing methodological choices (see Chambers, 2003).
12 The American Language Survey was the basis 
for Labov (1966a).
13 Weinreich et al. (1968: 167) write: ‘To 
account for such intimate variation, it is necessary to 
introduce another concept into the mode of orderly 
heterogeneity which we are developing here: the 
“linguistic variable”– a variable element within the 
system controlled by a single rule’. The term ‘variable 
rule’ does come up in footnote 56 on page 170, but 
it is presented without comment.
14 Although, in section 3.21 on Coexistent 
Systems, Weinreich, Labov and Herzog (1968: 159) 
discuss forms from different language systems (in 
one speaker): 
In terms of the model of a differentiated lan-
guage system that we are developing, such 
forms share the following properties: (1) They 
offer alternative means of ‘saying the same 
thing’: that is, for each utterance in A there is a 
corresponding utterance in B which provides 
the same referential information (is synony-
mous) and cannot be differentiated except in 
terms of the over-all significance which marks 
the use of B as against A.
15 Labov’s (1972d) paper had first been pre-
sented in 1968 at the LSA winter meeting.
16 Labov and Fanshel (1977) take up a different 
track of narrative analysis by analysing a psycholo-
gist’s doctor–patient relations.
17 Reviewed by Kretzschmar (1996). 
18 Reviewed by Kretzschmar (2005).
19 Volume III is in progress at the time of 
writing. The draft chapters are available at: http://
www.ling.upenn.edu/phonoatlas/PLC3/PLC3.html.
20 This book is reviewed in Bailey (2007). Some 
critics view this work as a return to traditional dialec-
tology, with a lack of representative sampling in any 
one area. 
21 See Thomas (2001) for a discussion of Labov’s 
influence.
REFERENCES
Bailey, R. W. (2007) ‘The greatest atlas ever’, American 
Speech, 82(4): 292–300.
Bailey, C-J. N. and Shuy, R. W. (eds) (1973) New Ways of 
Analyzing Variation in English. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press.
Bamberg, M. G. W. (ed.) (1997) ‘Oral versions of personal 
experience: three decades of narrative analysis’, Journal of 
Narrative and Life History, (7): 1–4.
Becker, K. and Coggshall, E. (2009) ‘The Sociolinguistics of 
Ethnicity in New York City’. Language and Linguistics 
Compass 3/3 751–766, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2009.00138.x

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
37
Bereiter, C., Engelman, S., Osborn, J. and Reidford, P. A. (1966) 
‘An academically oriented pre-school for culturally deprived 
children’, in F. M. Hechinger (ed.), Pre-school Education 
Today. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. pp. 105–36.
Blake, R. and Josey, M. (2003) ‘The layl diphthong in a 
Martha’s Vineyard community: What can we say 40 years 
after Labov?’ Language in Society, 32: 451–85.
Bloch, B. and Trager, G. L. (1942) Outline of Linguistic 
Analysis. Baltimore: Linguistic Society of America.
Bloomfield, L. (1933) Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
and Winston.
Bright, W. (ed.) (1966) Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the 
UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 1964. The Hague: 
Mouton.
Buchstaller, I. (2009) ‘The Quantitative Analysis of Morpho-
syntactic Variation: Constructing and Quantifying the 
Denominator’. Language and Linguistics Compass 3/4: 
1010–33, 10.1111/j.1749-818x.2009.00142.x
Burke, K. (1969) A Grammar of Motives. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Campbell-Kibler, K. (2007) ‘Accent, (ING), and the social logic 
of listener perceptions’, American Speech, 82: 32–64.
Cedergren, H. J. (1973) ‘On the nature of variable constraints’, 
in C-J. N. Bailey and R. W. Shuy (eds), New Ways of 
Analyzing Variation in English. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. pp. 13–22.
Chambers, J., Trudgill, P. and Schilling-Estes, N. (eds.) (2002) 
The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell.
Chambers, J. K. (2003) Sociolinguistic Theory. 2nd edn. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. and Halle, M. (1968) The Sound Pattern of 
English. New York: Harper and Row.
Curie, H. C. (1952) ‘A projection of socio-linguistics: the 
relationship of speech to social status’, Southern Speech 
Journal, (18): 28–37.
Fasold, R. W. (1991) ‘The quiet demise of variable rules’, 
American Speech, 66: 3–21.
Fischer, J. L. (1958) ‘Social influence on the choice of a linguistic 
variant’, Word, 14: 47–56.
Gordon, M. J. (2006) ‘Interview with William Labov’, Journal 
of English Linguistics, 34(4): 332–51.
Green, L. J. (2007) ‘Syntactic Variation’, in R. Bayley and 
C. Lucas (eds), Sociolinguistic Variation. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 24–44.
Gumperz, J. J. (1958) ‘Dialect differences and social stratifica-
tion in a North Indian village’, American Anthropologist, 
60: 668–82.
Guy, G. R. (2007) ‘Variation and phonological theory’, in 
R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds), Sociolinguistic Variation. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. pp. 5–23.
Hagen, A. M. (1988a) ‘Dutch dialectology: the national and 
the international perspective’, Historiographia Linguistica, 
15: 263–87.
Hagen, A. M. (1988b) ‘Sociolinguistic aspects in dialectology’, 
in U. Ammon, D. Norbert and K. J. Mattheier (eds), 
Sociolinguistics/soziolinguistik: an International Handbook 
of the Science of Language and Society. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter.
Halle, M. (1962) ‘Phonology in generative grammar’, Word, 
18: 54–72.
Harris, Z. (1951) Methods in Structural Linguistics. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Hazen, K. (2006) ‘IN/ING Variable’, in K. Brown (ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Elsevier. pp. 581–4.
Hazen, K. (2007a) ‘Variationist approaches to language & edu-
cation’, in N. Hornberger and K. King (eds), The Encyclopedia 
of Language and Education. Volume 10: Research Methods 
in Language and Education. 2nd edn. pp. 85–98.
Hazen, K. (2007b) ‘The study of variation in historical 
perspective’, in R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds), Sociolinguistic 
Variation. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 70–89.
Hazen, K. (2008) ‘(ING): a vernacular baseline for English in 
Appalachia’, American Speech, 83(2): 116–40.
Hechinger, F. M. (ed.) (1966) ‘An academically oriented 
pre-school for culturally deprived children’, in Pre-school 
Education Today. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Herold, R. (1990) ‘Mechanisms of merger: the implementation 
and distribution of the low back merger in Eastern 
Pennsylvania’. University of Pennsylvania dissertation.
Hock, H. H. and Joseph, B. D. (1996) Language History, 
Language Change, and Language Relationship. New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hymes, D. (1962) ‘The ethnography of speaking’, in 
T. Gladwin and W. C. Sturtevant (eds), Anthropology and 
Human Behavior. Washington, DC: Anthropological Society 
of Washington. pp. 13–53.
Jackendoff, R. (2002) Foundations of Language. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Kenyon, J. (1948) ‘Cultural levels and functional varieties of 
English’, College English, 10: 31–6.
Kirk, S. A. (1958) Early Education of the Mentally Retarded. 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Klima, E. (1964) ‘Relatedness between grammatical systems’, 
Language, 40: 1–30.
Kloecke, G. G. (1927) De Hollandsche expansie in de 
zestiende en zeventiende eeuw en haar weerspiegeling in 
de hedendaagsche Nederlandsche dialecten. The Hague: 
Nijhoff.
Koerner, K. (1991) ‘Toward a history of modern sociolinguistics’, 
American Speech, 66(1): 57–70.
Kretzschmar, W. A., Jr. (1996) ‘A glass half empty, a glass half 
full’, American Speech, 71(2): 198–205.
Kretzschmar, W. A., Jr. (2005) ‘The Philadelphia story’, 
American Speech, 80(3): 321–30.
Labov, W. (1963) ‘The social motivation of language change’, 
Word, 19: 273–309.
Labov, W. (1966a) The Social Stratification of English in 
New York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1966b) ‘Hypercorrection by the lower middle class 
as a factor in linguistic change’, in W. Bright (ed.), 
Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the UCLA Sociolinguistics 
Conference, 1964. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 84–101.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
38
Labov, W. (1969a) ‘Contraction, deletion, and inherent varia-
bility of the English copula’, Language, 45: 715–62.
Labov, W. (1969b) ‘The logic of non-standard English’, in 
J. Alatis (ed.), Linguistics and the Teaching of Standard 
English to Speakers of Other Languages and Dialects. 
Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and 
Linguistics 1969. Washington, DC: Georgetown University 
Press. pp. 1–44.
Labov, W. (1969c) The Study of Nonstandard English. 
Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972a) ‘Academic ignorance and Black intelli-
gence’, The Atlantic Monthly, 229: 59–67.
Labov, W. (1972b) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the 
Black English vernacular. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1972c) ‘The linguistic consequences of being a 
lame’, in Language in the Inner City. Philadelphia: University 
of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 255–92.
Labov, W. (1972d) ‘Negative attraction and negative concord 
in English grammar’, Language, 48: 773–818.
Labov, W. (1972e) ‘Rules for ritual insults’, in T. Kochman 
(ed.), Rappin’ and Stylin’ Out: Communication in Urban 
Black America. Champaign-Urbana, IL: University of Illinois 
Press. pp. 265–314.
Labov, W. (1972f) ‘The social stratification of (r) in New York 
City department stores’, in William Labov, Sociolinguistic 
Patterns. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 
pp. 43–69.
Labov, W. (1972g) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1972h) ‘Some principles of linguistic methodology’, 
Language in Society, 1: 97–120.
Labov, W. (1972i) ‘The study of language in its social context’, 
in W. Labov (ed.), Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 183–259.
Labov, W. (1980) ‘The social origins of sound change’, in 
W. Labov (ed.), Locating Language in Time and Space. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 251–65.
Labov, W. (1982) ‘Objectivity and commitment in linguistic 
science’, Language in Society, 11: 165–201.
Labov, W. (1984) ‘Field methods of the project on linguistic 
change and variation’, in J. Baugh and J. Sherzer (eds), 
Language in Use: Readings in Sociolinguistics. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp. 28–53.
Labov, W. (1988) ‘The judicial testing of linguistic theory’, in D. 
Tannen (ed.), Linguistics in Context: Connecting Observation 
and Understanding. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 159–82.
Labov, W. (1989) ‘The child as linguistic historian’, Language 
Variation and Change, 1: 85–97.
Labov, W. (1990) ‘The intersection of sex and social class in 
the course of linguistic change’, Language Variation and 
Change, 2: 205–54.
Labov, W. (1991) ‘The three dialects of English’, in P. Eckert 
(ed.), New Ways of Analyzing Sound Change. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 1–44.
Labov, W. (1994) Principles of Linguistic Change, Vol. 1: 
Internal factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (1996) ‘When intuitions fail’, in L. McNair, 
K. Singer, L. Dolbrin and M. Aucon (eds), Papers from the 
Parasession on Theory and Data in Linguistics. Chicago: 
Chicago Linguistic Society 32. pp. 77–106.
Labov, W. (1997) ‘How I got into linguistics’. http://www.ling.
upenn.edu/~wlabov/HowIgot.html
Labov, W. (1998) ‘Co-existent systems in African-American 
English’, in S. Mufwene, J. R. Rickford, G. Bailey and 
J. Baugh (eds), African-American English. London: 
Routledge.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change, Vol 2: 
External factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2006) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. 2nd edn. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Labov, W. (2008) ‘Transmission and diffusion’, Language, 
83(2): 344–87.
Labov, W. and Ash, S. (1997) ‘Understanding Birmingham’, in 
C. Bernstein, T. Nunnally and R. Sabino (eds), Language 
Variety in the South Revisited. Tuscaloosa, AL: University of 
Alabama Press. pp. 508–73.
Labov, W. and Fanshel, D. (1977) Therapeutic Discourse: 
Psychotherapy as Conversation. New York: Academic Press.
Labov, W. and Waletsky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis: oral 
versions of personal experience’, in J. Helm (ed.), Essays on 
the Verbal and Visual Arts: Proceedings of the 1966 Annual 
Spring Meeting of the American Ethnological Society. 
Seattle: University of Washington Press. pp. 12–44.
Labov, W., Ash, S. and Boberg, C. (2006) The Atlas of North 
American English: Phonetics, Phonology, and Sound 
Change. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Labov, W., Cohen, P., Robins, C. and Lewis, J. (1968) A study 
of Non-Standard English of Negro and Puerto Rican 
speakers in New York City. 2 vols. Philadelphia: US 
Regional Survey.
Labov, W., Karen, M. and Miller, C. (1991) ‘Near-mergers and 
the suspension of phonemic contrast’, Language Variation 
and Change, 3: 33–74.
Labov, W., Yaeger, M. and Steiner, R. (1972) A Quantitative 
Study of Sound Change in Progress. Philadelphia: US 
Regional Survey.
Lavandera, B. R. (1975) ‘Linguistic structure and sociolinguis-
tic conditioning in the use of verbal endings in “si” Clauses 
(Buenos Aires Spanish)’. PhD dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania.
Lavandera, B. R. (1989) ‘The study of language in its socio-
cultural context,’ in Frederick J. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: 
the Cambridge Survey: Vol. 4, Language: The Socio-
Cultural Context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 1–13.
Lee, E. S. (1951) ‘Negro intelligence and selective migration: a 
Philadelphia test of the Klineberg hypothesis’, American 
Sociological Review, 16: 227–33.
Kirk, S. A. (1958) Early Education of the Mentally Retarded. 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
McDavid, R. I., Jr. (1966) ‘Dialect differences and social differ-
ences in an urban society’, in W. Bright (ed.), Sociolinguistics: 
Proceedings of the UCLA Sociolinguistics Conference, 
1964. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 72–83.
Malkiel, Y. (1976) ‘From romance philology through dialect 
geography to sociolinguistics’, International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language, 9: 59–84.

LABOV: LANGUAGE VARIATION AND CHANGE
39
Martinet, A. (1952) ‘Function, structure, and sound change’, 
Word, 8: 1–32.
Martinet, A. (1955) Economie des Changements Phonétiques. 
Berne: Francke.
Meillet, A. (1905) ‘Comment les mots changent de sens’, 
Année Sociologique, 9: 1–38.
Meillet, A. (1921) Linguistique Histoire et Linguistique 
Générale. 2 vols. Paris: Société de Linguistique.
Milroy, L. (1980) Language and Social Networks. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Milroy, L. (1987) Observing and Analysing Natural Language. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Moulton, W. G. (1960) ‘The short vowel system of Northern 
Switzerland: a study in structural dialectology’, Word, 16: 
155–83.
Moulton, W. G. (1962) ‘Dialect geography and the concept of 
phonological space’, Word, 18: 23–32.
Paul, H. (1891) Principles of the History of Language. (Revised 
and translated by Herbert A. Strong from the 1890 edition). 
New York: Longman, Green.
Pederson, L. (1964) ‘The pronunciation of English in Chicago: 
consonants and vowels’. PhD dissertation, University of 
Chicago.
Pilch, H. (1955) ‘The rise of the American English vowel 
pattern’, Word, 11: 57–93.
Pope, J., Meyerhoff, M. and Ladd, D. R. (2007) ‘Forty years of 
language change on Martha’s Vineyard’, Language, 
83(3): 615–27.
Poplack, S. (1979) ‘Function and process in a variable 
phonology’. PhD dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.
Poplack, S. (1980a) ‘Deletion and disambiguation in Puerto 
Rican Spanish’, Language, 56: 371–85. 
Poplack, S. (1980b) ‘The notion of plural in Puerto Rican 
Spanish: competing constraints on /s/ deletion’, in 
W. Labov (ed.), Locating language in Time and Space. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 55–68.
Port, R. F. and Leary, A. P. (2005) ‘Against formal phonology’, 
Language, 81(4): 927–64.
Read, A. W. (2002) ‘Milestones in the history of English 
in America’, in R. W. Bailey (ed.), Publications of the 
American Dialect Society 86. Durham, NC: Duke University 
Press.
Rickford, J. R. and Eckert, P. (2001) Style and Sociolinguistic 
Variation. New York: Cambridge UP.
Sapir. E. (1921) Language, an Introduction to the Study of 
Speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace, and Company.
Saussure, F. (1972 [1916]) Cours de linguistique générale. 
Paris: Payot.
Shuy, R. W. (1965) Social Dialects and Language Learning. 
Champaign, IL: NCTE.
Shuy, R. W. (1990) ‘A brief history of American Sociolinguistics, 
1949–1989’, in F. P. Dinneen and E. F. K. Koerner (eds), 
North American Contributions to the History of Linguistics. 
Philadelphia: Benjamins. pp. 183–209.
Tagliamonte, S. (2006) Analysing Sociolinguistic Variation. 
New York. Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, E. (2001) An Acoustic Analysis of Vowel Variation in 
New World English. Publication of the American Dialect 
Society 85. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Trudgill, P. (ed.) (1978) Sociolinguistic Patterns in British 
English. London: Edward Arnold.
Vendryes, J. (1925) Language: A Linguistic Introduction to 
History. Tr. P. Radin. London: Routledge.
Weinreich, U. (1951) ‘Research problems in bilingualism, with 
special regard to Switzerland’. PhD dissertation. Columbia 
University.
Weinreich, U. (1953) Languages in Contact: Problems and 
Findings. New York: Linguistic Circle of New York.
Weinreich, U. (1954) ‘Is a structural dialectology possible?’, 
Word, 10: 388–400.
Weinreich, U. (1959) Review of Charles F. Hockett’s A Course 
in Modern Linguistics. Romance Philology, XIII: 329–32.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. (1968) Empirical 
Foundations for a Theory of Language Change, in W. P. 
Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for Historical Lin-
guistics: A Symposium. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Whitney, W. D. (1867) Language and the Study of Language. 
New York: Scribner.
Wolfram, W. (1991) ‘The linguistic variable: fact and fantasy’, 
American Speech, 66: 22–32.

Bernstein: Codes and 
Social Class1
G a b r i e l l e  I v i n s o n
3
3.1 INTRODUCTION
Basil Bernstein introduced the origins of his 
lifetime’s work as a sociologist in the first volume 
of Class, Codes and Control (CCC), published in 
1971. His personal history begins with mention 
of the period 1939–45, alluding to his Jewish 
background and immigrant status. He started his 
career as a resident worker at the Bernhard Baron 
Settlement in Stepney, London (1971: 2) where he 
ran clubs for boys aged between 9 and 18 years 
old. Bernstein noted that the boys in the club often 
held values that were in conflict to those held by 
more senior members of staff in the Settlement. 
He also noted the differences between Reform 
Judaism that informed practices within the 
Settlement and Orthodox Judaism practised by 
members of the community that the Settlement 
served. Bernstein became interested in the ways 
factions within what may appear to be homogene-
ous groups maintained contrasting values and how 
these were passed down across time as a social 
‘genetic code’. His experiences in the Settlement 
gave him a strong insight into ‘the structure and 
process of cultural transmission’ and particularly 
inter-generational transmission (ibid.). Bernstein 
stated:
Thus the settlement introduced me to the inter-
relationships between social class and religious 
belief within the context of an apparently distinct 
and homogeneous group (1971: 3).
In 1947, while studying for a BSc degree in 
Economics in Sociology at the London School of 
Economics, Bernstein read widely in sociology 
and psychology and was inspired by Durkheim’s 
description of the social bond and the structuring 
of experience. After further study he received a 
postgraduate certificate of education and started 
teaching at Kingsway Day College in London. 
Here again, Bernstein’s personal experiences pro-
vided insights into issues that remained central to 
his theoretical work. For example, many who 
attended the college were on day release from 
various industries such as the General Post Office 
and London docks, and Bernstein noted how dif-
ficult it was to motivate the boys to learn in class, 
in comparison to outside the college. The boys he 
taught were enrolled on a course in elementary 
vehicle maintenance. Outside college the boys 
listened with rapt interest to 50-minute lectures on 
topics such as ‘the internal combustion engine, the 
general mechanics and electrics of the car and 
advanced study of road safety’ (ibid.: 4). In order 
to try to motivate them inside college, he used the 
topic of car mechanics to instruct them in English, 
arithmetic, general science and civics. At the end 
of the course the boys received a ‘printed and 
embossed’ (ibid.) certificate in elementary car 
maintenance. Bernstein described how the credi-
bility of the whole course was thrown into jeop-
ardy when one of the boys asked, ‘What do I do 
with this guv?’ He explained:
With my heart in my mouth I replied, ‘Send it to 
your insurance firm, they might do something 
about your premium.’ About a month later the 
same student came up to me with a broad grin 
and said, ‘It worked. They’ve reduced it!’ We were 
in business both metaphorically and materially 
(ibid.: 5).

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
41
The formative experience of striving to make 
learning meaningful to boys who had been written 
off by their earlier experiences of schooling gave 
Bernstein an abiding interest in the way groups 
invest in and are positioned by institutions and 
especially schools and families.
Bernstein’s sociological endeavour has been to 
describe and explain pedagogic practice: a prac-
tice which almost invariably decontextualizes 
meanings from the situated contexts of everyday 
life and recontextualizes them within abstract, 
text-based symbolic codes which appear to have 
no connection or relevance to social functions. 
Bernstein became fascinated with the use of 
abstract codes and asked why some groups were 
motivated to preserve and pass these on while 
other groups in the same society ascribed them 
little or no value at all. The boys following the 
vehicle maintenance course initially saw no reason 
for the academic certificates handed out by the 
college because they appeared to have no eco-
nomic or practical function. However, such insti-
tutions distributed the accolades that are used to 
guarantee access to well-paid, stable, professional 
jobs. As his work developed, Bernstein drew upon 
Foucauldian (1977) notions of dominant discourse 
to capture the values maintained by groups hierar-
chically positioned within societies. However, in 
contrast to Foucault, Bernstein retained a strong 
sense that power is hierarchically structured. In a 
neo-Marxian sense, he recognized that groups 
closer to the apparatus of governance or with 
access to the tools of production have greater con-
trol than other groups over the discourses that 
carry influence and legitimacy. He was particu-
larly interested in which groups have wrestled for 
control of educational systems and the knowledge, 
codes and discourse that they reward. Towards the 
end of his life, Bernstein warned that we were 
beginning to see a new social order which does 
not reproduce the division of labour based along 
class lines filtered via education systems. The 
control of the highly valued symbolic codes and 
their distribution had begun to shift away from 
academia. This veritable crisis at the heart of edu-
cation is not only a crisis about the inheritability 
of social codes and access to professional jobs but 
it also has implications for subjectivity. The other 
theme that has dominated Bernstein’s work is the 
relationship between social organization and the 
formation of consciousness. Consciousness relates 
to subjectivity, which is influenced by access to, and 
familiarity with, specific groups and institutions 
that provide the tools for thought, and therefore the 
possibility to reflect on one’s position in society 
and in the world.
During his early teaching experience, Bernstein 
noted a great discrepancy between the oral and 
written accomplishments of the boys following 
the elementary course in motor mechanics. During 
lessons, he explored language with the boys by 
taking apart lines of poetry and rearranging them 
on the page while discussing with them the 
changes afforded by words in space. Bernstein 
noted that:
The space between the lines was the listener or 
reader’s space out of which he [sic] created 
a unique, unspoken, personal meaning (ibid.: 6).
The linguistic strand of his work can be seen in 
embryonic form in this example and provides a 
hint that Bernstein was primarily interested in 
meaning and only secondarily interested in the 
formal structures of language such as syntax. His 
interest in meaning relates to what kinds of sym-
bolic tools groups in society have for reflecting on 
life and on themselves. His early interest in the 
symbolic resources provided by language was 
illuminated by reading Sapir (1921), Whorf (1956) 
and especially Cassirer’s Philosophy of Symbolic 
Forms. In exploring the relationship between con-
sciousness and social organization, he developed 
an interest in speech codes inspired to some extent 
by Vygostsky’s psychology, and although the 
book, Thought and Language, had not been trans-
lated in 1958, Bernstein found an article translated 
by Luria in Psychiatry, II, 1939. He also found 
an article on speech, used by working-class men 
and women to describe their experience of a 
tornado in Arkansas, by Strauss and Schatzman, 
that explored social class and forms of communi-
cation. His early attempts to characterize speech 
codes according to syntactical differences has to 
be seen within this broader picture. He later aban-
doned his early attempts to differentiate working- 
and middle-class speech codes in terms of syntax, 
admitting that they were not significant features 
and did not help him to understand the formation 
of consciousness. Even so, much of the criticism 
levelled at Bernstein, especially by Labov, focused 
on his early attempts to differentiate social-class 
codes in terms of syntax. It has to be remembered 
that he was primarily interested in what meanings 
can be created in the spaces between the words 
arranged on a page, or more generally, between 
language and the social contexts experienced by 
groups. His fundamental question has always 
been, ‘Which groups are afforded the symbolic 
tools to recognise how they have been positioned 
within society?’ Therefore much of his socio-
logical work has scrutinized academic institutions 
where, traditionally, abstract rather than context-
dependent symbolic codes have been created, 
maintained and passed down.
Bernstein’s early interests in social organiza-
tion, social-class groups, meaning, speech forms 
and consciousness were reworked numerous times 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
42
throughout the development of the theory. At the 
heart of his work was a striving to understand how 
meanings come to be formed and how different 
groups value and protect their own meanings. The 
description of Bernstein’s theoretical work will 
therefore start with meaning.
3.2  THE CENTRAL PROBLEMATICS 
OF BERNSTEIN’S OEUVRE
Central to Bernstein’s sociology of knowledge 
and pedagogy is the status of meaning. In every 
aspect of a social problem that we may choose to 
think about, Bernstein insists on asking whose 
meanings are recognized and legitimated in this 
context and whose are not. What are the social 
forces or power dynamics that allow one group’s 
meanings to be taken seriously while other groups’ 
meanings are not? Bernstein sums it up beauti-
fully as ‘What meaning and where?’ Practically 
everything else I shall describe in relation to this 
complex theory comes back to these questions. 
In his sociological reach he was interested in 
which groups manage to be the ones who impose 
meaning on others, how they mobilize and create 
institutional structures to maintain their powerful 
positions and, further, what invisible, unintended 
or defensive structures allow dominant social norms 
or discourses to be re-imagined, reinstated and 
reproduced. He was also interested in change in 
social norms across a long historical trajectory 
from the Hellenistic era to the present and, indeed, 
the future. Once we have the central problematic 
of meaning in place it becomes easier to under-
stand the way Bernstein took some concepts from 
sociolinguistics and not others, and how he was 
happy to adapt, extend and transform what look 
like linguistic concepts in non-linguistic ways. 
Bernstein’s work has in turn influenced the field 
of sociolinguistics to provide new inspiration to 
contemporary theorists such as Halliday, Hasan 
and Kress. The conversation between Hasan and 
Bernstein is deep-rooted and ongoing (cf. Hasan, 
1989, 1992a, 1992b, 1995, 1996, 2002, 2006; 
Hasan et al., 2005). The most well-known aspect 
of Bernstein’s sociological work is the quasi-
linguistic notion of ‘code’.
3.3 CODE: AN INITIAL OVERVIEW
Bernstein developed the notion of code in order to 
differentiate between groups within the same soci-
ety in the spirit of Marx, Gramsci and Foucault 
(cf. Hymes, 1995: 4). In the 1960s and 1970s, this 
project ran counter to movements within linguistics 
in which Chomsky’s search for a universal gram-
mar was influencing the field in ways which 
played down difference and inequality. For 
Chomsky, in the USA, the fundamental basis of 
language was innate and language was acquired 
rather than learned; the drive towards a universal 
grammar, even a universal language, aimed to 
provide all groups with equal access to the lin-
guistic resources required to participate in society. 
In contrast, in pointing out difference, Bernstein 
in the UK was attempting to demonstrate the role 
of social institutions, such as family and school, in 
the perpetuation of social-class inequality. For 
Bernstein the fundamental basis of language was 
the ‘real’ (Kress, 2001), active, everyday experi-
ence and behaviour of children, young people 
and adults involved in specific family and school 
settings that made up their daily lives, placing 
emphasis on social structuration of the environ-
ment rather than biological substrates. Bernstein 
became branded in the USA as the person who 
aligned minority groups of class and, by implica-
tion, race/ethnicity with a deficit, or ‘restricted 
code’ and this dominated many people’s reading 
of his work. While we might say that Chomsky’s 
Language Acquisition Device pointed to a, hope-
fully, more egalitarian future, the Pedagogic 
Device that Bernstein developed around the end of 
the 1980s aimed to uncover the roots of present 
social inequality.
In this chapter my primary aim will be to intro-
duce the reader to Bernstein’s notion of ‘code’ in 
a way which gets beyond simplistic understanding 
of ‘restricted’ and ‘elaborate’ forms by paying 
attention to the theoretical influences that inspired 
his work. To do this I am going to take advantage 
of the way Bernstein’s work developed across a 
40-year span and reflect on code as he constantly 
revisited and reflected upon it to provide it with a 
depth that it did not have initially (cf. Note Vol. 1, 
Introduction, 1971: 1–20). This approach will help 
to contextualize some of the early formulations of 
code and recognize the depth and richness that it 
acquired as the theory evolved.
Broadly, Bernstein was interested in how human 
consciousness was formed in relation to changes 
in social organization across the long historical 
trajectory from the Greeks and Romans, through 
the medieval era, to the hyper-individualism of 
neo-liberalism.2 In brief, he made a connection 
between social organization and consciousness 
via a particular kind of engagement with language 
which does not quite align with the systems and 
structures that make up linguistics. Between social 
relations and consciousness there are many kinds 
of mediation: ‘(B)etween language and speech is 
social structure’ (Bernstein 1990: 95). While ini-
tially code was characterized in terms of syntactic 
features, later Bernstein changed this to express 

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
43
them in terms of semantic features. The form of 
mediation that Bernstein developed to accommo-
date his interest in meaning was speech forms. 
The concept of ‘speech form’ provided a way to 
capture something of the ways different groups are 
oriented to meanings, depending on their exposure 
to and experience of specific kinds of social rela-
tionships. In particular, he focused on relation-
ships between children and parents in their homes 
and teachers and pupils in schools, so that his 
work could be characterized as a sociology of 
pedagogy in the broadest sense. He was not con-
cerned with linguistic performance or ability, 
instead studying and describing the implicit mean-
ings that align with speech forms. When he wrote 
about language he was not referring to systems of 
grammar, syntax and vocabulary, the structures of 
language systems, but to the social relationships 
that make up institutions, such as families. He was 
interested in the way social relationships align and 
order ideas, characterized as the grammar of the 
social in contradistinction to the grammar of lin-
guistics. He argued that working-class children 
participate in different kinds of social interaction 
with parents than do middle-class children and, 
even more importantly, that fractions within the 
middle classes are oriented to meaning in different 
ways, his later work becoming particularly con-
cerned with the latter as social changes take place 
within organic solidarity.
From the 1980s he became interested in changes 
in symbolic control relating to late capitalism. In 
a series of papers, especially Chapter 4 of Vol. IV 
and Chapter 4 of Vol. V, Bernstein addressed the 
limits of what can be thought across a vast his-
torical canvas in which he identified dominant 
shifts in the way knowledge has been and is imag-
ined. The kind of knowledge that has been given 
high status and recognized as sacred rather than 
profane, esoteric rather than mundane, or scien-
tific rather than common sense, has changed 
across epochs from the Hellenistic era, through 
the Middle Ages, to the Enlightenment and into 
late capitalism. He pointed to the turning points, 
brought about through cultural shifts based on 
the dominance of, for example, Christianity, then 
science and, presently, the market, across Western 
societies. Such shifts are rare, yet their implica-
tions are great because they realign boundaries 
between high- and low-status knowledge and 
change its ideological underpinning. They also 
change how subjectivity is imagined across eras. 
Bernstein used the quasi-linguistic conception of 
code to capture these shifts, suggesting that code 
regulates relations between state and citizen, edu-
cation policymaker and teacher and, at another 
level, teacher and pupil. Bernstein’s theory is 
based on a distinction between code and its reali-
zations, which are ‘a function of the culture acting 
through social relations in specific contexts’ 
(Bernstein, 1974: 173–4). Codes operate at the 
level of culture and his theory sought to explain 
how some codes and not others come to dominate 
in society.
The latest shift that captured Bernstein’s atten-
tion in the mid 1980s related to late capitalism. 
While the logic of free-market economics has 
come to dominate public life, there is an internal 
contradiction at the heart of globalization. While 
it purports to support a free-market principle in 
the global circulation of good and services, ‘non-
discrimination is discriminatory’ (Hasan, 2006: 
213) because free trade, such as ‘the policy of non-
discrimination in recruiting labour’ (ibid. original 
emphasis) actually imposes restrictions. Ironically, 
discourses of decentred state control in terms of 
the free market have created excessive state control, 
which Bernstein characterized as ‘a totally peda-
gogised society’ (Bernstein 2001: 377). This social 
shift has fundamental consequences for knowledge 
and pedagogy:
Today led by the U.S.A. and the U.K., there is 
a new principle guiding the latest transition of 
capitalism. The principles of the market and its 
managers are more and more the managers of 
the policy and practices of education. Market 
relevance is becoming the key orienting criterion 
for the selection of discourses, their relations to 
each other, their forms and their research […] 
Knowledge, after nearly a thousand years is 
divorced from the inwardness and literally dehu-
manized (Bernstein, 2000: 86; emphasis Hasan’s, 
cited in Hasan, 2006: 212).
Speech forms: elaborated 
and restricted codes
Clarifying the fundamental consequences of 
a totally-pedagogized society requires description 
of a range of concepts, starting with ‘speech 
forms’, which dominated Bernstein’s work up to 
the mid 1970s. They capture something of the way 
different, usually social-class, groups are oriented 
to meaning. Using the language of semiotics, 
Bernstein attempted to capture the distinct signifi-
cation that governs the relationship between signi-
fier and signified for different class groups within 
society and connect this to their differential posi-
tioning in relation to the economic base of mate-
rial and symbolic production, the latter relating to 
who has control of what can be thought in society. 
Across his large historical canvas, who controlled 
the thinkable and unthinkable shifted from priests 
in the church, to scientists in universities and, 
latterly, to managers of markets. Each of these 
groups has had varying amounts of influence on 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
44
schools and teachers, who differentially distribute 
access to codes used by those who have control 
over symbolic production and so over what can be 
thought in each era. Traditionally, working-class 
groups have had less access to schooling and have 
performed less well than their middle- and upper-
class counterparts since schooling became com-
pulsory for all. Bernstein set out to investigate 
social-class speech codes and the codes through 
which subject knowledge, such as science or art, 
is transmitted in schools.
Explanation for working-class children’s lower 
educational achievement appeared to be located in 
the mismatch between the speech codes acquired 
in their families and those used for instruction in 
schools. Bernstein (1971) attempted to classify 
the speech forms found in families with different 
orientations to space, time and authority, initially 
in terms of two, inter-dependent problems: the 
empirical explanation of class-regulated, differen-
tiated school success; and the more general one of 
what, in the 1950s, was termed the ‘process of 
socialization’. In the introduction to Vol. I CCC, 
Bernstein described how the concepts of code 
came about in his work. Initially they were defined 
in terms of the ease or difficulty of predicting the 
syntactic alternatives taken up to organize mean-
ing. However, Bernstein was heavily criticized for 
using the terms ‘public’ and ‘formal language’, 
which became identified with non-standard and 
standard (English) use respectively. Between 1958 
and 1961, Bernstein admitted to having used 
a range of ‘unreliable features in an initial attempt 
at a description’ of forms of speech (1990: 95). 
These included using terms like ‘short’, ‘simple, 
often with unfinished sentences’ and ‘poor syntac-
tic structure,’ to characterize public language use. 
This became confused with dialect so that even 
when he refined the features of these two speech 
forms and called them ‘restricted’ and ‘elaborated’ 
codes, the charge of aligning working-class speech 
forms with a deficit model of language was still 
made. These were unfortunate times and the main 
issue that Bernstein was trying to focus on – social 
relationships – was lost for many audiences and 
especially for those in the USA where Labov 
(e.g. Labov, 1970) was developing descriptions 
for Black-American speech.
Elaborated and restricted codes were aimed at 
capturing something fundamental about groups’ 
orientation to meaning. ‘Elaborated codes were 
considered to regulate a greater range of combina-
tory possibilities than restricted codes and their 
syntactic alternatives were considered less pre-
dictable’ (1990: 96). Bernstein stressed that he 
was not attempting to capture anything relating to 
linguistic competence that would allow the charge 
of a deficit model of language use for some groups 
to stand up. Instead, what he had differentiated was, 
‘how sets of social relationships in which people 
were embedded acted selectively on what was 
chosen from common linguistic resources’ (ibid.). 
He was concerned with the organization of social 
contexts and how these organizations oriented 
groups to different ranges and different kinds of 
meanings.
Research projects investigated interaction 
between mothers and children from different 
social-class backgrounds, for which Bernstein and 
his researchers designed projects to investigate the 
contextual constraints on their speech (Bernstein, 
1971, 1973; Cook-Gumperz, 1973). Bernstein iden-
tified ‘positional’ and ‘personal’ family types. In 
positional families, role relations and procedures 
of social control were characterized by strong 
boundaries regulating spatial and temporal fea-
tures and roles were specialized and segregated. 
In effect, hierarchy between children and parents 
was made explicit in interactions. For example, a 
parent might say to a child, ‘Do this because I say 
so’. In personal family types, social control was 
achieved through ‘complex forms of interpersonal 
communication’ and the boundaries between roles 
were blurred. Here a parent might typically say to 
a child, ‘Maybe we could find another way to do 
that dear, what do you think?’ While both types 
of family would be found in working-class and 
middle-class groups, Bernstein suggested that 
there would be more positional types in working-
class groups as was borne out to some extent 
by later empirical studies (Cook-Gumperz, 1973; 
Robinson, 1973; Turner, 1973; Aggleton, 1984, 
1987; Wells, 1985; Hasan, 1989). However, he 
was particularly interested in different forms of 
organic solidarity engendered by corporate capi-
talism, differentiating an ‘old’ middle class as 
positional and a new middle class as personal.
The forms of symbolic control, boundary main-
tenance and orientations to meaning that charac-
terized family types were later worked out with 
great sophistication using Halliday’s systematic 
grammar (Halliday, 1973, 1978). Instead of trying 
to describe codes in terms of the predictability of 
their syntax, as he had originally attempted, 
Bernstein turned to semantic features and identi-
fied forms of regulation that took place in four 
contexts: a moral system of regulation, often asso-
ciated with the family; an instructional system, 
often associated with learning subject principles 
in schools where children were required to manage 
objects and people; an ‘inter-personal’; and an 
‘imaginative’ context. In this manner, by the end 
of the 1960s, Bernstein had a way to distinguish 
codes and speech variants. A code was deemed 
restricted or elaborated depending on the extent 
to which speech in each of these four contexts 
was context-dependent or context-independent. 
Stressing that speech is always to some extent 

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
45
context-dependent, he was interested in the degree 
to which its form did not rely on immediately 
present, visual, and/or auditory clues for it to 
make sense to another person. This distinction has 
come to have a central place in many other socio-
cultural theoretical approaches which refer to the 
extent to which meanings are de-contextualized, 
abstract or rely on propositional rather than empir-
ical clues for sense to be made (e.g. Luria, 1976; 
Scribner and Cole, 1981; Wertsch, 1985a, 1985b; 
Vygotsky, 1986).
The important transition from a syntactical 
description of a speech form in his earlier formu-
lation of code to a semantic description allowed 
greater depth of distinction and aligned Bernstein’s 
work with other traditions, allowing the concept 
of code to escape the charge levelled against his 
early work as constituting a deficit model of lan-
guage relating to class. Codes regulated relation-
ships both between and within contexts. As the 
theory developed, the principles of classification 
and frame were developed to translate codes 
between different levels of analysis. Along with 
Whorf (1956), Bernstein was interested in ‘the 
connection of language to social life in terms of 
constraint’ (Hymes, 1995: 5), the way language 
acts as a constraint on what is thought and done 
which is a sociolinguistic rather than a linguistic 
endeavour. ‘Class mediates between institutional 
culture and local personnel – class is an active 
specifiable force’ (ibid.: 21–2). To get a grip on 
this we must recognize the important influence of 
Durkheim on Bernstein’s lifelong endeavour.
Durkheim’s problematization
The problem addressed by Durkheim’s sociology 
of knowledge was about the nature and origins of 
rationality. Kant held that the basic categories 
of time and space could not be derived from indi-
vidual experience but exist a priori in the structure 
of the human mind. Durkheim recognized that 
this effectively removed the study of these basic 
categories from the field of scientific enquiry 
and objected that, in deriving universal categories 
from the rational quality of the human mind, 
cultural variability in the conception of categories, 
such as time and space, could not be accounted 
for. Durkheim aimed to show that the genesis and, 
consequently, the functioning of logical operations 
could be problematized as a function of social 
relations. He suggested that basic categories were 
collective representations and his mission was to 
identify collective features of representations as 
distinct from features of individuals.
First, Durkheim defined social facts as sui generis 
(unique) and, secondly, maintained that social 
facts were not reducible to facts about individuals. 
Social aspects of representations were considered 
to be relatively stable, giving them objectivity 
over individuals. Collective representations were 
conceptualized as having a ‘life of their own’, 
with ‘the powers to attract and repel one another 
and form syntheses of all kinds’ (Lukes, 1973).3 
The dimensions and dynamics of social facts 
became the preserve of sociology and the subse-
quent dichotomy between social psychology and 
sociology could be said to stem from this defini-
tion. It has to be recognized that the nature of 
Durkheim’s mission meant that he neglected the 
psychic aspects of collective representations 
(Moscovici, 1984).
In The Division of Labour, Durkheim used a 
distinction between traditional and modern cul-
tures to outline two forms of social relationship 
that gave rise to different forms of consciousness. 
However, his distinction between mechanical and 
organic solidarity has too often been interpreted 
as a straightforward difference between so-called 
‘primitive’ and ‘modern’ solidarities. This simplis-
tic reading neglects the point that primitive socie-
ties had elaborate cosmologies and that social 
groups were positioned differently within them 
(Lévi-Brühl, 1925/1926). Both mechanical and 
organic solidarities were present in traditional 
societies. One fundamental difficulty with the 
problematics posed by Durkheim was that he did 
not provide the conceptual tools to demonstrate 
explicitly the presence of both organic and 
mechanical solidarity in complex societies while 
Bernstein’s work, as it has evolved over at least 
40 years, specifically addressed this theoretical 
lacuna. He suggested that because Durkheim 
was interested in the emergence of individualism, 
his concern was with only one main form of 
solidarity:
Durkheim’s organic solidarity refers to individuals 
in privatised class relationships; the second form of 
organic solidarity refers to persons in privatised 
class relationships. The second form of organic 
solidarity celebrates the apparent release, not of 
the individual, but of the persons and new forms 
of social control. Thus, we can distinguish individu-
alised and personalised forms of organic solidarity 
within the m.c. [middle class] (Bernstein 1978; 
reprinted 1997: 62, emphasis in original).
Bernstein made a distinction between ‘individ-
ualised’ and ‘personalised’ forms of organic soli-
darity, arguing that new forms of the division of 
labour in modern societies created fractions within 
class divisions: for example, he differentiated an 
‘old’ middle class and a ‘new’ middle class. The 
old middle class sought to retain its position of 
privilege within society by focusing on cultural 
reproduction, seeking to educate through explicit 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
46
forms of instruction. The new middle class repre-
sented a change in habitus, educating by making 
the mode of socialization, rather than the mode of 
instruction, explicit:
In the new m.c., socialisation is into weak classifi-
cation and weak frames, which promote, through 
the explicitness of the communication code, far 
greater ambiguity and drive this class to make 
visible the ideology of socialisation; crucial to its 
ideology is the concept of the person not of the 
individual (Bernstein, 1997: 62).
The two modes of communication employed 
by the new and the old middle class can be viewed 
as two codes, Jenkin’s (1990) historical analysis 
showing that progressive pedagogies were created 
and maintained by a faction of the new middle 
class.
Bernstein’s main concern was with principles 
of social control, his secondary focus on distinct 
forms of experience. When he wrote about chil-
dren, teachers or others he did not refer to the 
‘embodied’ child or teacher within a phenomeno-
logical account of their specific actions, but to 
general patterns of intentionality and motivation 
that arise due to the common experiences of the 
group as they experience forms of social control 
within institutions. As Jenks points out, children 
(and/or other groups, such as teachers) act as 
‘metaphors for the different forms of conscious-
ness within different realizations of solidarity’ 
(Jenks, 1995: 175). Bernstein was dealing with 
‘both the structural constituents and the social 
bond’ (ibid) […] where ‘normative expectations 
arise’ (Jenks, ibid.: 177). In particular, he has been 
concerned with forms of social control in educa-
tion, with the ‘languages’ used in schools and 
class cultures, and how these differentially posi-
tion and structure pupils’ experience of schooling. 
The languages that children acquire within their 
homes are influenced by how families are located 
within a class structure and culture. Congruence 
or clash between home and school codes was used 
to explain the relative educational success of 
middle-class in comparison with working-class 
children.4
Bernstein wished to be able to apply the notion 
of code to multiple levels of analysis, from micro-
interactional processes to social-organizational 
parameters for what can be thought and not 
thought in societies across vast time frames, using 
his concepts of classification and frame. As it 
is easier to demonstrate how classification and 
frame work in relation to school than it is to 
families, partly because schools have patterns of 
practice that are more visible and amenable to 
description than those within families, which 
are hugely variable and more difficult to access, 
I shall therefore describe them in relation to the 
former.
Classification and framing
The principles of classification and framing are 
used to identify different forms of social organiza-
tion which are realized, for example, in kinds of 
curriculum structure and pedagogic practice.
Classification, here, does not refer to what is clas-
sified, but to the relationships between contents. 
Classification refers to the nature of the differen-
tiation between contents. Where classification is 
strong, contents are well insulated from each 
other by strong boundaries. Where classification is 
weak, there is reduced insulation between contents, 
for the boundaries between contents are weak 
or blurred. Classification thus refers to the degree 
of boundary maintenance between contents 
(Bernstein 1971: 205, emphasis in original).
Classification and framing are related dialecti-
cally, such that, although connected, they vary 
independently of one another within certain limi-
tations. Framing was defined as the degree of 
control teachers and pupils have over the trans-
mission of knowledge:
Framing refers to the form of the context in which 
knowledge is transmitted and received. Frame 
refers to the specific pedagogic relationship 
between teacher and taught. In the same way as 
classification does not refer to contents, so frame 
does not refer to contents of pedagogy. Frame 
refers to the strength of the boundary between 
what may be transmitted and what may not be 
transmitted, in the pedagogic relationship. Where 
frame is strong, there is a sharp boundary, where 
frame is weak, a blurred boundary, between what 
may and may not be transmitted. Frame refers us 
to the range of options available to teachers and 
taught in the control of what is transmitted and 
received in the context of the pedagogical relation-
ship. Strong framing entails reduced options; weak 
framing entails a range of options. Thus frame 
refers to the degree of control teacher and pupil 
possess over the selection, organization, and 
pacing of the knowledge transmitted and received 
in the pedagogic relationship (Bernstein 1971: 
205–6 emphasis in original).
The first kind of boundary that may be consid-
ered is between school knowledge and everyday 
knowledge, or between what children may bring 
with them from outside school and what they have 
to leave at the school door. This might refer to 
behaviours and artefacts but more specifically it 

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
47
refers to what can literally be said and not said 
in school contexts. For example, Singh (1993) 
described how girls struggled to stifle their 
competence in information and communication 
technology (ICT) to conform to the dominant 
representation of technocratic masculinity that 
was being maintained by the male ICT teacher 
in their primary school classroom. Local school 
cultures and the curriculum that they maintain will 
determine the nature of this boundary.
The curriculum becomes apparent at the level 
of the school as unspecified contents, ‘defined in 
terms of the principle by which certain periods of 
time and their contents are brought into a special 
relation with each other’ (Bernstein, 1977: 79). 
Such periods of time may be relatively long or 
short. High-status categories are insulated from 
other contents, standing in a ‘closed’ relationship 
with each other, thus avoiding ‘pollution’: those 
less well-insulated stand in a mutually ‘open’ rela-
tionship. Within a curriculum, high-status subjects 
will be recognizable by having more time allo-
cated to them than other subjects and being closed 
to the influence of others: they will have their own 
curriculum space and specialist teachers. In such 
terms, a collection-type curriculum is character-
ized as having strong classification and framing, 
its elements having strong boundaries distin-
guished as subjects, such as English, mathematics, 
geography, and so on, with recognizable periods 
of time allocated to them. Subjects or specialized 
discourses have their own curriculum space and 
internal logic insulated from everyday discourses. 
Schools with collection-type curricula provide 
pupils with strong educational identities based 
on visible criteria specified by the inner logic of 
school subjects. 
Students who fail to demonstrate adequate 
competence are identified and ‘carefully screened’ 
to prevent them from polluting the ‘pure’ catego-
ries of educational knowledge. In contrast, an 
integration-type curriculum is defined through 
weaker forms of boundary maintenance, and con-
tents are said to be in relatively open relation to 
each other, ‘The various contents are subordinated 
to some idea which reduces their isolation from 
one another. Where we have integration, the vari-
ous contents become part of a greater whole’ 
(Bernstein, 1977: 80). The discrete elements of 
the curriculum associated with the collection type 
are organized according to superordinate catego-
ries which were for some time called themes or 
topics in British state primary schools. In them, 
because aspects of different subjects are taught 
through themes, the criteria relating to them tend 
not to be made explicit to children. In such child-
centred curricula where subject principles were 
taught through topics or themes, such as those 
documented in the Plowden Report of 1969, there 
was emphasis upon ways of knowing rather than 
forms of knowledge. They required teachers to 
reach consensus concerning the underlying idea 
around which integration is organized and to enter 
into a different kind of social relationship. In 
schools with integration-type curricula, power 
relations between pupils and the teacher were 
thought to shift toward pupils who might exercise 
greater control over the production of school 
knowledge. In sum, differences in such pedagogic 
practices were to be located in the ‘manner in 
which criteria are transmitted’ (Bernstein, 1978, 
reprinted 1997: 59).
In later reworking his theory, Bernstein changed 
its emphasis and orientation from ‘contents’ to 
‘specialist discourse’, as outlined in Class and 
Pedagogies: Visible and Invisible (1978, reprinted 
in 1997) in which visible pedagogies realized 
through strong classification and strong framing, 
and invisible pedagogies realized through weak 
classification and weak framing, were contrasted. 
Insulation between contents was said to determine 
the space between one category and another: the 
greater the space, the more explicit the separation 
and the more likely that the distinction between 
them will be recognized. If there is little insula-
tion, there will be little space and contents are 
likely to be confounded. Recognition and realiza-
tion rules refer to what is made explicit to children 
in classroom practice and provide the clues, sig-
nals or messages that children require when trying 
to work out what is and is not legitimate practice 
within it. Daniels (1988) showed that in schools 
with different classification and framing practices, 
children used different recognition and realization 
rules to distinguish science and art texts. Morais 
and her colleagues in Portugal (Domingos, 1984; 
Morias, Fontinhas and Neve, 1993; Morais and 
Antunes, 1994; Morais and Neves, 2001) used 
classification and framing to describe different 
kinds of science classrooms in middle schools. 
They have shown that when teachers are taught 
how to manipulate classification and framing by 
making instructional discourses more explicit, 
working-class children have a better chance of 
accessing science, though not all children who 
recognize the codes for science in classrooms can 
necessarily realize legitimate science in their own 
answers and texts.
Schools do not reflect social structures – 
they mediate them via the curriculum. Bernstein 
made a distinction between subject ‘voice’ and 
‘message’ to emphasize the process of mediation. 
The site of production and maintenance of spe-
cialist discourses or subject disciplines is usually 
the university. They emerge here as subject ‘voice’, 
policed by peer review through publications 
in professional journals. Teachers make subjects 
available to children according to their own values, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
48
beliefs and representation, allowing ideology to 
exert influence in a process which transforms 
knowledge as it moves between sites. Thus, 
a subject’s ‘voice’ appears in classroom practice 
as its ‘message’. Such recontextualization is, in 
Bernstein’s theory, a form of mediation which 
points to the transformation of knowledge as it 
moves between sites. The curriculum determines 
how knowledge will be reconfigured in schools.
In his later work, Bernstein (1996) defined 
the kinds of practice projected by two opposing 
‘competence’ and ‘performance’ models of recon-
textualized knowledge (ibid., 58) viewed as the 
‘poles of choice’ from which a range of pedagogic 
practice can be described. Competence is practice 
which is not constrained by power relationships, 
‘intrinsically creative, informally, tacitly acquired, 
in non-formal interactions’ (ibid. 55). Competence 
relates to behaviour which is manifest in coopera-
tive social relations. Performance, on the other 
hand, is produced within hierarchical social 
relations. 
Bernstein outlined three different modes of 
competence and performance models, each entail-
ing different recognition and realization rules. 
Broadly, competence models are characterized by 
weak classification and framing and result in few 
explicit instructional structures, such that teachers 
are less able to appeal to criteria derived from 
specialist discourses in their efforts to control 
children. Children’s behaviour and the products of 
their behaviour, their texts, are more likely to be 
interpreted as manifestations of inner competence, 
rather than as manifestations of specialist subject 
discourse. Performance models are characterized 
by explicit instructional structures and strong clas-
sification. The relation between teacher and child 
is mediated by specialist discourses, and surveil-
lance within these contexts focuses on the realiza-
tion of subject-discipline criteria. The criteria for 
achieving legitimate texts are made relatively 
explicit to children within local classroom cul-
tures. Success relies less on producing personal or 
original texts and more on reproducing specialist-
subject criteria. Although fewer of children’s 
personal attributes, intentions and styles are used 
as criteria for control, they become easily classi-
fied as successful and less successful, precisely 
because subject-discipline criteria are publicly 
available. Surveillance of knowledge recontextu-
alized according to competence criteria is centred 
more directly on the intentions, attributes and 
individuality of children and less on those attribut-
able to specialist discourses. These models can, 
therefore, be seen as opposing forms of power 
(classification) and control (framing), and within 
any school or any classroom we would expect to 
find a patterning of practice which might tend more 
towards one of these poles rather than the other.
Within any society the curriculum is highly 
contested. The pedagogic modalities or discourses 
originating from it influence who has access to 
what kind of knowledge and when. At classroom 
level, it distributes legitimate and non-legitimate 
action and discourse within specialist contexts, 
some forms of action coming under scrutiny while 
others do not, determined by the curriculum type. 
Concern for this became more explicit in 
Bernstein’s later work on the pedagogic device, 
where framing acquired both an internal and 
external dimension, the latter being concerned 
with how much and what kinds of attributes chil-
dren could legitimately bring to and express in 
classrooms (cf. Bernstein, 1995: 395). Underlying 
these opposing pedagogic modes are competing 
notions of the person and the purposes of educa-
tion (Ivinson and Duveen, 2006). As has already 
been noted:
In the new m.c., socialisation is into weak classifi-
cation and weak frames, which promote, through 
the explicitness of the communication code, far 
greater ambiguity and drive this class to make 
visible the ideology of socialisation; crucial to its 
ideology is the concept of the person not of the 
individual (Bernstein, 1978, reprinted 1997: 62).
Towards the end of his life Bernstein had envi-
sioned the next social shift beyond these of the 
second half of the twentieth century, to what some 
refer to as the knowledge-based economy in 
which class divisions are subordinated to new 
social arrangements, such as ‘network-based soli-
darities’ or ‘neo tribes’ (Chisholm, 2001: 45).
3.4 THE PEDAGOGIC DEVICE
Much of Bernstein’s theory provides conceptual 
tools for tracing the movement of knowledge 
through complex processes of recontextualization 
from sites where knowledge originates, often the 
higher agencies of education such as universities, 
via the state, through policies and legislation, to 
institutional practice. The pedagogic device deter-
mines what is made thinkable or communicable at 
various levels of analysis, described according to 
how esoteric and mundane discourses spread 
across groups, in terms of: ‘distributive rules’ as to 
who may transmit what to whom; ‘recontextuali-
sation rules’ and how these are instantiated in 
classroom practice; and ‘evaluation rules’ (for 
a full description of these principles see Vol. 5, 
1996: 42–53). These concepts allow researchers to 
trace the range of influences across agents and 
agencies and to study whose discourse is given 
weight. Bernstein’s notion of discourse bears 

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
49
strong resemblances to what Foucauldian scholars 
refer to as ‘strategic fictions’ or ‘truths’. Dominant 
discourses fuse and eventually can be found 
echoing in teachers’ pedagogic discourse. For 
example, currently-competing discourses might 
be neoliberal or ‘retrospective’ versions of the 
Right, emphasizing ‘nation, family and individual 
responsibility’ (Beck, 2006: 185), managerial dis-
courses which emphasize ‘new entrepreneurialism 
and its instrumentalism’ (Bernstein, 2000: 61, 
cited in Beck, 2006: 185), or discourse about the 
innate ability, increasingly being fused with dis-
courses about genetics manifested in discourses of 
learning styles (e.g. Bourne, 2000; Moss, 2001, 
2002, 2004). Within all modalities of the peda-
gogic device regulating the communication that 
takes place in classrooms between teachers and 
children, their instructional discourse (ID) is 
always embedded within the regulative (RD).
Although pedagogy can be viewed as an ‘empty 
discourse’ rather than one in its own right, it is 
crucially the relay for power relationships outside 
itself, a ‘principle by which other discourses are 
appropriated and brought into a special relation-
ship with each other’ (Bernstein 1996: 47). In the 
process of dislocation from their original site of 
effectiveness to the pedagogic site, a gap opens 
up, a space in which ‘ideology can play’ (ibid.). 
All discourses project an interlocutor to whom the 
discourse is addressed (Bakhtin, 1981) and 
Bernstein refers to the interlocutor projected by 
pedagogic discourse as the imaginary subject 
(Ivinson and Duveen, 2006). Pedagogic discourses 
selectively create imaginary subjects, teachers make 
school knowledge available to children, exerting 
ideological influence in a process which trans-
forms knowledge. Subsumed within the imaginary 
subjects projected by teachers’ pedagogic dis-
course are ideological views about how children 
are imagined and the ideal persons, citizens and/or 
workers they ought to become. As children 
encounter instructional discourses they also come 
to recognize themselves, or not, in their teachers’ 
discourse as imaginary subjects. ‘While teaching 
involves fostering skills, practices and knowledge, 
at the same time pedagogic discourse inducts chil-
dren into becoming particular kinds of moral 
agent’ (Ivinson and Duveen, 2006: 110). ‘However, 
moral induction is not easy to justify, and different 
pedagogic modes make the regulative discourses (in 
comparison to the instructional discourse) more or 
less explicit’ (ibid.). Teachers as well as children are 
controlled by pedagogic modes, though teachers 
have far greater control. Weakly-classified compe-
tence modes have allowed historically-rooted social 
representations of gender, class and age, if not 
uniquely, to dominate pedagogic discourse (c.f 
Sharp and Green, 1975; Walkerdine, 1988, 1998), 
whereas, in performance modes, teachers tend to 
be more constrained by dominant representations 
of knowledge that circulate in society and in 
schools. For example, recent, official Literacy and 
Numerous pedagogic strategies in England were 
experienced by some teachers as oppressive 
(Moss, 2002, 2004).
Such ideas allow macro relations (social struc-
tures) to be recovered from micro interaction 
(classroom practice and discourses) and vice 
versa, providing rules which link descriptions of 
the surface structure of classroom organization to 
models of social relations. When knowledge is 
recontextualized according to a performance 
model, teacher–student relationships will be 
explicitly hierarchical or vertical, and when 
a competence model is evident, teacher–student 
relationships will appear flatter or horizontal. 
Students will be controlled in different ways 
according to which model dominates in a specific 
classroom. Codes can now be specified at various 
levels of analysis, and which children come to 
be recognized as legitimate actors in classroom 
contexts depends on whether or not they possess 
codes, which usually relate back to their family 
type and social-class positioning, that are recog-
nized by their teachers.
The implications for the way children are able 
to access knowledge in schools have long been 
generally argued in terms of school practices and 
specialist curriculum subjects, such as Science or 
Art having languages, vocabularies and logics that 
were presented to children by teachers in class-
room instruction using largely middle-class codes. 
Given that most professionals were either middle 
class or had been socialized into using middle-
class codes, it was held that, generally, though not 
at the level of all individuals, working-class chil-
dren encountered a double burden in accessing 
curriculum subject knowledge. They had to decode 
both what teachers where saying in pedagogic 
discourse and the specialist ‘scientific’ discourse 
of the subject before realizing knowledge through 
responses, texts and other productions that were 
expected, recognized and legitimated by teachers. 
Much empirical work testifies to the usefulness of 
this aspect of code theory by demonstrating that 
non-white, middle-class children and sometimes 
girls (e.g. Singh, 1993) have difficulty, for exam-
ple, telling stories in classrooms according to the 
code recognized by teachers (Heath, 1983; 
Michaels, 1986; Filer, 1997).
3.5  RELATIONSHIPS BETWEEN 
CODES AND LINGUISTICS
Bernstein’s concept of ‘code’ has a distinctive 
sociological flavour and yet, as Kress points out, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
50
it highlights things about language that linguists 
have admired, revered, even sometimes derided 
but have not managed to dismiss. Kress has sug-
gested that Bernstein made the often abstract 
nature of linguistics ‘real’:
Users of language, in their everyday actions, 
organize the resources of language to achieve the 
ends posed by the demands of their social life. 
These demands follow the lines and principles 
of the organization of the social groups in which 
their everyday lives have their location. Hence the 
organization of language as code both as the 
expression of the real actions of individuals in their 
social places, and as the expression of the organi-
sation of their social groups (Kress, 2001: 64) 
[italics in original].
The elaborate theoretical superstucture that 
became Bernstein’s theory of pedagogy unpacks 
again and again aspects that Kress so succinctly 
draws our attention to in the above quotation, 
particularly that social life is organized in hierar-
chical ways, that people live their daily life medi-
ated by their experiences within social groups, and 
that these experiences position them in specific 
ways within the world. In Bernstein’s words, 
‘Code Theory is based on a distinction between 
code and its realisations, in which realisations 
are “a function of the culture acting through 
social relations in specific contexts” ’ (Bernstein, 
1971: 173–4).
Code theory has been elaborated most fully as 
pedagogic practices that take place within bounded 
and explicitly-regulated environments, such as 
schools (Bernstein, 1971, 1978, 1981, 1990, 
1996). Even so, as a sociological account of the 
hierarchical nature of the social categories which 
give rise to differential power relations, the theory 
can be adapted to a wide range of social settings 
in which pedagogic practices are evidenced: for 
example, between parents and children, between 
priest and laity, between manager and worker and 
between expert and novice. The notion of code as 
it relates to socialization has retained its influence, 
even if the empirical work on which it has been 
based has rarely been given the credit it should. 
Kress (2001: 65) has been impressed with the 
stability of code orientation across time, suggest-
ing that social realities that have informed such 
work have informed linguistics and forced them to 
move away from abstract structures and towards 
the messy interface with the ‘real’. 
Individuals meet language not as a clear-cut 
system or systems but through practices in every-
day life, and the experiences of ordinary daily 
life influence the way people come to concepts, 
meanings and the relationships between them. 
Code orientation adds something beyond a neat 
description of language systems to suggest that, 
even when gaining access to the same language, 
children, by virtue of their movement and contacts 
in everyday life, where they go and to what range 
of daily experiences they have access, come to it 
with different ‘orientations’. It is not that their 
access to language is different but to meanings. 
Language acts back on users and enfolds them 
within the orientations to meaning that they learn 
though experience. Altering or breaking out of 
these orientations can be done through education 
in school and classroom contexts:
The significance for both learning and for what is 
learned is clear. What it is to be learner will have 
specific form depending on its representation 
through codes of different kinds. These codes will 
also shape how what is to be learned will be 
learned: habits of conceptual engagement leading 
to habits of cognitive work. Above all, the realist 
notions of signs – to put this now semiotically – 
the codal arrangements as signs having the form 
they do because of the meanings that they realise, 
bestows agency on learners (Kress, 2001: 65).
The descriptive language of the theory can 
specify in general terms the kinds of recognition 
and realization rules which teachers make availa-
ble to children in schools with different types of 
curriculum. However, the theory does not predict 
how individual children will read these rules. 
Daniels (1994: 65) has indicated that there is a 
need to describe the semiotic relays maintained by 
different schools and to investigate how these 
relate to cognition:
If progress is to be made towards the construction 
of a system of semiotic analysis of schooling that 
understands individual learning within activities 
that are organized acts of cultural transmission 
then at least two levels of development are 
required. At a theoretical level there is a need to 
refine and develop models of socio-institutional 
organization in such a way that allows for the 
empirical investigation of individual positioning. 
Similarly social models of learning require 
balanced accounts of the effects of the semiotic 
mediation of the organization of activity (Daniels, 
1994: 65).
Without this kind of work, links between 
micro-interactional processes and social structures 
remains problematic. Kress et al.’s (2001) work on 
multimodality is opening up new ways to identify 
values in classification and framing according to 
a multiplicity of modes of communication that 
are active in classrooms. Language becomes one 
of the several modes through which codes are 
instantiated in everyday classroom practice.

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
51
Bernstein’s theory influenced sociolinguistic 
theory across the globe due to its strong relation-
ship with systemic functional linguistics (e.g. 
Halliday, 1978, 1994; Hasan, 1992a, 1992b, 1996, 
2006; Halliday and Hasan, 1989), which provides 
the potential to connect language analysis with 
sociological analysis (Atkinson, 1985; Chouliaraki 
and Fairclough, 1999). Bernstein’s work has had 
considerable influence in sociolinguistics in 
Germany (c.f Leodolter, 1975; Oeverman, 1972; 
Wodak, 1986a, 1986b, 1996; Wodak and Shultz, 
1986). The concept of recontextualization has 
become a major concept in discourse analysis 
(cf. Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999; Iedema, 
1999; Wodak, 2000). Within Critical Discourse 
Analysis, the concept of recontextualization is 
useful in describing hybridity (Haraway, 1988). 
Recontextualization also captures some of the 
properties of discourse as condensations in time-
space involving disembedding and re-embedding 
(Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999: 110). In 
Europe, Bernsteinian sociolinguistics has focused 
on inequality and class struggle and had an enor-
mous impact on the post-1968 movement and 
school reforms. Bernstein’s work has inspired 
educationalists in many countries across the world, 
especially in South Africa and Chile, as part of the 
struggle for equality.
3.6 SOME LIMITS TO CODE THEORY
Children have to recognize the messages relayed 
by pedagogic practices and realize these as texts 
that will be recognized by teachers as legitimate 
forms of knowledge. Such notions allow research-
ers to analyse classrooms, identifying which kinds 
of pedagogic practice are present, locating them 
within poles of choice of models for recontextual-
izing knowledge. Information about children’s 
social-class background then allows prediction 
concerning their achievement in given classrooms. 
A great deal of empirical work testifies to the 
usefulness of the theory. However, social-class 
divisions and differences are becoming less easy 
to define and identify as relatively homogeneous 
experiences, especially when ethnic, race and 
gender differences are taken into account. 
Furthermore, the growth of new social groupings, 
such as network-based solidarities, neo-tribes and 
immigration are changing family structures and 
forcing children into new family groupings, rais-
ing questions about social class as the primary 
shaper of experience from which consciousness 
arises.
Bernstein’s theory suggests that different forms 
of consciousness or, we could say, different 
forms of logical thinking, arise from the practices, 
interaction and discourse experienced by children 
brought up in families of different social-class 
backgrounds. His theories describe how to map 
the social ground of classrooms in order to iden-
tify the social codes underlying practice and dis-
course. Instead of assuming that children recognize 
classroom codes according to their social-class 
background, there is a need to ask a preliminary 
question: how does the classroom code shape 
consciousness? There has been little empirical 
work that has set out to investigate the way in 
which classroom practices shape children’s under-
standings that has not relied on categories of 
gender, ethnicity or social class to classify 
responses. The descriptive language of the theory 
can specify, in general terms, the kinds of recogni-
tion and realization rules which teachers make 
available to children in schools with different 
types of curriculum. However, the theory does not 
predict how children will read these rules, except 
at the general level of social class.
Without this kind of work the link between 
micro-interactional processes and social structures 
remains problematic. Given that socialization is a 
function of social context, we set out to investigate 
the effect of different classroom cultures on chil-
dren’s developing understanding of the curricu-
lum by devising psychological instruments to 
investigate children’s social representations of the 
curriculum and found that children reconstructed 
the social order available to them in schools with 
different modes of curriculum (Ivinson, 1998a, 
1998b; Ivinson and Duveen, 2005, 2006). The 
study drew attention to the need to consider a level 
of mediation that has not been fully articulated in 
Code Theory, namely the constructive efforts of 
children themselves. Children reconstruct social 
structuration according to the socio-cognitive 
resources that they have available to them: they do 
not simply reproduce or reflect the adult order. It 
could be argued that classroom contexts are the 
primary socialization sites for understandings of 
the curriculum because these are the places where 
children experience the curriculum firsthand. Our 
work represents only one of the many develop-
ments to Bernstein’s work, which also includes 
work on the Epistemic Device (Moore and Maton, 
2001; Maton, 2004) and on the Corporeal Device 
(Evans et al., 2008). I wish to finish by returning 
to the dire predictions that Bernstein made in 
relation to the totally pedagogized society identi-
fied as the code shift of late capitalism. The pre-
diction that knowledge has become divorced 
from the knower rests on the extraordinary rich-
ness of the way Bernstein worked the distinction 
between esoteric and mundane knowledge referred 
to earlier.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
52
3.7  THE RULER OF CONSCIOUSNESS: 
THE POWER OF IDEAS
Distinctions between realms, such as the sacred 
and the profane, the public and the private, the 
esoteric and the mundane, and the moral and the 
amoral, have a long history. Scientific and com-
monsense knowledge are often viewed as an 
opposition between abstract and concrete thinking 
(cf. Dowling, 1998). This distinction implies a 
hierarchy in which abstract thinking is privileged 
above concrete thinking and it is this hierarchical 
valuation that has caused many writers, and not 
just Bernstein, to be accused of elitism. Lévy-
Brühl’s (1925/1926) distinction between pre-logi-
cal and logical thought conceptualized them as 
two distinct patterns of ideas but not hierarchical 
universes. In Bernstein’s work, the thinkable and 
unthinkable relate to two classes of knowledge, 
the esoteric and the mundane (Bernstein, 1996: 
43). Bernstein calls also on the esoteric realm 
when he explores the limits and possibilities to 
thinking in his last work, pointing to a dislocation 
between the esoteric and commonsense realms. In 
Bernstein’s terminology, control of the unthinka-
ble in simple, non-literate societies rests with their 
‘religious systems, agencies, agents, practices and 
the cosmologies to which they give rise’ (ibid.). 
In complex, modern societies this control lies 
with the ‘higher agencies of education’ (ibid.). He 
stressed that this does not mean that the unthink-
able can never take place elsewhere, for it does not 
relate to the unconscious or to the inaccessible, 
but to sociogenesis which takes place at the inter-
face between these two types of knowledge which 
relate to the material and immaterial world or to 
the everyday, mundane and the transcendental 
world. Within each world, knowledge has a differ-
ent relationship to a specific material base:
If meanings have a direct relation to a material 
base, these meanings are wholly consumed by the 
context. These meanings are so embedded in the 
context that they have no reference outside that 
context. These meanings are not simply context 
dependent, they are necessarily context bound: 
and meanings which are context bound can not 
unite anything other than themselves. They lack 
the power of relation outside a context because 
they are totally consumed by that context 
(Bernstein, 1996: 44).
For meanings to unite two worlds they can 
never be tied to a specific material base. The indi-
rect nature of the relation between these types of 
meanings and a specific material base requires 
a ‘specific social division of labour and a specific 
set of social relationships within that division of 
labour’, opening up what Bernstein calls a ‘poten-
tial discursive gap’. He stresses that this is not 
a ‘dislocation of meaning, it is a gap’ (ibid.).
The ‘discursive gap’ described by Bernstein 
outlines the social grounds from which change 
and therefore sociogenesis become possible. 
However, I think it is fair to say that Bernstein’s 
predictions for the future were bleak, especially 
concerning control over symbolic resources in 
higher education. While traditionally the univer-
sity has been seen as the site where knowledge is 
produced, increasingly the technologies of the 
free market and strong forms of accountability 
are being used to regulate universities. This repre-
sents a shift from a time when knowledge and 
education were valued for their own sakes towards 
a representation of knowledge as a commodity 
valued only for its economic output. Accordingly, 
knowledge has come to be thought of as economic 
capital:
Knowledge should flow like money to wherever it 
can create advantage and profit. Indeed, knowl-
edge is not just like money: it is money. Knowledge 
is divorced from persons, their commitments, their 
personal dedication, for these become impedi-
ments, restrictions on flow, and introduce deform-
ities in the working of the market. Moving 
knowledge about, or even creating it, should not 
be more difficult than moving and regulating 
money … . Once knowledge is separated from 
inwardness, commitment and personal dedication, 
then people may be moved about, substituted for 
each other, and excluded from the market 
(Bernstein, 1990: 135 cited in Bourne, 2000: 42).
When knowledge is viewed as a commodity it 
seems to have the flexibility to circulate like 
money, ‘dislocated from the knower’ (Bernstein 
1996: 4) and people can be substituted and dis-
pensed with. This shift effectively obscures the 
process through which knowledge is created 
involving personal effort, repeated practice and 
commitment. Bernstein argued that as the state 
increasingly controls social space we move 
towards a ‘totally pedagogised society’. He sug-
gested that the last time we had a ‘totally pedago-
gised society was in the medieval period, when the 
Catholic Church created this seamless, coherent, 
systematic society, in which people’s positions 
and powers were known and understood and 
developed’ (Bernstein, 2001: 377). Bernstein 
stated ‘It’s the first time that pedagogic panic has 
masked moral panic’ (ibid.). He also suggested the 
possibility that pedagogy has been reduced to 
technology in which learning is completely decon-
textualized from the rest of the acquirer’s life 
span, leading him to say that ‘what I fear most of 

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
53
all is the “emptying out of the self”, such as is 
found in the neo-liberal notion of trainability’ 
(Bernstein, 2001: 366). There is a growing con-
cern within education that vocational courses 
dominated by the ‘new adaptability, flexibility, 
creativity’ will become cheap training grounds in 
which those less well-off will be prepared not for 
work but for lifelong training (Bernstein, 1990; 
Bourne, 2000). If young people cannot recognize 
themselves in the imaginary subjects projected 
by pedagogic discourses, then they will have no 
resources with which to engage in education.
This shift in code recalibrates the relationship 
between the individual and the state. In schools it 
is still working-class groups who have less access 
to academic codes who are likely to be funnelled 
into vocational courses consisting of watered-
down, basic skills rather than being given access 
to the codes required to gain professional jobs. 
Bernstein reminds us that pedagogy needs to be 
meaningful as well as relevant. The challenge, 
therefore, as Erica McWillian (1995, cited in 
Bourne, 2000: 43) has suggested that it is time to 
shift the way we talk about education from the 
‘safe terrain of quality, effectiveness, and learner-
centredness’ to ‘an engagement somebody has 
with other bodies in institutional spaces’ (cited in 
Bourne, 2000: 43). Bourne challenges us to take 
seriously the commitment that teachers need to be 
able to teach and the desires of people who want 
to learn. She draws attention to the effort, affect 
and embodied practice of both teachers and learn-
ers, as well as the inter-class negotiations and 
complex role-taking that goes on in classroom set-
tings, areas seriously underplayed in recent years. 
By paying attention to the effort of teaching and 
learning it might be possible to make visible the 
point stressed by Evans et al. (2008) in relation to 
the Corporeal Device and described by Bourne, 
‘bodies are socially positioned, and pleasure con-
stituted through the historical formations of class, 
gender, and race’ (Bourne, 2000: 44). On a hope-
ful note, there may be some solace to be drawn 
from the notion that symbolic control, always a 
condition for someone else’s order, carries within 
itself the potential for transforming the order of 
the imposing other (Bernstein, 1990: 159 cited in 
Bourne, 2000: 44).
NOTES
1 There seems to be similarity here between 
the scale at which Bernstein is operating when he 
identifies shifts across eras and Lacan’s notion of a 
signifying cut. Lacan characterized signification in 
terms of S/s, where S is the signifier and s below is 
the signified. A shift in the large S brings about a 
‘discontinuity in the real’, relationships between 
the economic base and individuals undergoing 
Marxist transformation. For Bernstein it is code that 
regulates the relationship between S and s; after ‘the 
cut’ meanings for people change and those of all 
significations shift. His identification of shifts in 
knowledge across eras seems to signal the same kind 
of shift in meaning as Lacan’s cuts. Bernstein was 
concerned both with dominant and distinct cuts 
across time and within societies. Signification that 
dominates in one class group differs from another 
depending on how they are positioned with respect 
to the economic base of production. I am indebted 
to Janell Watson for drawing my attention to Lacan’s 
signifying cut when she gave a keynote paper at the 
First Deleuze Studies Conference, Cardiff, 11–13 
August 2008.
2 See also Bernstein: 1996 (Chapter 4); 2001 
(Introduction).
3 Lukes 1973: 8; Durkheim 1924a (1951 edn): 
34: tr. 1953b: 24.
4 For recent empirical work on middle-class 
experiences of schooling in the UK, see Power and 
Whitty (2002) and Power (2006).
REFERENCES
Aggleton, P. (1984) ‘Reproductive resistances: a study of 
origins and effect of youth sub-culture style amongst 
a group of new middle-class students in a college of further 
education’. PhD thesis, University of London.
Aggleton, P. (1987) Rebels Without a Cause? Middle-Class 
Youth and the Transition from School to Work. Lewis: 
Falmer Press.
Atkinson, P. (1985) Language, Structure and Reproduction: 
An Introduction to the Sociology of Basil Bernstein. 
London: Methuen.
Atkinson, P., Davies, B. and Delamont, S. (1995) Discourse 
and Reproduction: Essays in Honour of Basil Bernstein. 
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays 
by M. M. Bakhtin. Edited by M. Holquist, translated by 
C. Emerson and M. Holquist. Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press.
Beck, J. (2006) ‘ “Directed time”: identity and time in 
New Right and New Labour policy discourse’ in R. Moore, 
M. Arnot, J. Beck and H. Daniels (eds), Knowledge, Power 
and Educational Reform: Applying the Sociology of Basil 
Bernstein. London: Routledge Taylor Francis Group.
Bernstein, B. (1971b) ‘On the classification and framing of 
educational knowledge’, in M. F. D. Young (ed.), Knowledge 
and Control. London: Collier-Macmillan.
Bernstein, B. (1971a) Class, Codes and Control 1, Theoretical 
Studies Towards a Sociology of Language. London: 
Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1972) ‘A sociolinguistic approach to socializa-
tion; with some reference to educability’, in J. J. Gumperz 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
54
and D. Hymes (eds), Directions in Sociolinguistics. 
[Oxford: Blackwell] New York; London: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston, 1972.
Bernstein, B. (ed.) (1973) Class, Codes and Control 2, Applied 
Studies Towards a Sociology of Language. 2nd revised edn. 
London: Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1974) Class, Codes and Control 1, Theoretical 
Studies Towards a Sociology of Language. 2nd revised edn. 
London: Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1977) Class, Codes and Control 3, Towards a 
Theory of Educational Transmission. 2nd revised edn. 
London: Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1978) ‘Class and pedagogies: visible and 
invisible’, in J. Karabel and A. H. Halsey (eds). Power and 
Ideology in Education. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[Reprinted in (1997) A. H. Halsey, H. Lauder, P. Brown, 
A. Stuart Wells (eds) Education, Culture, Economy, Society. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.]
Bernstein, B. (1981) ‘Codes, modalities and the process 
of cultural reproduction: a model’, Language and Society, 
10: 327–63.
Bernstein, B. (1990) The Structuring of Pedagogic Discourse. 
Volume IV Class, Codes and Control. London: Routledge.
Bernstein, B. (1995) ‘Response’, in A. R. Sadovnick (ed.), 
Pedagogy and Knowledge: The Sociology of Basil Bernstein. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Bernstein, B. (1996) Pedagogy Symbolic Control and Identity 
Theory, Research, Critique. London: Taylor and Francis.
Bernstein, B. (2001) ‘Video conference with Basil Bernstein’, 
in A. Morais, I. Neves, B. Davies and H. Daniels (eds), 
Towards a Sociology of Pedagogy: The Contribution of 
Basil Bernstein to Research, New York: Peter Lang.
Bourne, J. (2000) ‘New imaginings of reading for a new moral 
order: a review of the production, transmission and acquisi-
tion of a new pedagogic culture in the UK’, Linguistic and 
Education, 11(1): 31–45.
Chisholm, L. (2001) ‘Thinking about education and power 
in knowledge societies: what are the implications for 
contemporary social change?’, in S. Power, P. Aggleton, 
J. Brannen, A. Brown, L. Chisholm and J. Mace (eds), 
A Tribute To Basil Bernstein 1924–2000. London: Institute 
of Education, University of London.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N (1999) Discourse in Late 
Modernity ; Rethinking Critical Discourse Analysis. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Cook-Gumperz, J. (1973) Social Control and Socialization: A 
Study of Class Difference in the Language of Maternal 
Care. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Daniels, H. R. J. (1988) An Enquiry into Different Forms of 
Special School Organisation, Pedagogic Practice and Pupil 
Discrimination. C.O.R. E. 12, (2).
Daniels, H. R. J. (1994) ‘The individual and the organization’, 
in H. R. J. Daniels (ed.), Charting the Agenda. London: 
Routledge.
Davies, B. (1994) ‘Durkheim and the sociology of education in 
Britain’, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 15(1): 3–25.
Diaz, M. (1984) ‘A model of pedagogic discourse with special 
application to Colombian primary level’. PhD dissertation, 
University of London.
Domingos, A. M. (1984) ‘Social class, pedagogic practice and 
achievement in science: a study of secondary schools in 
Portugal’. PhD dissertation, University of London.
Domingos, A. M. (now Morais) (1992) ‘Recognition and reali-
sation rules in acquiring school science – the contribution 
of pedagogy and social background of students’, British 
Journal of Education, 13(2): 247–70.
Dowling, P. (1998) The Sociology of Mathematics Education: 
Mathematical Myths/Pedagogic Texts. London: Falmer.
Evans, J., Rich, E., Davies, B. and Allwood, R. (2008) 
Education, Disordered Eating and Obesity Discourse: Fat 
Fabrication. London: Routledge Taylor Francis Group.
Filer, A. (1997) ‘ “At least they were laughing”: assessment 
and the functions of children’s language in their “news” 
sessions’, in A. Pollard, D. Thiessen and A. Filer (eds), 
Children and their Curriculum. the Perspectives of 
Primary and Elementary School Children. London: Falmer 
Press.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison. New York: Pantheon.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973) Exploration in the Function of 
Language. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic. The 
Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning. London: 
Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. and Hasan, R. (1989) Language, context and text. 
Aspects of Language in a Social Semiotic Perspective. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Halliday, M. (1994) Introduction to Functional Grammar, 
(2nd ed), London: Edward Arnold.
Haraway, D. (1988) ‘Situated knowledges: the science ques-
tion in feminism and the privilege of partial perspectives’, 
Feminist Studies, 14(3): 575–99.
Hasan, R. (1989) ‘Semantic variation and sociolinguistics’, 
Australian Journal of Linguistics, 9(2): 221–75.
Hasan, R. (1992a) ‘Speech genre, semiotic mediation and 
the development of higher mental functions’, Language 
Science, 14(4): 489–528.
Hasan, R. (1992b) ‘Meaning in Sociolinguistic Theory’, in 
K. Bolton and H. Kwok (eds), Sociolinguistic Today: 
International Perspectives. London: Routledge.
Hasan, R. (1995) ‘On social conditions for semiotic mediation: 
the genesis of mind in society’, in A. Sadovnik (ed.), 
Knowledge and Pedagogy: The Sociology of Basil Bernstein. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Hasan, R. (1996) Literacy, everyday talk and society’, in 
R. Hasan and G. Williams (eds), Literacy in Society. London: 
Longman.
Hasan, R. (2002) ‘Ways of meaning, ways of learning: code as 
an explanatory concept’, British Journal of Sociology of 
Education, 23(4): 537–48.
Hasan, R. (2006) ‘Literacy, pedagogy and social change: 
directions from Bernstein’s sociology’, in R. Moore, 
M. Arnot, J. Beck and H. Daniels (eds), Knowledge, Power 
and Educational Reform: Applying the Sociology of Basil 
Bernstein. London: Routledge Taylor Francis Group
Hasan, R., Matthiessen, C. and Webster, J. (eds) (2005) 
Continuing Discourse on Language: A Functional Perspective. 
Vol. I. London: Oakville.

BERNSTEIN: CODES AND SOCIAL CLASS
55
Heath, S. B. (1983) Ways with Words: Language, Life and 
Work in Communities and Classrooms. Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press.
Hymes, D. (1995) ‘Bernstein and poetics’, in P. Atkinson, 
B. Davies, S. Delamont (eds), Discourse and Reproduction; 
Essays in Honour of Basil Bernstein. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton 
Press.
Iedema, R. (1999) ‘Formalizing organizational meaning, 
Discourse and Society, 10: 49–65.
Ivinson, G. (1998a) ‘The construction of the curriculum’. PhD 
dissertation, Cambridge University.
Ivinson, G. (1998b) ‘The child’s construction of the curriculum’, 
Papers on Social Representations: Threads and Discussions. 
Special Issue: The Development of Knowledge, 7(1–2): 
21–40.
Ivinson, G. and Duveen, G. (2005) ‘Classroom structuration 
and the development of representations of the curriculum’, 
British Journal of Sociology of Education, 26(5): 627–42.
Ivinson, G. and Duveen, G. (2006) ‘Children’s recontextualisa-
tions of pedagogy’ in R. Moore, M. Arnot, J. Beck and H. 
Daniels (eds), Knowledge, Power and Educational Reform: 
Applying the Sociology of Basil Bernstein. London: 
Routledge Taylor Francis Group.
Jenkins, C. (1990) ‘The professional middle class and the 
origins of progressivism: a case study of the New Education 
Fellowship 1920–1950’, CORE 14, (1).
Jenks, C. (1995) ‘Decoding childhood’, in P. Atkinson, 
B. Davies and S. Delamont (eds), Discourse and Reproduction: 
Essays in Honour of Basil Bernstein. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton 
Press.
Kress, G. (2001) ‘A tribute’, in S. Power, P. Aggleton, 
J. Brannen, A. Brown, L. Chisholm and J. Mace (eds), 
A Tribute to Basil Bernstein 1924–2000. London: Institute 
of Education, University of London.
Labov, W. (1969) ‘The logic of non-standard English’, in 
J. E. Alacis (ed.), Report of the Twentieth Round Table 
Meeting on Linguistics and Language Studies, Georgetown 
Monograph Series in Language and Linguistics No. 22. 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press, 1970. 
pp. 1–29.
Leodolter (Wodak), R. (1975) Das Sprachverhalten von 
Angeklagten bei Gericht. Stuttgart: Scriptor Verlag.
Lévy-Brühl, L. (1925/1926) How Natives Think, trans. Lillian 
Clare. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Lukes, S. (1973) Emile Durkheim, His Life and Works: 
A historical perspective Harmonsworth: Penguin.
Luria, A. R. (1976) Cognitive Development: Its Cultural and 
Social Functions. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Maton, K. (2004) ‘The wrong kind of knower: education, 
expansion and the epistemic device’, in J. Muller, B. Davies 
and A. Morais (eds.), Reading Bernstein, Researching 
Bernstein. London: Routledge Falmer.
Michaels, S. (1986) ‘Narrative presentations: an oral prepara-
tion for literacy’, in J. Cook-Gumperz (ed.), The Social 
Construction of Literacy. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Moore, R and Maton, K. (2001) ‘Founding the sociology 
of knowledge: Basil Bernstein, epistemic fields and the 
epistemic device’, in A. Morais, I. Neves, B. Davies and 
H. Daniels (eds), Towards a Sociology of Pedagogy: The 
Contributions of Basil Bernstein to Research. New York: 
Peter Lang.
Morais, A. M. and Antunes, H. (1994) ‘Students’ differential 
text production in the regulative contexts of the classroom’, 
British Journal of the Sociology of Education, 15(2): 243–63.
Morais, A. M. and Neves, I. (2001) ‘Pedagogic social contexts: 
studies for a sociology of learning’, in A. Morais, I. Neves, 
B. Davies and H. Daniels (eds), Towards a Sociology of 
Pedagogy: The Contribution of Basil Bernstein to Research. 
New York: Peter Lang. pp. 185–212.
Morais, A. M., Fontinhas, F. and Neve, I. P. (1993) ‘Recognition 
and realisation rules in acquiring school science: contribu-
tion of pedagogy and social background of pupils’, British 
Journal of the Sociology of Education, 13(2): 247–70.
Moscovici, S. (1984) ‘The phenomenon of social representa-
tions’, in R. M. Farr and S. Moscovici (eds), Social 
Representations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moss, G. (2001) ‘Bernstein’s language of description: some 
generative principles’, International Journal of Social 
Research Methodology, 4(1): 17–19.
Moss, G. (2002) ‘Literacy and pedagogy in flux: constricting 
the object of study from a Bernsteinian perspective’, British 
Journal of Sociology of Education, 23(4): 549–58.
Moss, G. (2004) ‘Changing practice: the NLS and the politics 
of literacy policy’, Literacy, 38(3): 126–33.
Oeverman, U. (1972) Sprache und soziale Herkunft. Frankfurt/
Main: Suhrkamp.
Plowden Report (1969) Children: Their Primary Schools. 
London: HMSO.
Power, S. (2006) ‘Disembodied middle-class pedagogic identi-
ties’, in R. Moore, M. Arnot, J. Beck and H. Daniels (eds), 
Knowledge, Power and Educational Reform: Applying the 
Sociology of Basil Bernstein. London: Routledge Taylor 
Francis Group.
Power, S. and Whitty, G. (2002) ‘Bernstein and the middle 
classes’, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 23(4): 
595–606.
Robinson, W. P. (1973) ‘Where do children’s answers come 
from?’, in B. Bernstein (ed.), Class, Codes and Control 2. 
London: Routledge. pp. 202–34.
Sapir, E. (1921) Language, an Introduction to the Study of 
Speech. Oxford: E. Sapir.
Scribner, S. and Cole, M. (1981) The Psychology of Literacy. 
Cambridge, MA; London: Howard University Press.
Sharp, R. and Green, R. (1975) Education and Social Control. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Singh, P. (1993) ‘Instructional discourse: a case study of the 
social construction of technical competence in the primary 
classroom’, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 13(1): 
189–206.
Turner, G. J. (1973) ‘Social class and children’s language of 
control at age five and age seven’, in B. Bernstein (ed.), Class, 
Codes and Control 2. London Routledge. pp. 135–201.
Vygotsky, L. (1986) Thought and Language. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Walkerdine, V. (1988) The Mastery of Reason. London: 
Routledge.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
56
Walkerdine, V. (1998) Counting Girls Out; Girls and 
Mathematics. new edn. London: Falmer Press.
Wells, G. (1985) Language, Learning and Education: Selected 
Papers from the Bristol Study: Language at Home and at 
School. 2nd edn. Windsor: NFER-Nelson, 1985.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985a) (ed.) Culture, Communication and 
Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985b) Vygotsky and the Social Formation of 
Mind. Cambridge, MA: Havard University Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956) Language, Thought and Reality. 
New York: B. L. Whorf.
Wodak, R. (1986a) ‘Normal and deviant texts. The sociopsy-
chological theory of textplanning’, in Y. Tobin (ed.), From 
Sign to Text: A Semiotic View of Communication. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 333–55.
Wodak, R. (1986b) Language Behaviour in Therapy Groups. 
Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. New York: Addison 
Wesley Longman.
Wodak, R. and Schulz, M. (1986) The Language of Love and 
Guilt, Amsterdam: Benjamins.

4
4.1 INTRODUCTION
Dell Hymes’ formative role in the ethnography 
of communication, ethnopoetics and educational 
ethnography alone merit him biographic attention. 
In addition, though, tracing out Dell Hymes’ career 
arc offers a window on the birth and development 
of sociolinguistics as a whole. The particular clus-
ter of early influences on Hymes – Franz Boas, 
Edward Sapir, Roman Jakobson and Kenneth 
Burke – as well as Hymes’ resulting resistance to 
Chomskyan linguistics, are representative of the 
sources of impetus for sociolinguistics in general. 
Hymes  had an abiding personal and scholarly 
interest in American Indians in all their linguistic 
and cultural diversity. He argued for a widened 
scope for linguistics, which started with diversity 
rather than in a search for the universal. In particu-
lar, he wanted linguists to pay attention to the 
poetic, aesthetic, reflexive aspects of discourse 
through which cultural knowledge is circulated. 
His interest in diversity has always been linked 
with a concern for the sources and consequences of 
inequality, and much of his work has taken place in 
the context of educational research. In Hymes’ 
interests, we can see sociolinguistics’ recurring 
concerns. If we want to understand how sociolin-
guistics grew out of linguistics, understanding Dell 
Hymes’ life and career is a good place to start.
4.2  LIFE AND INTELLECTUAL 
BIOGRAPHY
Hymes was born in Portland, Oregon in 1927. 
He grew up there, attending Reed College as an 
undergraduate, and began graduate work in anthro-
pology at Indiana University in 1950, eventually 
receiving a doctorate instead in linguisticsm in 
1955, with minors in anthropology and folklore. 
This constellation of interests would stay with 
Hymes throughout his career. C. F. Voegelin, 
Hymes’ dissertation advisor at Indiana, described 
Hymes as ‘a literary critic and minor poet who sur-
prised us at Indiana when shifting from very general 
cultural interests to linguistics’ (Murray, 1998: 100). 
For Hymes, though, these interests were naturally 
allied, allowing him to explore ‘the use of language, 
oral narrative and poetry, the history of anthropol-
ogy and linguistics, Native Americans, theology’ 
(Hymes, n.d.). While at Indiana, Hymes began his 
association with Roman Jakobson, whose ‘crucial 
contribution was to introduce a “functionalist” per-
spective and to do so in a way that suggested an 
empirical, manageable way of dealing with speech 
functions’ (Hymes, 1975: 364), quoted in (Murray, 
1998: 100). That functionalist concern with how 
humans actually use language would steer Hymes’ 
work and presages sociolinguistics’ concern for 
contextualized language use.
From Indiana, Hymes became an assistant pro-
fessor of linguistics at Harvard University, but was 
denied tenure in 1960. Hymes was then offered a 
position at Berkeley, in both anthropology and 
linguistics. This was a fortuitous appointment. 
While other American linguistics departments 
were beginning to focus increasingly on transfor-
mational-generative grammar and other abstract 
models of linguistic competence, Berkeley’s 
department remained focused on descriptive work 
on non-English languages, and the ‘social and 
cultural determinants of language’ (Murray, 1998: 
101). Murray characterizes Berkeley as being split 
Dell Hymes and the 
Ethnography of Communication
B a r b a r a  J o h n s t o n e  a n d  W i l l i a m  M .  M a r c e l l i n o

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
58
between an old guard of linguists interested in 
fieldwork, resulting in descriptions of languages, 
and a younger generation interested in developing 
theoretical frameworks for studying language use. 
That younger generation, which included found-
ing sociolinguists like Hymes, Erving Goffman, 
John Gumperz and Susan Ervin-Tripp, grounded 
their work in the Sapirian tradition, but expanded 
their concerns with language beyond description.
Although their concern for the functions of 
language in social life represented a break from 
structural linguistics, there was clearly collegial 
respect between the emerging sociolinguists at 
Berkeley and the previous generation. Murray 
(1998: 131–3) points out that Hymes produced a 
rhetoric of continuity with the Sapirian and struc-
turalist traditions in American linguistic anthro-
pology, in part by including work by scholars such 
as Haas, Emeneau and Hockett in the anthology 
Language in Culture and Society (Hymes, 1964), 
and that the older and younger generations were 
always respectful of each other in their writing. 
This mutual respect, however, has historically 
occluded a very strong divide between their 
approaches to language. However much Hymes 
grounded his work in the past, he still demanded a 
break from prior linguistic study. Hymes advo-
cated a shift in focus away from linguistic code ‘la 
langue’ to actual speech, ‘la parole’. He argued 
for the primacy of language function, and for a 
shift from imagining the referential function of 
language as the primary one to seeing it as one of 
many. He saw the organizing principles of lan-
guage as derived from language functions, and 
social appropriateness as essential criterion for the 
‘rightness’ of utterances. He was fundamentally 
concerned with linguistic diversity, and so, per-
haps most importantly, he demanded that lan-
guage study be grounded in ethnographic 
observation rather than introspective theorizing.
In 1965, Hymes moved to the University of 
Pennsylvania, where he joined the faculty of 
the Department of Anthropology and trained 
what Murray (1998: 133) has called the ‘second 
generation’ of ethnographers of communication, 
whose work is represented in the influential 
anthology Explorations in the Ethnography of 
Communication, co-edited by two of Hymes’ stu-
dents (Bauman and Sherzer, 1974). During this 
period, Hymes worked with other sociolinguists 
to create a new journal devoted to ‘the means of 
speech in human communities, and their mean-
ings to those who use them’ (Hymes, 1972a: 2). 
The first issue of Language in Society appeared in 
1972, published by Cambridge University Press, 
with Hymes as editor. At the University of 
Pennsylvania, Hymes was also affiliated with 
the Departments of Folklore and Folklife and 
Sociology, and with the faculty in education. 
Hymes became Dean of the University’s College 
of Graduate Studies in Education in 1975. In 1987 
he moved to the Department of Anthropology at 
the University of Virginia, from which he retired 
in 2000.
The generational shift from descriptive linguis-
tics into sociolinguistics was contemporaneous 
with the Chomskyan shift to transformational-
generative grammar. The sociolinguistics move-
ment expressed continuity with prior generations 
of scholars, in contrast to the acrimony surround-
ing transformational grammarians’ split with 
structural linguistics. But both represented funda-
mental changes in linguists’ understanding of 
language. Hymes was particularly critical of 
Chomsky’s idea of linguistic competence and his 
failure to account for linguistic variation. Locating 
language within an a priori mental grammar does 
not account for or even acknowledge the enor-
mous role of the socially-contextualized ways we 
use language in determining the shape of utter-
ances. We do more than construct grammatically 
possible linguistic utterances, and, as Hymes fre-
quently noted, ungrammatical utterances may be 
socially appropriate, just as grammatical utter-
ances can be socially inappropriate (Hymes, 
1972b, 1989). Hymes objected to Chomsky’s defi-
nition of linguistic competence in the strongest 
terms, saying that ‘a child from whom any and all 
the grammatical sentences of a language might 
come with equal likelihood would be a social 
monster. Within the social matrix in which it 
acquires a system of grammar, a child acquires 
also a system of its use’ (Hymes, 1974: 75). The 
system of use children acquire within a social 
matrix of language is ‘communicative compe-
tence’, Hymes’ alternative to Chomsky’s ‘linguis-
tic competence’. While, for Chomskyans, humans 
are born with the capacity for acquiring linguistic 
competence, communicative competence is learned 
and thus can be more or less complete or flexible. 
This shift in understanding competence reflects 
Hymes’ concern for disadvantaged children who 
do not have equal access to the sociolinguistic 
resources they need (Hymes, 1971).
Hymes also took Chomsky to task for the fail-
ure of transformational-generative grammar to 
account for linguistic variation. Chomskyan lin-
guistics focuses on the aspects of language that 
are uniform across speakers, ruling variation off 
the field of study by stipulating idealized speaker/
hearers in completely homogeneous communities 
as its research object. Hymes is concerned with 
actual linguistic variety as found in speech and 
therefore calls for ‘concepts and methods that 
enable us to deal with diversity … . [T]he great 
stumbling block is that the kinds of organization 
most developed by linguists presuppose the gram-
mar as their frame of reference, [because they are 

DELL HYMES: ETHNOGRAPHY OF COMMUNICATION
59
concerned with the] analysis of a single, more or 
less homogenous, norm’ (Hymes, 1989: 433). The 
concepts and methods for linguistic investigation 
that resulted from Hymes’ concern with actual 
language use in social contexts would be ‘the 
ethnography of communication’.
4.3  THE ETHNOGRAPHY 
OF COMMUNICATION
Hymes is best known for his founding role in the 
ethnography of communication. Hymes proposed 
the term ‘ethnography of speaking’, later amended 
to ‘ethnography of communication’, to describe 
a new approach to understanding language in use 
(Hymes, 1962, 1964). In doing this, Hymes aimed 
to move away from considering speech as an 
abstract model and toward investigating the diver-
sity of speech as it is encountered in ethnographic 
fieldwork. Essentially, Hymes argues:
… that the study of language must concern itself 
with describing and analyzing the ability of the 
native speakers to use language for communica-
tion in real situations (communicative competence) 
rather than limiting itself to describing the poten-
tial ability of the ideal speaker/listener to produce 
grammatically correct sentences (linguistic compe-
tence). Speakers of a language in particular com-
munities are able to communicate with each other 
in a manner which is not only correct but also 
appropriate to the socio-cultural context. This 
ability involves a shared knowledge of the linguis-
tic code as well as of the socio-cultural rules, 
norms and values which guide the conduct and 
interpretation of speech and other channels of 
communication in a community … . [T]he ethnog-
raphy of communication ... is concerned with the 
questions of what a person knows about appropri-
ate patterns of language use in his or her com-
munity and how he or she learns about it (Farah, 
1998: 125).
The object of study Hymes proposes for lin-
guistics is ‘ways of speaking’ (Hymes, 1989). The 
idea of language as a set of ways of speaking is an 
alternative to the idea of language as grammar, an 
abstracted set of rules or norms. Under the rubric 
of ways of speaking, Hymes offers a bipartite 
conception of speech that encompasses both the 
‘means of speech’ available to speakers, and the 
‘speech economy’ these speakers participate in. 
Thus Hymes offers a theoretical basis for lan-
guage study that accounts for both linguistic vari-
ation from individual to individual and relative 
linguistic coherence across the social realm, 
while also offering a methodological heuristic for 
investigating communication, often represented in 
terms of the SPEAKING mnemonic.
This bipartite understanding of language is 
important because it equally foregrounds two 
aspects of speaking that Hymes feels cannot be 
separated: what speakers can and do say, and the 
communal context such speech occurs in. Speech 
does not occur in a vacuum, but rather within a 
specific context, and ‘when the meaning of speech 
styles are analyzed, we realize that they entail 
dimensions of participant, setting, channel, and 
the like, which partly govern their meanings’ 
(Hymes, 1989: 444). For Hymes, speech cannot 
be considered separate from the sociological and 
cultural factors that help shape linguistic form and 
create meaning, and so the frame he offers in 
place of grammar gives equal place to both 
aspects of speech: speech and the entailments that 
give meaning to speech cannot be considered in 
isolation. Hymes is thus adamant that any termi-
nology adopted must treat both aspects of speech 
equally, discarding both ‘speech styles and their 
contexts’ and ‘means of speech and their mean-
ings’ as being insufficient (Hymes, 1989: 446). 
Hymes points out that ‘contexts’ and ‘meaning’ 
fail to evoke ‘the norms of interaction that go 
beyond choice and style, and the attitudes and 
beliefs that underlie both’ as well as ‘leav[ing] the 
focus on “styles” and “means” ’ (Hymes, 1989: 
446). The solution is to separate ‘means of speech 
(comprising the features that enter into styles, 
as well as the styles themselves), and speech 
economy’ (Hymes, 1989: 446).
Hymes offers an explicit definition of means of 
speech as ‘the features that enter into styles, as 
well as the styles themselves’, but he does not do 
the same for economy of speech. Hymes does, 
however, talk about speech economy in such a 
way as to outline its major facets, and his choice 
of metaphor is instructive as well. Speech econ-
omy is a set of relationships within a speech com-
munity, the marketplace in which participants in 
speech use their means of speech, and those 
means of speech are in turn a constituent element 
of the speech economy. Means of speech and 
speech economy are conceptually distinct as ele-
ments of ways of speaking, but ‘the two concepts 
are of course interrelated, even interdependent (as 
said, meanings lie in relationships), and from a 
thoroughgoing standpoint, the speech economy of 
a community includes its means of speech as one 
of the components that enter into its pattern of 
relationships’ (Hymes, 1989: 446).
As have other language theorists (Saussure, 
Austin, Bourdieu), Hymes uses an economic 
metaphor as part of his articulation of how speech 
works. In addition to using the word ‘economy’, 
Hymes also uses economic terms when he justi-
fies his partitioning of ways of speaking into two 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
60
parts as reflecting ‘the major division of labor in 
our society between those who study verbal 
means and those who study conduct’ (Hymes, 
1989: 447, emphasis added). Hymes’ economic 
analogy is useful: much as individuals use their 
means of production to produce goods and serv-
ices, and then exchange these products in an 
economy, so too do speakers use their means of 
speech to produce discourse that is exchanged 
within a speech economy.
This idea of speakers acting in a speech econ-
omy accounts for the contextual, relational and 
socially-judged aspects of speech. By according 
speech economy equal status with means of 
speech, Hymes can frame utterances as being 
meaningless outside of a particular macro-social 
context and set of relationships, subject not just to 
decoding but also to aesthetic judgment from 
members of the speech economy. In this sense, 
ethnopoetics – culturally-relative aesthetic sensi-
bility – enters into Hymes’ conception of lan-
guage. Hymes illustrates this through Stanley 
Newman’s research on the Indian Yokuts lan-
guage. Newman’s research allowed him to con-
struct grammatically possible utterances that were, 
however, ineffective, either inadvertently humor-
ous or pompous (Hymes, 1989: 447). That is to 
say: within Yokuts means of speech were pos-
sible utterances that had no purchase in the 
Yokuts speech economy. This is the ‘economic’ 
aspect of speech, where the community makes 
judgments about how we may traffic in speech. As 
Hymes puts it, ‘grammatical Yokuts is not what is 
possible to the grammar … but what is possible 
according to Yokuts norms … . [W]e have a nor-
mative definition of possible Yokuts that is best 
described as aesthetic or stylistic in nature’ 
(Hymes, 1989: 448). This is communicative com-
petence visible in a specific example – grammar 
fails to account for rightness in Yokuts utterances, 
which hinge instead on context (the social) and 
aesthetics (ethnopoetics).
In addition to making visible the communally-
judged aspect of speech, the idea of speech econ-
omy serves an important conceptual function in 
maintaining a balance between an understanding 
of language as communally shared and a way of 
accounting for individual choice and variation in 
speech. Hymes makes clear that he wants a refer-
ence frame beyond the abstracted norms of a 
grammar, and that ‘we have reached a point at 
which the concept of grammar itself is that which 
needs to be transcended’ (Hymes, 1989: 434). 
Hymes argues for an understanding of speech that 
includes the diversity of the particular, not just the 
structured norms of an abstraction. Ultimately, 
Hymes rejects an understanding of language 
where it is permissible ‘to speak of the great role 
of language in general, but never language in 
particular,’ which leads to ‘a tendency to treat 
some linguistic particularities as inferior’ (Hymes 
1989: 450). The idea of speech economy is 
significant in dealing with this tension between 
general models of language and language particu-
larities because the metaphor of economy carries 
with it notions of the specific and general, the 
individual and the community. Conceptually, 
economy accounts for both individual actors 
and their aggregate conduct, and so the terms 
‘speech economy’ and ‘means of speech’ maintain 
and make visible the tension between the particu-
lar speech of the individual and the aggregate 
speech economy. In this conception of ways of 
speaking, Hymes offers a theoretical basis for 
approaching language through the ethnography of 
communication.
Hymes proposes a general method of ethno-
graphic investigation through taxonomic, descrip-
tive fieldwork (Hymes, 1972b). He is careful to 
point out, however, that ‘sociolinguistic fieldwork 
is not an end in itself’, but rather ‘a necessary part 
of the progress towards models (structural and 
generative) of sociolinguistic description, formu-
lation of universal sets of features and relations, 
and explanatory theories’ (1972b: 43). Hymes 
advocates comparative, ethnographic taxonomies 
as the only way to explore and understand lan-
guage systematically, because 
... communities differ significantly in the ways of 
speaking, in patterns of repertoire and switching, 
in the roles and meanings of speech. They indicate 
differences with regard to beliefs, values, refer-
ence groups, norms, and the like … . [I]ndividual 
accounts that individually pass without notice … 
leap out when juxtaposed, as contrasts that 
require explanation (Hymes, 1972b: 42).
Descriptive and taxonomical ethnographic work 
that allows for comparison between speech com-
munities allows for systemic classification of 
ways of speaking in four traditional areas: ‘genetic 
classification’ of language descent; ‘areal classifica-
tion’ of features spread through an area; ‘typologi-
cal classification’ of structural features independent 
of genetic or areal nature; and usage/role classifica-
tion (i.e. as a pidgin, trade language, etc.).
The sort of fieldwork Hymes advocates – 
ethnographies of communication – must ‘discover 
and explicate the competence that enables mem-
bers of a community to conduct and interpret 
speech’ (Hymes, 1972b: 52). The exploration and 
documentation of communicative competence 
within a speech community is the essence of the 
ethnography of communication. As a means to 
this end, Hymes defines the social units and units 
of analysis for ethnographies of communication 
and proposes an etic heuristic for their analysis.

DELL HYMES: ETHNOGRAPHY OF COMMUNICATION
61
The social unit proper to sociolinguistics is the 
‘speech community’. By speech community, 
Hymes does not mean a community defined by 
common language, but rather by common linguis-
tic norms: ‘a community sharing rules for the 
conduct and interpretation of speech, and rules for 
the interpretation of at least one linguistic variety’ 
(Hymes, 1972b: 54). This definition moves the 
ethnographer away from questions of grammar, 
and grammatically possible utterances, to ques-
tions of coherence and efficacy in the socially-
situated use of language. The question for Hymes 
is not only whether speakers have a common 
understanding of syntax and semantics but also 
whether or not they share ideas about the use of 
silence, ideas about the meaning of irony or 
emphasis, speech taboos, ways of formulating 
requests or statements, and so on.
Within speech communities, ethnographers 
must look for ‘speech situations’, ‘speech events’ 
and ‘speech acts’. By speech situations, Hymes 
means socially contextual situations like ‘ceremo-
nies, fights, hunts, meals, lovemaking, and the 
like’ (Hymes, 1972b: 56). Speech events occur 
within speech situations: so, for example, the 
exchange of vows is a speech event occurring 
within a wedding (a speech situation). Speech 
acts are the individual utterances that form the 
minimal unit of analysis for ethnographies of 
communication. Hymes offers the example of 
‘a party (speech situation), a conversation during 
the party (speech event), a joke within the conver-
sation (speech act)’ to illustrate the three terms 
(Hymes, 1972b: 54). Hymes distinguishes speech 
acts from grammatical conceptions like sentences, 
because the meaning, status and function of a 
speech act are not solely dependent upon gram-
matical form. The interpretation of speech acts is 
equally (at times more) dependent upon the social 
status and relationship of participants, as well as 
the immediate context of the utterance, and so ‘the 
level of speech acts mediates immediately between 
the usual levels of grammar and the rest of a speech 
event or situation in that it implicates both linguis-
tic form and social norms’ (Hymes, 1972b: 57).
To help ethnographers of communications 
frame their investigation of speech acts and events, 
Hymes offers the mnemonic device of the 
SPEAKING grid as a heuristic. Though it is by no 
means his most significant contribution to socio-
linguistics, the SPEAKING grid is perhaps the 
artefact most associated with Hymes as his popu-
lar legacy. The SPEAKING grid has been widely 
accepted in the ethnography of communication, 
and has been further developed into discrete 
research questions by Hymes’ students, Joel 
Sherzer and Regna Darnell (Sherzer and Darnell, 
1972). The eight components of the SPEAKING 
mnemonic are:
(S) Setting including the time and place, physical 
aspects of the situation such as arrangement of 
furniture in the classroom; (P) participant identity 
including personal characteristics such as age and 
sex, social status, relationship with each other; 
(E) ends including the purpose of the event itself as 
well as the individual goals of the participants; 
(A) act, sequence or how speech acts are organ-
ized within a speech event and what topic/s are 
addressed; (K) key or the tone and manner in 
which something is said or written; (I) instrumen-
talities or the linguistic code i.e. language, dialect, 
variety and channel i.e. speech or writing; (N) norm 
or the standard socio-cultural rules of interaction 
and interpretation; and (G) genre or type of event 
such as lecture, poem, letter (Farah, 1998: 126).
Ultimately, this list of components of speech acts 
is meant to explore and explain human, social 
purposes in language. Like all taxonomies, the 
SPEAKING grid is not an end in itself, but rather 
a means: ‘the formal analysis of speaking is a 
means to the understanding of human purposes and 
needs, and their satisfaction’ (Hymes, 1972b: 70), 
as well as a way of understanding how language 
works.
The ethnography of communication is thus not 
just a method but a coherent theoretical approach 
to language. Hymes provides a theoretical basis 
for language in ways of speaking, which accounts 
for the diversity and efficacy of actual human 
communication in terms of the ideas of means of 
speech and speech economy. Hymes also offers a 
justification for ethnographic methods, because it 
is linguistic differences, the contrastive juxtaposi-
tion of different ways of speaking, which allows 
for classification and systematic analysis of 
language. In turn, Hymes offers a specific set 
of terminology (‘speech community’, ‘situation’, 
‘event’ and ‘act’) and a suggested method for the 
conduct of the ethnography of communication 
(the SPEAKING mnemonic), with a specific unit 
of analysis in the speech act. Hymes has had an 
enormous impact in sociolinguistics by helping 
steer linguistic work toward human communica-
tion as it occurs in use: socially.
4.4 NARRATIVE AND ETHNOPOETICS
As we have seen, Hymes’s ethnography of com-
munication provides both a theoretical basis and a 
methodological heuristic for exploring how lan-
guage is embedded and enacted in discourse. 
Doing this kind of work requires paying attention 
to linguistic interaction in context. Ethnographers 
of communication explore the physical setting, 
the participants, their goals; the media and modes 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
62
of communication; and the norms that guide inter-
pretation. In fact, sometimes the actual words are 
relatively unimportant. This concern for the whole 
of communication, instead of just grammatical 
form, has implications for Hymes in his study of 
American Indian languages.
Like many other US anthropological linguists, 
Hymes has always been a student of American 
Indian languages, and by the time he began his 
doctoral dissertation fieldwork in the 1950s, many 
of these languages were dying out. In the Pacific 
Northwest, Hymes’s field site, Native American 
speech events could no longer be observed in their 
original contexts. Many of the Indians along the 
Columbia River had assimilated to European-
American culture, moved, or died; if there were 
native speakers of some of the varieties of Chinook 
and Sahaptin spoken there, they were elderly and 
isolated, no longer part of a community of speak-
ers. In some languages, Native American speech 
could no longer be recorded at all, since there 
were no longer any speakers of these languages. 
All that was available, in many cases, were ver-
sions of tales and myths that had been written 
down by earlier anthropologists, usually in ways 
that conformed to the anthropologists’ expecta-
tions about how folk tales and myths should look 
on the page. They were inert, decontextualized, 
interesting in content but disconnected from the 
speech events that called them forth and shaped 
them, which could no longer be observed ethno-
graphically.
Hymes’s ‘ethnopoetic’ approach to this mate-
rial was a theoretical framework and a set of 
methods for putting these tales and myths back 
into something like their original contexts. Like 
the literary theorists of his generation, Hymes 
believed in the value of close reading that is atten-
tive to all the syntactic and semantic details of 
texts that constrain how readers can interpret 
texts’ meaning. Following linguist Edward Sapir 
and literary theorist Kenneth Burke, with whom 
Hymes regularly corresponded (Jordan, 2005), 
Hymes saw language as a ‘terministic screen’ 
through which we see our world. Hymes also 
viewed narrative as a universal genre, centrally 
involved in the speech events in which culture is 
recreated and transmitted. By reading closely, 
Hymes proposed to reveal the implicit structure of 
traditional Indian narratives. This implicit struc-
ture would reveal much about how the narratives 
were embedded in and reflective of their cultural 
context. Particularly by looking at what happened 
when narrators ‘broke through’ into full perform-
ances, an analyst could see something of what 
made things coherent in the culture – its aesthetic 
system, in other words, or its native (‘ethno’) 
poetics. Ethnopoetic work could both show the 
rest of the world what Native American verbal art 
was like and help recover lost knowledge about 
languages and cultures that had died out 
(Blommaert, 2006).
In Vain I Tried to Tell You: Essays in Native 
American Ethnopoetics (1981, 2nd edn. 2004) is a 
collection of Hymes’s work in this area. Hymes 
sets out to show ‘how appreciation and interpreta-
tion of performances as unique events can be 
united with analysis of the underlying rules and 
regularities which make performances possible 
and intelligible’ (Hymes, 1981: 79). (All refer-
ences to In Vain I Tried to Tell You are to the 1981 
University of Pennsylvania Press edition.) Hymes 
situates performance in the range of abilities that 
characterize cultural competence vis-à-vis behav-
iours: being able to interpret behaviour, being 
able to report on behaviour, and being able to 
repeat behaviour. For cultural insiders, these three 
types of knowledge are in an implicational rela-
tionship: people can interpret more behaviour than 
they can report and report less than they can 
repeat. In other words, we can sometimes under-
stand what is going on in a situation without being 
able to say why, and we can talk about some cul-
turally meaningful behaviours without being able 
to do them. Behaviour that can be repeated 
(a prayer, a dance step, a ritual) can be repeated 
simply as a way of reporting on its existence or 
commenting on it, or, at the other end of the axis, 
it can be performed: i.e. done in such a way as to 
show that one means it and intends it to accom-
plish something. A person who is performing 
‘assumes responsibility to an audience’ (Hymes, 
1981: 84).
Finding truly performed speech is crucial for 
the analyst who wants to find evidence about cul-
ture in discourse, because ‘performance is a mode 
of existence and realization that is partly constitu-
tive of what the tradition is. The tradition itself 
exists partly for the sake of performance; perform-
ance is itself partly an end’ (Hymes, 1981: 86). 
Hymes’s discussion of the relation between per-
formance and tradition draws on Roman Jakobson’s 
(Jakobson, 1960, 1968) formulation of the func-
tions utterances serve. For Jakobson, utterances 
always have multiple functions, though one or 
another can be the focus in a particular situation. 
Utterances can be more or less ‘referential’ (aimed 
at making a claim about the world), more or less 
‘conative’ (aimed at getting an interlocutor to 
behave in a certain way), more or less ‘expressive’ 
(calling attention to the speaker), more or less 
‘metalingual’ (about the language or other system 
in which they are encoded), and more or less 
‘phatic’ (aimed at establishing contact among 
interlocutors). Most importantly for our purposes 
here, utterances can be more or less ‘poetic’: that 
is, more or less aimed at calling attention to pat-
terns of similarity and difference in their own 

DELL HYMES: ETHNOGRAPHY OF COMMUNICATION
63
structure. Poetic utterances, in this sense (which is 
somewhat different from everyday uses of the 
term), are ones that make visible normally invisi-
ble, implied categories and relationships. They do 
this by juxtaposing co-members of a category in 
repeated structural or semantic patterns.
For Hymes, only fully-performed speech is 
fully poetic. The poetic features of performance, 
those that distinguish it from non-performed 
speech, are thus designed to put tradition (linguis-
tic and cultural) on display, to present it rather 
than just to describe it. These features include 
iteration on various levels (repeated words, 
repeated structural patterns, repeated incidents in 
stories), quotation (which is another form of rep-
etition), the repeated use of various initial parti-
cles roughly similar to the English word now, and 
the grouping of lines into sets with predictable 
numbers of lines in each. (In the Chinookan 
narratives Hymes studies, there are often sets of 
three and five.) Hymes’s method for analysing 
Native American texts is complex and not easy to 
systematize. ‘In short’, says Hymes:
A satisfactory solution emerges only after several 
tries. One plunges in media res, making trial seg-
mentation by hand, and reconsiders and adjusts it 
in the light of the principles of consistent structure 
and form-meaning covariation. As one gets more 
deeply into a text, one gains a deeper sense of its 
inner logic and form, its particular integration of 
content and expression, and one’s sense of incon-
sistency or arbitrariness of analysis grows firmer 
(Hymes, 1981: 151).
Because ethnopoetic analysis, as Hymes practices 
it, is hard to teach or learn, Hymes’s methods have 
not been taken up widely. However, the idea that 
language and culture emerge in performance 
(and that performance is thus a crucial site for 
sociolinguistic analysis) has continued to resonate 
among North American linguistic anthropologists. 
Hymes’s student Richard Bauman (1977) first 
described linguistic and paralinguistic ‘keys 
to performance’ in relatively canonical, formal 
speech events like myth-telling. More recently, in 
keeping with theorists who talk about the ways 
in which all language is self-referential, Bauman 
and Charles Briggs (1990) broaden the notion 
of performance to include talk that is less ‘fully 
performed’, in Hymes’s sense, but which still 
can be said to enact and recirculate culture. 
Another student, Joel Sherzer, has carried forward 
the idea that the language used in certain Native 
American speech events is best described in 
terms of lines, verses and stanzas (Sherzer, 1975, 
1981).
The influence of Hymesian ethnopoetics is 
also evident in the work of Michael Silverstein 
(1985) and his students (e.g. Mannheim, 1986). 
In keeping with the field of sociolinguistics as a 
whole, the focus has shifted from monologic dis-
course to interaction, and from ‘culture’ as an 
abstraction to the processes by which people coor-
dinate understandings of the world in real time. 
Silverstein, Asif Agha (2006), and others (e.g. 
Lempert, 2008) talk about ‘interactional text’ and 
about how patterns of repetition and variation 
(now called ‘text metricality’ rather than ‘poetic 
structure’) knit together interactants’ words, ges-
tures and prosody into an emergent set of mean-
ings, personas and relationships.
4.5  VOICE AND EDUCATIONAL 
ETHNOGRAPHY
We have focused so far on the theoretical side of 
the ethnography of communication and ethnopo-
etics, and on Hymes’s theoretical contributions to 
sociolinguistics as a whole. His work has always 
had applied goals as well, however, having to do 
with making unheard voices and ways of speaking 
hearable. This is particularly explicit in his work 
in ethnopoetics, and it is alluded to in the title 
of his collected essays in ethnopoetics: In Vain 
I Tried to Tell You. In the introduction to the 
volume, Hymes characterizes it as ‘devoted to the 
first literature of North America’ (1981: 5). He 
explains its title by saying:
If we refuse to consider and interpret the surpris-
ing facts of device, design, and performance inher-
ent in the words of the texts, the Indians who 
made the texts, and those who preserved what 
they made, we will have worked in vain. We will 
be telling the texts not to speak. We will mistake, 
perhaps to our cost, the nature of the power of 
which they speak (Hymes 1981: 5–6).
Hymes’ work has always been linked with social 
activism, and the need for linguists to be able to 
integrate their ‘scientific and social goals’ (Hymes, 
1996: 26) is the basis for one of his critiques of 
abstract, universalizing, asocial approaches to 
language.
The major themes in Dell Hymes’ explicitly 
educational writings are the same as those in 
his work as a whole: the need for a view of lan-
guage and linguistics broad enough that it has 
something to say and do about inequality, the 
significance and ubiquity of narrative poetics in 
the circulation of knowledge, and the importance 
of understanding linguistic behaviour in its ethno-
graphic context. Hymes’ contribution to educa-
tional sociolinguistics is centred in particular on 
the concept of ‘narrative voice’.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
64
The goal of Hymes’s Native American ethno-
poetics, as discussed above, was to reconstruct or 
‘salvage’ the sociolinguistic and cultural frame-
works in which Chinookan stories made sense, 
frameworks that were on the verge of disappear-
ing. Only these frameworks made the texts Hymes 
studied fully and authentically interpretable; only 
these frameworks gave their tellers voice. By the 
same token, if not always for the same reasons, 
there are many children in the USA and around 
the world who lack voice, children who cannot be 
heard because educators do not understand the 
frameworks in which their stories make sense. In 
his writing about language and education, Hymes 
hoped:
to show ... that aesthetic shape is normal, and 
probably universal, something that comes with 
language itself, … that the possibility of narrative 
voice is given with the possibility of language, but 
at the same time, that its realization is partly at the 
mercy of others (Hymes, 1996: xi).
Hymes’ commitment to the application of socio-
linguistic work in the world arises, arguably, out 
of his generally leftist, egalitarian, activist politi-
cal stance (Blommaert, 2009). He positions him-
self against scholars who look for the universal in 
language and ignore the diversity among ways of 
speaking, because while diversity can be a 
resource, it can also be the basis for inequality.
In ‘Speech and language: On the origins and 
foundations of inequality among speakers’ 
(Hymes, 1996: 25–62), based on a paper pub-
lished in 1972, Hymes points out that linguistic 
diversity has always seemed problematic to 
Westerners, who have repeatedly proposed intel-
lectual solutions involving original unity (from the 
Tower of Babel story to comparative searches for 
proto-languages to universal grammar) and practi-
cal solutions involving the privileging of a single 
language or variety. That diversity should pose a 
problem, however, or that original unity should be 
its solution, is not self-evident. For the Busama of 
New Guinea and the Quileute of Washington 
State, Hymes says, ‘originally each person had a 
separate language, and ... community of language 
was a subsequent development’ (Hymes, 1996: 28). 
What would a linguistics be like that took that 
view? Perhaps it would see, in the many languages 
and varieties that exist, evidence that social and 
historical adaptation is a stronger influence than 
shared roots or cognitive predisposition. Perhaps 
it would focus not on languages or dialects but on 
speech communities or ways of speaking.
Hymes also critiques other mainstream ideas 
about language: the idea that different linguistic 
channels (speaking, writing and signing) are 
simply different ways of encoding the same 
messages, the idea that language and reality are 
ideally in one-to-one correspondence and the idea 
that languages and varieties are thus potentially 
equivalent for practical purposes. In another essay, 
he argues that language study ‘must overcome 
the separation between questions of language 
and questions of value that has characterized the 
development of modern linguistics in the United 
States’ (Hymes, 1996: 100–1). The very adaptabil-
ity of language implies maladaptation as well: 
resources suited to some purposes are unsuited to 
others. For linguists to continue to act as if the 
potential equality of languages (the fact that all 
are structurally complex, that lexica grow easily, 
that change is natural) were equivalent to actual 
equality is to sidestep some of the most important 
social issues to which linguistics is relevant. With 
Basil Bernstein, whose work Hymes takes seri-
ously, he argues that while different ways of 
speaking may be equivalent from a linguistic per-
spective, ‘[s]ome discrimination among verbal 
abilities and products is not prejudice, but accu-
rate judgment. The transformation of society to a 
juster, more equal way of life requires transforma-
tion of genuine equalities in verbal resource’ 
(Hymes, 1996: 46).
Contra Bernstein, however, Hymes objects to 
binary divisions of styles into ‘restricted’ and 
‘elaborated’ or, in Habermas’ formulation of the 
nature of linguistic inequality, distorted communi-
cation versus the ‘ideal speech situation’. While 
‘both Bernstein and Habermas are important in 
their pioneering efforts to analyze the problems of 
linguistic and communicative equality[,] both fall 
back on a cognitive ideal to which the absence of 
restriction, hence “more is better”, is intrinsic’ 
(Hymes, 1996: 55; see also Ivinson, this volume). 
Since human life is always lived under cultural 
constraints, such theorists are unable to propose 
alternatives.
Hymes’ proposal begins in arguing for narra-
tive as a way of knowing. Because teaching and 
learning through stories has traditionally been 
devalued in American educational culture, in 
favour of ‘rational’ modes of information-process-
ing, it is easy to fail to notice how the poetic pat-
terning of traditional tales can help socialize 
children to see the world as patterned in certain 
ways, or to miss seeing that children’s writing or 
oral storytelling is richly structured. In several 
essays Hymes proposes reanalyses, his or Virginia 
Hymes’s, of other people’s data, that uncover pat-
terns of lines and stanzas. Hymes follows Roman 
Jakobson and is in line with most linguists in 
holding the assumption that makes decontextual-
ized reanalyses of this sort possible: that structure 
inheres in texts, available for discovery to anyone 
who looks systematically. The fact that different 
analysts analyse texts differently suggests, though, 

DELL HYMES: ETHNOGRAPHY OF COMMUNICATION
65
that structuring may be an aspect of interpretation 
as well as an aspect of expression.
In talks and essays addressed to ethnographers 
of education, Hymes also talks about field 
methods. He reminds them that participant obser-
vation does not in itself constitute ethnography. 
He discusses what makes ethnography systematic 
and how it differs in fundamental epistemological 
ways from experimental research, ways that 
make it potentially empowering and democratiz-
ing. He compares the study of schools with eth-
nology, especially the study of Native American 
kinship, arguing that educational research should 
be more cumulative, more comparative, and more 
cooperative.
4.6 DISCUSSION
Hymes’ foundational works in sociolinguistics 
are still being read. They are included in collec-
tions of essential readings for anthropology and 
sociolinguistics (Duranti, 2009; Paulston and 
Tucker, 2003). His ethnopoetic work has also been 
recently republished (Hymes, 2003, 2004), and 
until recently, Hymes was still publishing in this 
area (Hymes, 2006). Although the concept of the 
speech community has been displaced to some 
degree by the community of practice (Wenger 
1998), it remains one of several possible analyti-
cal frameworks, more or less appropriate based on 
analytical purpose (Gee, 2005: 593; Holmes and 
Meyerhoff, 1999: 182).
Hymes is one of the most important figures in 
sociolinguistics: a founding member of the socio-
linguistics movement, the originator of the eth-
nography of communication, a pioneer in 
ethnopoetics, and a champion in linguistics for 
those who have been unvoiced in Western educa-
tional, anthropological and linguistic traditions. It 
is in this last set of concerns, where Hymes was an 
advocate, doing truly applied linguistic work, that 
we can see the coherence in his work. The 
repeated theme of Hymes’ scholarship is his 
insistence that linguistic theory and practice 
account for the individual, the particular and the 
actual. In countering Chomskyan linguistics, in 
proposing the ethnography of communication, 
and in his ethnopoetic approach to Native 
American texts, Hymes has always centred his 
theory and practice on what real human beings do 
with language. This insistence on the rich, socially 
contextualized reality of human communication 
creates a particular affordance: the ability to apply 
sociolinguistic research to real-world problems of 
disadvantage and inequity. The ethnography of 
communication forces the sociolinguist to describe 
speech communities on their terms, sensitive to 
their norms of communication. Ethnopoetics 
forces readers to decentre themselves and inter-
pret a text within its original context: the commu-
nication norms of the speech community that 
produced it. Hymes’ work in voice and education 
has been marked by an insistence on meeting the 
unvoiced – socioeconomically disadvantaged chil-
dren, American Indian speech communities within 
the larger US speech community – on their terms, 
within their context, and using their norms. 
Because Hymes resists the Western tendency to 
look only for the universal in language, he has 
been able to apply sociolinguistic research to the 
diverse, varied and local voices that have not 
received the ear they deserved. If we are sensitive 
to this coherency in Hymes work, the title of his 
ethnopoetics volume, In Vain I Tried to Tell You, 
takes on additional meaning. Hymes’ significant 
contributions to sociolinguistics have helped make 
the discipline more aware of and accountable to 
multiple speech communities.
REFERENCES
Agha, A. (2006) Language and Social Relations. New York: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bauman, R. (1977) Verbal Art as Performance. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. (1990) ‘Poetics and performance as 
critical perspectives on language and social life’, Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 19: 59–88.
Bauman, R. and Sherzer, J. (eds) (1974) Explorations in the 
Ethnography of Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Blommaert, J. (2006) ‘Ethnopoetics as functional reconstruc-
tion: Dell Hymes’ narrative view of the world (Review article)’, 
Functions of Language, 13: 229–49.
Blommaert, J. (2009) ‘Ethnography and democracy: 
Hymes’ political theory of language’, Text & Talk, 29(2): 
257–76.
Duranti, A. (2009) Linguistic Anthropology: A Reader. 2nd 
edn. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Farah, I. (1998) ‘The ethnography of communication’, in 
N. H. Hornberger and P. Corson (eds), Encyclopedia of 
Language and Education: Volume 8: Research Methods in 
Language and Education. Dordrecht: Kluwer. pp. 125–7.
Gee, J. (2005) ‘Meaning making, communities of practice, 
and analytical toolkits’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9(4): 
590–4.
Holmes, J. and Meyerhoff, M. (1999) ‘The community of prac-
tice: theories and methodologies in language and gender 
research’, Language in Society, 28: 173–83.
Hymes, D. (n.d.) Dell H. Hymes personal web page. 
Retrieved 16 January 2009, from http://www.virginia.edu/
anthropology/dhymes.html.
Hymes, D. H. (1962) 'The ethnography of speaking', in 
T. Gladwin and W. Sturtevant (eds.), Anthropology and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
66
Human Behavior. Washington, DC: The Anthropological 
Society of Washington. pp. 13–35.
Hymes, D. H. (ed.) (1964) Language in Culture and Society: 
a Reader in Linguistics and Anthropology. New York: 
Harper & Row.
Hymes, D. H. (ed.) (1971) Pidginization and Creolization of 
Languages. Proceedings of a conference held at the 
University of the West Indies, Mona, Jamaica, April 1968. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hymes, D. H. (1972a) ‘Editorial introduction to “Language in 
Society” ’, Language in Society, 1(1): 1–14.
Hymes, D. H. (1972b) ‘Models of the interaction of language 
and social life’, in J. J. Gumperz and D. Hymes (eds), 
Directions in Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of 
Communication. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. 
pp. 35–71.
Hymes, D. H. (1974) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An 
Ethnographic Approach. Philadephia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Hymes, D. H. (1975) ‘Pre-war Prague School and post-war 
American anthropological linguistics’, in E. Koerner 
(ed.), The Transformational-Generative Paradigm and 
Modern Linguistic Theory. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 359–80.
Hymes, D. H. (1981) In Vain I Tried to Tell You: Essays in 
Native American Ethnopoetics. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Hymes, D. H. (1989) ‘Ways of speaking’, in R. Bauman and 
J. Sherzer (eds), Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking. 
2nd edn. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 433–51.
Hymes, D. H. (1996) Ethnography, Linguistics, Narrative 
Inequality: Toward an Understanding of Voice. 1st edn. 
London: Taylor & Francis.
Hymes, D. H. (2003) Now I know only so far: essays in ethno-
poetics. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.
Hymes, D. H. (2004) ‘In vain I tried to tell you’: essays in 
Native American Ethnopoetics. Lincoln, NE, University of 
Nebraska Press.
Hymes, D. H. (2006) ‘Ethnopoetics’, Theory Culture Society, 
23: 67–9.
Jakobson, R. (1960) ‘Concluding statement: linguistics and 
poetics’, in T. Sebeok (ed.), Style in Language. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. pp. 350–77.
Jakobson, R. (1968) ‘Poetry of grammar and grammar of 
poetry’, Lingua, 21: 597–609.
Jordan, J. (2005) ‘Dell Hymes, Kenneth Burke’s “identifica-
tion,” and the birth of sociolinguistics’, Rhetoric Review, 
24: 264–79.
Lempert, M. (2008) ‘The poetics of stance: text-metricality, 
epistemicity, interaction’, Language in Society, 37: 
569–92.
Mannheim, B. (1986) ‘Popular song and popular grammar, 
poetry and metalanguage’, Word, 37: 45–75.
Murray, S. O. (1998) American Sociolinguistics: Theorists 
and Theory Groups. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John 
Benjamins.
Paulston, C. B. and Tucker, G. R. (2003) Sociolinguistics: the 
Essential Readings. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Sherzer, J. (1975) ‘Semantic systems, discourse structures, and 
the ecology of language’, in R. W. Shuy (ed.), Studies in 
Language Variation. Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. pp. 283–93.
Sherzer, J. (1981) ‘The interplay of structure and function in 
Kuna narrative, or: How to grab a snake in the Darien’, in 
Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and 
Linguistics, 1981. Washington DC: Georgetown University 
Press. pp. 306–22.
Sherzer, J. and Darnell, R. (1972) ‘Outline field guide for the 
ethnographic study of speech use’, in J. J. Gumperz and 
D. H. Hymes (eds), Directions in Sociolinguistics: The 
Ethnography of Communication. New York: Holt, Rinehart, 
and Winston. pp. 548–54.
Silverstein, M. (1985) ‘On the pragmatic ‘poetry’ of prose: 
parallelism, repetition, and cohesive structure in the time 
course of dyadic conversation’, in D. Schiffrin (ed.), 
Meaning, form, and use in context: linguistic application. 
Georgetown University Round Table on Language and 
Linguistics. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
pp. 181–98.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of practice. Cambridge & 
New York: Cambridge University Press.

5
5.1 INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
Interactional sociolinguistics is a qualitative, 
interpretative approach to the analysis of social 
interaction that developed at the intersection of 
linguistics, anthropology and sociology. It emerged 
primarily out of the work of anthropological lin-
guist John J. Gumperz, who, in his field research 
in the tradition of the ethnography of communica-
tion in the 1960s and 1970s, observed immense 
linguistic and cultural diversity in everyday talk, 
and sought to devise a method for analysing and 
understanding this diversity, and for testing 
hypotheses gained from doing ethnography through 
the collection and analysis of actual texts. Its 
development was also motivated by Gumperz’s 
interest in investigating intercultural encounters 
characteristic of many modern urban areas, as 
well as by his concern for social justice.
As an ‘approach to discourse’ (Schiffrin, 1994), 
interactional sociolinguistics (IS) offers theories 
and methods that enable researchers to explore not 
only how language works but also to gain insights 
into the social processes through which individu-
als build and maintain relationships, exercise 
power, project and negotiate identities, and create 
communities. IS methodology involves an ethno-
graphic component (observations of speakers in 
naturally-occurring contexts and participant-
observation), audio- and/or video-recording of 
interactions, detailed linguistic transcription of 
recorded conversations, careful micro-analysis 
of conversational features in the context of the 
information gained through ethnography, and 
sometimes, post-recording interviews. The key 
theoretical contributions of IS are to explain how 
speakers use signalling mechanisms, or ‘contextu-
alization cues’ (Gumperz, 1978, 1982a, 1982b, 
1992a, 1992b, 1999b, 2001), often prosodic (like 
intonation, stress, pitch register) or paralinguistic 
(like tempo, pausing, hesitation) in nature, to indi-
cate how they mean what they say, and how listen-
ers, through a nuanced, context-bound process 
Gumperz calls ‘conversational inference’, recog-
nize and interpret contextualization cues through 
their own culturally-shaped background knowl-
edge. In a foundational book investigating linguis-
tic diversity in interaction, Discourse Strategies, 
Gumperz (1982a) suggests that communicative 
experiences lead to expectations regarding how to 
use contextualization cues; this study also demon-
strates how members of diverse cultural groups 
often understand and employ these cues differ-
ently. Importantly, when interactional participants 
have dissimilar ‘contextualization conventions’ 
(Gumperz, 1982a) – that is, different ways of con-
ventionally using and interpreting contextualiza-
tion cues – misunderstandings and conversational 
breakdown can occur. Such breakdowns, Gumperz 
suggests, ultimately can contribute to larger social 
problems such as ethnic stereotyping and differen-
tial access to information and opportunities.
Conversational inference and the related notion 
of contextualization cues constitute an interactive 
theory of meaning-making that was designed to 
investigate intercultural communication and con-
flict based on cultural differences; in fact it has 
been suggested that the approach pioneered by 
Gumperz ‘provides the most systematic investiga-
tions of such conflict’ (Maynard, 1988: 315). It 
also offers a means of performing microanalysis 
of interaction in light of macro-societal issues like 
Gumperz and Interactional 
Sociolinguistics
C y n t h i a  G o r d o n

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
68
institutional discrimination, thus taking part in an 
ongoing quest in sociolinguistics to link the 
‘micro’ and the ‘macro’ in meaningful ways (e.g. 
Erickson, 2004; Scollon and Scollon, 2004). 
Furthermore, IS offers a linguistic approach to the 
contemporary, constructionist understanding of 
identity put forth by researchers from a range of 
disciplinary perspectives (Goffman, 1959; Berger 
and Luckmann, 1966; Ochs, 1993; Holstein and 
Gubrium, 2007; see also Chapter 7 this volume). 
It has also made important contributions to the 
social scientific study of language in general, 
complementing other approaches aimed at under-
standing language from both structural and func-
tional perspectives, such as conversation analysis 
and linguistic pragmatics. Additionally, IS has 
reached beyond the ‘ivory tower’ to offer non-
academics a means of understanding the role of 
language in social relationships, ways of identify-
ing causes of miscommunication, and strategies 
for improving communication. Gumperz, for 
instance, served as a consultant for an educational 
BBC television programme called Crosstalk 
(Twitchin, 1979) which addressed the subtleties of 
intercultural communication in multicultural 
workplaces in London; in addition, his work 
inspired other scholars to share, with non-academic 
audiences, sociolinguistic insights into everyday 
interactional dynamics.
This chapter presents an historical overview of 
IS, focusing on the research of Gumperz as well as 
of other scholars who have made significant con-
tributions to the development of the approach. It 
outlines IS’s primary inspirations, goals, topical 
foci, theoretical constructs, and methods. It also 
describes contemporary research in IS, identifying 
it as topically diverse, theoretically rich, and 
poised to address increasingly interdisciplinary 
research questions.
The main section of this paper traces the devel-
opment of IS in detail, focusing primarily on the 
work of its founder, John Gumperz, and highlight-
ing how, in formulating the key concepts and 
methodological frameworks of IS, he incorporated 
insights from scholars who examine interaction 
and meaning from a range of disciplinary perspec-
tives (Section 5.2). I focus in particular on the 
methodological insights Gumperz developed in 
collaboration with Dell Hymes and through expo-
sure to conversation analysis; the theoretical 
insights he gleaned from scholars such as Erving 
Goffman, Harold Garfinkel, and H. P. Grice; and 
IS theory developments contributed by Gumperz’s 
student Deborah Tannen in light of Robin Lakoff’s 
work. I also situate Gumperz’s work in larger 
research trajectories in the field of linguistics. 
Next, I give a brief overview of five major 
research trajectories to which Gumperz’s research 
in IS has contributed substantially: code-switching 
and language contact; intercultural communica-
tion; language and gender; discursive identity 
construction; and language, power and institutions 
(Section 5.3). Finally, I discuss possible future 
directions of IS, in particular in the context of 
growing interests in interdisciplinary research 
(Section 5.4).
5.2  JOHN J. GUMPERZ AND THE 
DEVELOPMENT OF INTERACTIONAL 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Academic biography 1
John J. Gumperz was born in 1922 in Germany; 
fleeing Germany pre-Holocaust, he came to the 
United States in 1939. He served in the US 
Army; it has been suggested that his later aca-
demic interests in intercultural communication 
and social justice may have taken root in part as 
a result of his emigration and military experi-
ences. Gumperz received his bachelor’s degree in 
science from the University of Ohio, Cincinnati in 
1947, but after attending Linguistic Institute lec-
tures as a graduate student in chemistry at the 
University of Michigan, he redirected his studies 
to linguistics. Gumperz received his PhD in 
Germanic Linguistics in 1954 from the University 
of Michigan, where he studied with Kenneth 
Pike and Hans Kurath. His dissertation examined 
variables of a German dialect spoken by third-
generation immigrants in southeastern Michigan 
and linked these variables to social and religious 
groupings of individuals, setting the scene for his 
later research.
Gumperz went to Cornell University to teach as 
an instructor before finishing his degree. After 
receiving his PhD, Gumperz was invited to serve 
as the head of Cornell’s Hindi language training 
programme; he subsequently went to India to do 
postdoctoral research in sociolinguistics as part of 
an interdisciplinary research team. In 1956, he 
began collaborating with linguist Charles Ferguson 
at Deccan College (in India) on language diversity 
issues when both were visiting faculty there. 
Ferguson and Gumperz (1960) co-edited Linguistic 
Diversity in South Asia, a special issue of the 
International Journal of American Linguistics, 
which, in William Labov’s (2003: 5) words, pro-
vides ‘the most important general statement’ of 
the principles of the then young field of sociolin-
guistics. Gumperz gained more fieldwork experi-
ence in Norway in the 1960s, further fuelling his 
interests in linguistic diversity. The Norway study 
also resulted in a publication on code-switching 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
69
(Blom and Gumperz, 1972) in which forms and 
functions of code-switching are investigated in a 
novel way – as tied to situation (situational 
switching) and as tied to participants’ relationships 
and their signalling of how the listener should 
interpret what the speaker says (metaphorical 
switching). As Kathryn Woolard (2004: 75), 
a student of Gumperz, remarks, his work ‘has had 
not only seminal but enduring influence on the 
accepted anthropological view on codeswitching’. 
Importantly, the Norway study also proved foun-
dational for Gumperz’s development of the notion 
of contextualization cues in the IS framework: 
code-switching, like uses of pitch, intonation, 
pausing, gesture, and other contextualization cues, 
can be used to signal how verbal messages should 
be interpreted.
After his research in India, Gumperz was 
invited to design a Hindi-Urdu programme at the 
University of California, Berkeley. A number of 
his studies around that time focused specifically 
on conversational Hindi-Urdu (Gumperz, 1958, 
1960, 1963; Gumperz and Naim, 1960; Gumperz 
and Rumery, 1962), but he increasingly grew 
interested in sociolinguistic aspects of language 
use across different cultural groups. At Berkeley, 
Gumperz served as chairperson for South and 
South-East Asian Studies (from 1968 to 1971); he 
also served as a faculty member in the Department 
of Anthropology, becoming a full professor in 
Anthropology in 1965. While affiliated with 
Berkley, Gumperz has taken opportunities to cul-
tivate connections with scholars in Europe, espe-
cially in Austria, Germany, and the UK, as well as 
with scholars in the United States. He is currently 
an emeritus professor at Berkeley, and is affiliated 
with the University of California Santa-Barbara as 
a faculty member of an interdisciplinary research 
group with a PhD emphasis called Language, 
Interaction and Social Organization (LISO).
In establishing IS as an approach, Gumperz has 
explored topics as varied as language diversity, 
language contact, bilingualism, language and edu-
cational issues, and interethnic communication. 
With Dell Hymes, Gumperz co-edited two vol-
umes key to the ethnography of communication 
(Gumperz and Hymes, 1964, 1972). His book 
Discourse Strategies (Gumperz, 1982a) and its 
companion edited volume, Language and Social 
Identity (Gumperz, 1982b), are viewed as ground-
breaking in the study of issues of language and 
culture and as foundational IS texts. Discourse 
Strategies marks the beginning of Gumperz’s cur-
rent, ongoing research looking at interethnic and 
intercultural communication, communication and 
social background, and the social significance of 
details of communication (Prevignano and di 
Luzio, 2003). Language and Social Identity 
consists of essays by students and postdoctoral 
researchers working with Gumperz – among them 
Monica Heller, Daniel Maltz, Ruth Borker, Celia 
Roberts, T.C. Jupp and Deborah Tannen – and 
by his spouse, and frequent co-author, Jenny 
Cook-Gumperz.
In the 1990s, Gumperz continued to refine his 
approach, linking conversational inference to 
Michael Silverstein’s (1992, 1993) work on index-
icality and conceptualizing contextualization cues 
as a class of indexicals (Gumperz, 2003), while 
also applying it to new institutional contexts in 
collaborative work (Cook-Gumperz and Gumperz, 
1996, 1997, 2002) and furthering investigation of 
contextualization processes (as seen in Gumperz’s 
contributions to two key IS edited volumes: Auer 
and di Luzio’s The Contextualization of Language, 
and Duranti and Goodwin’s Rethinking Context, 
both published in 1992). In conjunction with his 
former student Stephen Levinson, Gumperz co-
edited a volume reexamining the influential 
‘Whorf hypothesis’ (Gumperz and Levinson, 
1996). In recent years, Gumperz (1999b, 2001) 
has taken opportunities to write reflective essays 
about IS. Additionally, he discusses his approach 
in Language and Interaction: Discussions with 
John J. Gumperz (Eerdmans, Prevignano and 
Thibault, 2003). This book includes two inter-
views with Gumperz (Prevignano and di Luzio, 
2003; Prevignano and Thibault, 2003) in which he 
talks about the motivations of his work, explains 
in detail his conceptualization of contextualization 
cues, and outlines connections he sees between 
his approach and others, such as conversation 
analysis and Silverstein’s semiotics. It also 
includes commentaries on Gumperz’s work by 
researchers such as Levinson (2003). In a response 
essay, Gumperz (2003) addresses issues brought 
up by these commentaries.
In total, Gumperz has more than 100 published 
books, chapters and articles over the span of 
his career. He has also received many academic 
accolades, has served on the editorial boards of 
numerous academic journals, and is founding 
editor of the influential Studies in Interactional 
Sociolinguistics book series (in which Discourse 
Strategies is the first volume). Through his classes 
at Berkeley and visits to other universities in both 
the United States and abroad, Gumperz has intro-
duced IS and issues of language and communica-
tion to students of interaction around the world. 
His approach is viewed as a key part of sociolin-
guistic research programmes in various European 
countries, such as Greece (Tsitsipis, 2006) and the 
UK (Rampton, 2007). Gumperz has been identi-
fied not only as the founder of IS but also as ‘one 
of the foundational spirits in the broader field of 
sociolinguistics itself’ (Levinson, 2003: 43).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
70
Social and moral motivations in 
the development of interactional 
sociolinguistics
Interactional sociolinguistics emerged as Gumperz 
was developing ‘replicable methods of qualitative 
analysis that account for our ability to interpret 
what participants intend to convey in everyday 
communicative practice’ (Gumperz, 2001: 215). 
However, although as an approach to discourse IS 
gives insight into conversation as an entity in gen-
eral, and into meaning-making processes in par-
ticular, it did not develop out of an interest in 
‘interaction in the abstract’, but rather as a means 
of exploring linguistic and cultural diversity in 
everyday talk (Gumperz, 2003: 105). As Duranti 
and Goodwin (1992a: 229–30) note, ‘Gumperz’[s] 
work is unique for his ability to merge intellectual, 
social, and moral considerations within his ana-
lytical apparatus’; that is, Gumperz developed IS 
as a way of not only explicating the interpretive 
procedures underlying talk but also to address the 
consequences of real-life, everyday conversational 
misunderstandings between members of different 
cultural groups.
The ‘social’ considerations of IS emerge through 
Gumperz’s interest in understanding and explain-
ing instances of miscommunication he observed 
in various fieldwork studies he undertook in India, 
Europe and the United States, and in trying to 
contribute to improving intercultural communica-
tion in increasingly diverse areas, particularly 
urban areas. For instance, in a now classic case-
study example, Gumperz was invited to observe 
interactions between members of two groups 
suffering strained interactions and feelings of ill-
will at work: native British cargo handlers and 
the Indian and Pakistani staff cafeteria workers 
who served their meals at a major British airport 
(Gumperz, 1982a, Chapter 8). Gumperz observed 
cultural differences in uses of – and expectations 
regarding – intonation, a key contextualization 
cue. When the Indian and Pakistani cafeteria 
workers offered a serving of gravy, for instance, 
they did not use rising intonation as most native 
British English speakers would. Instead, they 
uttered ‘gravy’ with a flat intonation because, to 
them, this was a culturally polite way of offering 
something. To native British English speakers, 
who had different expectations regarding intona-
tion, this sounded rude; they thus misinterpreted 
the cafeteria workers’ intentions. Calling into 
attention this seemingly minor difference in into-
nation usage and discussing it with members of 
both groups actually improved communication 
and inter-group perceptions. In this way, IS 
research clearly has practical social implications; 
it ‘may lead to an explanation for the endemic and 
increasingly serious communication problems that 
affect private and public affairs in our society’ 
(Gumperz, 1982a: 172). This is particularly impor-
tant as workplaces – and nations – become 
increasingly diverse.
The ‘moral’ considerations Duranti and 
Goodwin (1992a) mention relate to social injus-
tices. Gumperz’s work explores issues such as 
misattribution of intent, stereotyping, and dis-
crimination in the context of interaction, in par-
ticular against ethnic minorities. Following the 
work of Frederick Erickson (1975), Gumperz 
investigates the role of language in enacting dis-
crimination in ‘gatekeeping encounters’; these are 
encounters in which ‘two persons meet, usually as 
strangers, with one of them having authority to 
make decisions that affect the other’s future’ 
(Erickson and Schultz, 1982: xi). In such encoun-
ters, the consequences of misunderstandings can 
be very serious, especially for the person not in 
the authority position. In many of Gumperz’s case 
studies, the participants have different expecta-
tions about contextualization conventions and/or 
mismatches regarding the nature of the institu-
tional encounter in which they are involved. Thus, 
miscommunication does occur, and the person 
seeking access, usually an individual from an 
ethnic minority group, risks being denied material 
goods, a job prospect, or some other resource. For 
example, in a tape-recorded interview-counselling 
session that Gumperz (1982a, Chapter 8) analy-
ses, a Pakistani teacher who has been unable to 
secure permanent employment in London has an 
unsuccessful exchange with the native British 
staff counsellor whose job it is to help him, largely 
due to different expectations about what needs 
to be said in the session and to different uses of 
prosodic and paralinguistic features like rhythm 
and intonation. Careful turn-by-turn analysis of 
the recording reveals that their interaction is 
rhythmically asynchronous and the speakers never 
achieve a joint understanding of where the interac-
tion is going at any given time. In other words, 
they seem to be ‘on parallel tracks which don’t 
meet’ (Gumperz and Roberts, 1980; as cited in 
Gumperz, 1982a: 185). Thus, the teacher does not 
receive the support he needs and the staff counsel-
lor is not able to do her job effectively. One moti-
vation of many IS studies, including many by 
Gumperz, is the belief that by uncovering cultural 
differences and by educating people about them, 
some such misunderstandings can be circum-
vented, thereby decreasing the likelihood of unin-
tentional discrimination or denial of resources 
based on misinterpretation of culture-specific uses 
of contextualization cues.
In line with this belief, Gumperz has partici-
pated in public educational efforts. As mentioned, 
he served as a consultant on an educational pro-
gramme called Crosstalk, which was broadcast on 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
71
BBC television in 1979. As part of a 10-part series 
called Multi-Racial Britain, Crosstalk aimed to 
help develop awareness of possible causes of 
intercultural miscommunication in workplaces, as 
well as to draw attention to the role of language in 
stereotyping and discrimination. Written materials 
were also prepared by Gumperz and his col-
leagues to accompany the programme (Gumperz 
et al., 1979, 1980). Crosstalk, while serving as a 
useful tool for educating the general public at the 
time it was aired, has applications for formal edu-
cational contexts too, such as for teaching English 
as a foreign language and for teacher training 
(Baxter and Levine, 1982), as well as for courses 
in intercultural communication (Kiesling and 
Paulston, 2005: 2). It also inspired later work 
aimed at general audiences, such as an educa-
tional video focused on communication between 
Native Alaskans and non-Natives called Interethnic 
Communication (Scollon and Jones, 1979), and, 
more famously, general audience books by Tannen 
(1986, 1990) that examine various kinds of cross-
cultural and cross-subcultural communication.
The development of interactional 
sociolinguistics: Gumperz and his 
major intellectual influences
The research programme of Gumperz and his 
development of IS grew not only out of interest 
in the social issues facing diversifying societies 
but also out of Gumperz’s training in structural 
linguistics; his contact with scholars from various 
fields interested in interaction, qualitative method-
ologies, and meaning-making; and broader move-
ments in linguistics in the 1960s through to the 
1980s. Gumperz’s linguistics background; contacts 
with anthropologists, sociologists, language philos-
ophers and other linguists; and participation in 
larger language debates contributed substantially 
to the development of IS.
A starting point: Bloomfield and 
structural linguistics
Gumperz’s linguistic training was in the tradition 
of Saussure, Sapir and Bloomfield (Prevignano 
and di Luzio, 2003: 8); Gumperz specifically rec-
ognizes Leonard Bloomfield’s (1933) book 
Language, a pioneering work in American struc-
tural linguistics, as having influenced and moti-
vated some of his early reflections. As linguistic 
anthropologist (and Gumperz’s student) Michael 
Agar (1994: 16) notes, structural linguistics ‘puts 
a circle’ around language, meaning that it sepa-
rates grammar from its cultural context. However, 
Gumperz observes that structuralists’ ‘basic 
insights into linguistic, that is, phonological and 
syntactic competence and their approach to speak-
ing as a partially subconscious process, continue 
to be useful’ despite shortcomings of the approach 
(Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003: 20). As we will 
see, Gumperz utilizes the notion of ‘competence’ 
in a similar sense to Hymes’s ‘communicative 
competence’. He also draws on a view of speaking 
as a partially ‘subconscious’ or ‘automatic’ phe-
nomenon in examining how interpretations are 
actually made in interaction (see, e.g. Gumperz, 
1982a). Thus he extends basic ideas from struc-
tural linguistics into social and cultural realms.
Structural linguistics also motivated Gumperz’s 
research in a more specific way: Gumperz cites as 
a starting point for him Bloomfield’s thinking on 
regional linguistic diversity as it is interconnected 
with patterning of interpersonal contacts. 
Bloomfield’s work offered ‘an initial outline of a 
theory of diversity that rests on human interaction 
as an analytical prime, and does not rely on 
a priori assumptions about ethnic, class or group 
identity’ (Gumperz, 2003: 106). Gumperz (2003: 
107) reports that a common assumption in the 
1950s and 1960s was that communication between 
members of different social groups was problem-
atic, yet, frustratingly, there was a lack of empiri-
cal evidence supporting this assumption. Therefore, 
he ‘set out to explore the validity of the interac-
tional approach to diversity’ that he saw seeds of 
in Bloomfield’s work (Gumperz, 2003: 107). 
Building on this, in research over the course of his 
career, Gumperz would move to erase ‘the circle’ 
that disconnects language from social life.
An anthropological perspective: Hymes and 
the ethnography of communication
In order to investigate diversity in interaction, in 
the 1960s Gumperz turned to anthropological 
methods while collaborating with Dell Hymes, 
who was then developing the ethnography of com-
munication (see Gumperz and Hymes 1964, 1972; 
Chapter 4, this volume). In fact, Gumperz’s use of 
ethnographic methods goes further back, at least 
to his time in India: Ferguson and Gumperz 
(1960), for example, undertook an exploration of 
language contact ‘through qualitative methods 
involving work with informants, informal obser-
vations, and (sometimes) questionnaires’ (Duranti, 
2001: 5). The ethnography of communication, 
however, provided a systematic set of qualitative 
methodologies offering a means of analysing 
‘patterns of communication as part of cultural 
knowledge and behavior’ (Schiffrin, 1994: 137). 
Importantly, ethnographic methods differ greatly 
from those of structural linguistics: rather than 
contrasting formal units, such as sounds or sen-
tence structures, across languages, ethnographers 
undertake in-depth fieldwork, usually involving 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
72
participant-observation and interviewing. From 
relatively long-term observation and engagement 
with the community under study, ethnographers 
learn things about people and the diverse ways in 
which they use language that can only be discov-
ered and understood over time. To use Pike’s 
(1967) terms, ethnographers of communication 
are interested in viewing data from both etic and 
emic perspectives (see Carbaugh and Hastings, 
1992). In other words, analysis needs to go 
beyond a general perspective and occur ‘in terms 
of categories which account for native perceptions 
of significance’ (Gumperz, 1982a: 15). This is 
important because it extends beyond describing 
grammatical structures to the more problematic – 
and, for Gumperz, more consequential – task of 
identifying culturally meaningful categories, the 
relationships between them, and how language 
plays into their creation and maintenance.
This kind of anthropological ‘thick description’ 
(Geertz, 1973) can be said to characterize 
Gumperz’s research, even during the early forma-
tion of IS. In Rampton’s (2007: 597) words, 
‘Gumperz’s work stands out for its empirical rec-
onciliation of linguistics and ethnography’. For 
example, Gumperz’s fieldwork in a caste-stratified 
North Indian village and a small, homogeneous 
town in northern Norway led to the development 
of means of exploring language diversity as firmly 
embedded in specific aspects of sociocultural life, 
giving an emic understanding of the data (see 
Gumperz, 1971). His findings indicated that social 
interaction – frequency and quality of interaction 
among individuals, specifically – explained the 
linguistic distinctions he observed. Category 
labels put on people like ‘touchable’ and ‘untouch-
able’ (terms of social categorization then used in 
many Indian communities) were not sufficient to 
explain what was going on. In addition, ideologies 
of interpersonal relations – who should interact 
with whom, and in what way – further explicated 
patterns of language use in these two locales. 
Gumperz thus discovered information about what 
Hymes (1972: 277) refers to as speakers’ ‘com-
municative competence’, which includes informa-
tion such as ‘when to speak, when not’ and ‘what 
to talk about with whom, when, where, in what 
manner’, going far beyond the grammatical 
knowledge described by structuralists.
Studying interaction and conceptualizing 
knowledge: Goffman and Garfinkel
The notion of ‘communicative competence’ sug-
gests that in interacting, speakers follow not only 
grammatical rules, but also social rules, such 
as regarding what kinds of conversational topics 
are appropriate for what kinds of situations. In 
order to get at social rules in a meaningful way, 
Gumperz reached beyond linguistics and anthro-
pology to build into IS elements of sociologist 
Erving Goffman’s work on the ‘interaction order’ 
and ethnomethodologist Harold Garfinkel’s inter-
est in the interpretive processes and background 
knowledge needed to keep interaction going. In 
fact, Gumperz has commented, ‘In my approach 
to interaction, I take a position somewhat between 
that of Erving Goffman and Harold Garfinkel’ 
(Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003: 8).
Although Goffman ‘does not analyze language 
per se’ (Schiffrin, 1994: 102), Gumperz views him 
as a ‘sociological predecessor’ of his own work 
(Gumperz, 2001: 216). Goffman (1967, 1974, 
1981) contemplates face-to-face interaction with 
a focus on how it is that social encounters are 
constructed. In other words, he recognizes the 
‘interaction order’ – how people behave in one 
another’s co-presence and co-construct their social 
worlds in everyday encounters – as a legitimate 
area of study. Like Goffman, Gumperz views eve-
ryday interaction as worthy of study; furthermore, 
Goffman and Gumperz were both on the faculty 
at Berkeley – Gumperz in Anthropology, and 
Goffman in Sociology – for a number of overlap-
ping years (1960–1968). Gumperz also finds 
inspiration in Goffman’s work in that the notion of 
‘interaction order’ provides ‘a distinct level of 
discursive organization bridging the linguistic and 
the social’ (Gumperz, 2001: 216). However, 
whereas Goffman does not focus on the details of 
language in his work, Gumperz, with his concept 
of contextualization cues, does.
Moreover, Goffman’s observations and theoriz-
ing uncover many interesting – and often taken-
for-granted – phenomena that occur in everyday 
encounters; IS is able to investigate these phenom-
ena from a perspective that highlights the role of 
linguistic features and investigates conversation as 
a collaborative endeavour. For example, identity 
presentation, considered in Goffman’s (1959) The 
Presentation of Self in Everyday Life, is examined 
from an IS perspective in Language and Social 
Identity (Gumperz, 1982b). Additionally, identity 
presentation and construction continues to be 
a topic of interest for IS scholars. For example, 
Tannen (1999), Kotthoff (2000), Kendall (2007) 
and others have drawn on IS to examine the lin-
guistic creation of gendered identities. Framing, 
or how people establish and negotiate ‘definitions of 
a situation’ (Goffman, 1974: 11), relates to a central 
part of IS: invoking Silverstein’s (1992, 1993) dis-
cussions of indexicality, Gumperz remarks that 
‘Contextualization cues, along with other indexical 
signs, serve to retrieve the frames (in Goffman’s 
sense of the term) that channel the interpretive 
process’ (Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003: 10). In 
other words, using a speaker’s contextualization 
cues as guidelines, a listener imagines himself or 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
73
herself to be in a particular kind of situation; this 
enables a listener to assess what the speaker 
intends. Thus, contextualization cues are a means 
of collaboratively accomplishing framing in dis-
course. Numerous IS scholars have demonstrated 
how this occurs and continue to develop a theory of 
framing in the context of sociolinguistics by inte-
grating and extending Goffman’s and Gumperz’s 
theorizing (e.g. Tannen, 1993a). Frames theory has 
been used to investigate a host of contexts, ranging 
from everyday family interactions (e.g. Gordon, 
2002, 2008; Kendall, 2006), to medical encounters 
(e.g. Ribeiro, 1994; Tannen and Wallat, 1993; 
Pinto, Ribeiro and Dantas, 2005), to moments of 
conversational humour (e.g. Kotthoff, 2000, 2002; 
Davies, 2003). Additionally, research has incorpo-
rated Goffman’s (1967) work on face-saving and 
Brown and Levinson’s (1987) work on face and 
linguistic politeness into IS analyses, such as by 
Kendall (2004), Kotthoff (2000) and Tannen 
(2005[1984]). Building on Goffman (1981), 
research in the IS tradition has also considered 
how alignments or ‘footings’ are linguistically 
created and managed (e.g. Couper-Kuhlen, 1996; 
Davies, 2003; Gordon, 2003; Tannen, 2003).
Gumperz also cites the work of Garfinkel as 
instrumental in his thinking about the nature of 
social interaction, as well as the knowledge 
required to participate in it. Garfinkel (1967) 
developed an approach within sociology known as 
ethnomethodology, which focuses on the interac-
tive processes by which people create social 
organization and the knowledge needed to do this. 
Research in the IS tradition is able to examine the 
linguistic means by which social organization is 
accomplished. In addition, Garfinkel’s (1967) 
experiments – usually known as ‘breaching’ or 
‘Garfinkeling’ experiments – caught Gumperz’s 
attention; these involved breaking social norms as 
a means of uncovering often unnamed social rules 
as well as people’s knowledge and expectations 
about situations. Furthermore, Garfinkel made the 
insightful observation that interactants can never 
be detailed enough in talk to convey every aspect 
of meaning; thus some combination of ‘practical 
reasoning’ and ‘unstated, taken-for-granted back-
ground knowledge’ is needed to fill in what is left 
unsaid (Gumperz, 2001: 216). For Gumperz, 
Garfinkel’s observations brought to light the role 
of sociocultural background knowledge in inter-
pretation, a critical component of his theory of 
conversational inference. In the IS framework, 
and in the spirit of Hymes (1972), researchers 
argue that speakers gain sociocultural knowledge 
from having been acculturated in a community. In 
other words, knowledge about how to use lan-
guage in culturally apt ways – how to use pitch, 
intonation and other contextualization cues, 
including those that are non-verbal – comes from 
a speaker’s collection of cultural experiences. It is 
this knowledge base that participants rely on too 
as they interpret contextualization cues. The nature 
and functioning of this knowledge – what exactly 
it encompasses, and how people access and acti-
vate the appropriate knowledge at a given conver-
sational moment – is still under investigation in IS 
and related areas of research.
Micro-analysis of talk: conversation analysis
Garfinkel and Goffman also influenced Gumperz 
in a more indirect way: conversation analysis 
(CA) (see Chapter 26, this volume), which proved 
influential to Gumperz’s research, grew out of the 
work of two of Goffman’s students at Berkeley in 
the 1960s: Harvey Sacks and Emanuel Schegloff. 
In collaboration with Sacks’s student Gail 
Jefferson, Sacks and Schegloff applied Garfinkel’s 
ethnomethodology specifically to conversation 
(see Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson, 1974). CA is 
interested in how conversation represents and cre-
ates social organization among participants; its 
focus on conversational discourse – both face-to-
face and over the phone – as a research site and on 
the details of language provided inspiration for 
Gumperz’s focus on talk and on the micro features 
of interaction (Gumperz, 1999b, 2001; Prevignano 
and di Luzio, 2003).
Both IS and CA examine actual social encoun-
ters, and their methods both involve recording, a 
form of careful linguistic transcription, and analy-
sis of interaction. Key CA notions and conceptu-
alizations of interaction are also central to IS. For 
example, Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1974), 
in a seminal CA study, outline a ‘systematics’ for 
conversation based on the basic organizational 
unit of the conversational turn. This study views 
conversation as a sequentially organized event; in 
Heritage’s (1984: 242) words, each utterance is 
‘context-shaped’ (shaped by the prior utterance) 
and ‘context-renewing’ (creating a context for the 
next utterance). IS researchers consider this sense 
of context (discourse context) in their analyses; 
however, IS also takes a broader perspective on 
what constitutes context and its effect on conver-
sation.2 For example, whereas CA researchers 
tend to claim it is ‘the independence of the turn-
taking system from various aspects of the socio-
cultural context of speech’ such as the speakers’ 
ethnicity, gender, or socioeconomic class (Duranti, 
1989: 222), IS scholars consider such aspects to 
be central to how interaction unfolds, and indeed 
are interested in exploring diversity of turn-taking 
patterns across cultural groups (e.g. Tannen, 
2005[1984]). In other words, whereas ‘the CA 
view of interaction is a structural view’ (Schiffrin, 
1994: 236), IS shows a more social and cultural 
emphasis. Thus, for instance, CA research has 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
74
examined assessments from the perspective of 
conversational structure (Pomerantz, 1984), and 
research growing out of IS builds on this to dem-
onstrate how two parents use assessments as a 
means of presenting different kinds of identities in 
interaction (Gordon, 2007).
In part, based on these different conceptualiza-
tions of what constitutes an utterance’s context, IS 
and CA differ in another regard: Gumperz adopted 
playback, used in early sociolinguistic work by 
William Labov (Labov and Fanshel, 1977; see 
also Fanshel and Moss, 1971), as a means of test-
ing analyst interpretations. Playback involves 
playing recordings of the interaction for those 
who participated in it, or for other insiders to the 
language variety and/or community, and asking 
for impressions in an open-ended way. It therefore 
provides multiple perspectives on interaction, 
which can be particularly insightful in cases of 
cross-cultural (mis)communication, where ana-
lysts might have native speaker insights into one 
side of the conversation, but not the other, based 
on his or her own cultural and linguistic back-
ground, as in Gumperz (1982a) and Tannen 
(2005[1984]).
CA and IS continue to exist, side-by-side, as 
approaches to discourse analysis. Although they 
both investigate conversational discourse as what 
Schegloff (1982) calls ‘an interactional achieve-
ment’, i.e. as something ‘incrementally accom-
plished’ via collaboration, CA and IS examine 
different aspects of the achievement. Sharing an 
interest in the micro features of conversation, they 
continue to influence and complement each other 
mutually, for example by offering different per-
spectives on similar kinds of social interaction, as 
in Tannen and Goodwin’s (2006) co-edited Text 
and Talk special issue on family interaction. 
Furthermore, some scholars, like Goodwin (1990), 
have integrated CA methods with ethnographic 
fieldwork, blurring the distinction between the 
approaches and demonstrating that integrated 
perspectives are often especially revealing.
Inference: Berkeley scholars – 
Grice and Lakoff
A number of scholars who interacted with 
Gumperz at Berkeley during the formulation of IS 
also influenced its development in meaningful 
ways. Levinson (2003: 32), who was then Gumperz’s 
graduate student, describes the intellectual environ-
ment in which the approach developed:
In Berkeley at that time there was a rare and won-
derful confluence of ideas from different disci-
plines concerning the study of meaning – in 
philosophy, Grice and Searle were expounding 
the ideas about implicature and speech acts now 
associated with them, Fillmore was preoccupied 
with indexicality in language, Kay with its socio-
logical import, Robin Lakoff with contextual mean-
ing, and George Lakoff was attempting to wrap it 
all up in a unified theory of generative semantics.
This intellectual milieu seems to have shaped 
Gumperz’s thinking in multiple ways.
First, Gumperz’s theory of conversational infer-
ence, which explains how people assess what 
others say to create meaning in conversation 
and what is required for this to occur, is related 
to language philosopher H. P. Grice’s (1975) dis-
cussion of conversational cooperation, intention 
and implicature (Gumperz, 2001: 216; see also 
Gumperz, 1982a: 202). Grice’s (1975: 47) influ-
ential Cooperative Principle (CP) states: ‘Make 
your contribution such as is required, at the stage 
at which it occurs, by the accepted purpose of the 
talk exchange in which you are engaged’. This 
principle, essentially, explains why conversation 
works at all, in particular at the level of informa-
tion exchange. The CP includes four maxims 
which indicate that a speaker should be as (but not 
more) informative than required, tell the truth, 
contribute relevant remarks, and be orderly and 
clear. Within this framework, Grice suggests that 
speakers send certain meanings intentionally 
through implicatures sent by following or break-
ing (‘flouting’) maxims. An implicature is ‘an 
inference about speaker intention that arises from 
a recipient’s use of both semantic (i.e. logical) 
meanings and conversational principles’ (Schiffrin, 
1994: 193); it refers to ‘something which is 
implied in conversation, that is, something which 
is left implicit in actual language use’ (Mey, 1993: 
99). Thus, if a man asks a woman where he can 
buy a cup of coffee, and she says, ‘there’s a place 
around the corner called Joe’s’, based on the CP 
maxims of truth and relevance, the man infers that 
coffee is for sale by the cup at Joe’s.3 These 
maxims play into an IS understanding of how 
meaning-making works as well.
Secondly, Grice’s (1975) and Searle’s (1975) 
discussions of ‘the semantic basis of indirect con-
versational inference’ (Gumperz, 1982a: 202) link 
to Gumperz’s exploration of the indirect means by 
which speakers signal how utterances are to be 
interpreted. One way of thinking about contextu-
alization cues is as indirect signals for interpreta-
tion: rather than saying, for example, ‘I’m mad 
that you didn’t invite me for coffee’, a speaker 
might furrow his brow and say, in a whiney tone 
of voice, ‘You didn’t invite me for coffee’, thus 
indirectly indicating how the listener should inter-
pret his meaning. The impact of Robin Lakoff’s 
(1973, 1975) work on indirectness and linguistic 
politeness fits into this area as well, and it is for-
mally incorporated into IS by Tannen (2005[1984]). 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
75
Lakoff (1973) notes that people regularly do not 
explicitly say what they mean in conversation for 
social reasons – to be nice, to respect another 
person’s space, to leave interpretation options 
open, and so on. Importantly, research in IS shows 
that conceptualizations of how to be convention-
ally polite differ across cultural and subcultural 
groups (e.g. Scollon and Scollon, 2001[1995]; 
Tannen, 2005[1984]; Rogerson-Revell, 2007).
Conversational style and conversational 
involvement: Tannen
While at Berkeley, Gumperz also collaborated with 
Tannen, who had a significant impact on IS, 
although she is perhaps best known for her work on 
language and gender. When Tannen was Gumperz’s 
student, they co-authored a foundational IS paper, 
‘Individual and social differences in language use’ 
(Gumperz and Tannen, 1979) which introduced the 
notion of contextualization cues and provides 
material that would later be incorporated into a 
central chapter of Discourse Strategies entitled 
‘Contextualization Conventions’. Tannen’s first 
book, Conversational Style (2005[1984]), provides 
an important case study of cross-subcultural com-
munication, introduces the key IS notion of ‘con-
versational style’ and a new understanding of what 
Gumperz (1982a) called ‘conversational involve-
ment’, while also serving as an excellent example 
and overview of IS methodology.
‘Conversational style’ refers to an individual’s 
way of speaking, including decisions about rate of 
speaking, pitch and amplitude, and the ‘countless 
other choices’ speakers make that affect an utter-
ance’s interpretation (Tannen, 2005[1984]: 14). 
In broad terms, a person’s conversational style 
encompasses how he or she uses various contextu-
alization cues. Drawing on the IS idea that a 
person’s contextualization conventions grow out 
of interactive experiences, Tannen suggests that 
conversational style can be influenced by a range 
of factors, including where a person grew up and 
his or her cultural background, race and ethnicity, 
and gender and sexual orientation. Tannen’s case 
study of six speakers – three New York Jewish 
speakers, two Californians, and one speaker from 
England – uncovers a style continuum. Her analy-
sis, building on not only Gumperz’s research but 
also Hymes’s (1974) on style and Lakoff’s on 
politeness (1973) and communicative style (1979), 
shows that features of the ‘high-involvement style’ 
characteristic of New Yorkers – such as talking 
along with other people and asking questions in a 
‘machine gun’ fashion – have a positive affect 
when used among those who share the style; 
these features create ‘rapport’. In contrast, as in 
Gumperz’s examples of mismatches in contextu-
alization conventions, aspects of high-involvement 
style have negative affects when used with 
speakers exhibiting a style characterized by 
‘high-considerateness’ (see also Tannen, 1981).
A concept from Gumperz that Tannen extended 
and made even more central to IS is ‘conversational 
involvement’ (Tannen, 2005[1984], 2007[1989]). 
Gumperz (1982a: 1) used this notion in a very basic 
way, equating sustaining conversational involve-
ment to participating in verbal exchanges; Tannen 
(2007[1989]: 13) develops involvement further: it 
is the ‘internal, even emotional connection indi-
viduals feel which binds them to other people as 
well as to places, things, activities, ideas, memories 
and words’. She suggests that when aspects of 
style are shared, interacting serves as a means of 
building coherence and of bringing people together, 
the inverse of how clashing styles can drive 
wedges between them. In Talking Voices, Tannen 
(2007[1989]) uses IS to examine both conversa-
tional and literary texts and focuses on repetition, 
the creation of dialogue (‘constructed dialogue’), 
and details as linguistic strategies that seem to be 
especially productive in creating involvement.
Tannen (1986, 2005[1984]) also argues in 
her work that, through contextualization cues, 
participants send what Bateson (1972) calls ‘met-
amessages’, or messages about how to interpret 
messages (e.g. ‘this is play’). In other words, 
Tannen develops the idea that participants use 
contextualization cues to negotiate both the nature 
of a given situation and aspects of interpersonal 
relationships. For example, through ‘mutual reve-
lation’, where participants reciprocally share per-
sonal experiences with one another, participants 
are able to signal indirectly something to the effect 
of: ‘We are intimate; we both tell about ourselves; 
we are both interested in hearing about the other’s 
experience’ (Tannen, 2005[1984]: 101).
Another contribution of Tannen to IS is bring-
ing IS notions and their roles in interpersonal 
communication to broader audiences. Through 
popular books like That’s Not What I Meant! 
(1986) and the best-selling You Just Don’t 
Understand (1990), academic ideas about lan-
guage and communication are shown to have, in 
the spirit of Gumperz’s interests in social issues, 
practical applicability to everyday life.4
Chomsky and Labov
When Gumperz was formulating and developing 
IS, other theories of language were being culti-
vated by Noam Chomsky and William Labov, and 
these influenced IS through providing approaches 
with which it could be compared and contrasted. 
In the early years of IS, Gumperz was considering 
language and social networks (Gumperz, 1971, 
1976), the sociolinguistics of bilingualism and 
code-switching (Gumperz 1964a, 1964b; Blom 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
76
and Gumperz, 1972; Gumperz and Cook-Gumperz, 
1974) and language use in a variety of institutional 
contexts, including educational environments 
(Gumperz and Hernandez-Chavez, 1972; Gumperz 
and Cook-Gumperz, 1974), job interviews and 
counselling sessions (Gumperz et al., 1979; 
Gumperz, 1982a), committee meetings (Gumperz 
and Cook-Gumperz, 1982), and legal contexts 
(Gumperz, 1982c). In such studies, Gumperz’s 
approach, in his own words, reworks ‘the estab-
lished traditions that continue to follow structural-
ist practices of separating the linguistic from the 
social’ (Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003:10). It thus 
stands in contrast with descendents of Saussure’s 
structuralist approach to linguistics, including 
alternatives to it, the most notable being generative 
grammar, pioneered by Chomsky beginning in the 
late 1950s. For Gumperz (1982a: 19), although 
generative grammar has ‘theoretical significance’, 
it also ‘clearly has only limited relevance for the 
study of verbal interaction processes’. Chomsky’s 
work focuses on the knowledge an ideal speaker 
needs to produce grammatical sentences (‘linguis-
tic competence’); it does not ‘attempt to account 
for the problem of cultural diversity’ (Gumperz, 
1974: 789). In contrast, Gumperz focuses on utter-
ances produced and interpreted in context, and the 
knowledge – linguistic, social, and cultural – that 
participants use in so doing. He thus moves to 
erase the metaphorical ‘circle’ that Agar (1994) 
has written about that disconnects language from 
social life, whereas Chomsky maintains the circle. 
Indeed, a major division that exists in contempo-
rary linguistics is the division between Chomskyan 
linguistics and sociolinguistics. Thus, IS continues 
to develop itself – at least implicitly – in contrast 
to generative grammar.
During the time of IS’s development, ‘the 
circle’ was also being erased by other scholars, 
such as Charles Ferguson (1959), who was exam-
ining diglossia; indeed, Ferguson’s work provided 
a foundation for Gumperz’s (1977) work on con-
versational code-switching (see also Blom and 
Gumperz, 1972). In addition, Labov was develop-
ing a quantitative sociolinguistics that linked lin-
guistic variables to social categories (see Labov, 
1966, 1972; see also Chapter 2, this volume). In a 
spirit similar to Gumperz, Labov’s research 
focuses on language as a social entity. However, 
as Gumperz notes, ‘important as quantitative 
sociolinguistics is’ for the study of language 
variation and change, ‘its applicability to the 
analysis of actual processes of face to face com-
munication … is limited’ (Gumperz, 1982a: 26). 
This is so because Labovian sociolinguistics tradi-
tionally focuses on the quantitative analysis of 
linguistic variables at the social group level, 
whereas IS focuses on individuals’ language use. 
Furthermore, the statistical analyses of variationist 
sociolinguistics do not give insight into meaning-
making as it happens moment-by-moment; in 
contrast, IS offers a view of language as ‘activity 
in a particular context, co-evolving along with 
that context, in part constitutive of it’ (Becker, 
1995[1984]: 73). Because IS gives a nuanced 
analysis of individuals communicating in unfold-
ing interactive sequences, it provides what Becker 
(1995[1984]) might call a ‘linguistics of particu-
larity’, which we need to achieve a more complete 
understanding of how language works generally.
Just as there are theoretical and methodological 
tensions between generative grammar and socio-
linguistics, so there are tensions between quantita-
tive and qualitative sociolinguistics. As Tannen 
(2005[1984]: 11–12) points out, it might be easy 
to dismiss a qualitative approach like IS due to 
its interpretive analytical procedures – with ‘inter-
pretive’ ‘wielded as a damning epithet’. Analysing 
talk in the IS tradition is necessarily interpretive in 
that researchers must weigh multiple possibilities 
– in terms of speaker intentions, listener interpre-
tations, and so on – as they grapple with different 
levels of linguistic structure, the delicate twists 
and turns of social encounters, and the fact that 
there is no one-to-one correspondence between 
form and meaning. However, as Johnstone (2000: 
36) notes, ‘sociolinguistic work is always “inter-
pretive,” whether the interpretation involves num-
bers or results of some other kind. … Only with 
interpretation does an analysis have a point’. And, 
although there will always be difficulties in uncov-
ering speaker intent, the theory developed by 
Gumperz addresses these difficulties by taking an 
interactive approach that captures the use of (para)
linguistic features in contextualized utterances as 
well as the listener’s reaction to these. In addition, 
examination of negotiations and repairs occurring 
in discourse can aid in analyst interpretations of 
speaker intent (Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003).
Although Gumperz’s IS is markedly different 
from variationist sociolinguistics, it can also be 
viewed as developing in complementary fashion 
and contributing complementary insights into lan-
guage and social life. Indeed, a growing number of 
scholars now view quantitative and ethnographic 
perspectives on language as usefully applied in 
tandem to explore issues like identity construction 
(e.g. Eckert, 2000; Schilling-Estes, 2004).
5.3  KEY RESEARCH TRAJECTORIES IN 
INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
We have seen that IS as an approach to the analysis 
of discourse grew primarily out of Gumperz’s 
work and multifaceted interests, as well as his 
incorporation of insights from a range of fields. 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
77
This formed a coherent framework of how mean-
ing-making occurs in interaction that has propelled 
numerous research trajectories both within and 
beyond IS. These include studies related to code-
switching and language contact, intercultural 
communication, language and gender, identity 
construction, and language, power and institutions. 
Note that as more and more scholars are using 
integrated methods – combining ideas and meth-
ods from IS and CA and social psychology, for 
example – it has become more and more difficult 
(if not impossible) to identify a ‘purely’ IS study.
Code-switching and language contact
Many studies in code-switching and language 
contact have built on Gumperz’s early and ground-
breaking work on linguistic diversity in speech 
communities, his scholarship on conversational 
code-switching, and his identification of code-
switching as fundamentally similar to style-shift-
ing and as a contextualization cue. In the 1980s 
and 1990s, Gumperz’s students drew on his 
framework to study language choice and language 
rights (e.g. Heller, 1982, 1985; Woolard, 1985), 
and colleagues in Europe (e.g. Auer and di Luzio 
1984, 1992) provided insights into code-switch-
ing, language socialization, and issues related to 
language and migration, while also contributing to 
the development of IS as an ‘interpretative’ socio-
linguistics (see also earlier work, published in 
German, by Kallmeyer and Schütze, 1977).
Code-switching continues to be a topic of inter-
est in sociolinguistic research (see Chapter 31, 
this volume). Code-switching has recently been 
examined in a number of vital everyday contexts, 
among them families (e.g. Wei, 1994; Blum-
Kulka, 1997), informal gatherings among friends 
(e.g. Hinnenkamp, 2003; Kallmeyer and Keim, 
2003; Keim, 2003), courtrooms (e.g. Gumperz, 
1999a; Jacquemet, 1996), workplaces (e.g. Holmes 
and Stubbe, 2004; Prego-Vazquez, 2007), educa-
tional contexts (e.g. Rampton, 1995; Bailey, 
2000), and email discourse (e.g. Georgakopoulou, 
1997). It has also been investigated as a resource 
in discursive identity construction (e.g. Rampton, 
1995; Bailey, 2000; Holmes and Stubbe, 2004; 
Auer, 2007) and for enacting societal ills such as 
racism (e.g. Hill, 1995). Indeed, much of this 
body of research, in the spirit of Gumperz, inves-
tigates code-switching and language contact as 
related to issues of social inequality.
Intercultural communication
As mentioned previously, Tannen’s (2005[1984]) 
work on ‘conversational style’ advanced IS by 
providing a discussion of, and developing, the 
theoretical underpinnings of IS as an approach to 
cross-(sub)cultural communication. Tannen’s 
(1986) That’s Not What I Meant! covers similar 
ground for non-academic audiences, while Agar’s 
(1994) Language Shock offers non-academic audi-
ences an anthropological perspective on issues of 
communication and culture.
Given our continually globalizing world, there 
is continued interest in intercultural communica-
tion, especially between ‘East’ and ‘West’, and IS 
is being used productively to explore it. For exam-
ple, Haru Yamada (1997) investigates Japanese–
American discourse, with a focus on workplace 
settings, while Linda W. L. Young (1994) consid-
ers Chinese–American interaction. Yuling Pan, 
Suzanne Wong Scollon and Ron Scollon’s more 
comprehensive Professional Communication in 
International Settings (2002) considers a range of 
cultural groups and discourse types and incorpo-
rates multiple approaches, and is also aimed at 
general audiences, while Scollon and Scollon’s 
(2001[1995]) Intercultural Communication: A 
Discourse Approach provides a thorough, more 
academic introduction to the topic. Donal 
Carbaugh (2005) integrates IS and ethnography in 
his book Cultures in Conversation to consider a 
variety of issues related to communication and 
culture. Such studies, building on Gumperz’s 
work, provide insight into various kinds of inter-
cultural miscommunication; they identify a range 
of causative factors, including uses of address 
terms, the structuring of information in discourse, 
and uses of pacing and pausing; some also give 
practical suggestions for improving communica-
tion. Many are important not only because they 
contribute to a more nuanced understanding of 
cultural differences and how these manifest inter-
actionally but also because they aim to educate the 
public about cultural aspects of communication.
Language and gender
Interactional sociolinguistics serves as one of 
many theoretical orientations that have been drawn 
on to investigate gender and communication. The 
pioneering study of Maltz and Borker (1982) pro-
vided a starting point for Tannen’s (1990, 1994, 
1996, 1999) writing on language and gender in 
which Tannen investigates interactions between 
women and men as a kind of cross-cultural com-
munication and firmly establishes IS as a useful 
approach to gendered interaction. Her general 
audience book You Just Don’t Understand 
(Tannen, 1990) offers insights into everyday com-
munication rituals of speakers of both genders. 
Much like Lakoff’s (1975) Language and Woman’s 
Place, Tannen’s work has fuelled both academic 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
78
and popular interest in the topic. In fact, language 
and gender research ‘exploded’ in the 1990s and 
continues to be a topic receiving a great deal of 
attention from researchers using various theoreti-
cal and methodological perspectives (Kendall and 
Tannen, 2001; see also Chapter 28, this volume). 
IS continues to be – implicitly or explicitly – 
important among these (see e.g. Tannen, 1993b; 
Hall and Bucholtz, 1995; Kotthoff and Wodak, 
1997; Wodak, 1997b, 1997c; Bucholtz, Liang and 
Sutton, 1999).
Discursive identity construction
In the tradition established by Language and 
Social Identity (Gumperz, 1982b), IS has been 
used to examine how people create and negotiate 
identities in interaction. Contexts explored include 
workplaces (e.g. Kendall, 2003; Holmes and 
Stubbe, 2004), educational settings (e.g. Cook-
Gumperz and Gumperz, 1996; Bailey, 2000; 
Wortham, 2006), families (e.g. Gordon, 2004; 
Tannen, Kendall and Gordon, 2007), and other 
social groups (e.g. Hamilton, 1998; Kiesling, 
2001). Gendered identities are of particular inter-
est, as are identities related to changing ethnic 
landscapes, especially in Europe (e.g. Auer, 2007). 
Such studies reveal the various linguistic means 
by which identities are constructed, make efforts 
at linking linguistic features with broader ideolo-
gies, and in general contribute to our understand-
ing of how individuals use language to accomplish 
social goals.
Language, power, and institutions
A thread of research known as critical discourse 
analysis (CDA) addresses social inequalities 
through academic research in a spirit akin to the 
goals of Gumperz’s IS approach (see for instance 
Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999); CDA shares 
with IS ‘the interest in looking at language as a 
means of illuminating social problems’ (Gumperz, 
personal communication). CDA studies draw on a 
number of approaches to discourse, among them 
IS, but focus more explicitly on issues of domi-
nance and inequality. For example, Scollon and 
Scollon (2001[1995]) integrate IS methodologies 
with a CDA focus on ideologies in Intercultural 
Communication, while Wodak (1997b, 1997c) 
does so to examine issues of language and gender.
Institutional encounters in which power is 
negotiated and exercised, like academic assess-
ments (Cook-Gumperz and Gumperz, 1997), 
medical encounters (Tannen and Wallat, 1993; 
Wodak, 1997a), and courtroom interactions 
(Jacquemet, 1996; Eades, 2003, 2005) have also 
been examined by drawing on IS, although the 
focus of such analyses is not necessarily power. 
While some researchers have criticized IS for 
examining how members of different groups use 
language (the ‘difference’ approach) to the exclu-
sion of considering larger power structures, like 
institutional discrimination (the ‘dominance’ 
approach) (Singh, Lele and Martohardjono, 1988), 
linking macro (sociopolitical forces and cultural 
discourses) and micro (conversational features) 
has actually been identified as a strength of IS 
(Levinson, 2003: 37). Furthermore, recent research 
by Eades (2005) explores difficulties in the differ-
ence/dominance dichotomy and explains strengths 
and weaknesses of each, suggesting we need a 
‘discourse’ approach to go beyond these two per-
spectives. In addition, Gumperz has answered 
some criticisms of IS by addressing larger cultural 
forces like gender discrimination in his research in 
more explicit ways; for example, Cook-Gumperz 
and Gumperz (1996) uncover a subtle subtext of 
gender discrimination in a PhD defence by analys-
ing contextualization cues like prosody in the 
context of the unfolding interaction, the interper-
sonal relationships among participants, the con-
tent of the talk, and the socio-historical roots of 
the defence as an event. Whether such efforts con-
vince critics or not, interests in learning more 
about ways to link micro and macro in analyses of 
social interaction persist (e.g. Al Zidjaly, 2006; 
Wortham, 2006), and much research in this area is 
inspired in some way by Gumperz’s approach.
5.4  SUMMARY AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
We have seen that, since its inception, interac-
tional sociolinguistics has been interdisciplinary. 
Its founder, John Gumperz, is an anthropological 
linguist (or a linguistic anthropologist – see 
Gumperz 2003: 117); other scholars contributing 
concepts, theories, and methodological perspec-
tives hail from sociology (Garfinkel and Goffman), 
anthropology (Hymes), philosophy (Searle and 
Grice), and linguistics (Lakoff and Tannen). Many 
of these scholars, like Gumperz himself, have 
stretched the boundaries of their respective disci-
plines; their scholarship connects what is ‘inside 
the circle’ of their field with that which lies out-
side. Growing from these interdisciplinary roots 
are numerous examples of studies using IS that 
involve scholars from multiple, and quite dispa-
rate, backgrounds and perspectives. For instance, 
genetic counsellors and linguists have collabora-
tively examined how prenatal genetic counsellors 
interact with their clients (e.g. Benkendorf et al., 
2001; Gordon et al., 2002); linguists and medical 

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
79
professionals have explored doctor–patient talk 
(e.g. Hamilton et al., 2008); and anthropologists, 
linguists, and communication studies scholars 
have addressed various facets of family discourse 
(e.g. Tannen and Goodwin, 2006). Given recent 
calls for moves toward interdisciplinarity in medi-
cal communication research (by Sarangi, 2004), in 
studies of the family (by Schneider and Waite, 
2005), and in CDA (by Wodak and Chilton, 2005), 
and given the current academic climate in which 
interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary research is 
valued and encouraged, IS will surely continue 
to play a leading role in investigations of social 
interaction across a range of contexts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I thank Najma Al Zidjaly, Richard Buttny, Donal 
Carbaugh, Deborah Tannen, and Alla Tovares for 
their helpful comments on earlier drafts of this 
chapter. I am especially grateful to John Gumperz 
for commenting on an earlier draft and for taking 
the time to talk with me about his work. I also 
thank Barbara Johnstone and Ruth Wodak for 
their valuable comments and suggestions.
NOTES
1 Biographical information was gleaned from 
the following sources: biographical overviews by Dil 
(1971) and Berenz (2001); a short ‘bionote’ written 
by Eerdmans, Prevignano and Thibault in their edited 
volume Language and Interaction: Discussions with 
John J. Gumperz (2003), as well as a short introduc-
tion of Gumperz (di Luzio, 2003), an interview with 
him (Prevignano and di Luzio, 2003), and an essay by 
Gumperz (2003) in the same volume; an unpublished 
biographical introduction and interview by Tannen 
conducted at Georgetown University in spring 2001; 
and personal communication between Gumperz and 
me (23 July 2008).
2 See Duranti and Goodwin (1992b) for a collec-
tion of essays – including one by Gumperz – critically 
examining the notion of context.
3 This example is adapted from Bergmann et al. 
(2007: 80).
4 You Just Don’t Understand spent nearly four 
years on the New York Times bestseller list.
REFERENCES
Agar, M. (1994) Language Shock: Understanding the Culture 
of Conversation. New York: Quill.
Al Zidjaly, N. (2006) ‘Disability and anticipatory discourse: the 
interconnectedness of local and global aspects of talk’, 
Communication and Medicine, 3(2): 101–12.
Auer, P. (2007) (ed.) Style and Social Identities: Alternative 
Approaches to Linguistic Heterogeneity. Berlin and 
New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Auer, P. and di Luzio, A. (1984) Interpretive Sociolinguistics. 
Tübingen: Narr.
Auer, P. and di Luzio, A. (1992) The Contextualization of 
Language. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bailey, B. (2000) ‘The language of multiple identities among 
Dominican Americans’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 
10(2): 190–223.
Bateson, G. (1972) Steps to an Ecology of Mind. New York: 
Ballantine Books.
Baxter, J. and Levine, D. (1982) ‘Review of Crosstalk by 
John Twitchen’, TESOL Quarterly, 16(2): 245–53.
Becker, A. L. (1995[1984]) ‘The linguistics of particularity: 
interpreting superordination in a javanese text’, in Beyond 
Translation: Essays Toward a Modern Philology. Ann Arbor, 
MI: University of Michigan Press. pp. 71–87.
Benkendorf, J. L., Prince, M. B., Rose, M. A., De Fina, A. and 
Hamilton, H. E. (2001) ‘Does indirect speech promote 
nondirective genetic counseling? Results of a sociolinguis-
tic investigation’, American Journal of Medical Genetics 
(Seminars in Medical Genetics), 106: 199–207.
Berenz, N. (2001) ‘Gumperz, John J.’, in Rajend Mesthrie (ed.), 
Concise Encyclopedia of Sociolinguistics. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier. p. 875.
Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction 
of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. 
Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Bergmann, A., Hall, Kathleen, C. and Ross, S. M. (2007) 
Language Files: Materials for an Introduction to Language 
and Linguistics. 10th edn. Columbus, OH: the Ohio State 
University Press.
Blom, J.-P. and Gumperz, J. J. (1972) ‘Social meaning in linguis-
tic structure: code-switching in Norway’, in J. J. Gumperz and 
D. Hymes (eds), Directions in Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart and Winston. pp. 407–34.
Bloomfield, L. (1933) Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1997) Dinner Talk: Cultural Patterns of 
Sociability and Socialization in Family Discourse. Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness: Some Universals 
in Language Usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bucholtz, M., Liang, A. C. and Sutton, L. A. (eds) (1999) 
Reinventing Identities: The Gendered Self in Discourse. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carbaugh, D. (2005) Cultures in Conversation. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Publishers.
Carbaugh, D. and Hastings, S. O. (1992) ‘A role for communi-
cation theory in ethnography and cultural analysis’, 
Communication Theory, 2: 156–65.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late 
Modernity: Rethinking Critical Discourse Analysis. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
80
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Gumperz, J. J. (1996) ‘Treacherous 
words: gender and power in academic assessment’, Folia 
Linguistica, 30(3–4): 167–88.
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Gumperz, J. J. (1997) ‘Narrative 
explanations: accounting for past experience in interviews’, 
Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4): 291–8.
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Gumperz, J. J. (2002) ‘Narrative 
accounts in gatekeeping interviews: Intercultural differ-
ences or common misunderstandings?’, Language and 
Intercultural Communication, 2(1): 25–36.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. (1996) ‘The prosody of repetition: on 
quoting and mimicry’, in E. Couper-Kuhlen and M. Selting 
(eds), Prosody in Conversation. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 367–405.
Davies, C. E. (2003) ‘How English-learners joke with native 
speakers: an interactional sociolinguistic perspective on 
humor as collaborative discourse across cultures’, Journal 
of Pragmatics, 35: 1361–85.
di Luzio, A. (2003) ‘Presenting John J. Gumperz’, in 
S. L. Eerdmans, C. L. Prevignano and P. J. Thibault (eds), 
Language and Interaction: Discussions with John J. 
Gumperz. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 1–6.
Dil, A. S. (1971) ‘A biographical sketch of John J. Gumperz to 
1971’, in A. S. Dil (ed.), Language in Social Groups: Essays 
by John J. Gumperz. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press. pp. xi–xiv.
Duranti, A. (1989) ‘Ethnography of speaking: toward a linguis-
tics of the praxis’, in F. J. Newmeyer (ed.), Language: The 
Cambridge Survey. Vol. IV, Language: The Socio-Cultural 
Context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 210–28.
Duranti, A. (2001) ‘Linguistic anthropology: history, ideas, and 
issues’, in A. Duranti (ed.), Linguistic Anthropology: A 
Reader. Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 1–38.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (1992a) ‘Editor’s introduction to 
“Contextualization and understanding” by John J. 
Gumperz’, in A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds), Rethinking 
Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 229–30.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (1992b) (eds), Rethinking 
Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eades, D. (2003) ‘Participation of second language and 
second dialect speakers in the legal system’, Annual 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 23: 113–33.
Eades, D. (2005) ‘Beyond difference and domination? 
Intercultural communication in legal contexts’, in 
S. F. Kiesling and C. B. Paulston (eds), Intercultural 
Discourse and Communication: The Essential Readings. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 304–16.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Eerdmans, S. L., Prevignano, C. L. and Thibault, P. J. (eds) 
(2003) Language and Interaction: Discussions with John J. 
Gumperz. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Erickson, F. (1975) ‘Gatekeeping and the melting pot: interac-
tion in counseling encounters’, Harvard Educational Review, 
45(1): 44–70.
Erickson, F. (2004) Talk and Social Theory: Ecologies of Speaking 
and Listening in Everyday Life. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Erickson, F. and Shultz, J. (1982) The Counselor as Gatekeeper: 
Social Interaction in Interviews. New York: Academic 
Press.
Fanshel, D. and Moss, F. (1971) Playback: A Marriage in 
Jeopardy Examined. New York: Columbia University Press.
Ferguson, C. (1959) ‘Diglossia’, Word, 15: 325–40.
Ferguson, C. A. and Gumperz, J. J. (eds) (1960) ‘Linguistic 
diversity in South Asia: studies in regional, social and func-
tional variation’, International Journal of American 
Linguistics, 26: 3 (part 3).
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Geertz, C. (1973) The Interpretation of Cultures. New York: 
Basic Books.
Georgakopoulou, A. (1997) ‘Self-presentation and interac-
tional alliances in e-mail discourse: the style- and code-
switches of Greek messages’, International Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 7(2): 141–64.
Goffman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday life. 
New York: Anchor Books.
Goffman, E. (1967) Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-To-Face 
Behavior. New York: Pantheon Books.
Goffman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis. New York: Harper and Row.
Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990) He-Said-She-Said: Talk as Social 
Organization Among Black Children. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press.
Gordon, C. (2002) ‘“I’m Mommy and you’re Natalie”: role-
reversal and embedded frames in mother–child discourse’, 
Language in Society, 31(5): 679–720.
Gordon, C. (2003) ‘Aligning as a team: forms of conjoined 
participation in (stepfamily) interaction’, Research on 
Language and Social Interaction, 36(4): 395–431.
Gordon, C. (2004) ‘“Al Gore’s our guy”: linguistically con-
structing a family political identity’, Discourse and Society, 
15(4): 607–31.
Gordon, C. (2007) “‘I just feel horribly embarrassed when she 
does that”: constituting a mother’s identity’, in D. Tannen, 
S. Kendall and C. Gordon (eds), Family Talk: Discourse and 
Identity in Four American Families. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. pp. 71–101.
Gordon, C. (2008) ‘A(p)parent play: blending frames and 
reframing in family talk’, Language in Society, 37(3): 
319–49.
Gordon, C., Prince, M. B., Benkendorf, J. L. and Hamilton, 
H. E. (2002) ‘“People say it’s a little uncomfortable”: 
Prenatal genetic counselors’ use of constructed dialogue to 
reference procedural pain’, Journal of Genetic Counseling, 
11(2): 245–63.
Grice, H. P. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole and 
J. L. Morgan (eds), Speech Acts. New York: Academic 
Press. pp. 41–58.
Gumperz, J. J. (1958) ‘Phonological differences in three Hindi 
dialects’, Language, 34(2): 212–24.
Gumperz, J. J. (1960) Hindi Reader, Vol. 1. Berkeley, CA: 
Center for South Asian Studies, University of California.
Gumperz, J. J. (1963) Conversational Hindi-Urdu, Vol. 2. 
Berkeley, CA: ASUC Bookstore, University of California.

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
81
Gumperz, J. J. (1964a) ‘Hindi–Punjabi code-switching in 
Delhi’, in H. G. Lunt (ed.), Proceedings of the Ninth 
International Congress of Linguistics. The Hague: Mouton. 
pp. 1115–24.
Gumperz, J. J. (1964b) Linguistic and social interaction in 
two communities’, American Anthropologist, 66(6):II. 
pp. 137–53.
Gumperz, J. J. (1971) Language in Social Groups. Stanford, 
CA: Stanford University Press.
Gumperz, J. J. (1974) ‘Linguistic anthropology in society’, 
American Anthropologist, 76(4): 785–98.
Gumperz, J. J. (1976) ‘The sociolinguistic significance of 
conversational code-switching,’ in J. Cook-Gumperz and 
J. J. Gumperz (eds), Papers on Language and Context, 
Working Paper No. 46. Berkeley, CA: Language Behavior 
Research Laboratory, University of California.
Gumperz, J. J. (1977) ‘The sociolinguistic significance of 
conversational code-switching’, RELC Journal, 8(1): 1–34.
Gumperz, J. J. (1978) ‘The conversational analysis of 
interethnic communication’, in E. Lamar Ross (ed.), 
Interethnic Communication (Proceedings of the Southern 
Anthropological Society). Athens: University of Georgia 
Press. pp.13–31.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982a) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982b) (ed.) Language and Social Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982c) ‘Fact and inference in courtroom testi-
mony’, in J. J. Gumperz (ed.), Language and Social Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 163–95.
Gumperz, J. J. (1992a) ‘Contextualization and understanding’, 
in A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds), Rethinking Context: 
Language as an Interactive Phenomenon. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 229–52.
Gumperz, J. J. (1992b) ‘Contextualization revisited’, in P. Auer 
and A. di Luzio (eds), The Contextualization of Language. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 39–53.
Gumperz, J. J. (1999a) ‘Culture in the cultural defense’, in 
M. Brody, G. Liebscher and H. Ogren (eds), Proceedings of 
the Sixth Annual Symposium about Language and Society 
(1998). Austin, TX: The Department of Linguistics, 
University of Texas. pp. 91–121.
Gumperz, J. J. (1999b) ‘On interactional sociolinguistic 
method’, in S. Sarangi and C. Roberts (eds), Talk, Work 
and Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation 
and Management Settings. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
pp. 453–71.
Gumperz, J. J. (2001) ‘Interactional sociolinguistics: a personal 
perspective,’ in D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen and H. Hamilton 
(eds), The Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 215–28.
Gumperz, J. J. (2003) ‘Response essay’, in S. L. Eerdmans, 
C. L. Prevignano and P. J. Thibault (eds), Language and 
Interaction: Discussions with John J. Gumperz. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. pp. 105–26.
Gumperz, J. J. and Cook-Gumperz, Jenny (1974) ‘The com-
municative basis of language problems in education’, in 
Sociolinguistics. Central Institute of Indian Languages, 
Mysore, India.
Gumperz, J. J. and Cook-Gumperz, Jenny (1982) ‘Interethnic 
communication in committee negotiations’, in J. J. Gumperz 
(ed.), Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 145–62.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hernandez-Chavez, E. (1972) ‘Bilingualism, 
bidialectalism and classroom interaction,’ in C. B. Cazden, 
V. P. John and D. Hymes (eds), Functions of Language in 
the Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 
pp. 84–110.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hymes, D, (eds) (1964) ‘The ethnography 
of 
communication’, 
Special 
issue 
of 
American 
Anthropologist, 66(6): II.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hymes, D. (eds) (1972) Directions in 
Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Communication. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Gumperz, J. J. and Levinson, S. C. (eds) (1996) Rethinking 
Linguistic Relativity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gumperz, J. J. and Naim, C. M. (1960) Urdu Reader. 
Berkeley, CA: Center for South Asia Studies, University of 
California.
Gumperz, J. J. and Roberts, C. (1980) ‘Developing awareness 
skills for inter-ethnic communication’, Occasional Papers, 
no. 12. Seameo Regional Language Center, Singapore.
Gumperz, J. J. and Rumery, J. (1962) Conversational Hindi–
Urdu. Vol. 1: parts 1 and 2. Berkeley: University of 
California.
Gumperz, J. J. and Tannen, D. (1979) ‘Individual and social 
differences in language use’, in C. J. Fillmore, D. Kempler 
and W. S.-Y. Wang (eds), Individual Differences in Language 
Ability and Language Behavior, New York: Academic Press. 
pp. 305–25.
Gumperz, J. J., Jupp, T. C. and Roberts, C. (1979) Crosstalk, a 
Study of Cross-Cultural Communication. Background mate-
rial and notes to accompany the BBC film. Southall: 
National Centre for Industrial Language Training.
Gumperz, J. J., Jupp, T. C. and Roberts, C. (1980) Crosstalk 
– the Wider Perspective. Southall: National Centre for 
Industrial Language Training.
Hall, K. and Bucholtz, M. (eds) (1995) Gender Articulated: 
Language and the Socially Constructed Self. New York: 
Routledge.
Hamilton, H. E. (1998) ‘Reported speech and survivor identity 
in on-line bone marrow transplantation narratives’, Journal 
of Sociolinguistics, 2(1), 53–67.
Hamilton, H. E., Gordon, C., Nelson, M., Cotler, S. J. and 
Martin, P. (2008) ‘How physicians describe outcomes to 
HCV therapy: prevalence and meaning of “cure” during 
provider–patient in-office discussions of HCV’, Journal of 
Clinical Gastroenterology, 42(4): 419–24.
Heller, M. S. (1982) ‘Negotiations of language choice in 
Montreal’, in J. J. Gumperz (ed.), Language and Social 
Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 108–18.
Heller, M. (1985) ‘Ethnic relations and language use in 
Montréal’, in N. Wolfson and J. Manes (eds), Language of 
Inequality. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 75–90.
Heritage, J. (1984) Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology. Oxford: 
Blackwell.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
82
Hill, J. (1995) ‘Junk Spanish, covert racism and the (leaky) 
boundary between public and private spheres’, Pragmatics, 
5(2): 197–212.
Hinnenkamp, V. (2003) ‘Mixed language varieties of migrant 
adolescents and the discourse of hybridity’, Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 24(1, 2): 
12–41.
Holmes, J. and Stubbe, M. (2004) ‘Strategic code-switching in 
New Zealand workplaces: scaffolding, solidarity and iden-
tity construction’, in J. House and J. Rehbein (eds), Multilingual 
Communication. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 133–54.
Holstein, J. A. and Gubrium, J. F. (eds) (2007) Handbook of 
Constructionist Research. New York: Guilford Press.
Hymes, D. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in 
J. B. Pride and J. Holmes (eds), Sociolinguistics. Harmonds-
worth: Penguin. pp. 269–93.
Hymes, D. (1974) ‘Ways of speaking’, in R. Bauman and 
J. Sherzer (eds), Explorations in the Ethnography of 
Speaking. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 433–51.
Jacquemet, M. (1996) Credibility in Court: Communicative 
Practices in the Camorra Trials. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Johnstone, B. (2000) Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kallmeyer, W. and Keim, I. (2003) ‘Linguistic variation and the 
construction of social identity in a German–Turkish setting. 
A case study of an immigrant youth group in Mannheim, 
Germany’, in J. Androutsopoulos and A. Georgakopoulou 
(eds), Discourse Constructions of Youth Identities. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 29–46.
Kallmeyer, W. and Schütze, F. (1977) ‘Zur Konstitution von 
Kommunikationsschemata der Sachverhaltsdarstellung’, 
in Dirk Wegner (ed.), Gesprächsanalysen. IKP-
Forschungsberichte. Series I, Vol. 65. Hamburg: Helmut 
Buske Verlag. pp. 159–274.
Keim, I. (2003) ‘Social style of communication and bilingual 
speech practices: case study of three migrant youth groups 
of Turkish origin in Mannheim, Germany’, Turkic Languages, 
6(2): 284–300.
Kendall, S. (2003) ‘Creating gendered demeanors of authority 
at work and at home,’ in J. Holmes and M. Meinhoff (eds), 
Handbook of Language and Gender. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 600–23.
Kendall, S. (2004) ‘Framing authority: gender, face and 
mitigation at a radio network’, Discourse and Society, 
15(1): 55–79.
Kendall, S. (2006) ‘“Honey, I’m home!”: framing in family 
dinnertime homecomings’, Text and Talk, 26(4–5): 
411–41.
Kendall, S. (2007) ‘Father as breadwinner, mother as worker: 
gendered positions in feminist and traditional discourses of 
work and family’, in D. Tannen, S. Kendall and C. Gordon 
(eds), Family Talk. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 123–63.
Kendall, S. and Tannen, D. (2001) ‘Discourse and gender’, 
in D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen and H. E. Hamilton (eds), The 
Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. 548–67.
Kiesling, S. F. (2001) ‘ “Now I gotta watch what I say”: shift-
ing constructions of masculinity in discourse’, Journal of 
Linguistic Anthropology, 11(2): 250–73.
Kiesling, S. F. and Paulston, C. B. (2005) ‘Introduction to 
Part I: approaches to intercultural discourse’, in S. F. Kiesling 
and C. B. Paulston (eds), Intercultural Discourse and 
Communication: The Essential Readings. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 1–3.
Kotthoff, H. (2000) ‘Gender and joking: on the complexities of 
women’s image politics in humorous narratives’, Journal of 
Pragmatics, 32: 55–80.
Kotthoff, H. (2002) ‘Irony, quotation and other forms of 
staged intertextuality: double or contrastive perspectivation 
in conversation’, in C. F. Graumman and W. Kallmeyer 
(eds), Perspective and Perspectivation in Discourse. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 201–29.
Kotthoff, H. and Wodak, R. (1997) Communicating Gender in 
Context. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in 
New York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (2003) ‘Thinking about Charles Ferguson’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 163: 
5–7.
Labov, W. and Fanshel, D. (1977) Therapeutic Discourse: 
Psychotherapy as Conversation. New York: Academic 
Press.
Lakoff, R. (1973) ‘The logic of politeness, or minding your p’s 
and q’s’, in C. Corum, T. C. Smith-Clark and A. Weiser 
(eds), Papers from the Ninth Regional Meeting of the 
Chicago Linguistics Society. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Department of Linguistics. pp. 292–305.
Lakoff, R. (1975) Language and Woman’s Place. New York: 
Harper and Row.
Lakoff, R. (1979) ‘Stylistic strategies within a grammar of 
style’, in J. Orasanu, M. Slater and L. L. Adler (eds), 
Language, Sex and Gender. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science, 327: 53–78.
Levinson, S. C. (2003) ‘Contextualizing “contextualization 
cues”‘, in S. L. Eerdmans, C. L. Prevignano and 
P. J. Thibault (eds), Language and Interaction: Discussions 
with John J. Gumperz. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 31–9.
Maltz, D. N. and Borker, R. A. (1982) ‘A cultural approach to 
male–female miscommunication’, in J. Gumperz (ed.), 
Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 195–216.
Maynard, D. W. (1988) ‘Language, interaction and social 
problems’, Social Problems, 35(4): 311–34.
Mey, J. L. (1993) Pragmatics: An Introduction. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Ochs, E. (1993) ‘Constructing social identity: a language 
socialization perspective’, Research on Language and 
Social Interaction, 26(3): 287–306.
Pan, Y., Scollon, S. W. and Scollon, R. (2002) Professional 
Communication in International Settings. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.

GUMPERZ AND INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
83
Pike, K. L. (1967) Language in Relation to a Unified Theory of 
the Structure of Human Behavior. The Hague: Mouton.
Pinto, D., Ribeiro, B. T. and Dantas, M. T. Lopes (2005) ‘ “Let 
the heart speak out” – interviewing practices by psychia-
trists from two different traditions’, Communication and 
Medicine, 2(2): 177–88.
Pomerantz, A. (1984) ‘Agreeing and disagreeing with assess-
ments: some features of preferred/dispreferred turn shapes’, 
in J. M. Atkinson and J. Heritage (eds), Structures of Social 
Action: Studies in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 57–101.
Prego-Vazquez, G. (2007) ‘Frame conflict and social inequality 
in the workplace: professional and local discourse struggles 
in employee/customer interactions’, Discourse and Society, 
18(3): 295–335.
Prevignano, C. L. and di Luzio, A. (2003) ‘A discussion with 
John J. Gumperz’, in S. L. Eerdmans, C. L. Prevignano and 
P. J. Thibault (eds), Language and Interaction: Discussions with 
John J. Gumperz. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 7–29.
Prevignano, C. L. and Thibault, P. J. (2003) ‘Continuing the 
discussion with John J. Gumperz’, in S. L. Eerdmans, 
C. L. Prevignano and P. J. Thibault (eds), Language and 
Interaction: Discussions with John J. Gumperz. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. pp. 149–61.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity Among 
Adolescents. London: Longman.
Rampton, B. (2007) ‘Neo-Hymsian linguistic ethnography in 
the United Kingdom’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11(5): 
584–607.
Ribeiro, B. T. (1994) Coherence in Psychotic Discourse. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Rogerson-Revell, P. (2007) ‘Humor in business: a double-
edged sword. A study of humor and style shifting in inter-
cultural business meetings’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39: 4–28.
Sacks, H., E. A. Schegloff and G. Jefferson (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organization of turn-taking in conversa-
tion’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Sarangi, S. (2004) ‘Editorial: towards a communicative 
mentality 
in 
medical 
and 
healthcare 
practice’, 
Communication and Medicine, 1(1): 1–11.
Schegloff, E. A. (1982) ‘Discourse as an interactional achieve-
ment: some uses of “uh huh” and other things that come 
between sentences’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Analyzing 
Discourse: Text and Talk (Georgetown University Round 
Table on Languages and Linguistics, 1981). Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press. pp. 71–93.
Schiffrin, D. (1994) Approaches to Discourse. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Schilling-Estes, N. (2004) ‘Constructing ethnicity in interac-
tion’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 8(2): 163–95.
Schneider, B. and Waite, L. J. (2005) Being Together, Working 
Apart: Dual-Career Families and the Work–Life Balance. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scollon, R. and Jones, E. (1979) Interethnic Communication. 
Video presentation, Talking Alaska series, No. 5. Fairbanks, 
AK: Alaska Native Language Center.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2001[1995]) Intercultural 
Communication: A Discourse Approach. 2nd edn. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell. 
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2004) Nexus Analysis: 
Discourse and the Emerging Internet. New York: 
Routledge.
Searle, J. R. (1975) ‘Indirect speech acts,’ in P. Cole and 
J. L. Morgan (eds), Syntax and Semantics. Vol. 3. New 
York: Academic Press. pp. 59–82.
Silverstein, M. (1992) ‘The indeterminacy of contextualization: 
When is enough enough?’, in P. Auer and A. di Luzio (eds), 
The Contextualization of Language. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. pp. 55–76.
Silverstein, M. (1993) ‘Metapragmatic discourse and 
metapragmatic function’, in J. A. Lucy (ed.), Reflexive 
Language: Reported Speech and Metapragmatics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 33–58.
Singh, R., Lele, J. and Martohardjono, G. (1988) 
‘Communication in a multilingual society: some missed 
opportunities’, Language in Society, 17(1): 43–59.
Tannen, D. (1981) ‘New York Jewish conversational style’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 
30: 133–49.
Tannen, D. (1986) That’s not What I Meant!: How 
Conversational Style Makes or Breaks Relationships. New 
York: Ballantine Books.
Tannen, D. (1990) You Just Don’t Understand: Women and 
Men in Conversation. New York: Ballantine Books.
Tannen, D. (1993a) (ed.) Framing in Discourse. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Tannen, D. (1993b) (ed.) Gender and Conversational 
Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tannen, D. (1994) Gender and Discourse. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. (Reprinted with an added chapter in 
1996.)
Tannen, D. (1996) ‘The relativity of linguistic strategies: 
rethinking power and solidarity in gender and dominance’, 
in Gender and Discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 19–52.
Tannen, D. (1999) ‘The display of (gendered) identities in talk 
at work’, in M. Bucholtz, A. C. Liang and L. A. Sutton (eds), 
Reinventing Identities: The Gendered Self in Discourse. 
New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 221–40.
Tannen, D. (2003) ‘Power maneuvers or connection maneu-
vers? Ventriloquizing in family interaction’, in D. Tannen 
and J. E. Alatis (eds), Linguistics, Language and the Real 
World: Discourse and Beyond (Georgetown University 
Round Table on Languages and Linguistics, 2001). 
Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. pp. 50–62.
Tannen, D. (2005[1984]) Conversational Style: Analyzing Talk 
Among Friends. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tannen, D. (2007[1989]) Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue 
and Imagery in Conversational Discourse. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Tannen, D. and Goodwin, M. H. (eds) (2006) ‘Family 
discourse, framing family’, special issue of Text and Talk, 
26(4, 5): 407–9.
Tannen, D. and Wallat, C. (1993) ‘Interactive frames 
and knowledge schemas in interaction: examples from 
a medical examination/interview’, in D. Tannen (ed.), 
Framing in Discourse. New York: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 57–76.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
84
Tannen, D., Kendall, S. and Gordon, C. (eds) (2007) Family 
Talk: Discourse and Identity in Four American families. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tsitsipis, L. D. (2006) ‘Report on sociolinguistic research in 
Greece’, Sociolinguistica, 20: 183–7.
Twitchin, J. (director) (1979) Crosstalk. (Film/video) BBC.
Wei, L. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One 
Family: Language Choice and Language Shift in a 
Chinese Community in Britain. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters Ltd.
Wodak, R. (1997a) ‘Critical Discourse Analysis and the study 
of doctor–patient interaction’, in B.-L. Gunnarsson, 
P. Linell and B. Nordberg (eds), The Construction of 
Professional Discourse. London: Longman. pp. 173–200.
Wodak, R. (ed.) (1997b) Gender and Discourse. London: 
Sage.
Wodak, R. (1997c) ‘ “I know, we won’t revolutionize the 
world with it, but … ”: Styles of female leadership in 
institutions’, in H. Kotthoff and R. Wodak (eds), 
Communicating Gender in Context. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. pp. 335–71.
Wodak, R. and Chilton, P. (2005) A New Agenda in (Critical) 
Discourse 
Analysis: 
Theory, 
Methodology 
and 
Interdisciplinarity. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Woolard, K. A. (1985) ‘Catalonia: the dilemma of language 
rights’, in N. Wolfson and J. Manes (eds), Language of 
Inequality. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 91–109.
Woolard, K. A. (2004) ‘Codeswitching’, in A. Duranti (ed.), 
A Companion to Linguistic Anthropology. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 73–94.
Wortham, S. (2006) Learning Identity: The Joint Emergence of 
Social Identification and Academic Learning. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Yamada, H. (1997) Different Games, Different Rules: 
Why Americans and Japanese Misunderstand Each Other. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Young, L. W. L. (1994) Crosstalk and Culture in Sino–American 
Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

PART 2
Sociolinguistics and 
Social Theory


Social Stratification
C h r i s t i n e  M a l l i n s o n
6
6.1 INTRODUCTION
It is fitting that ‘social stratification’ is the first 
entry in Part II, sociolinguistics and social theories, 
of this new SAGE Handbook of Sociolinguistics. 
One of the first and most famous sociolinguistic 
studies, Labov’s (1966) The Sociolinguistic 
Stratification of New York City, explicitly engaged 
the topic of social stratification and its patterned 
relationship with language. Labov posited that if 
the dialect of individual New York City speakers 
was studied in the larger context of the speech 
community, it could be seen ‘as an element in a 
highly systematic structure of social and stylistic 
stratification’ (1966: vii). In short, Labov con-
tended that processes of social stratification pro-
duce social divisions, evidence of which can be 
seen when examining the social distribution of 
sensitive linguistic forms. 
Indeed, the social differentiation of languages 
and/or linguistic features within or across com-
munities and/or societies is generally what socio-
linguists mean when they talk about stratification. 
Only within or across socially-stratified speech 
communities, and within or across different 
interaction or contextually-variable stylistic con-
texts, can socially-sensitive linguistic features 
be found. Thus, stratification has come to play a 
central role in defining sociolinguistic concerns. 
Section 6.2 of this chapter presents an overview 
of studies in the areas of variationist sociolin-
guistics and the sociology of language that inves-
tigate how languages and/or language features 
are employed by speakers who belong to social 
groups that are hierarchically arranged within a 
given society.
Stratification still remains a concept, however, 
that has tended more to underlie various sociolin-
guistic theories, methods, and analyses than exist 
as an object of theoretical and analytic inquiry in 
and of itself. Sustained interdisciplinary scholar-
ship and collaboration would provide an avenue 
for sociolinguists and sociologists of language to 
explore new ways of thinking about and measur-
ing the relationship between language and social 
stratification. Section 6.3 of this chapter thus pro-
vides some background on sociological approaches 
to social stratification, while Section 6.4 reviews 
some contemporary empirical research on social 
stratification that is likely to be of interest to soci-
ologists, sociolinguists/sociologists of language, 
and scholars from related fields.
Section 6.5 explores challenges and new direc-
tions for interdisciplinary research on social strat-
ification. On the one hand, sociolinguistics may 
have yet fully to benefit from sociological perspec-
tives on social stratification and social inequality. 
On the other hand, in future interdisciplinary col-
laboration, the use of sociolinguistic data may 
be able to shed light on debates about the nature 
and processes of stratification in ways that will 
be innovative and applicable to theory building 
in sociology. The conclusions of this chapter 
consider some of these possibilities.
6.2  SOCIAL STRATIFICATION: 
SOCIOLINGUISTIC STUDIES
Modern sociolinguistics is generally said to have 
originated in the 1960s as an interdisciplinary 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
88
subfield, a unique intersection of the troika of 
sociology, anthropology and linguistics (Shuy, 
2003). A 1964 seminar was held at the LSA 
Summer Linguistics Institute, and a 1966 session 
was organized at the Ohio Valley Sociological 
Society’s annual meeting – each on the topic of 
sociolinguistics (see Fishman, 1997; Shuy, 2003). 
Among those in attendance were prominent soci-
ologists Garfinkel, Goffman, Gumperz, Hymes, 
Sacks and Schegloff, and up-and-coming sociolin-
guists, such as William Labov, among others. Around 
the same time, university courses were beginning 
to be developed in the sociology of language and 
sociolinguistics, and new and important works in 
the field were beginning to be published. 
Over time, sociolinguistics crystallized into a 
diverse field of study. Some areas of sociolinguis-
tics, such as conversation analysis and discourse 
analysis, tend to analyze the finer patterns of lan-
guage in use. The work of early scholars Hymes, 
Gumperz and Goffman, as well as other research 
from conversation analysis and ethnomethodol-
ogy, are reviewed elsewhere in this handbook 
(see, for example, Chapters 3, 4, 9, 27 and related 
chapters in this handbook).
This chapter centers primarily on the investiga-
tion of social stratification and social inequality as 
manifested in the traditions of variationist socio-
linguistics and the sociology of language. First is 
a review of key research in the sociology of lan-
guage that explores language and social stratifica-
tion, typically in the form of society-level studies 
of language contact, language planning and policy, 
and language attitudes. Following is a review 
of some key stratification-oriented variationist 
research. Variationist sociolinguistics, known for 
studies of dynamics within and across speech 
communities, has perhaps most overtly claimed to 
investigate language and social stratification. 
Critiques are also offered with respect to how each 
tradition has engaged with the theory, methods 
and analysis of social stratification.
Sociology of language
The title of an early article by Fishman (1965) 
asked, ‘Who speaks what language to whom and 
when?’ – basic questions that the sociology of 
language has since pursued in depth. As Hellinger 
(2005: 1117) put it, sociolinguistics and the soci-
ology of language lie along a ‘continuum’, with 
language structure and function, influenced by 
social forces at one end of the continuum (‘socio-
linguistics’) and sociopolitical issues related to 
language at the other (‘sociology of language’). 
Though such a continuum is idealized and the 
relationship between such poles is more fuzzy 
than fixed, the questions that are at the heart of the 
sociology of language are those of power, inequal-
ity and social stratification. The sociology of lan-
guage is covered more thoroughly elsewhere in 
this handbook (see Chapter 5); thus, only a brief 
review of some trends in the sociology of language 
is given here, with respect to social stratification.
Some of the earliest compilations – Toward a 
Sociology of Language (Hertzler, 1953), The 
Sociology of Language (Hertzler, 1965), and 
Readings in the Sociology of Language (Fishman, 
1968) – set the tone for research that explores how 
language may reflect, signal, support or challenge 
unequal relations of power within societies, and 
also what consequences arise out of conflicting 
relationships with language(s) in different socie-
ties. Since that time, much work in the sociology 
of language has examined how languages are 
treated, politically and culturally, in given socie-
ties, at specific periods and over time. For exam-
ple, what economic, political and cultural 
processes have fostered the spread of powerful 
languages such as English, in its many global 
varieties (Brutt-Griffler, 2002; Crystal, 2003)? 
Other work has investigated language policies and 
language planning endeavors with an eye to power 
dynamics and inequality (e.g. Haugen, 1985; 
Tollefson, 1991; Myers-Scotton, 1993; Wright, 
2004). Much of the research in the sociology of 
language is based on data collected via censuses, 
language surveys and fieldwork (Chen, 1997).
Complementary to studies of powerful lan-
guages and/or language practices are myriad stud-
ies of languages that are threatened or endangered, 
as well as those that analyze how speakers of 
underprivileged language(s) resist linguistic and 
cultural subordination. The theory of Bourdieu 
(1991) on language and symbolic power is par-
ticularly applicable to understanding how speak-
ers, particularly in educational situations, may 
resist efforts at language planning and language 
standardization. Other work explores the social 
conditions under which speakers of minority lan-
guages may or may not view language as a marker 
of ethnonational identity, as well as what attitudes 
they may hold toward the standard and their ver-
nacular (e.g. Rickford, 1985; Heller, 2003; see 
also articles in the International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language and in the book series 
Contributions to the Sociology of Language). 
Within the tradition of the sociology of lan-
guage, some studies deal more overtly and some 
more indirectly with aspects of social stratifica-
tion. Sociology of language research tends to 
analyze, on individual, group and national levels, 
how speakers operate in multilingual societies, 
how societies react to multilingualism in the form 
of policy and planning efforts, and how language 
relates to social identity. In each case, issues of 
self-interest, prestige, status, power and inequality 

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
89
are emphasized. While this type of work is clearly 
seen as falling within the general scope of the socio-
linguistic discipline, theoretical and methodologi-
cal connections between the sociology of language 
and the broader discipline of sociology remain 
more tenuous. As a founder of this area of study, 
Fishman has been particularly outspoken on this 
disconnect between sociology, the sociology of 
language, and sociolinguistics. On the one hand, he 
argues, sociolinguists have ‘created their sociol-
ogy as they went along’, resulting in ‘self-imposed 
underexposure to serious sociological stimulation’ 
(Fishman, 1991: 130, 132). On the other hand, 
sociologists have been equally inattentive, such 
that ‘only a small proportion of the worldwide 
sociolinguistic literature is getting through to soci-
ology’ (Fishman, 1991: 131) (see also Rickford, 
1986; Chen, 1997). Currently, of the constituent 
parts of the American Sociological Association 
listed on its website (http://asanet.org), three relate 
most directly to language: Communication and 
Information Technologies, Ethnomethodology and 
Conversation Analysis, and Sociology of Culture, 
which includes a subsidiary network on Language 
and Culture. There is currently no section on the 
sociology of language. 
Like much research from the sociology of 
language approach, variationist sociolinguistic 
research can be subject to similar critiques regard-
ing its lack of sustained engagement with sociol-
ogy, including sociological literature on social 
stratification. Following is a review of some 
key studies from the variationist perspective, 
which also, some more overtly and some more 
indirectly, deal with aspects of social inequality 
and stratification. 
Variationist sociolinguistics
As modern sociolinguistics developed in the 
United States, considerable attention was directed 
toward solving language-related social problems: 
namely, the educational inequalities facing the 
underclass, whose language patterns are stigma-
tized in the US educational system. Early varia-
tionist sociolinguists began to address these 
concerns, in part, by quantitatively investigating 
how linguistic variables are patterned by linguistic 
and social factors (see also Chapters 1 and 21, in 
this handbook). The quantitative findings helped 
build the case that dialects, including stigmatized 
varieties of English spoken by socially disfa-
voured groups, are rule-governed and patterned 
systems. 
In the first systematic investigation of an urban 
speech community, Labov (1966) investigated 
how language related to social stratification. By 
‘social stratification’, as defined in a later work 
(1972: 43–4), Labov meant that ‘the normal work-
ings of society have produced systematic differ-
ences between certain institutions or people, and 
that these differentiated forms have been ranked in 
status or prestige by general agreement’. Thus, he 
analyzed how language features varied by specific 
social structures, most notably social class (see 
also Chapter 19, in this handbook). For nearly all 
the variables Labov studied, individuals who were 
deemed to have high ‘social status’ typically used 
the most ‘prestigious’ and the least stigmatized 
linguistic forms. Furthermore, this pattern per-
sisted even across speech style (or register): 
within each class-based group, speakers used stig-
matized variants most often in casual conversation 
and least often when reading word lists or set 
passages. 
There were a few exceptions to these overarch-
ing patterns. Occasionally, despite what would 
have been expected by their social class position, 
speakers in the middle ranges of the lower 
socioeconomic class produced the standard (non-
stigmatized or prestigious) form. In more formal 
styles, the lower middle class also tended to use a 
higher percentage of standard forms than did the 
higher classes. Labov explained these ‘crossover 
effects’ as being a connection between speakers’ 
class location, social/self-consciousness, and 
language variation.
Labov also observed that linguistic patterns 
related to class seemed to vary by gender, with the 
middle-class women generally using more stand-
ard forms than other women or men. Another 
seemingly contradictory pattern was that women, 
in the 1966 study, showed greater stylistic varia-
tion in their language than men, in two regards. 
Women in every class used prestigious forms 
more often in formal styles than men did. In 
casual styles, however, women used stigmatized 
forms more often than men. Yet not all women 
who showed the first pattern necessarily also 
showed the second. 
Labov (2001: 292–3) later called the fact that 
women can be both more and less linguistically 
conservative the ‘gender paradox’: women con-
form more closely than men to sociolinguistic 
norms that are overtly prescribed, but conform 
less than men when they are not, as in the case of 
innovative forms that have not yet been socially 
evaluated by wider society. Other sociolinguists 
have critiqued the idea of the gender paradox, 
however, noting that it may simply result from the 
fact that researchers often group speakers accord-
ing to gender and then examine group-level 
data for potential gender-based patterns (Eckert, 
1989; Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 1992, 1999; 
Meyerhoff, 2007). (There have been similar 
critiques of how sociolinguists group speakers by 
race and ethnicity.)

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
90
Another early, large-scale sociolinguistic study 
revealed similar patterns in the social and stylistic 
patterning of linguistic variables in an urban 
centre of the USA. Wolfram (1969) analyzed data 
from 728 interviews, each lasting over an hour, 
with 48 African-Americans from the general 
urban population in Detroit. For eight different 
linguistic variables, all of the African-American 
women used more standard forms than the African-
American men. Still, not all the African-American 
women behaved in the same way. Like Labov 
(1966), Wolfram found that middle-class African-
American women used non-stigmatized features 
much more than either the upper-class or the 
lower-class African-American women. 
Like Labov’s and Wolfram’s research, Trudgill’s 
(1974) study investigated patterns of social and 
stylistic variation of linguistic features in Norwich 
English. In Trudgill’s study, speakers moved 
closer to the prestigious forms of speech as the 
formality of the speech situation increased. At the 
same time, the higher social status a person was 
deemed to have, the more likely they were to use 
prestigious forms. Cedergren (1973) conducted a 
similar variationist study of Spanish in Panama 
City, Panama. Much like Labov (1966), Wolfram 
(1969) and Trudgill (1974), she found a curvilin-
ear pattern of linguistic change, in which the 
upper working-class and lower middle-class 
speakers were more likely to use innovative vari-
ants than speakers from other social classes. Other 
social factors correlated with the use of innovative 
variants as well: gender, age, and rural versus 
urban residence.
Since these early studies, sociolinguistic 
research has continued to explore which social 
variables are the most important in modeling lan-
guage variation and change in a given speech 
community. Now, however, considerably more 
attention is given to how a broader set of social 
factors influence language in contexts around the 
world. Whereas early research mainly focused on 
class, gender, age and race/ethnicity, sociolin-
guists have increasingly begun to focus on how 
locally salient factors (which are simultaneously 
affected by broader societal forces like economics 
and urbanization) also condition language variation. 
For example, Nichols (1983) examined language 
variation among lower-class African-American 
women and men in rural, coastal South Carolina. 
Her study revealed that even in a small commu-
nity, gender and class affect linguistic behavior 
across segments of the population, along dimen-
sions of social capital. While some of the women 
used more standardized English forms than the 
men, older women actually used the most vernac-
ular, using more than twice as many non-standard 
Gullah features as either the younger women or all 
of the men. Nichols explained these language 
choices by pointing to key structural effects: edu-
cational attainment, job opportunities, and social 
networks.
Other studies have also investigated interac-
tions between language use and speakers’ place, 
social networks, and social locations. Gal’s (1979) 
study of language shift among Hungarian speak-
ers in the town of Oberwart, Austria was one of 
the first to analyze language use in relation to 
social networks. As the town faced increased 
urbanization, the choice to use either Hungarian 
or German or to code-switch signaled speakers’ 
affiliations with either a less prestigious peasant 
status or a more prestigious worker/urbanite status. 
In a similar study in Australia, Schmidt (1985) 
studied the Jambun Aboriginal community’s use 
of the language Dyirbal. In general, younger 
speakers were shifting away from the use of 
Dyirbal and increasingly using English. When 
younger speakers did use Dyirbal, however, the 
choice was dependent upon social networks, with 
some younger speakers using Dyirbal with family 
members, some using it with older members of 
the Jambun community, and others using it with 
peers in certain in-groups.
In England, Li (1994) analyzed language choice 
in the Tyneside Chinese community. Findings 
revealed that the intersecting factors of age 
and social network were the strongest predictors 
of whether a given speaker would be Chinese 
monolingual/dominant, Chinese–English bilingual, 
or English dominant, because the combination of 
age and social network reflected the degree to 
which a given speaker was socially integrated into 
the Tyneside community. The oldest members of 
the community tended to have networks made up 
of people who were their kin and/or Chinese; 
these speakers were largely Chinese monolingual/
dominant. The youngest members of the community, 
who tended to have intragenerational, non-kin, 
and non-Chinese networks, were largely English 
dominant. The study revealed how patterns of lan-
guage choice are formulated in relation to, and 
carried out within, a local social matrix, rather than 
simply being the result of the singular or combina-
tory effects of any individual social or linguistic 
factors. In a similar, larger-scale study in England, 
sociolinguists have investigated whether dialects 
in the towns of Milton Keynes, Reading and Hull 
are becoming more or less alike over time 
(Kerswill, 1996; Cheshire et al., 1999; Williams 
and Kerswill, 1999; Kerswill and Williams, 2000). 
Findings also point to the complexity and inter-
connected nature of social and linguistic factors in 
processes of language change. In this study, how 
and how much this linguistic process took place 
was closely tied to several social and stylistic 
factors, including speaker’s location, age, class, 
gender, social network and contextual style.

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
91
In another approach that examined communi-
ties of practice, rather than social networks, 
Mallinson (2006; see also Mallinson and Childs, 
2007) examined language variation among two 
groups of women in Texana, a small rural com-
munity in the southern USA. The ‘church ladies’ 
and the ‘porch sitters’, though they had nearly the 
same educational attainment, had occupational 
and lifestyle differences that distinguished them 
as discrete communities of practice. The church 
ladies adhered to a much more standard variety 
of English than the porch sitters, who, among 
other features, used more forms characteristic of 
African-American English. For these women, 
language use was one of many intersecting sym-
bols and practices that constructed class-related 
social divisions within the US stratification 
system.
Other sociolinguistic studies have investigated 
how and why notions of prestige vary and change 
over time in various communities. Rickford (1986) 
found no singular notion of prestige among speakers 
in a Guyanese community, and his informants did 
not value standardized English forms across the 
board. Rather, speakers who valued local practices 
also tended to value the vernacular (that is, creole 
forms), which they used to manifest solidarity 
with their class and to express their connections to 
the local place. Haeri’s (1997) study of Cairo, 
Egypt, also examined how social and stylistic fac-
tors affect the use of Classical Standard Arabic and 
Non-classical Standard Arabic (urban Cairene). 
She found that men of all educational levels and 
from all social classes were more conservative 
speakers, using significantly more Classical 
Standard features than women from the same 
cohorts. She attributes women’s less frequent use 
of Classical Arabic features to the fact that 
Classical Arabic is a particularly gendered lan-
guage in the domain of religion (e.g. men pray 
aloud, women pray in silence). In addition, in the 
Cairene speech community, Classical Standard 
Arabic was not the only prestige variety; rather, 
English and French were also valuable. Similarly, 
Jourdan (2008) examined generational language 
shift in Honiara, the capital of the Solomon 
Islands. Investigating the effects of urbanization in 
this tourist center, she found middle-class speak-
ers (particularly younger middle-class speakers) 
increasingly using Pijin exclusively as their pri-
mary language, rather than English or one of 64 
different vernacular varieties, to index an urban 
affiliation.
The studies reviewed above represent only a 
small portion of significant variationist sociolin-
guistic research surrounding social stratification, 
but they share some common elements. Each 
of these studies centers largely on studying the 
relationship between language and social class, 
because class is a central pillar of the hierarchical 
arrangements that are found in stratified societies 
(see Chapter 19, in this handbook). At the same 
time, these studies also go beyond class to theo-
rize and analyze how linguistic features are dis-
tributed in a stratified speech community along a 
range of relevant social dimensions – not only 
class but also age, race, gender and more.
Variationist sociolinguistics has been subject to 
some significant critiques. For example, scholars 
including Romaine (1984), Cameron (1990) and 
Williams (1992) have contended that variationist 
theory and analysis do not actually explain the 
relationship between language and society; rather, 
they reflect sets of assumptions about the nature 
of society and about the nature of social factors. 
Variationists have made tremendous strides in 
analyzing the nuances of variation, drawing from 
and contributing to formal linguistic theory, but 
a similar pace has not been kept with social and 
sociological theory. One long-standing hindrance 
is the fact that collaboration between sociolin-
guists and sociologists has generally been more 
sporadic than sustained. Some variationists, 
particularly recently, have lamented how this 
disjuncture affects understandings of specific 
forms of stratification, especially social class and 
social status (e.g. Rickford, 1986; Mallinson, 
2006, 2009; Dodsworth, 2008; Mallinson and 
Dodsworth, 2009).
Another critique is that most variationists ana-
lyzing the social distribution of linguistic features 
tend only to wrestle with questions of how social 
structures like class, gender, race/ethnicity and 
age are observable forms or aspects of stratifica-
tion and leave undertheorized and underanalyzed 
how such forms are part of stratification processes 
that build systems of social stratification. As a 
result, variationists may miss the opportunity to 
theorize more fully how stratification relates to 
sociolinguistic concerns on broader and intercon-
nected levels.
To summarize, this section has observed that, 
in research from both the sociology of language 
and variationist sociolinguistics traditions, stratifi-
cation has tended to exist more as a background 
concept rather than an object of theoretical and 
analytic inquiry. Certainly, sociolinguists’ ways of 
thinking about and analyzing the relationship 
between language and social stratification would 
benefit from sustained collaboration with sociolo-
gists, and vice versa. As Fishman (1991) argued, 
sociolinguists and sociologists need comprehen-
sive training in each other’s fields. For sociolin-
guists, Fishman said he was ‘not really advocating 
any particular brand or school of sociology or any 
particular “all purpose” research methodology or 
data collection and analysis technique’; instead, he 
advocated ‘a disciplined, hard-nosed grounding in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
92
any major substantive segment and data-collecting 
and analyzing method among all those that sociol-
ogy has to offer, so that one can both criticize it 
and select from it knowingly’ (1991: 132). To this 
end, Section 6.3 aims to bridge some of the dis-
juncture between sociology and sociolinguistics 
by exploring how social stratification has been 
theorized and analyzed within sociology. 
6.3  SOCIAL STRATIFICATION: 
SOCIOLOGICAL STUDIES
For sociolinguists to engage more fully with 
sociological perspectives on social stratification, 
it is important to explore what the term ‘social 
stratification’ typically means in sociology, in 
addition to what it typically means in sociolin-
guistics. As expounded in the previous section, 
stratification research by sociolinguists tends to 
focus on how and to what extent linguistic varia-
bles pattern by social factors in a given speech 
community. In sociology, the term ‘social stratifi-
cation’ refers to the hierarchical arrangement of 
groups within a society, and the term can be used 
in both broad and narrow senses. In a narrow 
sense, stratification ‘can imply a commitment to a 
particular way of thinking about inequality, as 
seeing society as structured layers. … In the 
increasingly used wider meaning, stratification is 
concerned with all facets, mechanisms and proc-
esses that generate, sustain, and describe social 
inequalities’ (Savage, 2005: 250). 
Sociological studies of social stratification tend 
to investigate systematic, structured inequality 
along a few different dimensions. A first major 
concern is how to identify the different forms 
of stratification that are found in a society and 
how they are organized. For example, achieved 
characteristics such as power, wealth and prestige 
play a significant role in dividing people into 
hierarchically-ranked social groups, but so do 
ascribed characteristics like race and gender. In a 
given society, which of these forms are found and 
which are most relevant? Other aspects of this first 
major concern surround how social classes or castes, 
etc., should be labeled and imposed (e.g. upper-
middle class, lower-working class). 
A second major concern is how conceptually to 
approach social stratification, to develop various 
theories about its forms, to compare stratification 
across societies, and to examine how stratification 
changes over time. For example, Marx traced the 
history of various modes of production in different 
societies and, as a result of his study, predicted 
the collapse of the capitalist system. Finally, a 
third major concern in studies of social stratifica-
tion deals with the processes and conditions of 
stratification – in short, how groups in power 
maintain their privileges, how disadvantaged 
groups try to get ahead, and the consequences of 
cohesive or conflicting social relationships in any 
given society. The remainder of this section inves-
tigates these major concerns in tandem, giving 
examples of how stratification theories relate to 
sociolinguistic research.
Some sociological theories 
of stratification
Most accounts of sociological theories of stratifi-
cation begin with Karl Marx and Max Weber, both 
of whom adopt a broadly relational view of class, 
wherein class is defined by people’s relationships 
to various income-generating resources or assets. 
Less space will be devoted to giving the details of 
these theories, as they are carefully articulated in 
many volumes on social stratification; see, for 
example, Grusky (2001), from which the follow-
ing overviews of Marxian and Weberian theories 
are summarized.
In brief, Marx argued that human history 
unfolds through conflict between social classes 
over economic inequalities. The most powerful 
class rules both materially and intellectually (that 
is, they appropriate not only material goods but 
also ruling ideas). In a capitalist system, the pow-
erful actors are capitalists, and the deprivation/
exclusion of resources and the garnering of 
surplus value from surplus labor that are inherent 
in exploitation constitute a specific type of 
class relations. Differences in class interest – that 
is, who exploits versus who gets exploited – 
generate class conflict. In the class struggle, 
rewards at the top are extracted from the surplus 
labor generated at the bottom, which leads to 
alienation for the workers (see summary in Grusky, 
2001: 87–102).
Marx further argued that the ideology best 
expressing the interests of the ruling class always 
prevails in social institutions such as religion, 
economics, education, law and politics. The ide-
ologies are necessarily pervasive because they 
must convince the elite as well as the rest of soci-
ety that the rule of the dominant class is legitimate 
and justified. Thus, both the powerful elite and the 
proletariat are influenced by the overarching ide-
ology that determines mass belief. Standard lan-
guages and language ideologies may accordingly 
be seen as a product of social stratification, as a 
site of conflict between the norms of the privi-
leged and those of the non-elite. 
Weber, like Marx, believed that the basic cate-
gories of all class situations derive from owning 
property versus not owning property. At the same 
time, he also believed that the stratification system 

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
93
is complicated by status groupings that can 
compete, coexist or overlap with class-based 
groupings. Unlike classes, status groups are nor-
mally communities that recognize each other as 
having more or less social honor, which affects the 
organization of everyday life. For example, a spe-
cific lifestyle is expected from those who wish to 
belong to the elite, and restrictions are placed on 
social interactions with undesirable others; lan-
guage use may be one way that groups create and 
signal status distinctions. Thus, for Weber, the 
development of status was essentially a question 
of stratification (see summary in Grusky, 2001: 
132–49).
Most sociological thought since the time of 
Marx and Weber has also tended to see social 
relationships as fundamentally unequal, though 
still recognizing functionalist perspectives, which 
can be traced back to Durkheim (for a review, 
see Grusky, 2001). Many sociological methods 
were pioneered as ways of understanding social 
inequality, including community studies and the 
development of class mobility surveys in the UK 
and the USA (Savage, 2005: 236). In the USA, 
Blau and Duncan (1967) introduced the status 
attainment model of inequality. They viewed 
occupational position and mobility as the single 
best indicators of class differentiation and thereby 
of social stratification. In their model, stratifica-
tion occurs through a process of intergenerational 
status transmission that depends on a person’s 
father’s educational attainment and occupational 
status in combination with the person’s own edu-
cational attainment, status of their first job, and 
status of their current occupation. These and simi-
lar indices have found considerable utility in vari-
ationist sociolinguistic research (see Chapter 19, 
in this handbook, for a review).
Since the development of Blau and Duncan’s 
model and their attendant socioeconomic scales, 
some scholars have critiqued a lack of theory 
behind how the scales are conceived, and others 
have raised issues of validity, such as posited 
male/Eurocentric biases inherent in the scales (see 
Warren, Sheridan and Hauser, 1998). Such assess-
ments have helped refine sociological thinking 
about the causal processes that generate social 
stratification in two main ways. First, sociologists 
are paying more attention to context: the fact that 
parents’ education, income and occupation, and a 
person’s own mental ability and aspirations are 
not the only factors that account for how much 
educational and occupational status people achieve 
in their lifetimes. Secondly, sociologists are 
increasingly attuned to how social structures like 
race, gender, sexuality, region of origin and more 
are imbricated in systems of social stratification. 
These and other avenues are explored in the 
remainder of this section. 
Contemporary directions in sociological 
theories of social stratification
With each critique of older approaches have arisen 
new, more complex questions in the sociological 
study of social stratification. The current dilemma 
is how to develop sociological theory that looks 
much more carefully at how contemporary and 
changing social relations have affected social 
stratification – particularly with regard to how 
major societal forces, like race/ethnicity, gender 
and others, generate inequality (Savage, 2005: 
237–9). Historically, factors like race and gender 
have been, in Grusky’s words, ‘relegated to the 
sociological sidelines by class theorists of both 
Marxist and non-Marxist persuasion’ (2001: 28). 
Feminist sociologists (including Acker, 1973, 
1988) critiqued this perspective, however, and 
sparked much controversy over how to incorpo-
rate women in class analysis and stratification 
research. Since that time, many other sociologists 
have made clear that class is not the only signifi-
cant form of social stratification, arguing that it is 
necessary to consider how men and women, as 
well as members of racial/ethnic groups, sexual 
groups, age cohorts, etc., are differently located in 
the class system (e.g. Fraser, 2000; Anthias, 2001; 
Crompton, 2003; Malesevic and Hall, 2005). 
This perspective has generally caught on in 
sociological research. Indeed, as Savage (2005: 
245) pronounced, stratification theories that do 
not successfully incorporate identity and agency 
can only reach ‘something of a dead end’, because 
they fail to make clear the theoretical linkages 
between class position, class consciousness and 
class action. Instead, more pluralistic theories of 
social stratification are needed to address contem-
porary conditions of inequality. 
Savage (2005: 245–9) finds particularly prom-
ising the work of French sociologist Pierre 
Bourdieu. Bourdieu is relatively well known 
among sociolinguists, since much of his own work 
centers on language (e.g. Bourdieu, 1991), and 
many of his theories have already been used in 
much contemporary sociolinguistic scholarship 
(see, e.g., Haeri, 1997; Myles, 1999; Pujolar, 
2000; Goldstein, 2003, and many more; for a 
review, see also Hanks, 2005). Bourdieu was a 
forerunner in implicating different types of capital 
in the process of status attainment. His work dis-
tinguished cultural, social, economic and sym-
bolic capitals as objectified or embodied forms 
that accumulate over time (Bourdieu, 1986). As a 
result of accumulating capitals, he theorized, 
advantage and privilege also accumulate for 
certain social groups over time, which produces 
social stratification. 
In comparison to traditional theories of social 
stratification, Bourdieu’s theory is particularly 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
94
innovative in two regards, as discussed in detail by 
Savage (2005: 245–9). First, Bourdieu’s theory 
recognizes agency, identity and subjectivity. The 
approach thus ‘allows a way of relating stratifica-
tion theory to issues of identity and subjectivity 
that do not rely on the problematic baggage of a 
class formation approach, which assumes that iden-
tities are linked to an awareness of group member-
ship and identification’ (Savage, 2005: 248). 
Secondly, Bourdieu’s theory focuses sociological 
attention on processes of accumulation of resources 
(rather than merely on a person’s relationship to 
income-generating resources, as in a Marxian per-
spective). This aspect ‘allows the sociology of 
stratification to connect with current debates about 
socio-cultural change in ways that can challenge 
simple accounts of change and have the potential to 
offer more nuanced insights into persistence and 
the remaking of privilege’ (Savage, 2005: 249).
Another aspect of Bourdieu’s theory that is 
particularly relevant to sociolinguists is the view 
of language as integral to creating status distinc-
tions that center on cultural capital. Bourdieu 
(1984) defined cultural capital as tools legitimated 
and valued by the dominant culture. Cultural 
capital is signaled to others via symbols in ways 
that are recognizable to the dominant class, by 
having ‘good’ manners, ‘proper’ language, and 
other behaviors. These status markers then serve 
as the criteria that élites use to select others to join 
them in social interaction and receive the benefits 
of association with them or limit access for those 
deemed undesirable. For example, the use of 
standardized English is a major component of 
cultural capital, and it influences material outcomes 
via increasing access to educational opportunities, 
job opportunities, and income and wealth.
At the same time, Bourdieu’s theories are not 
without critique. For one, although he recognizes 
gender oppression as symbolic violence, he also 
pays little attention to how race/ethnicity struc-
tures social inequalities (Acker, 2006: 35). 
Moreover, Bourdieu (as with many other theo-
rists) tended not to suggest how to test his theory; 
for example, his concept of ‘habitus’ can be cri-
tiqued on the grounds that he undertheorizes how 
agents acquire habitus and gives researchers little 
guidance for how to operationalize it.
One contemporary sociological approach that 
is similar to Bourdieu’s theory is that of feminist 
sociologist Joan Acker, although her approach 
pays more explicit attention to how class, race and 
gender relations are interlocking and co-constitutive. 
In Acker’s framework, ‘ “class” stands for prac-
tices and relations that provide differential access 
to and control over the means of provisioning and 
survival’ (2006: 68). In terms of empirical corre-
lates of class, Acker prioritizes observable norms, 
lifestyle, status displays and consumption habits. 
These divisions are reinforced by images and 
symbols, which include language. With these 
various data, researchers can study how class-
related social divisions are created, how they 
change over time, and how they connect to extral-
ocal social relations (other social structures) that 
shape social practices and social identities. For an 
example of how Acker’s theory can be used in 
variationist sociolinguistic research, see Mallinson 
and Dodsworth (2009).
The view that Acker takes enables a study of 
stratification as the social process through which 
rewards and resources are systematically and 
unequally allocated within societies. This per-
spective ‘suggests a shift in terminology – we are 
enmeshed in class relations, not located in class 
structures’ (Acker, 2006: 47). Because specific 
processes of inequality supplant rigid boundaries 
and positions in Acker’s model, the ways inequal-
ity is perpetuated locally must therefore be exam-
ined. This focus on the relations of distribution 
(the allocation of economic resources) may have 
more explanatory utility for sociolinguists than 
one that focuses primarily on the means of pro-
duction, to which it may be more difficult to relate 
and isolate differences in patterns of linguistic 
variables. With respect to these and other charac-
teristics, Acker’s theory is fully compatible with 
identity-based approaches to linguistic variation 
that recognize important intersections between 
gender and class and also emphasize local social 
distinctions and the practices that index and con-
struct them (Mallinson and Dodsworth, 2009).
The theories of Bourdieu and Acker are just 
two contemporary sociological approaches to 
social stratification that have found some utility 
within sociolinguistics. Section 6.4 builds upon 
this discussion to examine some empirical research 
that may be of interest to scholars from both 
fields. In each of these studies, language is priori-
tized as being a key element in the study of social 
stratification. 
6.4  EMPIRICAL CONNECTIONS BETWEEN 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND SOCIOLOGY 
IN THE STUDY OF SOCIAL 
STRATIFICATION
Both sociologists and sociolinguists share a 
common perspective on language as being a pri-
mary and overt marker of social identities and a 
constituent of the dominant social ideologies that 
influence agents in the social world. Whereas there 
are many areas of scholarship in which sociolin-
guists and sociologists can overlap productively, 
this section highlights empirical work on educa-
tional and occupational attainment, a hallmark 

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
95
area in the study of social stratification (particu-
larly in the USA). The reason for highlighting 
educational and occupational attainment here is 
largely because while there are many directions 
for interdisciplinary collaboration along these 
lines, sociolinguists and sociologists have not 
generally connected in this endeavor.
Studies of status attainment are particularly 
relevant to sociolinguists and sociologists because 
they often implicate standard language ideologies, 
which privilege the use of standard language 
forms, as being a primary mechanism in the 
perpetuation of advantage and disadvantage in 
culturally-hegemonic school and workplace 
reward systems. In broad perspective, Lippi-
Green (1997) reviewed the ways in which ideolo-
gies about language variation, which surface in 
the United States’ educational system, the judicial 
system, in organizations, and in the media, per-
petuate discrimination and social inequality. 
Similarly, Bonfiglio (2002) explored how stand-
ard language ideologies that developed in America 
are tinged with xenophobia and racism.
Particularly in educational contexts, recent 
sociological and sociolinguistic studies have 
shown how family class resources, race, language 
and other factors intertwine to generate inequality. 
Lovaglia et al. (1998) found that deprivation of 
resources over time can have negative effects on 
self-esteem, and these psychological factors can 
affect minority students’ motivation as well as 
their results on already culturally-biased tests, 
which are written in the language that white mid-
dle-class people know best (Fischer et al., 1996; 
Feagin, 2000: 169; Royster, 2003). In another 
example, the disproportionate allocation of wealth 
in US society to whites (Oliver and Shapiro, 1995) 
allows élite parents to send their children to better, 
often private schools, where resources are more 
concentrated and classes are smaller (Fischer 
et al., 1996; Roscigno, 1998; Charity Hudley and 
Mallinson, forthcoming). 
Similarly, Farkas (1996) conducted an empiri-
cal study of group differences in school outcomes, 
in which he studied cultural background as being 
a resource that is central to educational outcomes 
and cognitive development. Farkas showed how 
teachers judge students on non-cognitive traits 
that may or may not be related to cognitive per-
formance, such as homework, disruptiveness and 
facility in standardized English. If learners ‘sound 
better’ to their teachers, then teachers often treat 
them better as well. Such cultural/ideological fac-
tors are hugely determinative of minority students’ 
success in schools, and schools remain a cultural 
battleground where minority/poor children are 
fundamentally disadvantaged.
In 2007, Durham et al., a team of sociologists, 
speech pathologists and educators, also studied 
why some children perform better than others in 
elementary school, since elementary school per-
formance strongly determines a person’s educa-
tional attainment later in life and since educational 
attainment is one of the key factors in social 
mobility – and therefore in social stratification. 
When they examined language data from white, 
low-socioeconomic-status children from the 
Midwestern region of the USA, they found that 
the oral language skills the children had when 
they entered kindergarten (before they had much 
formal education) explained most of the effect of 
family socioeconomic status on the children’s 
elementary school performance. Presumably, the 
stigmatization of these speakers at school only 
goes to reinforce their initial disadvantage.
Other studies have also explored a range of 
sociological and linguistic factors in affecting the 
educational attainment of minority US youth. 
Fernandez et al. (1989) and Warren (1996) both 
examined Latino/a students’ rates of high school 
attrition, focusing on factors that include family 
socioeconomic status, parental education, school 
attendance, self-esteem and English-language 
ability. Van Hofwegen and Wolfram (2008) simi-
larly explored the acquisition and development of 
African-American English among eight African-
American youths; their research was part of a 
larger longitudinal study, conducted by a team of 
linguists, psychologists and educators, that exam-
ined factors influencing African-American youths’ 
literacy skills and overall school success.
Myriad other sociolinguistic and sociological 
studies have examined identity practices, lan-
guage use, literacy and status attainment: for 
example, the educational and job attainment of the 
‘lads’ and the ‘ear’oles’ in the UK (Willis, 1977); 
the educational and job attainment of the white 
‘Hallway Hangers’ and the African-American 
‘Brothers’ (MacLeod, 1995); the different linguis-
tic and identity practices of white American 
working- and middle-class ‘Jocks’ and ‘Burnouts’ 
(Eckert, 2000); the educational experiences of 
African-American youths (Fordham, 1996; 
Smitherman, 2000; Ferguson, 2001; Ogbu, 2003); 
Latina American high school students’ discourse 
about education, class, and gender (Bettie, 2003); 
and more. 
All of these studies are just a few examples of 
how sociolinguistic and sociological perspectives 
dovetail in research on social stratification. Each 
study theorizes and analyzes how the élite create a 
status culture and control access to their rewards 
and privileges on the basis of who possesses and 
uses these cultural tools. Once it is in place, the 
status culture affects the opportunities of those 
individuals and groups who are in advantaged 
and disadvantaged social positions. As these 
studies have shown, the accumulation of capitals 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
96
(i.e. cultural, social, economic, symbolic) is a 
primary mechanism in status attainment within 
a stratified society. 
At the same time, while capitals operate inter-
dependently, it is also important not to assume 
they interact with each other in linear ways. Class-
advantaged people are not necessarily cultural-
capitally advantaged, and factors like racial and 
gender segregation may override the influence of 
capitals. For example, tests of ‘literacy’, in combi-
nation with other measures, disproportionately 
disqualified African-Americans from voting in the 
early history of the United States (Feagin, 2000). 
Recently, Baugh (2007) found that even if pro-
spective African-American or Latino/a tenants 
have more than enough money to rent an apart-
ment (a question of economic capital), they still 
may be ‘linguistically profiled’ over the phone 
if they speak a stigmatized variety of English 
(a question of cultural capital). Language thus can 
perpetuate racially-based housing discrimination, 
which affects residential segregation (Massey and 
Lundy, 2001). In turn, residential segregation 
perpetuates rates of unemployment, high crime 
and poverty, which, together with underfunded 
schools, constrain the educational success of chil-
dren who live in US inner cities (Labov, 2008).
This section has briefly reviewed some sociologi-
cal and sociolinguistic studies that view language as 
one of many unequal rewards and resources that 
operate in processes of stratification. More inter-
disciplinary collaboration along these lines would 
complement and broaden sociolinguists’ and soci-
ologists’ understandings of how patterns of lan-
guage variation and change, literacy, language 
attitudes and more are interconnected in systems 
of inequality within and across societies. Section 
6.5 thus concludes by exploring other avenues in 
the study of stratification that are complementary 
to both sociolinguistics and sociology.
6.5  NEW DIRECTIONS, 
INTERDISCIPLINARY QUESTIONS
In considering the future of the sociolinguistic 
study of stratification alongside the future of the 
sociological study of stratification, some chal-
lenges and possibilities are common to both fields. 
In Social Stratification, Grusky (2001: 1–36) con-
templated the future of stratification research 
in sociology, theoretically and analytically. For 
example, he asked sociologists to consider how 
the class standing of modern individuals is chang-
ing. If class is becoming divorced from its historic 
relationship to kinship and property, then what 
principal stratifying forces are replacing economic 
capital? Like Savage (2005), Grusky argued that 
sociologists must increasingly consider how class 
is complexly interrelated with individuals’ life-
styles, consumption practices and identities.
These questions are also central to sociolinguists. 
If the principal stratifying forces are changing, how 
might sociolinguists need to adapt their theories 
about language variation and change? For example, 
do we need to revisit our theories about where and 
how language change originates by social class, in 
the light of increasing rates of extreme poverty and 
the recent explosive growth of the hyper-rich 
around the world (Pieterse, 2005)? Or, in another 
example, Smith, Durham and Fortune (2007) found 
that language change was affected by the ways that 
primary caregivers talked to children. In what ways 
might other linguistic effects arise as a result of 
occupational stratification, particularly the gender 
and/or racial segregation of occupations and jobs – 
a condition that is entrenched and found worldwide 
(Wharton, 2004)? And what, if any, sociolinguistic 
consequences arise from the diversification of 
workers, work groups and organizations?
Other salient questions concern dynamics of 
urbanity and rurality. For the first time in the 
world’s history, our population is now more urban 
than rural (Wimberley, Morris and Fulkerson, 
2007). What are the linguistic effects of increasing 
urbanization? Social and linguistic issues related to 
conditions of poverty remain poignant, even in 
wealthy countries: for example, the steepest ine-
quality is not the largest in poor countries, but 
rather within the UK and the United States (Pieterse, 
2005). In the US context in particular, many large 
urban centres are plagued by poverty, and minority 
youths face language discrimination, language 
prejudice and extreme gaps in the quality of their 
education (see Section 6.4, in this chapter). In other 
parts of the world, however, linguistic and educa-
tional inequality is particularly high in rural and/or 
developing areas and particularly for women 
(Kristof and WuDunn, 2009). For example, rates of 
female illiteracy are nearly double those of men in 
African and Latin American countries; minority 
women (Kristof and WuDunn, 2009) often face 
discrimination in educational and job opportuni-
ties, especially if they were raised in rural areas 
speaking an indigenous language (Tiano, 1987). As 
dynamics of rurality and urbanity change around 
the globe, the intersection of literacy, education and 
status attainment will persist as a central arena in 
research on social stratification.
This entry on social stratification has reviewed 
just some of the possibilities for sociolinguists and 
sociologists to work together, in mutually benefi-
cial ways, to explore the nature of stratification 
and its relationship to language variation and 
change. Brainstorming about potential interdis-
ciplinary avenues in the study of stratification 
inevitably raises more questions than answers. 

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
97
At the same time, given the inherently complex 
social and linguistic dynamics of contemporary 
global societies, sociolinguists must increasingly 
reach across disciplinary boundaries. By joining 
forces with sociologists and other like-minded 
scholars to cultivate further the territory of social 
stratification research, sociolinguists may exam-
ine in new and interdisciplinary ways how pat-
terns of language variation and change, literacy, 
language attitudes and more are intertwined in 
systems of inequality within and across societies.
REFERENCES
Acker, J. (1973) ‘Women and social stratification: a case 
of intellectual sexism’, American Journal of Sociology, 
78: 936–45.
Acker, J. (1988) ‘Class, Gender, and the Relations of distribu-
tion’, Signs, 13: 473–97.
Acker, J. (2006) Class Questions: Feminist Answers. New 
York: Rowman and Littlefield.
Anthias, F. (2001) ‘The material and the symbolic in theorizing 
social stratification’, British Journal of Sociology, 52: 
367–90.
Baugh, J. (2007) ‘Linguistic contributions to the advancement 
of racial justice within and beyond the African diaspora’, 
Language and Linguistics Compass, 1: 331–49.
Bettie, J. (2003) Women Without Class: Girls, Race, and 
Identity. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Blau, P. M. and Duncan, O. D. (1967) The American 
Occupational Structure. New York: Free Press. 
Bonfiglio, T. P. (2002) Race and the rise of standard American. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the 
Judgement of Taste. President and Fellows of Harvard 
University Press and Routledge and Kegan Paul, Ltd. 
Bourdieu, P. (1986) ‘The forms of capital’, in A. H. Halsey, 
H. Lauder, P. Brown and A. S. Wells (eds), Education: 
Culture, Economy, and Society. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. pp. 46–68.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Brutt-Griffler, J. (2002) World English: A Study of its 
Development. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Cameron, D. (1990) ‘Demythologizing sociolinguistics: why 
language does not reflect society’, in J. E. Joseph and 
T. J. Taylor (eds), Ideologies of Language. London: 
Routledge. pp. 79–93.
Cedergren, H. (1973) ‘The interplay of social and linguistic 
factors in Panama’. PhD dissertation, Cornell University.
Charity Hudley, A. H., and Mallinson, C. (Forthcoming) 
Valuable Voices: Understanding English Language 
Variation in American Schools. New York: Teachers College 
Press.
Chen, S. (1997) ‘Sociology of language’, in N. H. Hornberger 
and D. Corson (eds), Research Methods in Language and 
Education. New York: Springer. pp. 1–14.
Cheshire, J., Gillett, A., Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (1999) 
‘The role of adolescents in dialect levelling’. Final Report 
Submitted to the Economic and Social Research Council, 
June 1999.
Crompton, R. (2003) ‘Class and gender beyond the “cultural 
turn” ’, Sociologica, Problemas e Práticas, 42: 9–24.
Crystal, D. (2003) English as a Global Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Dodsworth, R. (2008) ‘Sociological consciousness as a com-
ponent of linguistic variation’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
12: 34–57.
Durham, R. E., Farkas, G., Hammer, C., et al. (2007) 
‘Kindergarten oral language skill: a key variable in the 
intergenerational transmission of socioeconomic status’, 
Research in Social Stratification and Mobility, 25: 
294–305.
Eckert, P. (1989) ‘The whole woman: sex and gender differ-
ences in variation’, Language Variation and Change, 1: 
245–67. 
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992) ‘Think practically 
and look locally: language and gender as community-based 
practice’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 21: 461–90. 
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1999) ‘New generaliza-
tions and explanations in language and gender research’, 
Language in Society, 28: 185–201. 
Farkas, G. (1996) Human Capital or Cultural Capital: Ethnicity 
and Poverty Groups in An Urban School District. New York: 
Aldine de Gruyter. 
Feagin, J. R. (2000) Racist America. New York: Routledge.
Ferguson, A. A. (2001) Bad Boys: Public Schools in the Making 
of Black Masculinity. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press.
Fernandez, R. M., Paulsen, R. and Hirano-Nakanishi, M. 
(1989) ‘Dropping out among Hispanic youth’, Social 
Science Research, 18(1): 21–52.
Fischer, C. S., Hour, M., Jankowski, M. S., et al. (1996) 
Inequality by Design. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press.
Fishman, J. A. (1965) ‘Who speaks what language to whom 
and when?’, La Linguistique, 2: 67–88.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1968) Readings in the Sociology of 
Language. The Hague, Paris: Mouton de Gruyter.
Fishman, J. A. (1991) ‘Putting the “socio” back into the socio-
linguistic enterprise’, International Journal of the Sociology 
of Language, 92: 127–38.
Fishman, J. A. (1997) ‘Bloomington, summer of 1964: the 
birth of American sociolinguistics’, in C. B. Paulston and 
G. R. Tucker (eds), The Early Days of Sociolinguistics: 
Memories and Reflections. Dallas, TX: Summer Institute of 
Linguistics. pp. 87–95.
Fordham, S. (1996) Blacked Out: Dilemmas of Race, Identity, 
and Success at Capital High. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Fraser, N. (2000) ‘Rethinking recognition’, New Left Review, 
3: 107–20.
Gal, S. (1979) Language Shift: Social Determinants of Linguistic 
Change in Bilingual Austria. New York: Academic Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
98
Goldstein, T. (2003) ‘Contemporary bilingual life at a Canadian 
high school: Choices, risks, tensions, and dilemmas’, 
Sociology of Education, 76: 247–64.
Grusky, D. B. (ed.) (2001) Social Stratification: Class, Race, 
and Gender in Sociological Perspective. 2nd edn. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press.
Haeri, N. (1997) The Sociolinguistic Market in Cairo: Gender, 
Class and Education. New York: Columbia University Press.
Hanks, W. F. (2005) ‘Pierre Bourdieu and the practices of 
language’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 34: 67–83.
Haugen, E. (1985) ‘The language of imperialism: unity or 
pluralism?’, in N. Wolfson and J. Manes (eds), Language of 
inequality. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 3–17.
Heller, M. (2003) ‘Globalization, the new economy, and the 
commodification of language and identity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 7: 473–92.
Hellinger, M. (2005) ‘Contrastive sociolinguistics’, in 
U. Ammon, N. Dittmar, K. J. Mattheier and P. Trudgill (eds), 
Sociolinguistics: An International Handbook of the Science 
of Language and Society. Vol. 2. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 
pp. 1117–26.
Hertzler, J. (1953) ‘Toward a sociology of language,’ Social 
Forces, 32: 109–19.
Hertzler, J. (1965) The Sociology of Language. New York: 
Random House.
Jourdan, C. (2008) ‘Language repertoires and the middle class 
in urban Solomon Islands’. in M. Meyerhoff and N. Nagy 
(eds), Social lives in language – Sociolinguistics and multi-
lingual speech communities: Celebrating the work of 
Gillian Sankoff. Philadelphia: John Benjamins pp. 43–67.
Kerswill, P. E. (1996) ‘Milton Keynes and dialect levelling in 
south-eastern British English’, in D. Graddol, J. Swann and 
D. Leith (eds), English: History, Diversity and Change. 
London: Routledge. pp. 292–300.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2000) ‘Creating a new town 
Koiné: children and language change in Milton Keynes’, 
Language in Society, 29: 65–115.
Kristof, N., and WuDunn, S. (2010) Half the Sky: Turning 
Oppression into Opportunity for Women Worldwide. New 
York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of New York City. 
Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the 
Black English Vernacular. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change: Social 
Factors. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2008) ‘Unendangered dialects, endangered people’, 
in K. A. King, N. Schilling-Estes, L. Fogle, J. J. Lou and B. 
Soukup (eds), Sustaining Linguistic Diversity: Endangered 
and Minority Languages and Language Varieties: Defining, 
Documenting, and Developing. Washington, DC: 
Georgetown University Press. pp. 219–38.
Li, W. (1994) Three generations, Two Languages, One Family: 
Language Choice and Language Shift in a Chinese 
Community in Britain. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Lippi-Green, R. (1997) English With an Accent: Language 
Ideology and Discrimination in the United States. New 
York: Routledge.
Lovaglia, M., Lucas, J., Houser, J., Thye, S. and Markovsky, B. 
(1998) ‘Status processes and mental ability test scores’, 
American Journal of Sociology, 104(1): 195–228.
MacLeod, J. (1995) Ain’t No Makin' It. Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press.
Malesevic, S. and Hall, J. A. (2005) ‘Citizenship, ethnicity, and 
nation-states’, in C. Calhoun, C. Rojek and B. Turner (eds), 
The Sage Handbook of Sociology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
pp. 561–78.
Mallinson, C. (2006) ‘The dynamic construction of race, class, 
and gender through linguistic practice among women in a 
Black Appalachian community’. PhD dissertation, North 
Carolina State University. 
Mallinson, C. (2009) ‘Sociolinguistics and sociology: current 
directions, future partnerships’, Language and Linguistics 
Compass 3: 1034–51.
Mallinson, C., and Childs, B. (2007) ‘Communities of practice 
in sociolinguistic description: Analyzing language and 
identity practices among Black women in Appalachia’, 
Gender and Language, 1: 173–206.
Mallinson, C., and Dodsworth, R. (2009) ‘Revisiting the need 
for new approaches to social class in variationist sociolin-
guistics’, Sociolinguistic Studies, 3(2): 253–78.
Massey, D. S. and Lundy, G. (2001) ‘Use of Black English 
and racial discrimination in urban housing markets: new 
methods and findings’, Urban Affairs Review, 36(4): 
452–69.
Meyerhoff, M. (2006) Introducing Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Routledge.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993) ‘Elite closure as a powerful language 
strategy: the African case’, International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language, 103: 149–63.
Myles, J. (1999) ‘From habitus to mouth: language and class 
in Bourdieu’s sociology of language’, Theory and Society, 
28: 879–901.
Nichols, P. (1983) ‘Linguistic options and choices for Black 
women in the rural South’, in B. Thorne, C. Kramerae and 
N. Henley (eds), Language, Gender, and Society. Boston: 
Heinle and Heinle. pp. 54–68.
Ogbu, J. U. (2003) Black American Students in an Affluent 
Suburb: A Study of Academic Disengagement. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Oliver, M. L., and Shapiro, T. (1995) Black Wealth/White 
Wealth: A New Perspective on Racial Inequality. New York: 
Routledge.
Pieterse, J. N. (2005) ‘Global inequality: bringing politics back 
in’, in C. Calhoun, C. Rojek and B. Turner (eds), The 
Sage Handbook of Sociology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
pp. 423–41.
Pujolar, J. (2000) Gender, Heteroglossia and Power: A Socio-
linguistic Study of Youth Culture. London: Mouton de 
Gruyter.
Rickford, J. R. (1985) ‘Standard and non-standard language 
attitudes in a creole continuum’, in N. Wolfson and 
J. Manes (eds), Language of Inequality. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. pp. 145–60.
Rickford, J. R. (1986) ‘The need for new approaches to social 
class analysis in sociolinguistics’, Journal of Communication, 
6: 215–21.

SOCIAL STRATIFICATION
99
Romaine, S. (1984) ‘The status of sociological models and 
categories in explaining linguistic variation’, Linguistische 
Berichte, 90: 25–38.
Roscigno, V. J. (1998) ‘Race and the reproduction of educa-
tional disadvantage’, Social Forces, 76: 1033–60.
Royster, D. A. (2003) Race and the Invisible Hand: How White 
Networks Exclude Black Men From Blue-Collar Jobs. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Savage, M. (2005) ‘Class and stratification: current problems 
and revival prospects’, in C. Calhoun, C. Rojek and 
B. Turner (eds), The Sage Handbook of Sociology. Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage. pp. 236–53.
Schmidt, A. (1985) Young People’s Dyirbal: An Example of 
Language Death From Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Shuy, R. W. (2003) ‘A brief history of American sociolinguistics 
1949–1989’, in C. Paulston and G. R. Tucker (eds), 
Sociolinguistics: The Essential Readings. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 4–16.
Smith, J., Durham, M. and Fortune, L. (2007) ‘ “Mam, my 
trousers is fa’in doon!”: community, caregiver and child in 
the acquisition of variation in a Scottish dialect’, Language 
Variation and Change, 19: 63–99.
Smitherman, G. (2000) Talkin That Talk: Language, Culture 
and Education in African America. New York: Routledge.
Tiano, S. (1987) ‘Gender, work, and world capitalism: Third 
World women’s role in world development’, in B. B. Hess 
and M. M. Ferree (eds), Analyzing Gender: A Handbook 
of Social Science Research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
pp. 216–43.
Tollefson, J. W. (1991) Planning Language, Planning Inequality: 
Language Policy in the Community. London: Longman.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The social differentiation of English in 
Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
van Hofwegen, J. and Wolfram, W. (2008) ‘Coming of age in 
African American English: a longitudinal study’, paper 
presented at the NWAV 37 Conference, Houston, TX.
Warren, J. R. (1996) ‘Educational inequality among white and 
Mexican-origin adolescents in the American Southwest: 
1990’, Sociology of Education, 69(2): 142–58.
Warren, J. R., Sheridan, J. T. and Hauser, R. M. (1998) 
‘Choosing a measure of occupational standing’, Sociological 
Methods and Research, 27: 3–76.
Wharton, A. (2004) ‘Gender inequality’, in G. Ritzer (ed.), 
The Handbook of Social Problems: A Comparative 
International Perspective. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
pp. 156–71.
Williams, A. and Kerswill, P. (1999) ‘Dialect levelling: change 
and continuity in Milton Keynes, Reading and Hull’, in 
P. Foulkes and G. Docherty (eds), Urban Voices: Accent 
Studies in the British Isles. London: Edward Arnold. 
pp. 141–62.
Williams, G. (1992) Sociolinguistics: A Sociological Critique. 
London: Routledge.
Willis, P. (1977) Learning to Labour: How Working-Class Kids 
Get Working-Class Jobs. Farnborough: Saxon House.
Wimberley, R., Morris, L. and Fulkerson, G. (2007) ‘World 
population takes a turn’, The News and Observer (Raleigh, 
NC, USA) (23 May): 15A.
Wolfram, W. (1969) A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit 
Negro Speech. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Wright, S. (2004) Language Policy And Language Planning: From 
Nationalism to Globalisation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

Social Constructionism
A n t h e a  I r w i n
7
7.1 INTRODUCTION
Consider sociolinguistics. Where did it come 
from? Why is it called what it’s called? How come 
courses in sociolinguistics appear on many different 
types of degree programme: for example, Ling-
uistics, (English) Language, Sociology, Cultural 
Studies and so on? An academic did not suddenly 
come upon a subject and know by observing 
something about its ‘nature’ that it was sociolin-
guistics. It is not an entity with discrete bounda-
ries, just as the subjects I’ve listed above are not 
entities with discrete boundaries. Universities 
over the years have decided on the distinctions 
between the disciplines via discussion and debate, 
and what constitutes sociolinguistics has gone 
through a similar process.
The key word here is process. Social construc-
tionism (SC) does not take as its starting point 
entities or states such as sociolinguistics, or 
motherhood, or government, or manners; rather, it 
argues that these have been constructed in particu-
lar ways by the societies in which they appear. 
SC looks beyond, and indeed challenges, taken-
for-granted notions such as ‘it is natural for every 
woman to have a maternal instinct’; or ‘govern-
ments represent the societies that elect them’; or 
‘it is rude to speak with your mouth full’ and says 
‘Who says?’ SC wants to look back and above and 
beyond to the processes that have caused these 
things to become taken-for-granted ‘knowledge’: 
Who has said what, when, to whom, and how, to 
get us to where we are on any one topic? 
This is not to say, it should be pointed out, that 
SC is all about critiquing the taken-for-granted: 
often the processes that are observed will involve 
some element of power and therefore potentially 
inequality, and in such cases there is often rightful 
critique; but in other cases it is simply a case of 
identifying and observing a social process. These 
two different approaches are sometimes known as 
macro and micro, weak and strong, or dark and 
light SC (although each of these sets of labels 
could be accused of being unnecessarily evalua-
tive) (Burr, 1995). The macro, weak, or dark form 
asserts that we engage in construction that is 
informed by, or at least linked to, wider economic 
and social processes; the micro, or strong, or light 
form allows the individuals involved a good deal 
more ‘agency’, a concept to which I will return 
later, that broadly refers to acting independently 
and making one’s own choices. 
While we should not lump all SC together as 
negative social critique, neither should we think of 
the macro and micro versions as two distinct 
schools of thought. It is probably more useful to 
consider it like a continuum as regards the extent 
to which what is constructed has been regularized 
and in turn institutionalized, and there is no reason 
why analysis cannot take account of ‘macro’ 
elements in analysing ‘micro’ texts in detail.
The interactional nature of what I have been 
discussing above has probably already suggested 
that language would be a key element in SC. 
Wilson and Stapleton (2007: 393) point out that 
the obvious synergies between the two have not 
always been acted upon when they claim that 
‘modern social theory highlights the role of lan-
guage in social change/reproduction, yet rarely 
draws on actual linguistic resources or theory. 
Equally, sociolinguistics situates linguistic prac-
tice within the social domain, but only weakly 
makes links to social theory’. They recognize the 
potential for sociolinguistics to both inform and 
be informed by social theory, and the latter part of 
this chapter will show that there is a growing body 
of work that we could refer to as social construc-
tionist sociolinguistics. 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
101
I will, for the remainder of the chapter, attempt 
to position sociolinguistics in relation to SC. I will 
start by situating SC itself within social theory 
more broadly by giving an overview of key devel-
opments and shifts, particularly over the last three 
decades or so, but with some material from con-
siderably earlier than that when contextually 
useful. I will go on to discuss in some detail the 
work of Berger and Luckmann, to whom SC is 
generally traced back. Next, I will discuss other 
social theorists upon whom work in the social 
constructionist area of contemporary sociolinguis-
tics has drawn. Of these, Goffman is the closest to 
the tradition of Berger and Luckmann. Foucault, 
too, would be explicitly labelled a social construc-
tionist. Others would not be so explicitly labelled, 
but are worthy of inclusion as their shift away from 
the structural to engage more fully with agency 
makes them important precursors or adjuncts to 
SC per se: for example, Bakhtin, Bourdieu and 
Said. Finally, I will review what I consider to be 
key social constructionist sociolinguistic work, 
highlighting the types of data and, by extension, 
the areas of society, which it has sought to 
explore. 
7.2 HISTORICAL CONTEXT
To begin to situate SC, it is useful to consider the 
shift in thinking that is referred to as postmodern-
ism and, in turn, to situate that we need to go 
much further back, starting with the Enlightenment, 
with the caveat that this is by necessity a bit of a 
‘potted history’. The Enlightenment is so called 
because it marks a shift from medieval ways of 
thinking which saw things as divinely ordained, 
and from a feudal power structure that consisted 
of a very thin pyramid with the divinely ordained 
king at the top and a great many serfs, the vast 
majority of the population, at the bottom, with 
very few others in between. With the Enlightenment 
came a focus on rationality. Big advances were 
made in the scientific world, and it began to be 
suggested that there might be universal ways of 
categorizing everything and suggesting how they 
might develop, for example Darwin’s theory of 
evolution. Things were now viewed not as indi-
vidual entities but as related to other entities. 
Marx’s theories (e.g. Marx and Engels, 1970, 
1992) suggested a process of development for the 
socio-political sphere too. The world could be 
seen as, at least potentially, progressing, moving 
forward towards something greater. The develop-
ment of chaos theory and the fall of Communism 
in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe suggested, 
for some, the point at which any universality 
of thought no longer applied (this has been 
challenged by many saying that the fall of 
Stalinism is not the same thing as the unworkability
of socialism). 
In any case, postmodernism developed as a 
way of viewing the world that rejected any form 
of ‘grand narrative’, that is, anything that pur-
ported to have all the answers, to be a ‘theory of 
everything’ (in the way that Darwinism and 
Marxism appeared to provide a template for the 
potential development of the whole natural and 
socio-political worlds, respectively). The world 
began to be viewed as fragmented, and thus it 
became as important to look at the little things as 
well as the big things, as important to look at the 
local as well as the global. The evaluative distinc-
tion between high culture and popular culture 
became blurred, and with that came a focus on the 
‘ordinary’ or ‘everyday’. And the idea that ‘every-
thing is relative’ (albeit a rather simplistic way of 
putting it) challenged the very notion of ‘truth’. 
And with no universal structure, the agency of the 
individual is paramount.
In the academic sphere, the development of 
postmodernism was accompanied by, or perhaps 
preceded by, what is sometimes referred to as ‘the 
linguistic turn’: i.e., a recognition that our experi-
ence of the world is very much bound up with the 
language that we hear, read and use. Early engage-
ment with this came from the structuralists, and in 
particular from Ferdinand de Saussure (1983). He 
claimed that the meaning of particular linguistic 
terms did not come from some inherent nature, but 
instead from their relationship to other terms, a 
relationship of difference: things ‘mean’ as much 
because of what they are not as what they are. As 
an illustration, when we are acquiring language as 
children, our understanding of different animals 
develops the more animals we are aware of: we 
get to know that a dog is not a cat, but also that it 
is not a cow nor a fish nor a bird either. And what 
it means to be a man (at least in dominant Western 
culture) is as much bound up with not being a 
woman, not being feminine, as it is with any 
essential element of masculinity; one cannot be 
understood without the other. The relational aspect 
of de Saussure’s work challenged earlier ideas of 
the essentialism of meaning. Debates were also 
had over which direction this understanding moves 
in, about the extent to which the language we 
acquire has implications for the way we see, expe-
rience and categorize the world. Do we experience 
things and then, having made sense of them per-
ceptively, acquire ways to talk about them (the 
kind of view psychologists like Piaget (1954) 
would have taken)? Or is it impossible for us to 
even begin to make sense of the world until we 
acquire a language, a lens to view it through, as in 
the view taken by Sapir (1921) and Whorf (1956)? 
This again is a matter of degree. The debates 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
102
about language and culture moved the discussions 
on further, but structure was still key, regardless of 
whether we consider that societal structure led to 
the development of language or vice versa. This 
focus on structure was challenged by poststructur-
alists who wanted to examine not the structures 
per se, but where the structures had come from, 
what processes had occurred to lead to things 
being structured as they are. 
7.3 KEY THINKERS 
Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann
Social constructionism can be traced back to 
Berger and Luckmann. It is a phenomenological 
approach that contrasts with traditional positivist 
approaches, and which sought to analyse individu-
als in society in a scientific manner, thus position-
ing them as passive objects, ‘vessels’ from which 
‘static’ information could be collected or gleaned. 
The phenomenological approach, on the other 
hand, concerns itself with human consciousness 
and ‘common sense’ and how the world is under-
stood and structured from individuals’ and groups’ 
points of view as subjects. 
More specifically, Berger and Luckmann work 
within the area of the ‘sociology of knowledge’. 
They suggest that it was necessary to look not just 
comparatively at differences between what is 
taken as ‘knowledge’ in different societies, but 
also at how things come to be taken as knowledge; 
in their words, ‘not only … the empirical variety 
of knowledge in human societies, but also … the 
processes by which any body of knowledge comes 
to be socially established as ‘reality’ (1966: 15). 
They draw on historicist work, which claims situ-
ations can only be understood on their own terms 
(1966: 19). Marxist and Nietzschean work, too, 
provide useful context for Berger and Luckmann’s 
development of the sociology of knowledge. 
Marxist thinking sees human consciousness as 
brought about by activity, and more specifically 
labour, and the social relationships that arise in 
and from this activity. It tends to focus on ideol-
ogy as a weapon of the powerful and as encourag-
ing a ‘false consciousness’ among workers (1966: 
18). Nietzchean thinking, too, talks of the ‘art of 
mistrust’ (1966: 19). It is fair to say that their 
contribution is to shift the focus of the social 
construction of reality from the highbrow to the 
everyday and from power struggle between groups 
to the interpersonal. 
In shifting to the everyday context, Berger and 
Luckmann refer to Mannheim, who suggested that 
ideology is just as much a factor of an individual’s 
thought as of their opponent’s or oppressor’s 
thought (1966: 21), and that reality could only be 
got at by analysing any situation from as many 
positions as possible (1966: 22). Mannheim, how-
ever, focused on the intelligentsia, because he 
believed this group could most easily transcend 
the ideological nature of their thought, and the 
sociology of knowledge has thus tended to focus 
on intellectual or theoretical thought; Berger and 
Luckmann stress instead that ‘common-sense 
“knowledge” rather than “ideas” must be the 
central focus for the sociology of knowledge. It 
is precisely this “knowledge” that constitutes the 
fabric of meanings without which no society 
could exist’ (1966: 27). 
Drawing on Durkheim and Weber, Berger and 
Luckmann place, at the centre of the sociology of 
knowledge, the subjective/objective duality of 
society, and, more precisely, the ways in which 
‘subjective meanings become objective facticities’ 
(1966: 30). They observe that the world originates 
in individuals’ thoughts and actions, but is then, 
on a separate level, objectified and ‘maintained as 
real by these [thoughts and actions]’ (1966: 33). 
Life is arranged in patterns and categories that 
exist before the individual comes along but are 
also affected or reproduced by that individual, and 
it is language that gives us access to the objectifi-
cations arising from these patterns and categories 
(1966: 35). 
They differentiate between the world of dreams 
and the world of reality in the sense that the latter 
is intersubjective and that the ‘here’ and the ‘now’ 
that we experience in the world of reality have to 
be continuously negotiated through interaction 
(1966: 37). Furthermore, they see the world of 
dreams, along with other contexts such as theo-
retical thought, and play, as ‘enclaves’ which are 
‘enveloped’ by the broader, everyday reality that is 
recognized as the norm, and that shifts into one or 
more of these other contexts are treated by us as 
‘excursions’ (1966: 39). We can here hear distinct 
echoes of Goffman’s notion of ‘framing’. 
Berger and Luckmann spend some time thinking 
about the importance of ‘the other’ for individuals’ 
knowledge of themselves, in that this is only fully 
available via ‘the other’s’ attitude towards the self 
(1966: 44). ‘Others’, just like the world of reality 
in general, are categorized, or ‘typified’, by lan-
guage and ‘dealt with’ in those terms, and this is 
reciprocal in how the ‘others’ ‘deal with’ the self 
(1966: 45). There is an element of ‘I know that 
you know that I know …’, and so on, in our shared 
use of language and the ‘social stock of knowl-
edge’ that it objectifies for us (1966: 60); at the 
same time, however, this social stock of knowl-
edge is distributed in various ways, and we know 
this, but not fully, which plays a big part in how 
we negotiate meanings and relationships in every-
day life (1966: 61). This negotiation of meanings 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
103
happens at various levels: ‘habitualisation’, when 
repeated actions take on a pattern and then mean-
ing; ‘institutionalisation’, when different actors 
recognize and reproduce the typifications of these 
habitualized actions; and ‘legitimation’, where 
social reality is invested with meaning and thus 
becomes plausible (1966: 94).
Erving Goffman
Of all the theorists discussed here, Goffman is the 
one who is most roundly positioned in the social 
constructionist camp. Goffman’s (1959) focus is 
very much on the individual in interaction with 
other individuals, and on agency, and as such he 
could be described as the most ‘micro’ of the 
theorists we have discussed so far. Goffman talks 
about the ‘presentation of self’, but for him it 
encompasses much more than incidental perform-
ances of identity. He describes all social interac-
tion in terms of a dramatic performance and as 
such highlights that identity (or ‘the self’ as he 
terms it) is an ongoing interactive construction 
rather than something ‘given’. He says, ‘a cor-
rectly staged and performed scene leads the audi-
ence to impute a self to a performed character, but 
this imputation – this self – is a product of a scene 
that comes off, and is not a cause of it’ (1959: 
244–5). He thus clearly provides a social develop-
ment of the notion of a dialectic between self 
and other.
The correct staging and performance of which 
he speaks have several components. For every 
interaction there is a ‘front’ (scenery and props) 
and each participant utilizes a ‘personal front’ 
consisting of ‘appearances’ (social statuses) and 
‘manner’ (interactional role) (1959: 35). He dis-
tinguishes ‘front region’ from ‘back region’ or 
‘backstage’, and says that ‘suppressed facts’ will 
make an appearance backstage. He further 
observes that ‘impression management’ often 
occurs in teams which do not exist in relation to a 
structure, but rather in relation to the impression 
they construct. So, although membership of some 
‘teams’, for example in workplaces, is determined 
by the ‘structure’ of the company, this does not 
determine the team identity, which rather comes 
from interpersonal dynamics which construct and 
uphold the ‘impression’. 
Goffman does not see society as random and 
structureless; he accepts that structures come into 
existence, but only because of the repetitive rein-
forcing behaviour of individuals. For Goffman, as 
a result of numerous specific interactions played 
out in it, any particular front may in time take on 
a meaning of its own and become ‘a ‘collective 
representation’ and ‘a fact in its own right’ 
(Goffman 1959: 34). 
A particularly relevant aspect of Goffman’s 
work for sociolinguistics is his notion of ‘footing’ 
(Goffman 1981), which illustrates well the social 
construction of identity by separating out indi-
viduals from the role(s) they play in conversa-
tional interaction. The notion of footing 
deconstructs the relationship between speaker and 
utterance and claims that there is not a one-to-one 
relationship between the two. There are three 
voices involved in any utterance: first, there is the 
animator, the person that utters the words; sec-
ondly, there is the author, the person that origi-
nated the beliefs; and thirdly, there is the principal, 
the person whose viewpoint is currently being 
expressed. The only role that is entailed by speak-
ing an utterance is that of animator. Regarding the 
other two roles, put simply, speakers takes on the 
role of author if they use their own words; and 
they take on the role of principal if they speak 
sincerely. Conversely, the role of author may be 
attributed to someone else by quoting another 
speaker; and the role of principal may be revoked 
by speaking ironically, or in other words ‘saying 
what you don’t mean’. In this case, the role of 
principal is not attributed to anyone else: it is 
simply avoided altogether.
The roles of author and principal are complex, 
however. Regarding the author, the distinction 
between quoting and not quoting another speaker 
is not a simple one. Speakers may consciously 
invoke another speaker when they speak, either 
explicitly, by directly quoting from them, or 
implicitly, by appropriating a voice. Invoking 
another speaker may also happen unconsciously: 
if we accept that identity and knowledge are con-
structed in interaction, we would expect speakers 
to allude to previous exchanges in present ones, 
sometimes unconsciously. Indeed, given the 
degree of intertextuality in language use (cf. 
Bakhtin, 1986), it is very rare that any utterance 
will be entirely new and original. The invoked 
exchanges and other speakers will not necessarily 
be from the current speaker’s local context, but 
may also be from wider public life or the media. 
Regarding the role of principal, again the distinc-
tion between sincerity and insincerity or irony is 
not a simple one. If we accept that certain dis-
courses become dominant in society and are con-
sequently taken as ‘given’ or ‘the norm’, a speaker 
drawing on these may unconsciously act as the 
principal of particular positions. 
Michel Foucault
Foucault focuses on the relationship between 
interactions between individuals and wider rela-
tions of power, placing a greater degree of focus 
on agency than structure. Foucault suggests that 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
104
we view power as ascending. There are power 
relations in every personal interaction we take part 
in but ‘these (micro-level) mechanisms of power 
have been “invested, colonised, utilised, invo-
luted, transformed, displaced, extended” (1980: 
99) by more general forms, and these are what we 
tend to see as forms of social power’. 
Foucault sees ‘objects’ as ‘discursively produced’ 
rather than having an intrinsic meaning. For any 
one topic, there are multiple discourses (ways of 
speaking about something). However, this does 
not mean that we can make the world into any-
thing we want simply by speaking, writing or 
thinking in a certain way. Foucault shows us that 
there are multiple discourses but some are more 
highly valued or ‘dominant’ than others and these 
tend to form an accepted ‘system’. All of the dis-
courses may, however, vie for these dominant 
positions. For example, in the UK, there are com-
peting discourses about asylum. One discourse 
would say things like ‘they’re coming over here 
and taking our homes and our jobs and there’s 
nothing left for us’, while another would say 
things like ‘of course we should welcome people 
who are fleeing persecution – our foreign policy 
has created some of their situations’. These vie for 
dominance on the pages of the UK press and, in 
turn, in everyday discussion. There is a certain 
amount of input from political figures, and argu-
ably their discourse is more likely to be consid-
ered to be dominant, but actually the vast majority 
of this discursive reproduction happens at the 
level of individual interactions. While more tradi-
tional Marxist thinking would claim that there is 
only one dominant ideology and it is that which 
positions us, Foucault believes that we, as inter-
acting individuals, uphold the system and so it 
follows that we can subvert it. He claims it is pos-
sible for the dominant discourses to be subverted 
and the marginalized ones voiced.
Foucault coins the term ‘power/knowledge’ 
(1980) to illustrate how close he believes the rela-
tionship between the two concepts to be. For 
Foucault, knowledge gives you power; but on the 
other hand, those who have power are more likely 
to have their discourse accepted as knowledge. It 
is clear that, like Bourdieu, Foucault does not see 
the material and the ideological as completely 
discrete aspects of life. It is also clear that his 
ideas begin to question the very notion of ‘truth’. 
So, his notion of knowledge does not correlate 
with ideology: what is central are the procedures 
by which something comes to be considered 
knowledge and, by extension, ‘truth’. He is not 
claiming that we can never ‘get at’ the material 
reality of an event; he is simply pointing out 
that there may be considerable struggle over 
what constitutes the ‘taken-for-granted’ truth of 
that event. 
Dominant discourses and systems of power by 
definition create categories of ‘deviants’, which 
are seen as being in opposition to ‘the norm’. (See 
Foucault (1977) for Foucault’s discussion of how 
sexual deviance and criminality have been con-
structed in the Western world. The ‘norms’ are 
maintained by ‘surveillance’; Foucault uses the 
panopticon, designed by Jeremy Bentham, as a 
metaphor for this (Foucault, 1977)). The panopti-
con is a concrete mode of surveillance whereby 
the architecture of a prison allows the prison 
guard to see all of the prisons but none of the 
prisoners can see the guard. Foucault argues that 
this works on an abstract level too; due to these 
material manifestations of surveillance, the notion 
enters the psyche of individuals in a society to the 
extent that the material forms are no longer 
required: individuals begin to self-monitor from 
the point of view of the powerful.
Pierre Bourdieu 
Bourdieu too focuses on the relationship between 
interactions between individuals and wider rela-
tions of power; he places a greater degree of 
focus on structure than does Foucault, however. 
We could therefore label him a ‘structural con-
structionist’, displaying characteristics of SC, but 
inhabiting a position on the continuum closer to 
structure than agency, and differing from Goffman 
and Foucault in this regard. Bourdieu moves 
beyond the traditional Marxist counterposing 
of the material and the ideological, by revisiting 
the Marxist notion of ‘capital’ in ways that 
suggest significant overlap between the two, and 
which move away from a deterministic view of 
identity towards a constructionist one, in which 
individuals use these various ‘forms of capital’ 
as resources with which to construct their 
identities, albeit within limits imposed by wider 
structures. 
Traditional Marxism focuses on economic cap-
ital, something that has been produced, been 
assigned a value, and can be exchanged in pursuit 
of profit. Bourdieu (1986) suggests, however, that 
it is not only material entities that should be 
defined as ‘capital’; the label for him can and 
should also be applied to certain ‘symbolic’ 
aspects of life. ‘Social capital’ applies to the net-
works and relationships that might be of value to 
a person as regards their ‘social standing’; ‘cul-
tural capital’ applies to accumulating valuable 
forms of knowledge (which might differ depend-
ing on the type of schooling one has for example); 
‘physical capital’ applies to one’s presence, the 
way one moves, the physical tasks one can carry 
out, the way one ‘handles oneself’; ‘linguistic 
capital’ applies to the way one speaks. 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
105
What is notable about Bourdieu’s ‘forms of 
capital’ is that, although there are overarching 
norms, dictated by the power-holders, regarding 
the value attributed to each of these forms of 
capital, and different subtypes within them, these 
values may differ at a more local level, particu-
larly as regards social class. So, for example, 
speaking a marked form of the local dialect 
(a specific type of linguistic capital (cf. Bourdieu 
and Thompson 1991)) and being strong and tough 
(a specific type of physical capital) may be highly 
valued within the working class (cf. Labov’s 
(1972) work on ‘lames’ being excluded from peer 
groups because they did not display ‘core’ linguis-
tic behaviour). This type of capital, while locally 
valuable however, may preclude social mobility: it 
may be relatively more difficult, or at least less 
comfortable, for a core member of a working-
class community to enter a professional career, 
with its focus on speaking standard English and 
acting in a ‘refined’ manner, regardless of whether 
that person has gained the relevant qualifications 
or ‘cultural capital’. This questions further the 
idea that society is a ‘meritocracy’. 
Bourdieu’s theory of capital offers us a picture 
of free-thinking agents who can consciously 
attempt to acquire particular forms of capital to 
exchange for particular kinds of experience, status 
or indeed other forms of capital. For Bourdieu, 
this is very much agency within limits however: 
societal structure is very real, and ultimately soci-
ety will tend to reproduce itself in a similar form. 
His concept of ‘habitus’ is useful here (Bourdieu, 
1984). It is via the habitus that objective material 
conditions become translated into subjective human 
dispositions; individuals carry out certain prac-
tices relative to structural aspects of their lives, 
such as family, schooling and social class, and to 
their experiences within certain ‘fields’ of activity, 
and as such come to embody and play these out. 
Mikhail Bakhtin
Bakhtin was primarily a literary theorist, but some 
of his key ideas can be applied equally well to 
spoken language, and indeed in his later work he 
began to engage with this. Probably his most 
famous work is his analysis of the work of the 
novelist Dostoyevsky (Bakhtin, 1984a). In it, he 
introduced three key concepts: the unfinalizability 
of the self, the inseparability of the self and the 
other, and polyphony, i.e. many voices. He related 
the concept of polyphony to truth: whereas a tra-
ditional view might suggest that two separate 
accounts that differ entails that one of them is 
untrue, Bakhtin suggested that it was only in 
polyphony, and the engagement and dialogue that 
it presupposed, that truth could be found. 
Bakhtin’s later work (Bakhtin, 1986) engaged 
more with everyday spoken language, and the key 
concepts of this work were genre and intertex-
tuality. Whereas it is usual to think of genre as an 
attribute of written language, Bakhtin said that 
spoken language also displayed this. He differen-
tiated between primary genres, which structured 
what was acceptable in everyday language, and 
secondary genres, which dealt with specialist dis-
course such as legal and scientific. With intertex-
tuality, he claimed that no utterance is unique, that 
the making of an utterance involves ‘appropriat[ing] 
the words of others and populat[ing] them with 
one’s own intention’. This can be seen to develop 
further his notion of the relationship between the 
self and the other. 
Bakhtin took a particular interest in ritual and 
the carnivalesque (Bakhtin, 1984b), particularly in 
their liminal nature; that is, that they are ambigu-
ous spaces ‘between worlds’ in which societal 
norms do not apply. An example of liminality is 
the ritual of ‘kissing under the mistletoe’ found in 
certain Western cultures around the Christmas 
period. Mistletoe is usually placed on a threshold 
(e.g. the entrance to a home), and the ritualistic 
nature of the kisses means that they are not viewed 
as moral transgressions. Carnival similarly allows 
individuals to construct alternative identities in a 
non-judgmental space. Rites of passage are some-
times considered liminal; in fact it can be useful to 
view the whole period of adolescence as a liminal 
time and space in which adolescents can experi-
ment with the threshold between childhood and 
adulthood. Liminality has interesting applications 
in sociolinguistics in that language allows us to 
shift between different contexts and rules with 
simple changes to discourse, tone and so on. 
Edward Said
On the topic of ‘othering’ and ‘deviance’, it is 
important to consider the work of Edward Said 
(1978) on ‘Orientalism’. The theorists we have 
considered thus far have generally discussed the 
ways in which they see identities and relationships 
being constructed within specific societies, albeit 
with power differentials, for example social class. 
Said takes a more global approach and engages 
with power relationships between ‘West’ and 
‘East’, and by extension between individuals and 
groups of different ethnicities. He analyses the 
notion of ‘the Orient’ as being an object of 
Western construction which arises from a set of 
categories, images and classifications held by 
Westerners.
Through reinforcement, these representations 
come to be viewed as reality to the point that ‘the 
Orient’ as an entity is seen to exist. It does not, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
106
however, have a status equal to that of its creator. 
Because the West has constructed this entity, it 
sees itself as active and ‘the Orient’ as passive. 
The former automatically feels it ‘knows’ and can 
master the latter, and therefore a relation of power 
(which appears natural) comes into play. Thus, 
political motives are forgotten as this definition of 
the entity comes to be seen as ‘truth’.
Furthermore, it is through this creation of an 
‘other’ that the West constructs an identity for 
itself. ‘The West’ and ‘the Orient’ do not mean 
anything intrinsically, but are defined through the 
differences between them.
7.3  SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONIST 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
This section will explore a range of sociolinguistic 
work that draws on and develops the SC tradition, 
in some cases as a general approach and in other 
cases by applying the work of a particular social 
theorist to spoken interaction. Not surprisingly, 
identity is a common theme throughout this work, 
shifting the sociolinguistic focus from language 
system to speaker(s), and from structure to per-
formance and later construction. In what follows, 
I sketch work on themes including constructions 
of gender; constructions of ethnicity, national 
identity and minority languages; constructions of 
childhood and adolescent identity (and often gen-
dered and ethnicicized aspects of these); mediated 
constructions of political relations; and construc-
tions and reproduction within the legal system. It 
should be noted that I can discuss only a very 
small fraction of the research in sociolinguistics 
that draws, in one way or another, on SC.
Gender
Milroy (1992: 215) writes of meaning becoming 
‘gendered’: certain forms become symbolically 
associated with masculine or feminine norms 
through regular use by, and in turn association 
with, particular groups. Lavandera (1982, cited in 
Milroy, 1992: 175) claims that patterns of sounds 
(because they are inherently meaningless) acquire 
‘social significance’, whereas patterns in discourse 
acquire ‘social meaning’. Holmes claims that 
these two can interact, however: forms with social 
meaning may acquire social significance because 
a particular group favours them; forms with social 
significance may have social meaning attributed 
to them by being seen to carry a particular value 
of the community that habitually uses them. Thus, 
in certain contexts, ‘the use of phonetic variation 
and the construction of identities are inseparable’ 
(Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 1995: 503, cited in 
Holmes).
Holmes (1997) further challenges traditional 
notions of particular linguistic features being 
‘women’s’ or ‘men’s’ features. She highlights the 
problem that arises from simply counting pragmatic 
particles and concluding questions of identity from 
the results: such particles are interactive and so will 
serve particular (not necessarily identical) social 
functions for their speakers. She identifies four dif-
ferent functions of tag questions: facilitative, soften-
ing, epistemic modal (expressing uncertainty or 
tentativeness) and challenging. Similarly, ‘I think’ 
and ‘you know’ can function either as hedges or as 
boosters (Holmes, 1985, 1986). 
Coates (1999) uses Goffman’s notions of front 
and backstage to explore UK women ‘behaving 
badly’, as she terms it: in the contexts in which 
they are most relaxed, they report behaviour and 
fantasies that do not fit with the norms of feminin-
ity. Coates claims that, while there is an opportu-
nity for subversion here, because it is ‘backstage’, 
a less dominant arena, it must be recognized that 
it also upholds the dominant order. 
Kiesling (1998) analyses US college fraternity 
men’s contextual variation in the use of the varia-
ble pronunciation of the English suffix spelled 
‘-ing’. Most of the men use less of the vernacular 
(‘dropped–g’) form in fraternity meetings but 
some use more. He claims that all the men are 
constructing powerful identities (they are encour-
aged to do so by the norm of hegemonic masculin-
ity), but that the working-class men’s identities 
are based on physical rather than structural power, 
the latter of which they have less access to than 
middle-class men. He claims that they show more 
than just a resistant solidarity: their solidarity is 
bound up with hegemonic masculinity to create 
what Kiesling calls ‘camaraderie’. The men iden-
tify themselves with certain prototypes (‘align-
ment roles’) within the confines of hegemonic 
masculinity, and thus their language use is bound 
up with physical power and serves to construct 
identity rather than simply produce context-
specific interactional patterns (e.g. the resistance 
of one group to another). Through this evidence of 
alignment to prototypical roles, Kiesling claims 
that social interactive sense-making can be viewed 
in a similar way to other cognitive capacities.
Kiesling (2005) exemplifies the ways in which 
a group of (heterosexual) men in the United States 
discursively negotiate closeness, which is con-
structed by the dominant discourses of their culture 
as being in opposition to heterosexuality. They do 
this via indirectness, which again reminds us of the 
importance of considering form as well as function 
when considering construction of discourses. 
Cameron (1997) highlights the importance of 
considering both form and content of conversation 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
107
when identifying multiple discourses or discursive 
struggle. In her data, young men use an apparently 
cooperative style of talk but the content consists 
of ‘the same old gendered script’ (1997: 64). 
Ethnicity
Menard-Warwick’s (2005) work on what she calls 
‘trangression narratives’ reminds us that the ‘other’ 
involved in our negotiation of identity may not in 
fact be a physically different person; dialogical 
positioning can also be employed where we need 
to negotiate between contradictory positions, in 
this case in terms of how the speaker orients 
towards a relative who she values highly while 
distancing herself from this violation of traditional 
family values. 
Schilling-Estes (2004), in a discussion of a 
sociolinguistic interview from a tri-ethnic rural 
community in the USA, shows how speakers of 
different ethnicities tend to highlight ethnic com-
ponents of their speech when talking about (local) 
race relations, but do not do this when they are 
talking about family and friends, or about race 
relations on a national level. This highlights the 
fact that the relationship between the ‘self’ and the 
‘other’ is dynamic and continuously negotiated. 
All of this is done within ethnolinguistic patterns, 
however, which reminds us of the constant inter-
play between structure and agency. By applying 
Bakhtin’s notion of ‘dialogicality’, Schilling-
Estes also provides us with an insightful way to 
look at the role that researchers play in the con-
struction of those they research. 
Plas (2007) provides a fascinating demonstra-
tion of how social constructionist analysis can 
allow us to reassess historical accounts. He focuses 
on a north Dalmatian ethnographic account from 
the end of the nineteenth century in the context of 
early Croatian institutional-ethnographic practice 
and demonstrates that unpicking the dialogical 
aspects of this account, and ethnographic accounts 
in general, is essential in constructing reliable 
histories. The account shows respondents a ques-
tionnaire orienting to their own rather than the 
questionnaire’s categories and themes, and the 
dialogic activity between author and editor as 
result of this shows a renegotiation of the identi-
ties discussed. This can be read as ideologically 
problematic given the cultural and national 
categories and themes that are dealt with. 
Jaworski et al.’s (2003) analysis of British holi-
day programmes’ construction of the local con-
tains interesting echoes of Said’s notion of 
‘Orientalism’. Although the presenters–tourists 
construct their relationship with local people as 
one of ‘closeness’ and ‘friendship’, and thus by 
extension as equals, close discourse analysis 
reveals that they are constructed as ‘helpers’/
‘servants’ or ‘experts’, thus ‘othering’ them (even 
in the second example which could be likened to 
Said’s notion of ‘exoticisation’, whereby an 
overwhelmingly positive stereotype still serves to 
marginalize the ‘other’). Local people often 
subvert these roles, however, by constructing 
themselves as, for example, ‘cosmopolitan’ and as 
such equal to those who are ‘othering’ them. 
Childhood and adolescence
Björk-Willén (2007) exemplifies, in her study of 
children in a multilingual pre-school play setting 
in Sweden, that very young children also engage 
in ‘crossing’ for the negotiation of individual and 
group identities. She shows the ways in which a 
young speaker secures her own participation in 
the play by replicating the utterances of her co-
interlocutors, not as a direct imitation, but as her 
own contributions, evident for example by being 
multimodally linked to a different non-vocal 
action. Her co-interlocutors speak Spanish while 
she does not. Where the replication is in English, 
Björk-Willén terms the utterance ‘shadowing’ and 
where it is in Spanish, she terms it ‘crossing’. 
Ardington (2006) exemplifies how preadoles-
cent Australian girls employ framing, and specifi-
cally shifting between play and non-play frames, 
to negotiate identities and boundaries. It is no 
accident that shifting between these frames is a 
key site for negotiation, as the girls are in an in-
between stage, drawing on both childhood and 
adolescent/adult types of talk. Unlike in docu-
mented talk of adult women, the girls use playful 
confrontation such as reciprocal name-calling and 
insulting as well as supportive behaviour to build 
alliances. It is notable that preadolescent talk 
often accompanies activity, and Ardington finds 
that a thematic activity can both be a springboard 
into language play and a frame that the girls can 
easily switch back to should their play frame 
become problematic, a useful strategy given the 
in-between stage of the girls and thus their exper-
imental construction of identity. 
Fraser and Cameron (1989) highlight apparent 
contradictions in the input of individual adoles-
cent speakers into conversation but challenge 
definition of these as contradictions, analysing 
them instead in terms of the young women’s 
attempts to make sense of society via the interplay 
of various discourses (1989: 32). 
Adolescence and gender
Coates (1999) observes that the adolescent girls 
in her data use various discourses to position 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
108
themselves as women: liberal, patriarchal, pseudo-
scientific and so on. At the age of about 14 years 
old, a change in linguistic features suggests 
the advent of a new discourse that she calls the 
‘discourse of consciousness raising’. However, 
this discourse is in competition with the fact that 
the content of what the girls say often comes from 
a patriarchal, repressive discourse.
Eckert (1993) describes the discourse strategies 
used by the adolescent girls she studies as 
‘co-operative competition’, thus challenging the 
polar opposition which sees men as competitive 
and women as cooperative, and highlighting the 
necessity of analysing function. The girls compete 
and negotiate agreement on trivial issues (which is 
easier and less threatening) and these have a 
cumulative effect. She claims that both gender and 
age account for why the girls use such discourse. 
Historically, men have inhabited the marketplace 
and women the domestic sphere, which has made 
it necessary for women to accumulate ‘symbolic 
capital’ (Bourdieu, 1986) to override the fact that 
they lack economic capital (which was at that time 
the most highly valued form of capital). This 
involved proving the whole self to be worthy of 
authority. The entrance of women into the market-
place has brought with it a contradictory situation 
for women: competition in the marketplace vio-
lates men’s cultural prerogative, and competition 
in the personal realm contradicts the underlying 
definition of personal worth. 
Adolescence and ethnicity
Hewitt (1986) identifies a need to redefine the 
term ‘code-switching’ to encompass what the ado-
lescents in his UK study were doing. Code-
switching had been seen to involve ‘two or more 
fixed and discrete linguistic systems’, between 
which speakers alternate either randomly (Labov, 
1971) or in ways that show meaningful patterning 
(Gumperz, 1982). However, Hewitt suggests, fol-
lowing Le Page’s (1985) theory, that speakers 
exist in a ‘linguistic space’ made up of ‘acts of 
identity’ which provides a less structuralist, more 
speaker-centred definition of code-switching.
The Black adolescents in Hewitt’s study report 
creole use mainly in relation to lower-class life 
and conflict, especially with the police. Within 
this, its use can be triggered by competitive topics 
or situations or an antagonistic relationship with 
one’s interlocutor (Hewitt, 1986: 108). This could 
be interpreted as the young people ‘doing’ conflict 
in a certain way, at the local level, which relates to 
and helps them to understand and deal with it at a 
more global level. Indeed, Hewitt saw the possi-
bility for transformation of the social order (albeit 
cultural and partial) through transformation of 
symbolic forms. He claimed therefore that Black/
White speech relations were important as they 
explored the local interactive order and, by exten-
sion, wider social relationships (ibid.: 124).
Hewitt observes the use of Jamaican creole by 
White adolescents with their Black peers. Although 
he accepts that such creole use often constitutes 
racial abuse (1986: 135), he claims that it also 
occurs in friendship situations as the playful ritu-
alistic employment of terms of abuse. This 
expresses ‘both a cultural self-contextualising and 
a positioning through the rivalries of verbal and 
other forms of play. Its reference is not simply that 
of cultural position but of personal position, with 
the emphasis on individual competitive relations’ 
(ibid.: 136). It serves to negotiate relationships 
between the young White person and their Black 
friends.
Rampton (1995) coined the term ‘language 
crossing’, which he differentiated from code-
switching by saying that the former involves ‘the 
use of language varieties associated with social or 
ethnic groups that the speaker does not normally 
belong to’ (1995: 17). Rampton’s case in point is 
young White speakers’ use of Stylished Asian 
English: they employ certain explicit lexical and 
phonological traits, but not the more implicit 
grammatical structure. Here we can see the impor-
tance of the ‘other’ in constructing one’s own 
identity. There is the potential for challenge to 
structures here too, as the ‘crossing’ often marks a 
challenge to adult stereotypes of the ‘other’. That 
said, Rampton makes it clear that most of this 
work is done in ‘liminal’ spaces, which lessens the 
potential of any material challenge. 
Rampton’s work, like Hewitt’s (1986) work 
before it, involves young White people with their 
Asian friends; some of the more recent observa-
tions of ‘crossing’, however (Bucholtz, 1999; 
Cutler, 1999), illustrate young White people who 
rarely come into contact with ethnic minority 
communities still making a conscious choice to 
employ the language of these communities. This 
is very much a case of style over structure, and 
indeed Bucholtz concludes that the young White 
boys in her data are able to ‘disclaim their struc-
tural advantage’ (1999: 455), thus actually mask-
ing structural inequality rather than challenging it. 
Jaworski et al. (2003) apply the notion of limi-
nality to adolsecents’ ‘gossipy’ talk. The adoles-
cents construct their own orientation to certain 
norms by way of gossiping, mostly about ‘others’, 
but sometimes about themselves in a process that 
Jaworski et al. term ‘self-othering’. They shift 
between keying their talk seriously and playfully, 
and thus between constructing approval or disap-
proval of the behaviour about which they talk. 
This ambiguity allows for a state of constant limi-
nality and thus constant negotiation of identities. 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
109
Adolescence and social class
My own work (Irwin, 2006) links the use of you 
know in a group of mostly working-class London 
adolescents (WCG) and I know in a mostly 
middle-class group (MCG) to Foucault’s notion of 
power/knowledge and, by extension, to group-
specific (re)production of dominant discourses 
and power relations. Speakers in WCG use you 
know clause-finally to mark the information in 
that clause, which tends to be about the deviance 
of others, as dominant. Speakers in MCG use 
I know either clause-initially or as a stand-alone 
item in reaction to the previous speaker’s utter-
ance and to mark that utterance as dominant. 
Thus, the use of you know shows relatively active 
identity construction, while the use of I know 
shows relatively reactive identity construction, but 
both groups construct their identities indirectly: 
WCG because they talk about others, and MCG 
because they react to others.
My work on the same groups of adolescents 
negotiating deviant positions (Irwin, 2008) 
employs Goffman’s concept of footing to explore 
the ways in which speakers either shift positions 
or only partially inhabit them, thus allowing them 
to engage with deviance without being fully posi-
tioned as deviant. The adolescents in WCG give 
deviant positions a voice in two ways: by saying 
an utterance and then retracting it with the phrase 
‘only joking’ and, on one occasion, by shifting 
positions. In terms of footing, the speaker thus 
withdraws the claim to have been the principal of 
the previous utterance. This gives the adolescents 
the opportunity to explore alternative discourses 
and positionings while still marking their knowl-
edge of and adherence to the dominant discourse. 
The adolescents in MCG, on the other hand, 
voice deviant positions but avoid inhabiting them 
until such time as they have been communally 
evaluated. The linguistic strategies they use 
include: switching between possible and actual 
worlds, a marked shift of framing that problema-
tizes the extent to which a speaker is viewed as the 
principal of an utterance; switching between the 
grammatically general (e.g. general ‘you’) and the 
grammatically specific (e.g. ‘I’ or ‘we’), which 
problematizes authorship; and switching between 
questions and statements, which at the question 
stage renders principal irrelevant or at most 
suggested. 
Ethnicity, national identity 
and minority languages
Sandel (2003) employs Bourdieu’s notion of lin-
guistic capital to the linguistic context in Taiwan, 
where for many years the nationalist government 
forbade the speaking of local languages and dia-
lects, whereas more recently the policy has been 
reversed and local varieties are being accepted and 
taught in schools. The Bourdieuian perspective is 
a useful one here as it takes us beyond the public/
private binary and suggests that there has been a 
complex interplay between the public and private 
as regards the linguistic capital value of different 
language varieties to both policymakers and 
communities. 
Budach et al. (2003) analyse a discursal shift 
around minority languages to which aspects of 
both Foucault’s and Bourdieu’s theories are appli-
cable. They recognize that the dominant dis-
courses 
around 
minority 
languages 
have 
traditionally linked language with community, 
and they observe a recent shift which they exem-
plify via data from literacy centres and a call 
centre in francophone Canada. Given the ongoing 
commodification taking place in the globalized 
market, they suggest that ‘community’ is now 
being treated as a commodity that can be 
exchanged for linguistic and cultural resources, 
thus echoing notions of the complex interplay of 
linguistic, social, symbolic and economic capital. 
Messing (2007) explores language shift in the 
Malintzi region of central Mexico, and argues for 
the importance of focusing on individuals and 
communities in order to gain a clearer picture of 
the specific ways in which such shifts occur. Her 
data exemplify Mexican (Nahuatl) speakers nego-
tiating their orientation towards and against 
various identities via their use of three key, some-
what competing, discourses: the pro-development 
metadiscourse of salir adelante, ‘forging ahead’ 
and improving one’s socioeconomic position; 
the discourse of menosprecio, denigration of 
indigenous identity; and the pro-indígena or pro-
indigenous discourse that promotes a positive 
attitude toward indigenous identity. 
A theme of co-option and related disempower-
ment beneath superficial celebration of diversity 
can be found in Stroud’s (2004) work on Rinkeby 
Swedish, a specific form of Swedish spoken by 
immigrant communities. By labelling and thus 
recognizing this unique form of Swedish, the 
authorities may on the surface be recognizing 
heterogeneity and giving voice to minority com-
munities, but Stroud claims that this is subverted 
by the fact that the way in which Rinkeby Swedish 
is talked about and positioned devalues the linguis-
tic capital of the immigrants who speak it. 
‘Othering’ in the legal system
Although Baker (2004) does not explicitly describe 
himself as taking a Foucauldian approach, 
his work on the UK House of Lords’ debate on 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
110
lowering the age of sexual consent for gay men 
provides an insightful example of competing 
discourses being constructed ‘via chains of argu-
mentation’. In the debates, the word ‘homosexual’ 
was associated with acts, whereas the word ‘gay’ 
was associated with identities, and the discourses 
that were constructed around the former linked 
it to danger, crime and ill health, whereas the 
discourses that were constructed around the latter 
focused on equality and tolerance. 
D’hondt (2009) highlights a contradiction in 
Belgian courtroom practice relating to the accept-
ability of constructing a defendant as a cultural 
‘other’. Attorneys will regularly provide a ‘cultural 
defence’ in the sense that they do not deny the 
facts of the case, but argue that it is mitigated by 
the effects of the defendant’s cultural background 
on their actions. This ‘othering’ strategy, although 
its relevance is regularly challenged by the prose-
cution, does not detrimentally affect relations 
within the courtroom. If, on the other hand, the 
defendant highlights his or her ‘otherness’ in 
drawing attention to perceived mistreatment by 
the authorities, the tendency is for the interjection 
to be ignored by the defence or rejected by the 
judge. D’hondt identifies the key difference 
between the two examples to be that, in the first, 
the context of the ‘otherness’ is external to 
Belgium, whereas, in the second, the context is 
discrimination within Belgium. This challenges 
the very heart of the legal system as a system 
that should treat all defendants equally, and any 
challenges to this are silenced. 
Ethnicity, national identity and policing
Wilson and Stapleton’s (2007) work on discourses 
of policing in Northern Ireland draws both on 
(Foucauldian) notions of discourse and Bourdieu’s 
concept of habitus. They point out the contentious 
nature of policing for the nationalist community in 
Northern Ireland, even given the development 
from the Royal Ulster Constabulary to the new 
Police Service of Northern Ireland. By using the 
concept of ‘habitus’ the paper engages with the 
fact that discourses are not stand-alone entities, but 
are in fact very much tied up with the material world, 
in particular the context and interactional practices 
of those who (re)produce them. They exemplify 
this via the ‘discourse of resistance’ reproduced 
by a group of nationalist women in Belfast. 
Mediated (political) discourse
O’Malley (2009) uses frame analysis to explore 
an Irish radio programme that claims to be ‘for 
and about disabled people’, and challenges that 
claim by exemplifying how the complexity of the 
disabled person’s experience tends to, as she puts 
it, ‘fall between frames’. She draws on Scannell’s 
(1991) notion of the ‘double articulation’ of radio 
talk: i.e. it is at once an interaction between the 
co-interlocutors on the radio programme, and 
oriented towards the listening audience. In this 
context, part of the ‘presenter frame’ is to intro-
duce the participants to the audience in a ‘relevant’ 
way, but perhaps not the way they would have 
introduced themselves, and the ‘Interview frame’ 
consists of a question and answer format that 
elicits factual answers; this facticity tends towards 
a medical construction of disability that loses 
sight of each participant’s complex identity and 
experience.
Clayman (1992) develops Goffman’s concept 
of footing in order to analyse how neutrality and 
drama are achieved simultaneously by political 
interviewers. They can introduce to their inter-
viewees opposing points of view and challenges 
from other people (authors), while at the same 
time leaving their own position ambiguous (i.e. 
whether or not they are the principal of the utter-
ance). In this way, utterances are marked as con-
troversial, while at the same time speakers avoid 
the potential results of voicing such controversial 
material. 
Weizman’s (2006) discussion of media talk in 
the Israeli context draws on Goffman’s (1974) 
notion of the multiplicity of roles and the person-
role continuum to show how social roles (e.g. 
politician, journalist, show host), interactional 
roles (e.g. interviewer, interviewee) and personal 
identities are differentiated in meta-talk about 
news interviews, and are negotiated within news 
interviews. Such orientation to these roles by 
participants provides evidence of participants’ 
construction of their reality. Situations may be 
evaluated by politicians in terms of both their 
personal identity and their social role, and these 
may be marked as being at odds with each other, 
or indeed as being in correlation: for example, 
where a politician constructs themselves as a 
‘pleasant’ individual in terms of personal identity 
and not just because of their professional ability to 
come across as such. The constriction of interac-
tional roles may be used as a mitigating factor for 
aggressive behaviour as well as a means to avoid 
it, but at the same time show hosts may be criticized 
when they blur the boundaries of interactional 
roles because this is seen not to remove constric-
tion but remove neutrality. Thus, these roles and 
their negotiation are oriented to by participants 
throughout media talk. 
The relevance of Goffman for the analysis of 
political discourse is also picked up on by 
Lauerbach (2006), who analyses television 
interviews with politicians of the UK Conservative 

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIONISM
111
and Labour Parties on Election Night, 1997. 
Lauerbach finds that the ‘voicing’ within the inter-
views with members of the two parties differed. 
The Conservatives, who lost, were presented with 
opposing ‘voices’ from within their own party, in 
the sense that the interviewer animated utterances 
that had been authored by someone else. There 
were no dissenting voices within the Labour Party 
to present to their politicians, so instead interview-
ers ‘ventriloquised’: i.e. they put (their own) dis-
course into the mouths of others to surmise what 
might happen in the future. In this way, debate 
was constructed but neutrality maintained in the 
sense that in neither case was the voice directly or 
fully that of the interviewer, and it also served to 
dramatize the proceedings. 
7.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS
It is clear, then, that social constructionist 
sociolinguistics has emerged as a key aspect of 
our field, which has drawn on the fruitful link 
between language and social theory. Two main 
things strike me about the themed areas into 
which the work falls. First, SC is particularly 
helpful in illustrating transitional and liminal 
spaces as we see from discussions of ethically-
diverse contexts and minority language debates as 
well as illustrations of the linguistic behaviour of 
preadolescents and adolescents. Secondly, it is 
clear that social constructionist work can provide 
relevant insights into everything from one-to-one 
interactions to constructions of power structures at 
the highest levels, and indeed to illustrate the 
latter in the former. As such, its potential to marry 
the ‘micro’ and the ‘macro’ has been and contin-
ues to be developed in interesting and important 
ways by sociolinguists.
REFERENCES
Althusser, L. (2001) Lenin and Philosophy and Other Essays. 
Monthly Review Press.
Ardington, A. (2006) ‘Playfully negotiated activity in girls’ 
talk’, Journal of Pragmatics, 38(1): 73–95.
Baker, P. (2004) ’“Unnatural acts“: discourses of homosexual-
ity within the House of Lords debates on gay male law 
reform’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 8(2): 88–106.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination. Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1984a) Problems of Dostoevsky’s Poetics. 
Edited and translated by C. Emerson. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1984b) Rabelais and His World. Bloomington, 
IN: University of Indiana Press.
Bakhtin, M. M. (1986) ‘The problem of speech genres’, in 
Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Austin, TX: University 
of Austin Press.
Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction 
of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. 
New York: Anchor.
Björk-Willén, P. (2007) ‘Participation in multilingual preschool 
play: shadowing and crossing as interactional resources’, 
Journal of Pragmatics, 39(12): 2133–58.
Bourdieu, P. (1984) Distinction: A Social Critique of the 
Judgement of Taste. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1986) ‘The forms of capital’ in Richardson, J. 
(ed.), Handbook of Theory and Research for the Sociology 
of Education. New York: Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Thompson, J.B. (1991) Language and 
Symbolic Power. Cambridge, MA: Polity Press.
Bruner, J. (1990) Acts of Meaning. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Bucholtz, M. (1999) ‘You da man: narrating the racial other in 
the production of white masculinity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 3(4): 443–60.
Budach, G., Roy, S. and Heller, M. (2003) ‘Community and 
commodity in French Ontario’, Language in Society, 32(5): 
603–27. 
Burr, V. (1995) An Introduction to Social Constructionism. 
London: Routledge.
Buttny, R. and Cohen, Jodi R. (2007) ‘Drawing on the words 
of others at public hearings: Zoning, Wal-Mart, and the 
threat to the aquifer’, Language in Society, 36(5): 
735–56. 
Cameron, D. (1997) ‘Performing gender identity: young men’s 
talk and the construction of heterosexual masculinity’, in 
S. Johnson, and U. Meinhof (eds), Hanna Language and 
Masculinity. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 47–64.
Clayman, S. E. (1992) ‘Footing in the achievement of 
neutrality: the case of news interview discourse’, in 
J. Heritage, and P. Drew (eds), Talk at Work: Interaction in 
Institutional Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 163–98.
Coates, J. (1999) ‘Changing femininities: the talk of teenage 
girls’, in M. Bucholtz, A. C. Liang, and L. A. Sutton (eds), 
Reinventing Identities: The Gendered Self in Discourse. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Cutler, C. (1999) ‘Yorkville crossing: White teens, hip hop and 
African American English’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 3(4): 
428–42.
de Saussure, F. (1983) Course in General Linguistics. London: 
Duckworth.
D’hondt, S. (2009) ‘Others on trial: the construction of cultural 
otherness in Belgian first instance criminal hearings’, 
Journal of Pragmatics, 41(4): 806–28.
Eckert, P. (1993) ‘Co-operative competition in adolescent 
“girl talk”’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and Conversational 
Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 32–61.
Foucault, M. (1977) Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison. London: Allen Lane. 
Foucault, M. (1980) Power/knowledge: Selected Interviews 
and Other Writings 1972–1977. London: Harvester Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
112
Fraser, E. and Cameron, D. (1989) ‘Knowing what to say: the 
construction of gender in linguistic practice’, in R. Grillo 
(ed.), Social Anthropology and the Politics of Language. 
London: Routledge.
Goffman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. 
London: Penguin.
Goffman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis. New York: Harper.
Goffman, E. (1981) Footing. Forms of talk. Philapdelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.124–59.
Gramsci, A. (1983) Selections from the Prison Notebooks. 
London: Sage.
Gumperz, J. J. (ed.) (1982) Language, Society and Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hewitt, R. (1986) White Talk Black Talk: Inter-Racial Friendship 
and Communication Among Adolescents. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Holmes, J. (1985) ‘Sex differences and miscommunication: 
some data from New Zealand’, in J. B. Pride (ed.), Cross-
Cultural Encounters: Communication and Miscommu-
nication. Melbourne: River Seine. pp. 24–43.
Holmes, J. (1986) ‘Functions of "you know" in women’s and 
men’s speech’, Language in Society, 15: 1–22. 
Holmes, J. (1997) ‘Women, language and identity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 1(2): 195–223.
Irwin, A. (2006) ‘London adolescents (re)producing power/
knowledge: you know and I know ’, Language in Society, 
35: 499–528. 
Irwin, A. (2008) ‘Now you see me, now you don’t: adolescents 
exploring deviant positions’, in E. Eppler, and P. Pichler 
(eds), Gender in Spontaneous Interaction. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Jaworski, A. and Coupland, J. (2005) ‘Othering in gossip: “you 
go out you have a laugh and you can pull yeah okay but 
like … ”’, Language in Society, 34(5): 667–94.
Jaworski, A., Ylänne-McEwen, V., Thurlow, C. and Lawson, S. 
(2003) ‘Social roles and negotiation of status in host–
tourist interaction: a view from British television holiday 
programmes’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 7(2): 135–64. 
Kiesling, S. F. (1998) ‘Men’s identities and sociolinguistic 
variation: the case of fraternity men’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 2(1): 69–99.
Kiesling, S. F. (2005) ‘Homosocial desire in men’s talk: balanc-
ing and re-creating cultural discourses of masculinity’, 
Language in Society, 34(5): 695–726. 
Labov, W. (1971) 'The notion of ‘system’ in Creole languages'. 
In D. Hymes (ed.), Pidginization and Creolization of 
Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 447–472.
Labov, W. (1972) Language in the Inner City. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lauerbach, G. (2006) ‘Discourse representation in political 
interviews: the construction of identities and relations 
through voicing and ventriloquizing’, Journal of Pragmatics, 
38(2): 196–215.
Le Page, R. B. (1985) Acts of Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
McHoul, A. and Grace, W. (1997) A Foucault Primer: 
Discourse, Power and the Subject. New York: New York 
University Press.
Marx, K. and Engels, F. (1970) The German Ideology. 
New York: International Publishers.
Marx, K. and Engels F. (2002) The Communist Manifesto. 
London: Penguin Classics. 
Menard-Warwick, J. (2005) ‘Transgression narratives, 
dialogic voicing, and cultural change’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 9(4): 533–56.
Messing, J. (2007) ‘Multiple ideologies and competing dis-
courses: language shift in Tlaxcala, Mexico’, Language in 
Society, 36(4): 555–77. 
Milroy, L. (1992) Linguistic Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Norrick, N. (1997) ‘Twice-told tales: collaborative narration of 
familiar stories’, Language in Society, 26.
O’Malley, M. (2009) ‘Falling between frames: institutional 
discourse and disability in radio’, Journal of Pragmatics, 
41(2): 346–56.
Piaget, J. (1954) The Construction of Reality in the Child. 
Tr. M. Cook. New York: Basic Books.
Plas, P. (2007) ‘Voicing folk for the academy: interdiscursivity 
and collective identity in a north Dalmatian ethnography, 
1899–1900’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39(12): 2244–72. 
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity Among 
Adolescents. London: Longman.
Said, E. (1978) Orientalism. New York: Random House.
Sandel, T. L. (2003) ‘Linguistic capital in Taiwan: the KMT’s 
Mandarin language policy and its perceived impact on 
language practices of bilingual Mandarin and Tai-gi 
speakers’, Language in Society, 32(4): 523–51. 
Sapir, E. (1921) Language: An Introduction to the Study of 
Speech. New York: Harcourt, Brace.
Scannell, P. and David, C. (1991) A Social History of British 
Broadcasting, vol. 1:1922–1939. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Schiffrin, D. (1996) ‘Narrative as self-portrait: sociolinguistic 
constructions of identity’, Language in Society, 25(2): 
167–203. 
Schilling-Estes, N. (2004) 'Constructing ethnicity in interac-
tion', Journal of Sociolinguistics, 8(2): 163–195.
Stroud, C. (2004) ‘Rinkeby Swedish and semilingualism in 
language ideological debates: a Bourdieuean perspective’, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 8(2): 196–214.
Taylor, C. (1991) ‘Language and society’, in A. Honneth, and 
H. Joas, (eds.), Communicative Action. Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press. pp. 23–35.
Weizman, E. (2006) ‘Roles and identities in news 
interviews: the Israeli context’, Journal of Pragmatics, 
38(2): 154–79.
Whorf, B. L. (1956) Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected 
Writings, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wilson, J. and Stapleton, K. (2007) ‘The discourse of resist-
ance: social change and policing in Northern Ireland’, 
Language in Society, 36: 393–425. 
Wolfson, N. (1978) ‘A feature of performed narrative: the 
conversational historical present’, Language in Society, 
7(2): 215–37.

Symbolic Interactionism, 
Erving Goffman, and 
Sociolinguistics
S h a r i  K e n d a l l
8
8.1 INTRODUCTION
Sociologist Erving Goffman (1922–82) devoted 
his career to exploring the nuances of face-to-face 
interaction to discover and describe the underlying 
interaction order. From his early ethnographies of 
a small island community – hospitals, prisons, and 
casinos (1959, 1961, 1963a, 1963b, 1967, 1971), 
to his later works highlighting language (1974, 
1981a, 1983), his work has inspired scholars 
throughout the social sciences and influenced 
several interactional approaches to language: 
ethnomethodology (Garot and Berard, in this 
volume), conversation analysis (Matthiessen and 
Slade, in this volume), and, especially, interac-
tional sociolinguistics (Gordon, in this volume; 
Schiffrin, 1994). Within sociology, Goffman 
remains an enigma, as his work is not easily 
classified and does not reflect the wider perspec-
tives or debates (Kim, 2003; Smith, 1999). A 
student at the University of Chicago in the 1940s, 
Goffman is most accurately classified as belong-
ing to the Chicago school, first formally 
recognized as an approach to sociology in text-
books by Krueger and Reckless (1931) and Karpf 
(1932). Some scholars, such as Denzin (1992) and 
Joas (1987), refer to all members of the Chicago 
school as symbolic interactionists. Likewise, 
Plummer (2000: 200) observes, ‘For the first 
four decades of the twentieth century, Chicago 
sociology dominated North American sociology; 
and symbolic interactionism was its implicit 
theory’.
Goffman himself rejected the symbolic interac-
tionist label on the grounds that it does not accu-
rately capture the variety of work accomplished 
during this period,1 nor does it effectively incorpo-
rate structure into the emergent view of interaction 
(Scheff, 2005; Verhoeven, 1993: 334–5). The 
latter criticism is aimed primarily at the form of 
symbolic interactionism developed by Herbert 
Blumer (1969), who coined the term in 1937. 
Within the Chicago school, Blumer’s approach 
was only one strand of interactionism that devel-
oped (Verhoeven, 1993, 1995). In a 1980 inter-
view, Goffman classified those scholars following 
in the tradition of Blumer and Louis Wirth to be 
symbolic interactionists, including Gregory Stone, 
Bernard Meltzer and, ‘to a degree’, Anselm 
Strauss (Verhoeven, 1993: 318). Goffman, in con-
trast, was most influenced by Everett Hughes who 
developed, in Goffman’s words, ‘a sort of occupa-
tional Sociology and basically Urban Ethnography’. 
Accordingly, he observes, ‘what I did up to a few 
years ago before I got somewhat more interested in 
Sociolinguistics was a version of Urban Ethnography 
with Meadian Social Psychology’ (318).2
However classified,3 Goffman’s work shares many 
of the principles that define symbolic interactionism, 
and he was influenced by scholars seminal to its 
inception, especially those associated with prag-
matism: the philosophers Charles Sanders Peirce, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
114
John Dewey, William James, George Herbert 
Mead and the American sociologist Charles 
Horton Cooley. In addition, he was influenced by 
the phenomenology of William James and Alfred 
Schütz, and the formalism of social anthropolo-
gists A. R. Radcliffe-Brown, Emile Durkheim and 
Georg Simmel. These influences contribute to 
Goffman’s distinctive style and, coupled with his 
unique and inspirational perspective, underlie his 
ability to show us ‘more of humanity than we 
could otherwise see’ (Friedsen, 1983: 362). This 
chapter first introduces the principles of symbolic 
interactionism as applied to the work of Goffman 
and others who participated in the Chicago school, 
and then traces his conceptions that have most 
influenced scholarship on language – society 
and self, face, framing and footing – to those 
scholars that most influenced him in the areas 
of pragmatism, phenomenology, formalism and 
sociolinguistics.
8.2 SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM
Symbolic interactionism is a sociological perspec-
tive founded on the basis of the ‘interpretive, 
subjective study of human experience’ within ‘an 
objective science of human conduct’ (Denzin, 
1992: 2). According to Plummer (2000), symbolic 
interactionism is characterized by four interweav-
ing themes. First, the primary concern is not with 
the individual or society but with the ‘joint acts 
through which lives are organized and societies 
assembled’ (195). The ‘self’ emerges through 
interaction with the ‘other’, making interaction-
ism fundamentally concerned with ‘how people 
do things together’ (Becker, 1986). Second, human 
worlds are not merely material or objective, but 
semiotic and symbolic. Thus, a major concern is 
with the process through which human beings ‘go 
about the task of assembling meaning’ through 
interaction with others, including ‘how we define 
ourselves’ and ‘the situations we are in’ (Plummer, 
2000: 194). In this process, symbolic resources, 
both verbal and non-verbal, play a central role 
(Smith, 1999). Third, symbolic interactionism is 
an active view of the social world ‘in which 
human beings are constantly going about their 
business, piecing together joint lines of activity, 
and constituting society through these interac-
tions’ (Plummer, 2000: 194). Fourth, and finally, 
the method of symbolic interactionism is funda-
mentally ‘direct examination of the empirical 
world’ (Blumer, 1969: 147). McCall and Becker 
(1990) observe, ‘The ultimate interactionist test of 
concepts is whether they make sense of particular 
situations known in great detail through detailed 
observation’ (5).
8.3  PRAGMATISM: PERFORMANCE 
AND IMPRESSION MANAGEMENT
Symbolic interactionism traces its roots to the 
American philosophical movement of pragmatism 
that emerged in the late nineteenth and early twen-
tieth centuries, particularly the work of George 
Herbert Mead. Pragmatism posed epistemological 
questions about knowledge: how we acquire it, the 
form it takes, and how we can judge its validity. It 
rejected the dominant philosophical paradigm’s 
‘quest for fundamental, foundational truths’ and 
its emphasis on intellectual theorizing; instead, it 
posited ‘a plurality of shifting truths grounded in 
concrete experiences and language, in which a 
truth is appraised in terms of its consequences’ 
rather than its conformity to abstract theories 
(Plummer, 2000: 197). The empirical basis of 
symbolic interactionism stems from Mead and 
Dewey who, in the early twentieth century, ‘trans-
formed philosophical arguments into empirically 
oriented theoretical inquiries’ (Cohen, 2000: 74). 
Dewey (1896) broke from the dominant theory of 
behaviorism to argue that ‘the organism is not a 
passive receiver of stimuli, but an active perceiver 
of the situations it confronts’ and whose behavior 
‘must be seen as a constant adaptation to the envi-
ronment’ (Denzin, 1992: 5). Mead (1934) opposed 
psychological behaviorism by developing ‘social 
behaviorism’, in which the self is a social object 
that could be studied objectively rather than 
through introspection (Denzin, 1992: 4). Mead 
offered a new understanding of the self as inter-
subjective, constructed in interaction with others. 
His theory of ‘how the mind and self emerge from 
the social process of communication by signs’ is 
viewed as founding the symbolic interactionist 
school (Delanty, 2000: 41).
The influence of pragmatism appears through-
out Goffman’s work, particularly in his concep-
tion of the ‘self’ as a collaborative, face-to-face 
achievement. In the 1980 interview, when asked 
about ‘the main explanatory paradigm of sym-
bolic interactionism’, Goffman stated, ‘you should 
go back to George Herbert Mead and Mind, Self, 
and Society ([1934] 1974), and the issue about the 
way we are constructed socially as individuals by 
taking to ourselves the opinion and attitude of the 
other’ (Verhoeven, 1993: 336). Mead’s conception 
of self originated with Cooley’s (1922: 184) 
‘looking-glass self’, the idea that the self is a 
reflected appraisal of the reactions of others 
(Denzin, 1992: 4). People ‘see themselves reflected 
back in the moral judgments of others, and their 
sense of moral worth is largely determined by this 
reflected self’ (Atkinson et al., 2007: 186). Like 
Cooley, Mead viewed the self as structured by the 
principle of sociality, or the taking of the attitude 

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM, ERVING GOFFMAN
115
of the other in a social situation. As Cooley (1922) 
put it, we ‘live in the minds of others without 
knowing it’ (208).4 However, whereas Cooley 
advocated a phenomenological, introspective 
approach to study the internal worlds of the self 
(Manning, 2005), Mead ([1934] 1974) advocated 
an empirical approach to explain how the self is 
intersubjective and achieved through social 
engagement. 
For Mead, the individual develops a self syn-
chronically and diachronically. In early socializa-
tion, the individual takes the role – i.e. mentally 
projects how others will react to one’s actions – of 
specific others and, later, gains the ability to take 
the role of the ‘generalized other’, imagining the 
reactions of a group, community or society. 
Through this process, the individual acquires the 
conventional meanings of symbols and the values 
and norms of a society. Whereas Cooley con-
ceived of ‘communication as originating in the 
consciousness’, Mead viewed consciousness as 
developing gradually through communication, 
particularly language (Mortensen, 2000: 114). 
The reciprocal self of Cooley and Mead under-
lies Goffman’s framework of impression mana-
gement and his dramaturgical metaphor for 
face-to-face interaction. In The Presentation of 
Self in Everyday Life, Goffman (1959: xi) explains 
that he will employ ‘the perspective … of the 
theatrical performance’ to consider the way in 
which the individual ‘presents himself [sic] and 
his activity to others, the ways in which he guides 
and controls the impressions they form of him, 
and the kinds of things he may or may not do 
while sustaining his performance before them’. 
Throughout this process, the individual guides the 
behavior of the other and is guided in turn. In 
Behavior in Public Places, Goffman (1963a) 
refers to this collaboration as the ‘special mutuality 
of immediate social interaction’ (16). 
In the dramaturgical framework, Goffman con-
ceives of the ‘self’ as a performance tailored to the 
audience and the situation. Because the individual 
has multiple audiences, he or she will display 
multiple selves. Goffman (1959: 48) quotes the 
pragmatist William James ([1890] 1925: 128–9) 
regarding the relation between self and other: ‘we 
may practically say that [an individual] has as 
many social selves as there are distinct groups of 
persons about whose opinion he [or she] cares’. In 
addition, this ‘performance’ includes Mead’s 
(1934) conceptualization of the ‘generalized other’ 
in the individual’s acquisition of society’s values 
and norms. Goffman (1959) observes that ‘when 
the individual presents himself [sic] before others, 
his performance will tend to incorporate and 
exemplify the officially accredited values of the 
society, more so, in fact, than does his behavior 
as a whole’ (35). 
Unlike Mead, however, Goffman recognizes 
two selves, neither of which is the ‘real’ self. In 
Presentation of Self, the first is a ‘character’, a 
‘dramatic effect arising diffusely from a scene that 
is presented’, and the second is ‘a harried fabrica-
tor of impressions involved in the all-too-human 
task of staging a performance’ (1959: 252, 253). 
In his description of deference and demeanor 
(1956/1967), one self is a social product, an 
‘image’ that is ‘pieced together’ from the expres-
sive implications of the encounter, and the other is 
an agent, ‘a kind of player in a ritual game’ (1967: 
31). In Frame Analysis, Goffman (1974) acknowl-
edges the biological being or ‘relatively identifia-
ble organism’ (519) engaged in an interaction but 
clarifies that there is no ‘perduring self’ who is 
‘present behind the particular roles he [or she] 
plays at any particular moment’. The self is ‘not 
an entity half-concealed behind events, but a 
changeable formula for managing oneself during 
them’ (573).
Atkinson et al. (2007: 187) suggest that, ‘if we 
take Goffman’s own analyses seriously, then we 
conclude that social life is not like a performance, 
but that it is a performance’ (italics in original). 
This perspective is supported by Goffman’s 
(1981a) comment, in Forms of Talk, that ‘I make 
no large literary claim that social life is but a 
stage, only a small technical one: that deeply 
incorporated into the nature of talk are the funda-
mental requirements of theatricality’ (4). Thus, 
Goffman’s dramaturgical model evokes Butler’s 
(1990) theory of ‘performativity’ which theorizes 
identity, specifically gender, as discursively 
produced and ‘performative’. Drawing on speech 
act theory, Butler (1993) explains that a ‘perfor-
mative’ is a ‘discursive practice that enacts or 
produces that which it names’ (13). Local prac-
tices bring gender into being ‘through the repeti-
tion or citation of a prior, authoritative set of 
practices’ (227). Crucially, Butler point outs, 
‘There is no gender identity behind the expres-
sions of gender; that gender is performatively 
constituted by the very “expressions” that are said 
to be its results’ (25). In 1959, Goffman cites 
Simone de Beauvoir’s (1953: 533) statement to 
much the same effect: even the ‘least sophisticated 
of women … is, like the picture or the statue, or 
the actor on the stage, an agent through whom is 
suggested someone not there – that is, the charac-
ter she represents, but is not’. As Lawler (2008) 
puts it, ‘we are copying an imagined original’ (106). 
Also, like Butler, to Goffman ([1976] 1979) the 
gendered self is accomplished through ritualized 
display: exhibiting ways of talking and behaving 
that are conventionally associated with gender. 
For both Goffman and Butler, identities are 
always achieved; and this achievement is social 
and interactional; it is not entirely a matter of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
116
individual choice. The question is ‘not “who we 
really are” but how we achieve identity, under 
what constraints and in what contexts’ (Lawler, 
2008: 104).5 In The Arrangement between the 
Sexes, Goffman (1977) focuses on some of the 
institutional practices that produce structural con-
straints on an individual’s actions. 
8.4  FORMALISM: ON FACE-WORK, 
DEFERENCE AND DEMEANOR
In a 1980 interview, Goffman identified the pri-
mary difference between his work and symbolic 
interactionism as the role of structure. Scheff 
(2005: 148) acknowledges that ‘Some of his work 
bears out his claim; it can be interpreted to show 
the powerful influence of situational and structural 
constraints, rather than actors’ motives, as the 
basis for behavior’. Rock (1979: 28), suggests that 
‘interactionism may be usefully construed as an 
amalgam of Simmel’s formal sociology and a 
pragmatist epistemology’. Certainly, this is true of 
Goffman’s approach. Ducharme and Fine (1994) 
note that Goffman blended ‘the individual focus’ 
of symbolic interactionism with ‘the cultural 
focus of Durkheim and the anthropologists, bring-
ing together structuralism and interactionism’ 
(90–1). Goffman applies ‘macro-level analysis 
(focusing on institutions, social structure, and the 
normative order) to micro-level variables (face-
to-face interactions)’, illustrating ‘the specific 
ways in which actors are routinely influenced by 
the powerful but unseen forces of social structure 
in their everyday lives’ (91).
Goffman was strongly influenced by social 
anthropologist Radcliffe-Brown, who was at 
Chicago during a time when those in anthropol-
ogy and sociology ‘knew each other fairly well’ 
(Verhoeven, 1993: 345). Radcliffe-Brown was 
influenced by Durkheim and Simmel (Stark, 
1989: 85) and is considered the founder of struc-
tural functionalism. However, for Radcliffe-
Brown, structure emerges through social action: 
‘concrete reality … is not any sort of entity but a 
process, the process of social life …. The process 
itself consists of an immense multitude of actions 
and interactions of human beings, acting as indi-
viduals or in combinations or groups’ ([1952] 
1965: 4). 
Through Durkheim and Radcliffe-Brown, 
Goffman was impressed by ‘the impact of culture 
and macrostructures on even the most minute 
details of everyday interactions’ (Ducharme and 
Fine, 1994: 90). Smith remarks that: 
Just as Durkheim demonstrated the social determi-
nants of the apparently personal act of suicide, 
Goffman showed how many of our seemingly 
insignificant and idiosyncratic concerns (our exple-
tives when we drop a glass, our discomfort when 
a stranger on a street holds a glance at us too 
long) are consequences of the normative ordering 
of interactional conduct. (2006: 32)
In fact, Goffman’s very notion of the ‘interaction 
order’ is a ‘continuation of the classical project 
instigated by Marx, Weber, and Durkheim, of 
defining the contours of the social domain’ 
(Layder, 2006: 250). 
The influence of Durkheim is explicit in 
Goffman’s ritual model of interaction. In two 
early writings (1955 and 1956, later appearing 
together in 1967), he outlines the processes (face-
work) and primary forms (deference and 
demeanor) of ceremonial behavior. Although he 
presents the concepts separately, they are compat-
ible enough to fuse into a single model, as I do 
in my description here and in Kendall (2004). In 
introducing deference and demeanor, Goffman 
(1967) draws on Durkheim’s suggestion that 
the ‘individual’s personality can be seen as one 
apportionment of the collective mana’, and that 
‘rites performed to representations of the social 
collectivity will sometimes be performed to the 
individual’. Goffman states that he will explore 
‘some of the senses in which the person in our 
urban secular world is allotted a kind of sacred-
ness that is displayed and confirmed by symbolic 
acts’ (47). 
According to Goffman (1967), people tend to 
interact as though ‘the self is ... a ceremonial 
thing, a sacred object which must be treated with 
proper ritual care and in turn must be presented in 
a proper light to others’ (91). This principle is 
realized in interaction by what he calls ‘the traffic 
rules of social interaction’: face (12). When inter-
acting with others, individuals assume that each 
person has a ‘face’, a public ‘image of self’, 
which consists of ‘approved social attributes’ and 
must be continually maintained and protected (5). 
People maintain (or do not maintain) the faces of 
self and other through the ‘expressive (or ceremo-
nial)’ component of language, that ‘component of 
verbal and non-verbal acts’ that ‘symbolically 
convey[s] appraisals of the social worth’ of the 
self and the other (5, 19, 31). Goffman identifies 
demeanor and deference as two basic elements 
of this ceremonial component. Demeanor is that 
element of an individual’s conduct that expresses 
that the individual is ‘a person of certain desirable 
or undesirable qualities’. Deference is that ele-
ment of an individual’s conduct that expresses 
‘the appreciation an individual shows of another 
to that other’ (77). Goffman (1967) defines two 
types of deference based on Durkheim’s (1954) 
classification of religious rites into ‘negative’ and 

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM, ERVING GOFFMAN
117
‘positive’ rites, respectively: through avoidance 
rituals, the individual ‘keep[s] at a distance from 
the recipient’, addressing the need for ‘privacy 
and separateness’ (62, 67). For example, speakers 
extend ceremonial respect and politeness, dis-
cretely avoid embarrassing facts, and employ 
‘careful ambiguity’ when making demands on, or 
appraisals of, the other (11). Through presenta-
tional rituals, the individual shows that he or 
she approves of the recipient’s private objectives 
or concerns, addressing the need to feel that one 
is someone whom ‘others are, or seek to be, 
involved with’ (73). For example, speakers give 
salutations, invitations, compliments, smiles, 
farewells, and notice changes in appearance, 
status or repute (71).
According to Goffman (1967: 12), the actions 
individuals perform or do not perform to make 
what they are doing ‘consistent with face’ is face-
work, which serves to counteract ‘events whose 
effective symbolic implications threaten face’. 
Goffman’s conceptualization of face-work was 
operationalized by Brown and Levinson (1987) in 
Politeness: Some Universals in Language Usage. 
Building on Goffman’s concept of face, they argue 
that some actions are intrinsically threatening to 
face (although which actions are ‘intrinsically’ 
threatening varies socially, culturally and situa-
tionally). They identify numerous modifications 
and additions participants use to mitigate these 
face-threatening acts to ‘indicate clearly that no 
such face threat is intended or desired’ (69–70). 
In Kendall (2004), I observe that Goffman 
(1967) makes an additional point about the rela-
tionship between deference and demeanor: indi-
viduals create a demeanor, in part, through 
deference. An individual expresses deference to 
create and sustain the other’s self, but deference is 
also a ‘means by which [the individual] expresses 
the fact that he [or she] is a well or badly 
demeaned individual’. In other words, the indi-
vidual expresses that he or she has certain quali-
ties through actions which convey demeanor, and 
an important component of these qualities is the 
manner in which the individual extends deference 
to others – i.e. the individual’s face-related prac-
tices. Based on this model, I demonstrate that a 
woman, who is a technical director of a radio 
news and talk show, expends linguistic effort to 
save the faces of her interlocutors as she speaks 
with two colleagues on separate occasions. I pro-
pose that some women who might appear to be 
speaking in a ‘powerless’ way by interactionally 
downplaying their institutional authority may, 
instead, be constructing a more egalitarian 
demeanor of authority.
Goffman’s initial conceptions and Brown and 
Levinson’s extensive elaboration have served as 
the basis for a vast amount of scholarship in 
sociolinguistics (see, for example, Bargiela-
Chiappini, 2003; Hickey and Stewart, 2004; 
Holtgraves, 2002; Placencia and García, 2007; 
Watts, 2003; Watts et al., 2006). Recent scholar-
ship employing Goffman’s conception of face 
includes: a contrastive analysis of British English 
and Uruguayan Spanish (Marquez-Reiter, 2000); 
interactions among friends (Manusov et al., 2004); 
clinical interviews (Cepeda, 2006); psychotherapy 
(Kurri and Wahlstrom, 2007); hip-hop (Cutler, 
2007); classroom language instruction (Nguyen, 
2007); and workplace interaction (Stewart, 2008; 
Tracy, 2008).
8.5  PHENOMENOLOGY: FRAMING 
ANALYSIS
In Frame Analysis, Goffman (1974) rejects the 
‘W. I. Thomas dictum’:6 ‘If men define situations 
as real, they are real in their consequences’ in 
favor of William James’ ([1890] 1950) question 
which, Goffman states, ‘gave matters a subversive 
phenomenological twist’: ‘Under what circum-
stances do we think things are real?’ (1–2). In this 
way, he enters the realm of philosophical phenom-
enology developed in the early twentieth century 
by Edmund Husserl and other German philoso-
phers, questioning ‘the nature of social action, 
interpretation, and meaning in everyday life’ 
(Turner, 2000: xiv).7 James addressed this question 
by positing different worlds, each of which, 
‘whilst it is attended to, is real after its own fash-
ion; only the reality lapses with the attention’ 
(293). Goffman agrees to a point; he states that 
‘James copped out’ because he granted the ‘world 
of the senses ... a special status, being the one we 
judge to be the realest reality, the one that retains 
our liveliest belief, the one before which the other 
worlds must give way’ (3). Goffman then turns to 
Alfred Schütz ’s (1945) argument about ‘multiple 
realities’, which follows James’ closely but gives 
more attention to the ‘possibility of uncovering 
the conditions that must be fulfilled if we are to 
generate one realm of “reality”, one “finite province 
of meaning”, as opposed to another’ (3–4). However, 
Schütz concludes that each realm has a certain 
‘cognitive style’ and is not, as Goffman puts it, 
‘generated in accordance with certain structural 
principles’ (5). Thus, Goffman concludes that James 
and Schütz are ‘quite unconvincing in providing 
any kind of account as to how many different 
“worlds” there are and whether everyday, wide-
awake life can actually be seen as but one rule-
produced plane of being, if so seen at all’ (5).
Goffman (1974) observes that ‘what is really 
happening’ is a more complicated question than 
James or Schütz envisioned. Bateson ([1955] 1972) 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
118
shows us that ‘a bit of serious activity can be used 
as a model for putting together unserious versions 
of the same activity’ and, following John Austin 
(1962) and Wittgenstein (1958), ‘although an indi-
vidual may dream unrealities, it is still proper to 
say of him on that occasion that he is really 
dreaming’ (7). Thus, in Frame Analysis, Goffman 
(1974) begins with the assumption that individu-
als, when attending to any current situation, ‘face 
the question’ of ‘What is it that’s going on here?’, 
and he offers ‘a framework that could be appealed 
to for the answer’ (8), which begins with a 
‘frame’: 
I assume that definitions of a situation are built up 
in accordance with principles of organization 
which govern events – at least social ones – and 
our subjective involvement in them; frame is the 
word I use to refer to such of these basic elements 
as I am able to identify. (10–11)
Frames are both cognitive and action-based: 
Given their understanding of what it is that is 
going on, individuals fit their actions to this under-
standing and ordinarily find that the ongoing 
world supports this fitting. These organizational 
premises – sustained both in the mind and in 
activity – I call the ‘frame’ of the activity. (247)
Participants apply a frame to an ‘everyday strip of 
activity’ to render ‘what would otherwise be a 
meaningless aspect of the scene into something 
that is meaningful’ (83, 21). 
Frames consist of a primary framework that is 
‘seen by those who apply it as not depending on 
or harking back to some prior or “original” inter-
pretation’ (21) or a transformed frame, which is 
either the result of keying, which is a primary 
framework ‘transformed into something patterned 
on this activity but seen by the participants to be 
something quite else’ (44), or fabrication, which is 
a primary framework deceptively managed by one 
or more individuals ‘so that a party of one or more 
others will be induced to have a false belief about 
what it is that is going on’ (83). For example, the 
primary framework ‘fighting’ may be keyed as 
‘playing’ or ‘contest’ or it may be fabricated as a 
‘playful deceit’ such as ‘kidding’. 
8.6  SOCIOLINGUISTICS: FOOTINGS 
AND FORMS OF TALK
In later years, Goffman increasingly turned his 
attention to language, beginning with the final 
chapter in Frame Analysis and culminating in 
Forms of Talk in 1981. As Duranti (2003) points 
out, sociolinguistics had only recently been named 
as such in the early 1960s. Later that same decade, 
Goffman, William Labov and Dell Hymes con-
verged at the University of Pennsylvania, contrib-
uting to ‘an intellectual climate in which the study 
of language as used in social life gained momen-
tum’ (328). Forms of Talk reveals Goffman’s 
involvement in this period of sociolinguistic 
development. The analyses presented in this 
volume are firmly situated within scholarship on 
language, culture and society. 
The chapter on footings has provided the basis 
for most of the scholarship using a framing 
approach. Goffman (1981b) introduced ‘footing’ 
to explain how participants negotiate interpersonal 
relationships, or alignments, as they dynamically 
frame an interaction. Footings are ‘the alignment 
we take up to ourselves and the others present as 
expressed in the way we manage the production or 
reception of an utterance’ (128). Shifts in footing 
involve a shift in language use; a change in par-
ticipation status (who is speaking, who is being 
addressed); and ‘an alteration in the social capaci-
ties in which the persons present claim to be 
active’ (126). Goffman predicts that sociolinguists 
‘can be looked to for help in the study of footing, 
including the most subtle examples’ but ‘presum-
ably … must find a structural means of doing so’ 
(128). To begin this endeavor, he elaborates on the 
concept of ‘participant status’, introduced in 
Frame Analysis (224), by delineating the types of 
hearers into ‘participation frameworks’ and break-
ing down the traditional concept of the ‘speaker’ 
into ‘production formats’. 
The participation framework describes ‘the 
relation of … all the persons of a gathering’ to 
a given utterance (1981b: 137). A ‘hearer’ or 
‘listener’ may be a ‘ratified participant’ who is 
mutually acknowledged to be participating in the 
conversation or a ‘bystander’ who is minimally 
‘perceivable by the official participants’. The 
latter is either an ‘eavesdropper’ who purposively 
‘follow[s] the talk’, or an ‘overhearer’ who does 
so ‘unintentionally and inadvertently’. In multi-
party talk, the current speaker may address all the 
ratified participants or single out one or more rati-
fied participants, thus distinguishing between 
‘addressed’ and ‘unaddressed recipients’. In terms 
of production formats, given an utterance, the 
‘animator’ articulates the utterance, ‘the principal’ 
is the person whose position or beliefs are repre-
sented by the utterance, and the ‘author’ is respon-
sible for the selection of the words and sentiments 
(144–5). The ‘participation status’ is the relation 
of any member of a social gathering to an utter-
ance and includes both the production format and 
participation framework (226). 
Goffman’s former students applied or extended 
his analysis of participation frameworks. 

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM, ERVING GOFFMAN
119
Philips (1972) used the approach to understand 
the scholastic performance of Warm Springs 
Indian children. Goodwin (1990) elaborated on 
participation frameworks with her notion of the 
‘participant framework’ to include an understanding 
of speakers’ and hearers’ respective monitoring.
In the first sociolinguistic collection devoted to 
framing, Tannen (1993) demonstrates that framing 
theory is fundamental to linguistic discourse 
analysis and, conversely, that discourse analysis 
provides valuable insight into the linguistic means 
through which frames are actively created. For 
example, Ribeiro (1993, 1994) uses framing 
to demonstrate that a woman experiencing a 
‘psychotic crisis’ during a psychiatric interview in 
a psychiatric hospital is incoherent based on the 
doctor’s definition of the situation but coherent 
within the frame that she creates. Tannen and 
Wallat (1993) use framing and footing to account 
for the complexity of a medical encounter in 
which a pediatrician examines a cerebral-palsied 
child in the mother’s presence at a Child 
Development Center. Tannen and Wallat explain 
how the pediatrician shifts among three frames 
to interact with four parties. Each frame consists 
of functions of talk, such as entertaining or 
explaining; linguistic register; and the footings the 
pediatrician takes up with respect to the four other 
parties (she addresses, ignores, or puts ‘on hold’ 
the child, the mother, the video crew and the 
medical residents who will view the recording at a 
later date) (65).
Goffman (1981b: 156), commenting on an 
earlier publication of Tannen and Wallat’s study 
(1982, then forthcoming), notes ‘the capacity of a 
dexterous speaker to jump back and forth, keeping 
different circles in play’. However, Tannen and 
Wallat (1993) suggest that, in this encounter, the 
pediatrician is burdened by the need to balance 
multiple, and often conflicting, frames; for exam-
ple, answering the mother’s questions in the con-
sultation frame interrupts the examination 
sequence, and reporting medical information to 
the video audience ‘may upset the mother, neces-
sitating more explanation in the consultation 
frame’ (67). They note that the pediatrician was 
aware of the difficulty she had in examining the 
child in the mother’s presence and, upon hearing 
their analysis, ‘was pleased to see a theoretical 
basis for what she had instinctively sensed’ (71).8 
Similarly, in Kendall (2008), a framing analysis 
of dinnertime interaction reveals that the mother 
bears a heavy interactional load through the 
number of frames she creates and sustains, and the 
need to juggle several frames simultaneously. 
I demonstrate that the mother accomplishes 
numerous tasks and activities by taking up multi-
ple discursive positions (Davies and Harré, 1990) 
within several interactional frames, whereas the 
father takes up fewer positions within fewer 
frames. Furthermore, the positions they take up 
are gendered, reflecting a sex-based division of 
labor, even though both parents work full-time 
outside the home. Through these gendered pat-
terns of participation, the parents create gendered 
parental identities and negotiate their parental 
authority with their daughter and with each other. 
8.7  CURRENT RESEARCH: APPLYING 
GOFFMAN
Framing and footing have proved to be fruitful for 
the analysis of language and identity, which is not 
surprising since they are components of a broader 
framework in which the self is actively achieved 
through interaction. Schiffrin (2006) describes 
and employs a ‘social constructivist perspective 
on identity drawn largely from the work of Erving 
Goffman’ (105). Ribeiro (2006) uses a framing 
approach in her analysis of identity, incorporating 
footing (Goffman, 1981b), positioning (Davies 
and Harré, 1990; Hollway, 1984) and voice 
(Bakhtin, 1981) to elucidate different ways in 
which participants determine ‘what’s going on 
here’ and ‘how I mean what I say’ (50). Together, 
these concepts provide a way of ‘capturing what 
we mean by identity or “doing identity work” in 
everyday conversation’ (50). 
Other analyses involving framing and footing 
focus on: workplace discourse (Kendall, 2004); 
psychiatric interviews (Ribeiro and Bastos, 2005); 
political talk show interviews (Lauerbach, 
2007); parent/child interaction (Gordon, 2002, 
2006, 2008); children’s free play in a therapeutic 
setting (Buchbinder, 2008); and irony in conversa-
tion (Clift, 1999). Keying appears in an analysis of 
pragmatic development in peer talk (Blum-Kulka 
et al., 2004) and in humorous narratives (Kotthoff, 
2000). Fabricated frames are employed in the 
analysis of telephone conversations (Dornelles 
and Garcez, 2001).
The concept of participation frameworks has 
provided a particularly fruitful approach for ana-
lyzing language. Duranti (2003) identifies partici-
pation framework as one of three ‘preferred units 
of analysis’ in the current paradigm of the study of 
language and culture, along with ‘language prac-
tice’ and ‘self/person/identity’ (333). Participation 
frameworks have been used to examine: workplace 
discourse (Rae, 2001); courtroom discourse 
(Matoesian, 2001); discourse markers in discussion 
groups (Waring, 2003); fraternity talk (Kiesling, 
2005); bilingual education (He, 2003); moral 
irony (Shoaps, 2007); speech therapy (Leahy, 
2008); political interviews (Bull and Fetzer, 2006); 
family discourse (Kendall, 2006); interpreting 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
120
(Leung and Gibbons, 2008); online identities 
(Aarsand, 2008); and telephone conversations 
(Su, 2009).
Recent scholarship on language also addresses 
other areas of Goffman’s (1976/1979) work: his 
analysis of gender advertisements has been 
employed in the analysis of magazine advertising 
(Bell and Milic, 2002; Rohlinger, 2002) and a 
Singaporean national advertising campaign (Lazar, 
2000). Role distance (Goffman, 1961/1997) is 
used in the analysis of public participation broad-
casting (Thornborrow 2001); the dramaturgical 
metaphor and ‘response cries’ in the analysis of 
online chat logs (Goddard, 2003); and ‘remedial 
interchanges’ (Goffman, 1971) in the analysis of 
complaint sequences (Dersley and Wootton, 2001).
8.8  CONCLUSION: GOFFMAN 
AND SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Goffman, some say, was a genius, displaying 
‘incredible perception of the microworld of social 
interaction’ (Scheff, 2005: 52). He was a veritable 
‘microscope of human nuance’ (Lemert, 1997: ix). 
Others praise him for ‘push[ing] sociology much 
deeper into the complexities of action’ (Cohen, 
2000: 74). Others fault his approach as unsystem-
atic (Psathas, 1980; Schegloff, 1988; Scheibe, 
2000) or hopelessly small scale (Gouldner, 1970). 
Yet Goffman’s influence throughout the social sci-
ences is evident and, in sociolinguistics, has 
increased over the decades. Perhaps we do not 
need to look to Goffman for theory, method or 
data in the conventional sense. Goffman himself 
saw his work as fundamentally exploratory in 
character, a preliminary to ‘the kind of sociologi-
cal theorizing and investigation the critics faulted 
him for not providing, not a substitute for that 
serious, systematic work’ (Smith, 2006: 111). As 
Scheff and Phillips (2006) argue, his contributions 
are ‘necessary before conventional science can be 
applied’ (6). 
Goffman’s approach most resembles that of 
Simmel (G. W. H. Smith, 1994; Smith, 2006), 
who distinguished form and content by examining 
a variety of social experiences to identify the 
underlying forms of human association: ‘conflict 
and accommodation’, ‘deference and hierarchy’, 
‘attachments and degradation’ (Plummer, 2000: 
199). Likewise, Goffman analyses interactions to 
identify the underlying order in the kinds of face-
work, the stages of remedial interchange, and so 
on. In terms of presentation, Smith (2006) explains 
that Goffman’s work is primarily conceptual, 
again similar to Simmel. Goffman approached the 
new terrain of the interaction order by ‘articulating 
the concepts’, connecting them into ‘conceptual 
frameworks … organized around an analytical 
theme’, and illustrating these concepts with exam-
ples. Thus, developing ‘richly illustrated concep-
tual frameworks is the analytical core’ of 
Goffman’s method (112). Nevertheless, like others 
in the Chicago school, Goffman adhered to the 
importance of naturalistic observation. His concepts 
were formed inductively in light of fieldwork and 
other kinds of data-gathering.
Perhaps the endurance of Goffman’s work is 
best summed up by Lemert: 
The experience Goffman effects is that of coloniz-
ing a new social place into which the reader 
enters, from which to exit never quite the same. To 
have once, if only once, seen the social world from 
within such a place is never after to see it other-
wise, ever after to read the world anew. In thus 
seeing differently, we are other than we were 
(1997: xiii).
Goffman’s work continues to offer directions for 
the study of language in context, inspiring new 
ideas and illuminating everyday processes of talk.
NOTES
1 In fact, the term was not in popular use for 
several decades after Blumer’s coinage in 1937 
(Plummer, 2000). In interviews conducted in 1980 
with 11 scholars who wrote theses in sociology at 
the University of Chicago between 1942 and 1959, 
only four claimed the label even though all were 
recognized as symbolic interactionists (Verhoeven, 
1995). Goffman claims that the ‘symbolic interac-
tion’ label was adopted in large measure in response 
to the separation of ethnomethodology from the 
Society for Social Problems (Verhoeven, 1993).
2 According to Goffman, his teacher, Everett 
Hughes was his greatest influence (Verhoeven, 
1993). Hughes studied at the University of Chicago 
under Robert Ezra Park, Ernest W. Burgess, and other 
noted scholars. Hughes considered Park his primary 
mentor (Chapoulie, 1996). Park founded the Chicago 
School (Strauss and Fisher, 1978) and, according to 
Goffman, ‘the whole Hughesian tradition’ (Verhoeven, 
1993: 321). Park and Charles H. Cooley were stu-
dents of Dewey and Mead (Carey, 2009: 110) and 
Park was a student of Simmel (Plummer, 2000: 200). 
Goffman’s other influential teacher, Lloyd Warner, 
became a protégé of Radcliffe-Brown (Smith, 2006), 
who was strongly influenced by Durkheim and 
Simmel (Stark, 1989: 85). Goffman notes that 
Radcliffe-Brown was central to his own interests and 
concerns and provided him with ‘a model for writing 
papers – much more than any sociologist’ (Verhoeven, 
1993: 321). According to Goffman, Mead provided 

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM, ERVING GOFFMAN
121
him with his general approach to sociology but notes 
that ‘it could have derived from Dewey almost as 
well’ (Verhoeven, 1993: 318, 336). 
3 Goffman is notoriously difficult to classify. See 
Smith (1999: 4–5) for citations defining him as sym-
bolic interactionist, structuralist, phenomenological, 
existentialist, ethogenic and symbolic realist. 
4 Goffman (1963a: 16–17 fn. 6) cites Park 
(1927: 738) to much the same effect.
5 In Discourse and Identity, Benwell and Stokoe 
(2006: 34) argue that, unlike Butler, Goffman’s con-
ceptualization of gender is ‘premised on a rational, 
intending self’. Conversely, earlier scholars credit him 
with contributing to the continental structuralists’ 
efforts to ‘delete’ or ‘decenter’ the subject (Gonos, 
1977; Jameson, 1976), which is the theoretical work 
underlying Butler’s later theory of performativity. In 
regards to gender, Butler’s (1990: 25) statement that 
‘there is no gender identity behind the expressions of 
identity’ echoes Goffman’s earlier conclusion that 
‘[o]ne might just as well say there is no gender iden-
tity. There is only a schedule for the portrayal of 
gender’ ([1976] 1979: 8).
6 This quote, which became known in sociology 
as the ‘W. I. Thomas dictum’, actually appears in a 
book co-authored with Dorothy S. Thomas (Thomas 
and Thomas, 1928: 572).
7 According to Layder (2006), while symbolic 
interactionism is ‘careful to address the “point of 
view of the actor,” phenomenology takes this as its 
central concern’, concentrating on ‘people’s con-
sciousness and experience of the world through the 
use of their senses’ (92).
8 This identification of an everyday problem 
harks back to the Chicago school. Gross (2007) com-
ments that what the practitioners of the school ‘had 
in common’ is that they ‘identified the practical prob-
lems and mundane exigencies that their informants 
experienced in the course of their everyday lives’ 
(196).
REFERENCES
Aarsand, P. A. (2008) ‘Frame switches and identity perform-
ances: alternating between online and offline’, Text and 
Talk, 28(2): 147–65.
Atkinson, P., Delamont, S. and Housley, W. (2007) Contours 
of Culture: Complex Ethnography and the Ethnography of 
Complexity. New York: Alta Mira Press. pp. 179–204.
Austin, J. L. (1962) Sense and Sensibilia. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination: Four Essays. 
M. Holquist (ed.). Tr. C. Emerson and M. Holquist. Austin, 
TX: University of Texas Press. (1st edn, 1935.)
Bargiela-Chiappini, F. (2003) ‘Face and politeness: new 
(insights) for old (concepts)’, Journal of Pragmatics, 35: 
1453–69.
Bateson, G. (1955) ‘A theory of play and fantasy’, Psychiatric 
Research Reports, 2: 39–51. Reprinted in G. Bateson 
(1972), Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Chicago: Chicago 
University Press. pp. 177–93. 
Becker, H. S. (1986) Doing Things Together: Selected Papers. 
Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press. 
Bell, P. and Milic, M. (2002) ‘Goffman’s gender advertise-
ments revisited: combining content analysis with semiotic 
analysis’, Visual Communication, 1(2): 203–22.
Benwell, B. and Stokoe, E. (2006) Discourse and Identity. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Blum-Kulka, S., Huck-Taglicht, D. and Avni, H. (2004) 
‘The social and discursive spectrum of peer talk’, Discourse 
Studies, 6: 307–28.
Blumer, H. (1937) ‘Social psychology’, in E. P. Schmidt (ed.), 
Man and Society: A Substantive Introduction to the Social 
Science. New York: Prentice-Hall. pp. 144–98.
Blumer, H. (1969) Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and 
Method. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness: Some Universals 
in Language Usage. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Buchbinder, M. H. (2008) ‘“You’re still sick!” Framing, foot-
ing, and participation in children’s medical play’, Discourse 
Studies, 10(2): 139–59.
Bull, P. and Fetzer, A. (2006) ‘Who are we and who are you?: 
the strategic use of forms of address in political interviews’, 
Text and Talk, 26(1): 3–37.
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion 
of Identity. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1993) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits 
of ‘Sex’. New York: Routledge.
Carey, J. W. (2009) Communication as Culture: Essays on 
Media and Society. Revised edn. New York: Routledge.
Cepeda, G. (2006) ‘La voz empatica medica y las estrategias 
de cortesia verbal [The medical empathy voice and oral 
politeness strategies in a clinical interview]’, Estudios 
Filologicos, 41: 55–69.
Chapoulie, J. (1996) 'Everett Hughes and the Chicago 
tradition', Sociological Theory, 14(1): 3–29.
Clift, R. (1999) ‘Irony in conversation’, Language in Society, 
28(4): 523–53.
Cohen, I. J. (2000) ‘Theories of action and praxis’, in 
B. S. Turner (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Social 
Theory. 2nd edn. Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 73–111.
Cooley, C. H. (1922) Human Nature and the Social Order. 2nd 
edn. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Cutler, C. (2007) ‘The co-construction of whiteness in an 
Mc battle’, Pragmatics, 17(1): 9–22.
Davies, B. and Harré, R. (1990) ‘Positioning: conversation 
and the production of selves’, Journal for the Theory of 
Social Behavior, 20(1): 43–63.
de Beauvoir, S. (1953) The Second Sex. Tr. Howard Madison 
Parshley. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Delanty, G. (2000) ‘The foundations of social theory: origins 
and trajectories’, in B. S. Turner (ed.), The Blackwell 
Companion to Social Theory. 2nd edn. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 21–46.
Denzin, N. K. (1992) Symbolic Interactionism and Cultural 
Studies. Cambridge, MA and Oxford: Blackwell. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
122
Dersley, I. and Wootton, A. J. (2001) ‘In the heat of the 
sequence: interactional features preceding walkouts from 
argumentative talk’, Language in Society, 30: 611–38.
Dewey, J. (1896) ‘The reflex arc concept in psychology’, 
Psychological Review, 3: 357–70.
Dornelles, C. and Garcez, P. M. (2001) ‘Making sense of 
nonsense: fabrication, ambiguity, error and clarification in 
the organization of experience in ordinary conversation’, 
Journal of Pragmatics, 33(11): 1707–30.
Ducharme, L. J. and Fine, G. A. (1994) ‘No escaping obliga-
tion: Erving Goffman on the demands and constraints of 
play’, in R. Bogue and M. Spariosu (eds), The Play of the 
Self. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press. 
pp. 89–112.
Duranti, A. (2003) ‘Language as culture in U.S. anthropology: 
three paradigms’, Current Anthropology, 44(3): 323–35.
Durkheim, E. (1954) The Elementary Forms of the Religious 
life. Tr. J. W. Swain. Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Friedsen, E. (1983) ‘Celebrating Erving Goffman’, Contemporary 
Sociology, 12(4): 259–62.
Goddard, A. (2003) ‘“Is there anybody out there?”: creative 
language play and “literariness” in internet relay chat 
(IRC)’, in A. Schorr, W. Campbell, and M. Schenk (eds), 
Communication Research and Media Science in Europe. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 325–43.
Goffman, E. (1955) ‘On face-work: an analysis of ritual ele-
ments in social interaction’, Psychiatry: Journal of 
Interpersonal Relations, 18(3): 213–31. Reprinted in 
Goffman, E. (1967) Interaction Ritual. pp. 5–46.
Goffman, E. (1956) ‘The nature of deference and demeanor’, 
American Anthropologist, 58: 473–502. Reprinted in 
Goffman, Erving (1967) Interaction Ritual. pp. 47–96.
Goffman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. 
New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Goffman, E. (1961) Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of 
Mental Patients and Other Inmates. New York: Doubleday 
Anchor. (1st edn, 1956.)
Goffman, E. (1963a) Behavior in Public Places: Notes on the 
Social Organization of Gatherings. New York: The Free 
Press.
Goffman, E. (1963b) Stigma: Notes on the Management of 
Spoiled Identity. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Simon & Schuster.
Goffman, E. (1967) Interaction Ritual: Essays on Face-To-Face 
Behavior. New York: Doubleday Anchor.
Goffman, E. (1971) Relations in Public: Microstudies of the 
Public Order. New York: Basic Books.
Goffman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis: An Essay on the 
Organization of Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
Goffman, E. (1976) ‘Gender advertisements’, Studies in the 
Anthropology of Visual Communication, 3(2): 69–154. 
Reprinted as Goffman, E. (1979) Gender Advertisements. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Goffman, E. (1977) ‘The arrangement between the sexes’, 
Theory and Society, 4(3): 301–31.
Goffman, E. (1981a) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Goffman, E. (1981b) ‘Footing’, in Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 124–59. First 
published (1979) Semiotica, 25(1–2): 1–29.
Goffman, E. (1983) ‘Felicity’s condition’, American Journal of 
Sociology, 89(1): 1–53.
Goffman, E. (1961 [1997]) ‘Role distance’, in C. Lemert and 
A. Branaman (eds), The Goffman Reader. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 35–41. 
Gonos, G. (1977) ‘“Situation” vs. “frame”: the “interaction-
ist” and the “structuralist” analyses of everyday life’, 
American Sociological Review, 4: 854–67.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990) He-Said-She-Said: Talk as Social 
Organization Among Black Children. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press.
Gordon, C. (2002) ‘“I’m Mommy and you’re Natalie”: role-
reversal and embedded frames in mother–child discourse’, 
Language in Society, 31(5): 679–720.
Gordon, C. (2006) ‘Reshaping prior text, reshaping identities’, 
Text and Talk, 26(4): 543–69.
Gordon, C. (2008) ‘A(p)parent play: blending frames and 
reframing in family talk’, Language in Society, 37(3): 
319–49.
Gouldner, A. (1970) ‘Other symptoms of the crisis: 
Goffman’s dramaturgy and other new theories’, in The 
Coming Crisis of Western Sociology. New York: Basic 
Books. pp. 378–90.
Gross, N. (2007) ‘Pragmatism, phenomenology, and twentieth 
century American sociology’, in C. J. Calhoun (ed.), 
Sociology in America. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press. pp.183–224.
He, A. W. (2003) ‘Novices and their speech roles in 
Chinese heritage language classes’, in R. Bayley and 
S. R. Schecter (eds), Language Socialization in Bilingual 
and Multilingual Societies. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters. pp. 128–46.
Hickey, L. and Stewart, M. (eds) (2004) Politeness in Europe. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Hollway, W. (1984) ‘Gender difference and the production 
of subjectivity’, in J. Henriques, W. Hollway, C. Urwin, 
V. Couze and V. Walkerdine (eds), Changing the Subject. 
London: Methuen. pp. 227–63.
Holtgraves, T. (2002) Language as Social Action: Social 
Psychology and Language Use. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates.
James, W. (1918 [1890]) ‘The consciousness of self’, in The 
Principles of Psychology. Vol. 1. New York: Henry Holt 
and Company. pp. 291–401. 
James, W. (1890 [1925]) The philosophy of William James. 
Modern Library edn. New York: Random House. pp. 128–9. 
James, W. (1890 [1950]) ‘The perception of reality’, in 
The principles of psychology. Vol. 2. New York: Henry Holt 
and Company. pp. 283–324.
Jameson, F. (1976) ‘On Goffman’s frame analysis’, Theory and 
Society, 3(1): 119–33.
Joas, H. (1987) ‘Symbolic interactionism’, in A. Giddens and 
J. Turner (eds), Social Theory Today. Oxford: Polity Press. 
pp. 82–115.
Karpf, K. B. (1932) American Social Psychology. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Kendall, S. (2004) ‘Framing authority: gender, face, and 
mitigation at a radio network’, Discourse and Society, 15: 
55–79.

SYMBOLIC INTERACTIONISM, ERVING GOFFMAN
123
Kendall, S. (2006) ‘“Honey, I’m home!”: framing in family 
dinnertime homecomings’, Text and Talk, 26: 411–42.
Kendall, S. (2008) ‘The balancing act: framing gendered 
parental identities at dinnertime’, Language in Society, 37: 
539–68.
Kiesling, S. F. (2005) ‘Homosocial desire in men’s talk: balanc-
ing and recreating cultural discourses of masculinity ’. 
Language in Society, 34(5): 695–727.
Kim, K.-k. (2003) Order and Agency in Modernity: Talcott 
Parsons, Erving Goffman, and Harold Garfinkel. Albany, 
NY: State University of New York Press.
Kotthoff, H. (2000) ‘Gender and joking: on the complexities of 
women’s image politics in humorous narratives’, Journal of 
Pragmatics, 32: 55–80.
Krueger, E. T. and Reckless, W. C. (1931) Social Psychology. 
New York: Longmans, Green.
Kurri, K. and Wahlstrom, J. (2007) ‘Reformulations of agent-
less talk in psychotherapy’, Text and Talk, 27(3): 315–38.
Lauerbach, G. (2007) ‘Argumentation in political talk show 
interviews’, Journal of Pragmatics, 39(8): 1388–419.
Lawler, S. (2008) Identity: Sociological Perspectives. Malden, 
MA and Cambridge, UK: Polity Press. 
Layder, D. (2006) Understanding Social Theory. 2nd edn. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lazar, M. M. (2000) ‘Gender, discourse and semiotics: the 
politics of parenthood representations’, Discourse and 
Society, 11(3): 373–400.
Leahy, M. M. (2008) ‘Multiple voices in Charles Van Riper’s 
desensitization therapy’, International Journal of Language 
and Communication Disorders, 43(1): 69–80.
Lemert, C. (1997) ‘Goffman’, in C. Lemert and A. Branaman 
(eds), The Goffman Reader. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. ix–xliii.
Leung, E. S. M. and Gibbons, J. (2008) ‘Who is responsible? 
Participant roles in legal interpreting cases’, Multilingua, 
27(3): 177–91.
McCall, M. M. and Becker, H. S. (1990) ‘Introduction’, in 
H. S. Becker and M. M. Hall (eds), Symbolic Interaction 
and Cultural Studies. Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press. pp. 1–15.
Manning, P. (2005) Reinvigorating the tradition of symbolic 
interactionism’, Symbolic Interaction, 28(2): 167–73.
Manusov, V., Koenig Kellas, J., and Trees, A. R. (2004) 
‘Do unto others? Conversational moves and perceptions of 
attentiveness toward other’s face in accounting sequences 
between friends’, Human Communication Research, 30(4): 
514–39.
Marquez-Reiter, R. (2001) Linguistic Politeness in Britain and 
Uruguay: A Contrastive Study of Requests and Apologies. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Matoesian, G. M. (2001) Law and the Language of Identity: 
Discourse in the William Kennedy Smith Rape trial. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Mead, G. H. (1934) Mind, Self, and Society: From the 
Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist. Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press.
Mortensen, N. (2000) ‘American pragmatism’, in H. Andersen 
and L. B. Kaspersen (eds), Classical and Modern Social 
Theory. Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp.109–20.
Nguyen, H. t. (2007) ‘Rapport building in language instruc-
tion: a microanalysis of the multiple resources in teacher 
talk’, Language and Education, 21(4): 284–303.
Park, R. E. (1927) ‘Human nature and collective behavior’, 
American Journal of Sociology, 2: 733–41.
Philips, S. U. (1972) ‘Participant structures and communicative 
competence: Warm Springs children in community and 
classroom’, in C. B. Cazden, V. P. John, and D. Hymes 
(eds), Functions of Language in the Classroom. New York: 
Teachers College Press. pp. 370–94.
Placencia, M. E. and García, C. (eds) (2007) Research on 
Politeness in the Spanish-Speaking World. London: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Plummer, K. (2000) ‘Symbolic interactionism in the twentieth 
century’, in B. S. Turner (ed.), The Blackwell Companion 
to Social Theory. 2nd edn. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. 193–222.
Psathas, G. (1980) ‘Approaches to the study of the world of 
everyday life’, Human Studies, 3: 3–17.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. (1952 [1965]) Structure and Function in 
Primitive Society. New York: The Free Press. 
Rae, J. (2001) ‘Organizing participation in interaction: doing 
participation framework’, Research on Language and 
Social Interaction, 34(2): 253–78.
Ribeiro, B. T. (1993) ‘Framing in psychotic discourse’, in 
D. Tannen (ed.), Framing in Discourse. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. pp. 77–112.
Ribeiro, B. T. (1994) Coherence in Psychotic Discourse. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Ribeiro, B. T. (2006) ‘Footing, positioning, voice: Are we talk-
ing about the same thing?’, in A. DeFina and D. Schiffrin 
(eds), Discourse and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 48–82.
Ribeiro, B. T. and Bastos, L. C. (2005) ‘Telling stories in two 
psychiatric interviews: a discussion on frame and narrative’, 
AILA Review, 18: 58–75.
Rock, P. (1979) The Making of Symbolic Interactionism. 
London: Macmillan.
Rohlinger, D. A. (2002) ‘Eroticizing men: cultural influences 
on advertising and male objectification’, Sex Roles, 
46(3, 4): 61–74.
Scheff, T. J. (2005) ‘Looking-glass self: Goffman as symbolic 
interactionist’, Symbolic Interaction, 28(2): 147–66.
Scheff, T. J. and Phillips, B. (2006) Goffman Unbound!: A New 
Paradigm for Social Science. Boulder, CO: Paradigm 
Publishers.
Schegloff, E. A. (1988) ‘Goffman and the analysis of conversa-
tion’, in P. Drew and A. Wootton (eds), Erving Gofman: 
Exploring the Interaction Order. Cambridge: Polity. 
pp. 189–35.
Scheibe, K. E. (2000) The Drama of Everyday Life. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Schiffrin, D. (1994) Approaches to Discourse. Cambridge, MA: 
Blackwell.
Schiffrin, D. (2006) ‘From linguistic reference to social reality’, 
in A. de Fina and D. Schiffrin (eds), Discourse and Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 103–34.
Schutz, A. (1945) ‘On multiple realities’, Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 5: 533–76. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
124
Shoaps, R. (2007) ‘“Moral irony”: modal particles, moral 
persons and indirect stance-taking in Sakapultek dis-
course’, Pragmatics, 17(2): 297–335.
Smith, G. (1999) ‘Introduction: interpreting Goffman’s 
Sociological legacy’, in G. Smith (ed.), Goffman and Social 
Organization: Studies in a Sociological Legacy. New York 
and London: Routledge. pp. 1–18.
Smith, G. (2006) Erving Goffman. London and New York: 
Routledge.
Smith, G. W. H. (1994) ‘Snapshots sub specie aeternitatis: 
Simmel, Goffman and formal sociology’, in D. Frisby (ed.), 
Georg Simmel: Critical Assessments. London: Routledge. 
pp. 354–83.
Stark, R. (1989) Sociology. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Stewart, M. (2008) ‘Protecting speaker’s face in impolite 
exchanges: the negotiation of face-wants in workplace 
interaction’, Journal of Politeness Research, 4(1): 31–53.
Strauss, A. and Fisher, B. (1978) ‘Interactionism’, in 
T. Bottomore and R. Nisbet (eds), A History of Sociological 
Analysis. London: Hutchinson. pp. 457–98.
Su, H.-Y. (2009) ‘Code-switching in managing a face-
threatening communicative task: Footing and ambiguity 
in conversational interaction in Taiwan’, Journal of 
Pragmatics, 41(2): 372–92.
Tannen, D. (ed.) (1993) Framing in Discourse. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Tannen, D. and Wallat, C. (1982) ‘A sociolinguistic analysis of 
multiple demands on the pediatrician in doctor/mother/
child interaction’, in R. Di Pietro (ed.), Linguistics and the 
Professions. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 39–50.
Tannen, D. and Wallat, C. (1993) ‘Interactive frames and 
knowledge schemas in interaction: examples from a 
medical examination/interview’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Framing 
in Discourse. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 57–76.
Thomas, W. I. and Thomas, D. S. (1928) The child in 
America: Behavior Problems and Programs. New York: 
Knopf.
Thornborrow, J. (2001) ‘Authenticating talk: building public 
identities in audience participation broadcasting’, Discourse 
Studies, 3(4): 459–79.
Tracy, K. (2008) ‘“Reasonable hostility”: situation-appropriate 
face-attack’, Journal of Politeness Research, 4(2): 169–91.
Turner, B. S. (2000) ‘Preface to the second edition’, in 
B. S. Turner (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Social 
Theory. 2nd edn. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishers. 
pp. xiv–xviii.
Verhoeven, J. C. (1993) ‘Interview with Erving Goffman, 
1980’, Research on Language and Social Interaction, 
26(3): 317–48.
Verhoeven, J. C. (1995) Methodological and Metascientific 
Problems in Symbolic Interactionism: A Report on the 
Opinions of Third Generation Symbolic Interactionists. 2nd 
edn. Leuven: Département Sociologie.
Waring, H. Z. (2003) ‘“Also” as a discourse marker: its use in 
disjunctive and disaffiliative environments’, Discourse 
Studies, 5(3): 415–36.
Watts, R. J. (2003) Politeness. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Watts, R. J., Ide, S. and Ehlich, K. (2006) Politeness in 
Language: Studies in its History, Theory and Practice. 2nd 
edn. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wittgenstein, L. (1958) Philosophical Investigations. Tr. 
G. E. M. Anscombe. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Ethnomethodology and 
Membership Categorization 
Analysis
R o b e r t  G a r o t  a n d  T i m  B e r a r d 1
9
9.1 INTRODUCTION
Any distinction between ethnomethodology and 
membership categorization analysis would risk 
being misleading, in that membership categoriza-
tion analysis is very much a variant of ethnometh-
odology, not an alternative tradition of inquiry. 
Even so, membership categorization has clearly 
established itself as a specific variant within the 
broader tradition of ethnomethodology, and there-
fore merits some specific attention in any longer 
survey of contemporary ethnomethodology. For 
this reason, ethnomethodology and membership 
categorization analysis are discussed under sepa-
rate headings below. While there are no official 
criteria for identifying scholarship as membership 
categorization analysis, much of its specificity 
is due to a confluence of two factors. First, sub-
stantively, membership categorization analysis 
addresses social identity, understood as an accom-
plishment of practical action and practical reason-
ing. By contrast, ethnomethodology involves, very 
broadly, the study of practical action and practical 
reasoning, whether with respect to identity or to 
anything else. Secondly, with respect to founda-
tional insights, membership categorization analy-
sis draws heavily upon relevant insights from 
Harvey Sacks, the founder of conversation analy-
sis, while also drawing on various themes and 
resources in the tradition of ethnomethodology, 
founded by Harold Garfinkel. By contrast, some 
ethnomethodology does not draw significantly 
upon the work of Sacks, and when ethnomethod-
ologists do utilize the work of Sacks, a wide range 
of his insights on language and communication 
can be used, many of which deal with other mat-
ters than membership categories. 
Conversation analysis is considered by many 
ethnomethodologists to be an offshoot of early 
ethnomethodology, albeit an offshoot that has 
developed significantly and successfully into a 
largely autonomous discipline. Other, more recent 
variants of ethnomethodology, including studies 
of work, and especially membership categoriza-
tion analysis, are not nearly so autonomous, but 
illustrate an important trend in ethnomethodology. 
The development of ethnomethodology can be 
characterized by a simultaneous expansion of the 
study of practical action and practical reasoning to 
an increasing variety of topics, and by the devel-
opment of substantive specializations within this 
increasingly broad scope. Both its expansion and 
its specializations bring ethnomethodological 
scholarship into increasing contact with other tra-
ditions in the study of society, social institutions, 
professions and language.
9.2 ETHNOMETHODOLOGY
Ethnomethodology (EM), one of the primary 
social theories to emerge out of the second half of 
the twentieth century,2 arose from contentious 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
126
beginnings3 to become one of the most remarkable 
and remarked upon approaches to social action 
and talk, recognized throughout the world (Lemert, 
2002; Rawls, 2002; Clayman, 1995). Although 
this is an introductory essay, it is not in itself 
ethnomethodological; in fact, an essay such 
as this, tracing the philosophical roots and branch-
ing tendencies of EM, is not encouraged by 
Garfinkel, the founder of EM. As Lynch and 
Sharrock (2003: xxviii) state, ‘Garfinkel actively 
discouraged his students from writing expositions 
of his ideas and of how those ideas relate to tradi-
tions of philosophical and social science scholar-
ship. He encouraged them instead to conduct 
studies of particular activities and work out the 
meaning and implications of familiar sociological 
themes’.4 Nonetheless, overviews of EM are 
not uncommon, and some are exemplary (Lynch 
and Sharrock, 2003; Rawls, 2002; Maynard and 
Clayman, 1991; Heritage, 1987, and above all, 
Heritage, 1984).
The corpus of EM consists of a wide range of 
studies, and, as Maynard and Clayman (1991: 
386) note, ‘it is more accurate to say there are 
several bodies of work, rather than a single enter-
prise’, yet its core ideas may be defined in terms 
of radical reflexivity. According to Melvin Pollner 
(1991: 370), ‘Radical reflexivity – the recursively 
comprehensive appreciation of the “accomplished” 
character of all social activity – enjoins the analyst 
to displace the discourse and practices that ground 
and constitute his/her endeavors and explore the 
very work of grounding and constituting’. As 
Zimmerman and Wieder (1971: 289) state, the 
task of EM is to explore ‘how members of society 
go about the task of seeing, describing, and 
explaining order in the world in which they live’ 
(Heap, 1980: 89). In other words, all the subject 
areas of the social sciences (that one might peruse 
in an introductory textbook), are important for EM 
not as objectively given facts of society, but as 
phenomena which members might make real 
through their mundane activities and accounts.5 
Early ethnomethodologists were radically reflex-
ive in specifying how seemingly obdurate features 
of everyday life such as objective reality (Pollner, 
1984), gender (Garfinkel, 1967: 116–85), bureauc-
racy (Bittner, 1965; Zimmerman, 1966, 1969a, 1969b, 
1969c), the police (Bittner, 1967; Sacks, 1972), 
method and measurement (Lynch, 1991), the work 
of the discovering sciences (Bjelic and Lynch, 
1989), and the convict code (Wieder, 1974) are 
ongoing, situated, accountable accomplishments 
of ordinary people around the world. In so doing, 
they respecified the work of the social sciences, 
and provided part of the groundwork for wide-
ranging interpretive cultural and linguistic 
approaches which emphasize agency and mean-
ing. This essay will briefly explore EM’s history, 
philosophical roots, and contributions to studies 
of language.
9.3 HISTORY
In working on Fred Strodtbeck’s jury project in 
1945, Garfinkel searched for a term in the Yale 
cross-cultural area files to describe the jurors’ 
methodology (Turner, 1974; also see Dingwall, 
2000; Rawls, 2002; Lynch and Sharrock, 2002). 
As Garfinkel stated, ‘If it were “ethnobotany”, 
then it had to do somehow or other with his 
[a member’s] knowledge of and his grasp of what 
were for members adequate methods for dealing 
with botanical matters’ (Turner, 1974: 16–17). For 
all practical purposes, jurors with limited legal 
training had to differentiate issues of fact from 
opinion, determining adequate grounds for evidence 
and demonstration, in extremely consequential 
matters. While ‘it was not a methodology that any 
of my colleagues would honor if they were 
attempting to staff the sociology department … 
the jurors’ concerns for such issues seemed to be 
undeniable’ (ibid.: 16). Rather than evaluating 
jurors’ methods in terms of an extraneous 
criterion of adequacy, Garfinkel grappled to under-
stand their ways of accomplishing their day’s 
work. Such an appreciation of how big topics and 
consequential matters are artfully addressed as a 
mundane, everyday affair has the potential to alter 
fundamentally the foundations of social science. 
Pages 31–34 of Studies in Ethnomethodology 
(1967), in which Garfinkel lays out the ‘policies’ 
of ethnomethodology as a sort of manifesto, 
capture better than any other text the excitement 
and possibility of this early period.6
Until recently, Studies in Ethnomethodology 
remained Garfinkel’s only book. Rather, ‘to a 
large extent his contribution is embodied in the 
work of others on whom he has had profound 
influence’ (Lynch and Sharrock, 2003: x). In his 
‘Acknowledgements as an Autobiographical 
Account’, Garfinkel (2002) notes the many rela-
tionships that grew out of, and bore the fruit of, 
EM. Especially notable is how Garfinkel was able 
to leave an indelible impression, and sometimes 
even a school of scholars committed to his ideas 
everywhere he went. After receiving his PhD from 
the famous Harvard Department of Social 
Relations in 1952, Garfinkel went on to UCLA, 
from 1954 until his retirement in 1987, where he 
influenced such luminaries as Egon Bittner, Stacy 
Burns, Aaron Cicourel, Kenneth Lieberman, Eric 
Livingston, Michael Lynch, Melvin Pollner, David 
Sudnow, D. Lawrence Wieder, Don Zimmerman 
and, most prominently, Harvey Sacks, among 
many others.7 Following from a brief month at 

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
127
the University of Manchester in 1973, and subse-
quent visits, a highly influential and rigorous 
British branch of EM arose, including Wesley 
Sharrock, E.C. Cuff, John Lee, Rod Watson, Max 
Atkinson, John Heritage and Jeff Coulter. Of the 
many people and places Garfinkel mentions, three 
other schools are worthy of mention as being 
strongly influenced by his work and presence: 
Boston University Sociology, which included 
George Psathas, Jeff Coulter and Michael Lynch, 
who launched dozens of graduate students; the 
Studies of Workplace and Technology at Xerox 
Palo Alto Research Center; and Yves LeCerf’s 
Degree Programme in Ethnomethodology and 
Computing Science at the University of Paris VIII. 
In terms of iconic texts, the four-volume Harold 
Garfinkel, edited by Michael Lynch and Wes 
Sharrock, presents a nearly definitive selection of 
EM’s primary texts,8 and is certain to become a 
canonical resource. A bibliography of works in 
EM compiled in 1990 included over 1400 entries 
in six languages (Fehr and Stetson 1990:
473–560), and has since significantly expanded. 
Conversation analysts and ethnomethodologists 
meet at international conferences in the 
UK (Manchester, Oxford), the Netherlands 
(Amsterdam), the USA (Boston, Santa Barbara, 
Los Angeles) and Japan (Tokyo) (Psathas and 
Nasu, 1999: 135; Rawls, 2002), and communicate 
through various listservs.9
9.4 PHILOSOPHICAL ROOTS
As Garfinkel was a student of Talcott Parsons 
(1968 [1937]), some have mistakenly attributed 
Garfinkel’s work, especially his respecification of 
norms (Garfinkel, 1963), as merely an elaboration 
of Parson’s functionalist paradigm (Alexander, 
1987). Lynch and Bogen (1994: 70) state that, 
‘Parson’s aim was to reconstruct the ordinary 
actor’s implicit knowledge into a logically coher-
ent set of conceptual elements and empirical 
propositions’. Such an aim forms merely a back-
drop to Garfinkel’s programme, as Garfinkel was 
dissatisfied with Parson’s ‘sketchy treatment of 
the actor’s knowledge and understanding within 
the voluntaristic theory’ (Heritage, 1984: 9; also 
see Garfinkel, 2005). For many ethnomethodolo-
gists, the Parsonian actor, who merely follows the 
culturally-prescribed ‘values’ and their according 
‘norms’, is a ‘judgmental (or cultural) dope’ 
(Garfinkel, 1967: 67–8), stripped of agency so 
analysts might realize their own views of social 
structure. In contrast, in order to build an under-
standing of the social system ‘built solely from the 
analysis of experience structures’ (Garfinkel, 
1952: 1, in Heritage, 1984: 9), Garfinkel and his 
students would draw upon, and at times creatively 
misread, the phenomenological writings of Alfred 
Schutz, Aron Gurwitsch and Maurice Merleau-
Ponty, and the philosophical insights of Ludwig 
Wittgenstein.10 As a short chapter such as this 
cannot hope to capture the depth and richness of 
these influences, we must be satisfied with a few 
delimited points of contact.
Schutz, who was at the New School for Social 
Research in New York at the time Garfinkel was at 
Harvard (Heritage, 1984: 37), was integral to 
Garfinkel’s intellectual growth, as he ‘developed a 
stance toward the nature of meaningful action 
which dealt directly with the themes of the actor’s 
knowledge, its intersubjective character and the 
nature of its sociological analysis’ (Heritage, 
1984: 38).11 Schutz (1962) furthered the phenom-
enological notion of epoché, or bracketing, upon 
which radical reflexivity utterly depends (Psathas, 
2003 [1977]: 113–4; Wieder, 2003 [1977]: 131–2). 
Under the attitude of everyday life, individuals 
rely upon ad-hoc recipe knowledge for getting 
through the day: we don’t understand how a phone 
works in greater detail than knowing to answer it 
when it rings, or push the buttons to call, for 
instance. An attitude of Cartesian doubt, whereby 
one questions reality and one’s mode of perceiv-
ing it, is not a pragmatic, practical means to get 
through one’s day (Heritage, 1984: 41). Hence, 
when ethnomethodologists advocated suspending 
the attitudes of everyday life to examine just what 
sociological topics might mean in the mundane 
course of human activities, their initiative was 
treated with scorn or rebuke by sociologists, just 
as one commonly responds when another breaches 
the attitude of everyday life (see especially 
Garfinkel, 1963). As Heap and Roth (2003 [1973]: 
89) state, ‘The domain of phenomenological 
inquiry … consists solely of the recognizable 
structures of immediate consciousness; while the 
domain of EM inquiry consists solely of mem-
bers’ situated practices which produce for them-
selves and for observers the sense of objective 
social structures’. 
The work of Aron Gurwitsch, a phenomenolo-
gist who knew Garfinkel personally, is vital for 
EM (Heritage, 1984: 37). In ‘The Last Work of 
Edmund Husserl’, Gurwitsch explores how the 
crisis of Western sciences is not one of technical 
validity, but one by which ‘Western man … has 
become alienated from himself … science, it 
seems, has nothing to say regarding things that 
matter most for human existence’ (Gurwitsch, 
1966: 399–400). As an alternative, Gurwitsch 
(1966: 409) proposes that ‘To obtain genuinely 
philosophical knowledge of the world, one has to 
go beyond the empty generality that all happen-
ings are causally determined. A method must be 
found which permits specification of the general 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
128
causality of the world and the construction of 
infinities of causal connections on the basis of 
what is accessible to actual experience, finite and 
fragmentary’.
Such a method must recognize how meaning is 
fundamentally determined in context. In his dis-
cussion of the principles of gestalt theory, 
Gurwitsch (1964: 115) states, ‘By “Gestalt” is 
meant a unitary whole of varying degrees of rich-
ness of detail, which, by virtue of its intrinsic 
articulation and structure, possesses coherence 
and consolidation and, thus, detaches itself as an 
organized and closed unit from the surrounding 
field’ (Gurwitsch, 1964: 115).12 In order to develop 
a social science which respected such deep con-
tours of everyday awareness, a Weberian scheme 
of ideal types, a Parsonian hierarchy of values and 
norms, or Lazarsfeld-inspired variable analysis, 
simply would not suffice. As Gurwitsch (1964: 
121) elaborates, ‘The part is what it is only as 
a constituent of the Gestalt-contexture and as 
integrated into its unity’. 
While the writings of Merleau-Ponty have been 
cited increasingly in more recent writings in EM, 
the precise influence of this work is not always 
clear (Czyzewski, 2003 [1994]). Merleau-Ponty is 
a much more opaque, less didactic phenomenolo-
gist than Schutz, primarily known for upsetting 
Cartesian dualisms through his emphasis on 
the deep intertwining of body and mind, subject 
and object, as well as his explorations of the 
nature of perception.13 The ethnomethodologist 
most notable for developing an EM inspired by 
Merleau-Ponty, by exploring embodiment in con-
text, is David Sudnow (1978, 1979, 1984). 
MacBeth (1988) and Livingston (1987) apply the 
insights of Merleau-Ponty to understanding con-
certed social behaviour.
The insights of Ludwig Wittgenstein, consid-
ered by many to be the premier philosopher of the 
twentieth century, are also vital for understanding 
EM. In Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein 
(1951) demonstrates, ‘the insufficiency of rules as 
either explanations of, or directives to, human 
action’ (Heritage, 1984: 121). Such a position is 
demonstrated by showing how a student comes to 
follow, or fails to follow, a mathematical formula, 
n + 2 to generate a series of cardinal numbers of 
greater than 1000.14 Through such an example, 
Wittgenstein elucidates the doctrine of finitism, 
pointing to the necessarily finite quality of rules, yet 
the potentially infinite circumstances of their 
invocation. Hence, ‘No course of action could be 
determined by a rule, because every course of 
action can be made to accord with a rule’ (para. 
201) (also see Das, 1998: 175ff).
Kripke (1982) speaks of this as the ‘skeptical 
paradox’, resolved by an appeal to community. 
Similarly, Bloor (1992: 274) finds that ‘collective 
support’ determines which actions will be seen as 
following a rule. Such a turn to ‘external actors’, 
such as socialization and culture as determinants 
of human conduct, is rejected by numerous eth-
nomethodologists. Instead, scholars such as 
Heritage (1984), Lynch (1992), Sharrock and 
Anderson (1984), Sharrock and Button (1999), 
and Sidnell (2003) read Wittgenstein as justifying 
a focus on how rules are used as constituent 
features of a setting, to make sense of action. 
The former position is commonly referred to as 
skepticist, while the latter, ethnomethodological 
position, is referred to as anti-scepticist.15
9.5  CONTRASTING PERSPECTIVES 
ON LANGUAGE
Topic and resource
Early, radically-reflexive, and foundational argu-
ments of ethnomethodologists centre around the 
inadequacy of the language of the social sciences 
to capture social realities. One key paper in this 
regard is Zimmerman and Pollner’s (2003 [1970]: 
80), where they state that ‘Sociologists have yet to 
treat the obvious as phenomenon’. The central 
inadequacy for sociologists ‘is characterized by a 
confounding of topic and resource’ (ibid.: 81). In 
other words, sociologists have yet to distinguish 
themselves from ordinary members of society, in 
that conventional sociologists use commonsense 
categories, commonsense knowledge and com-
monsense theories of the social world as unexam-
ined resources for inquiry.16 In providing for a 
new type of inquiry:
One would examine not the factual properties of 
status hierarchies: one would ask how members 
provide for the fact that status hierarchies are 
factual features of the members’ world. Similarly, 
instead of treating statistical rates as representa-
tions of trends, processes and factual states of 
society, one would ask how members manage 
and assemble those statistics, and how they use, 
read, and rely on those statistics as indications 
of the states of affairs they are taken to depict 
(ibid.: 83).
A primary contribution of EM with respect to 
language is its analysis of accounts, a term refer-
ring to a wide variety of communications which 
can include or overlap with reports, descriptions 
and explanations. Accounts are understood by EM 
as being reflexively related to the local context of 
language use, and to other constituents of local 
context, including situationally-relevant identities 
and attributes of persons. Accounts are generally 

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
129
understood in EM not in terms of communicating 
information which could serve as a resource for 
analysis, but in terms of how they constitute and 
display the meanings of social actions and interac-
tion, for and by members. Most importantly, 
accounts are often analysed with respect to what 
they are doing in talk-in-interaction, such as 
accusing, justifying or excusing.
When a member’s account is treated as a topic, 
the account is perceived within a different frame-
work of understanding than if an account is 
treated as a resource. As Heritage (1984: 138) 
states, ‘informants are routinely treated as compe-
tent and properly motivated reporters about their 
everyday affairs’, but researchers rarely reflect on 
‘what actors might be accomplishing in and 
through their acts of reporting’. When accounts 
are studied as actions, one finds that an account 
is ‘heavily dependent on the context of its pro-
duction’ (ibid.: 141).17 First, spoken language is 
indexical, continually invoking common sense 
knowledge and context as a resource (ibid.: 142, 
and see below). Secondly, language heard is 
understood through the documentary method of 
interpretation, whereby the context of an utterance 
unavoidably elaborates the meaning of the utter-
ance (ibid.: 150). Despite the infinite interpretive 
processes involved in communication, persons 
take for granted a shared agreement of meaning, 
and such interpretations will, in turn, maintain, 
transform or elaborate the context of the interac-
tion (ibid.: 156). 
D. Lawrence Wieder (1974) provides one of the 
most notable applications of this conception of 
accounts in his discussion of ‘Telling the Convict 
Code’. While the convict code has often been used 
by sociologists of prison subcultures to account 
for the implicit rules that organize such subcul-
tures, Wieder showed how the convict code is 
invoked by members of these subcultures in order 
to ‘maintain, transform and elaborate’ meanings 
in routine activities. Wieder found that ‘the code’ 
was used to account for the responses to his ques-
tions, as well as to constrain the types of questions 
he should ask. Additionally, the code was used 
by residents to remind each other of what sort 
of information should be told to the researcher, 
and by the staff, to account for why their efforts 
to rehabilitate the ex-cons might not have 
been successful. By focusing on how the code is 
‘tell-a-story-aboutable’ (Garfinkel, 1967: 33), and 
by treating accounts as topics for analysis, Wieder 
delved into the uses of the code as a multifaceted 
resource for residents and staff, rather than using 
the accounts merely as a resource for his own 
analysis to interpret members’ actions.
In ‘In Search of the Action’, Gilbert and 
Mulkay (1983) provide a strong critique of 
approaching accounts as resources. They state that 
sociologists often attempt to analyze social action 
based on little more than accounts of action, 
which is bound to lead to erroneous results since 
‘definitive accounts [of action] cannot be obtained’ 
(ibid.: 14). Aside from problems of ‘bias, decep-
tion, selective reporting, and so on’, members’ 
accounts often contradict themselves, forcing the 
analyst to ‘infer what the participants “really 
meant” by certain statements’ (ibid.: 14–15). In 
their study, they show how Blissett’s (1972: 9) 
contention that ‘professional actions of scientists 
are essentially political in character’, is erroneously 
derived from accepting scientists’ statements at 
face value. Gilbert and Mulkay interviewed many 
of the same scientists and, rather than using them 
as informants, they focused on the scientists’ acts 
of accounting and the contexts of these accounts. 
They found a ‘regularity ... in participants’ method 
of accounting’ (ibid.: 20), even if the accounts 
were contradictory at face value. For example, 
they found that if the scientist had decided another 
scientist was correct, it would be explained in 
terms of experimental evidence that preserved 
positivist assumptions. On the other hand, if a 
scientist had decided another scientist was incor-
rect, they would account for this on the basis of 
‘non-scientific factors’, including political factors, 
as Blissett had found (ibid.: 22). Thus, by looking 
at accounts as action, Gilbert and Mulkay gained 
deeper insights than an earlier researcher who had 
looked at similar data as a resource which revealed 
action. They posit that their insights could begin 
to show how a ‘traditional positivist conception of 
science is achieved and maintained’, in that the 
positivist tradition is invoked when describing 
what the scientist believes are ‘successful’ theo-
ries, but not for describing unsuccessful ones 
(ibid.: 22).
Indexicality
Aside from critiquing how social scientists con-
ventionally treat language, ethnomethodologists 
also critique linguists’ understanding of language. 
A foundational article is ‘On Formal Structures of 
Practical Actions’, in which Garfinkel and Sacks 
(1970) point out the inadequacy of the sociolin-
guistics of the time, for failing to consider the 
centrality of context as determinative of the mean-
ing of utterances. As they state, ‘Features of 
indexical expressions have motivated among pro-
fessionals endless methodological studies directed 
to their remedy’, as they aim to provide a distinc-
tion between objective and indexical expressions, 
and to substitute objective for indexical expres-
sions (ibid.: 349). Instead, Garfinkel and Sacks 
point out that indexical expressions are funda-
mentally without remedy. Hence, no law or rule of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
130
semantics or syntax can provide for talk’s mean-
ing. Rather, meaning is constituted by what indi-
viduals do with words in specific settings of talk.18 
As Heritage (1984: 139–40) states, ‘descriptions 
are not to be regarded as disembodied commentar-
ies on states of affairs’, since ‘understanding lan-
guage is not, in the first instance, a matter of 
understanding sentences but of understanding 
actions … an utterance is thus the starting point 
for a complicated process of interpretive inference 
rather than something which can be treated as 
self-subsistently intelligible’.
D. Lawrence Wieder (1971) explains in detail 
how indexicals might be overlooked in theories of 
anthropological or structural semantics, which 
construct ‘theoretical puppets that do nothing 
other than what a specific theorist proposes’ (ibid.: 
108). In this article, he takes issue with ‘the crite-
ria for using names, the extent to which a definite 
set of criteria could be employed by name 
users, and the extent to which meaning is deter-
mined by criteria of proper use’, for the theorists 
Goodenough, Lounsbury, Frake and Conklin 
(ibid.: 110). As many of these theorists’ rules are 
found to be invariant to the occasion in which a 
sign is used, Wieder finds that their methods are 
inappropriate to the phenomenon, ‘since criteria 
vary in their meaning over the occasions in which 
they are used’ (ibid.: 134). Hence, ‘structural seman-
tic analyses appear to be idealizations of what 
members are actually doing when they look and 
describe’, so instead, the analyst’s task should be 
to understand ‘the work that members do in 
making the orderly properties of the setting in 
which they act visible to each other’ (ibid.: 135).19 
Another ethnomethodologist who critiques the 
linguistic canon is Roy Turner (1970), who com-
plexifies J. L. Austin’s notions of performatives by 
which words are not merely saying something but 
doing something, a seminal insight for speech act 
theory.20 Turner provides a transcript of a tale, told 
by a former mental patient of being snubbed in 
public, told at a support group. While the orderli-
ness of the talk seems ‘terribly obvious, if not trite’ 
to societal members, the same utterances are ‘for-
biddingly opaque’ if we must locate our analysis 
within the confines of theoretical concepts (Turner, 
1970: 176). Turner hears the talk as constituting a 
‘complaint’, but is utterly ‘unable to locate any 
obvious syntactic properties that might be seen as 
structural correlates of complaints, nor do I have 
any operational means for identifying its bounda-
ries’ (ibid.:178). Throughout his analysis, Turner 
shows how he must have ‘recourse to member’s 
knowledge in providing the substance of my 
account’, especially since this is a ‘category-gener-
ated activity’,21 leaving the sociolinguist with ‘no 
choice but to reflect upon and analyze the social 
order to which he himself subscribes’ (ibid.: 187).
An especially fruitful use of ethnomethodo-
logical insights for studying the indexical nuances 
of communication is to be found in the work of 
David A. Goode, in his studies of the communica-
tion practices of people who carry severe handi-
caps. In contrast to work by Wikler and Pollner 
(1985), which examines a family’s denial of their 
child’s retardation as folie à famille, Goode finds 
that ‘‘everything,” for all practical purposes, may 
be communicated’ between Bianca, a severely 
handicapped young girl, and her mother. Such an 
analysis involves phenomenologically bracketing 
the predominant discourses of scientific rational-
ity, measurement, categorization and professional 
expertise by which doctors and other caregivers 
of Bianca characterized her as ‘slug like’ and 
‘low-functioning, multihandicapped, alingual, and 
non-ambulatory … with a poor prognosis for 
medical, sensory, cognitive and social develop-
ment’ (Goode, 2003 [1990]: 331). After spending 
hundreds of hours with Bianca’s family over a 
nine-month period, Goode was able to find how 
Bianca indicated to others how to feed her, how to 
follow common routines, and even how many 
blankets to put on her bed. These were ‘essentially 
circumstantial forms of communication’ (ibid.: 
343), fundamentally products of intimacy, which 
were constantly subject to ironicization by outsid-
ers (ibid.: 353). By perceiving via the standard-
ized, exogenous categorization schemes of the 
medical establishment, the ‘experts’ were unable 
to perceive Bianca’s ways of relating to others. In 
other words, the various ‘fields’ (Merleau-Ponty, 
1962: 10) in which different observers placed 
Bianca constituted her in fundamentally alterna-
tive ways, with great consequences for her well-
being and life chances.
Garfinkel and Sacks’ insights into the inade-
quacy of approaching language as simply a con-
duit of meaning are exemplified in a number of 
‘aids to the sluggish imagination’ (Garfinkel, 
1967: 38–46). In his tutorial project, Garfinkel 
asked his students to treat indexicals as if they 
were as problematic for themselves as they are for 
philosophers and linguists. For one study, 
Garfinkel asked his students to write on one side 
of a sheet what was actually said in a conversa-
tion, and write on the other side what they and 
their interlocutor understood that they were talk-
ing about. After enumerating a number of the 
features of such ‘common understandings’, 
Garfinkel (ibid.: 41) states that: ‘It hardly needs to 
be pointed out that the sense of the expressions 
depended upon where the expression occurred in 
serial order, the expressive character of the terms 
that comprised it, and the importance to the con-
versationalists of the events depicted’. In another 
study, students asked, in the course of an ordinary 
conversation, for clarification of a common 

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
131
utterance. For instance, when a woman stated, 
‘I had a flat tire,’ Garfinkel’s student responded, 
‘What do you mean, you had a flat tire?’ The chal-
lenges Garfinkel’s students were met with serve 
as telling rejoinders to those who may wish to 
address ‘the problem’ of indexicals, as they faced 
such responses as outright rage, ‘peevishness’, 
and a remarkably high response rate of, ‘What’s 
wrong with you?’22 Thus, Garfinkel demonstrated 
how the indexical character of language use is 
typically not problematic to members, thus 
suggesting how the indexical use of language 
might serve as a more apt topic of study than the 
‘problem’ of indexicals.
9.6  MEMBERSHIP CATEGORIZATION 
ANALYSIS
Membership categorization analysis (MCA) is a 
development from within ethnomethodology 
(EM), focusing on the empirical, qualitative 
understanding of membership categories as they 
are used by people in talk and social interaction, 
and also in texts and other communication media. 
Membership categories refer to identities, essen-
tially, and MCA centers around the study of iden-
tities as they are achieved or contested, organized 
and understood, within the practical contexts of 
social interaction and language use. Membership 
categories are extremely numerous and diverse, 
referring for example to categories of class, race, 
gender, nationality, religion, linguistic commu-
nity, age and occupation, to memberships of asso-
ciations, political parties or social clubs, and many 
other types of identity which are more obviously 
contextual in nature, such as driver, applicant and 
organ donor. The vast variety of identity catego-
ries are termed membership categories with refer-
ence to the convention within EM of referring to 
people (speakers, subjects, agents, actors, etc.) as 
‘members’. The notions of member and member-
ship often implicitly allude to the competence 
in cultural and linguistic methods of practical 
reasoning and practical action (folk methods or 
ethno methods) which can be found in members of 
any culture or linguistic community. Although 
MCA is situated within the social sciences, the 
approach is often philosophically informed and 
humanistic, as well as empirical, illuminating and 
explicating not only empirical data and patterns 
but also the logic and the rhetoric of social identi-
ties in their relations to social practices and social 
organization. 
MCA, following EM and conversation analysis 
(CA), is open-mindedly empirical in its approach, 
understanding issues and practices of identity 
without privileging certain types of identities, 
such as public speakers, without privileging cer-
tain types of communication, such as mass com-
munication, and without privileging communication 
in institutional contexts, such as political or pro-
fessional communication. MCA can and does 
encompass studies of specific varieties of identity, 
and studies of identity with reference to specific 
kinds of communication or specific institutional 
contexts, but such interests are not exclusive of or 
privileged with respect to the study of member-
ship categories and membership categorization 
practices observable in vernacular speech, among 
laypeople. 
Originating from the seminal scholarship of 
Harvey Sacks at the time he was laying the foun-
dations of CA, MCA has generally been neglected 
by the subsequent trajectory of CA, which has 
focused on the analysis of conversational sequenc-
ing rather than questions of identity. One dimen-
sion of this divergence can be related to distinctions 
between different national trajectories taken by 
EM, in that the primary development of MCA, 
understood as a development within EM, has been 
more international than that of CA.23 The tradition 
of British EM, as taught for example in Manchester, 
has been particularly influential for MCA, but 
foundational figures in MCA can be found in sev-
eral countries, not just the USA and the UK. 
Jayyusi, whose book Categorization and the 
Moral Order (1984) was a pivotal contribution for 
MCA, studied in the UK before teaching in the 
USA, and now teaches in the United Arab 
Emirates. Both Hester and Eglin, who coined the 
term ‘membership categorization analysis’ in their 
seminal edited collection Culture in Action (1997), 
have careers associated with British and Canadian 
universities. None of the primary authors associ-
ated with MCA, after Harvey Sacks, have held 
positions in the University of California system, 
which has been a remarkable source of both EM 
and CA scholarship. The fact that after Sacks’ 
untimely death the development of MCA became 
quite international may have provided additional 
opportunities for innovation. 
The divergence between MCA and sequentially-
oriented CA has been subjected to a penetrating 
critique by Watson (1997), who forwards a more 
inclusive position, but the divergence is now per-
haps beyond repair. While CA has generally 
diverged away from MCA and much CA has 
diverged from EM as well, MCA has retained a 
more inclusive and complementary understanding 
of the relationship between CA and MCA, and 
especially between MCA and EM. Hence, MCA 
studies of identity can include elements of sequen-
tial analysis, and are often attentive to methods of 
practical reasoning and practical action, in keep-
ing with ethnomethodological interests. To a 
degree that is unusual in EM, MCA continues to 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
132
draw upon Sacks’ work, integrating relevant 
insights from Sacks into ethnomethodological 
studies and extending them within a developing 
body of interdisciplinary research on identity cat-
egories. MCA is today an established international 
research tradition in its own right, with its own 
practitioners and literature, even as it continues 
to be identified in relation to either CA or EM, 
if not both.
The scope of MCA is quite broad, and the 
potential applications numerous. In the process 
of studying the deployment and understanding of 
membership categories in talk and other media 
of communication, MCA has developed a wide 
range of insights about how identities are organ-
ized across membership categories and how they 
can be related to a variety of other aspects of 
social interaction and social contexts. 
The fact that certain membership categories 
can be conventionally or contextually heard to 
belong together, such as ‘baby’ and ‘mommy’, or 
‘teacher’ and student’, is taken up in the analysis 
of membership category devices, or collections of 
categories. While many such devices could be 
understood formally, as elements of a culture and 
a language, MCA typically analyses membership 
category devices empirically, with respect to par-
ticular instances of talk-in-interaction, in contrast 
to traditions such as structuralism and conceptual 
analysis. Many membership category devices, 
which may be operative in particular instances of 
talk-in-interaction, would be quite difficult to 
understand except by reference to features of local 
context and action. A collection of suspects for a 
store robbery, for example, including the owner’s 
homeless sister-in-law, a disgruntled former 
tenant, and a neighborhood heroin addict, would 
in many ways defy formal analysis, as would a 
collection of potential interviewees for a media 
report on salmon fishing, including a biologist, an 
amateur fisherman, and a lieutenant governor. 
Collecting members of such disparate categories 
together into collections of potential suspects or 
interviewees could not make sense formally, as 
with abstract collections of identities such as types 
of occupation, types of family relative, types of 
criminal, types of political office-holder, types of 
hobbyist, etc. Many collections only make sense 
contextually, in isolated cases of talk-in-interaction, 
in a manner that would entirely escape broader, 
decontextualized analyses of cultural and linguis-
tic classifications. In the same way that devices 
or collections like these can be more obviously 
context-dependent, other, more conventional cat-
egory devices or collections such as those of 
family and religion can also be understood and 
analyzed as context-sensitive or context-dependent. 
Hence, in different contexts, the family might 
be understood in terms of household residence, in 
terms of financial dependents, in terms of medical 
history, or in terms of holiday invitations, all of 
which can yield different collections of family 
members, contrary to any formal, de-contextualized 
classification or enumeration of the set of mem-
bership categories constituting the collection 
‘family’.24
It is important to note, however, that MCA 
typically begins not by trying to find the relevance 
or sense of particular categories (e.g. husband and 
wife) or category devices (e.g. family), but by 
identifying whichever identities are achieved and 
understood to be contextually relevant by mem-
bers, and how they are achieved and understood to 
be relevant by members, without prejudgment. An 
example is provided in Berard (2005), in which a 
dispute about gender discrimination between a 
man and a woman is found to end in such a way 
as to suggest the importance of differences in 
profession and age, neither of which refer to the 
category device of gender. Empirical analysis 
often reveals that the identities which are observ-
ably relevant in given instances are different and/
or more numerous than would be predicted by 
theorists, social critics and laypeople. 
Similarly, the ways in which category devices 
may be contextually constituted and deployed can 
also be surprisingly organized and surprisingly 
methodical. One example is provided by Berard’s 
(2002) analysis of historical arguments before the 
US Supreme Court on the treatment of Japanese 
Americans during World War II, in which oppos-
ing sides treated Japanese Americans either with 
respect to their nationality/national ancestry, to 
emphasize the perceived military threat, or with 
respect to their race/ethnicity, to emphasize their 
abuse and their constitutional rights as minorities. 
A related insight refers to standardized rela-
tional pairs of categories, referring to pairs of 
categories which can be understood to be related, 
such as husband/wife and teacher/student, and 
which, moreover, often involve relational features 
such as rights and obligations, which may be either 
symmetric, as in the pair ‘neighbour–neighbour’ 
or asymmetric, as in the pair ‘parent–child.’ While 
these insights may be reminiscent of other, more 
popularized approaches to identity, such as role 
theory, a distinction of MCA is that the category 
pairings and any relational features understood to 
be applicable to them are typically illustrated by, 
or even worked up from, the closely detailed 
analysis of empirical data. Watson (1983), for 
example, builds upon a transcript of a police inter-
rogation in his discussion of the two relational 
pairs ‘offender’ and ‘victim’, and ‘white’ and 
‘black’, with reference to how a racial epithet used 
by a White suspect to describe the victim makes 
observable a motive for the offence, namely racial 
prejudice. In this manner, even topics such as race 

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
133
and race relations, which are widely understood as 
features of social structure, can be understood as 
local accomplishments, the products of observable 
social and communicative practices. 
The fact that individuals can be correctly 
described by means of an indefinite number of 
membership categories gives rise to questioning 
and analyzing how identifications are done mini-
mally, selectively, relevantly, contextually and 
intelligibly. The close attention within MCA to 
just those identities which become observably 
relevant in situated contexts of communication, 
with reference to participants’ own displayed 
understandings, distinguishes MCA from many 
other traditions of inquiry. By contrast, a variety 
of other approaches, often of a theoretical or criti-
cal nature, stipulate which identities are relevant 
for the study of social interaction and social 
organization rather than treating relevant identity 
as an empirical question. The fact that references 
to persons involve pragmatic selections from 
among the many categories which could correctly 
be used to refer to them is a specific application of 
the general problem of multiple description, noted 
by Sacks (see, e.g., Sacks, 1995: 41, 326).25 The 
implicit selection operative in mundane practices 
of description and reference illustrates again the 
complex, methodical and pragmatic nature of 
commonsense reasoning, as available through talk 
and texts. 
MCA also investigates and analyzes the intri-
cate and complex relationships which obtain 
between (1) identities, and (2) attributes or predi-
cates of persons such as their actions, their 
motives, their beliefs or knowledge and (3) inter-
actional contexts. These relationships, addressed 
for example in the work of Eglin and Hester (see, 
e.g., Eglin and Hester, 1992; Hester and Eglin, 
1997) and Jayyusi (1984) allow studies of mem-
bership categorization to branch out considerably, 
addressing many more facets of social interaction 
and communication than might be immediately 
apparent. 
MCA has also been used, most notably by 
Coulter (2001), to address collectivity categories 
(categories referring to social collectivities such 
as companies, churches, governments and armies) 
and also their features and their actions, thus 
respecifying many ‘macro’ social and institutional 
phenomena by reference to conventional methods 
of invoking and using collectivity categories in 
communication and interaction. A developing 
genre of MCA studies addresses interactions in 
institutional settings, especially settings associ-
ated with mass media, schooling and legal 
settings, suggesting at least one potential line of 
convergence with CA, which has developed a 
significant literature on studies of work.26 Such 
overlaps between MCA and other traditions, 
whether with sociological theory, CA, discourse 
analysis, discursive psychology, or other tradi-
tions, suggest some of the potential lines of devel-
opment and influence for MCA in the future.
Throughout their variety, MCA studies share an 
empirical and analytic focus on illuminating the 
pragmatic and categorical logic of social identi-
ties. Central concerns include how membership 
categories are related to each other and, further-
more, how they are inferentially related to issues 
of social action, social context or social structure, 
by means of the cultural and linguistic competen-
cies and methods which are the topics and the 
findings of MCA. 
9.7 CONCLUSION
While many students directly influenced by 
Garfinkel tend to be purists, insisting that eth-
nomethodology is fundamentally incommensura-
ble with other methods of the social sciences 
(what they termed formal analysis, or FA), such is 
not necessarily the case. One well-known eth-
nomethodologist who co-authored the very article 
on incommensurability with Garfinkel (Garfinkel 
and Wieder, 1992), D. Lawrence Wieder, in fact, 
also wrote about how EM could be incorporated 
with such theories and methods as conversation 
analysis, microanalysis (based on the work of 
Goffman) and the ethnography of speaking. 
Speaking optimistically, he notes that ‘the search 
itself may yield the discovery of new phenomena, 
reclassifications, new classifications, new dimen-
sions of taxonomies, the need for new concepts, 
and other comparable matters’ (Wieder, 1999: 
163; also see Berard, 2003). In other words, the 
contentions of our forebears need not be extended 
indefinitely.27 
EM still holds the promise to shake up our 
common assumptions and categorical ways of 
understanding reality. What Dingwall (2000: 909) 
states in regards to law and society studies could 
just as well apply to any discipline of the social 
sciences:
Ethnomethodology and conversation analysis may 
indeed be what their founders claimed them to be: 
not merely new research technologies but new 
ways of thinking about sociology and its core intel-
lectual project. As such, they necessarily challenge 
some of the currently hegemonic assumptions of 
law and society studies about both the positive 
and normative aspects of its research agenda. Are 
we really trying to find out how law works or to 
find illustrations for an a priori critique, aping the 
current fashion of the humanities to disdain mod-
ernism and the society which has given rise to it?

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
134
However contentiously the findings and insights 
of EM may have been reported or received, future 
generations of scholars will nonetheless continue 
to find amazement, bewilderment and room for 
growth in Garfinkel’s noticing that there is order 
in the plenum (Garfinkel, 2002: 95).
NOTES
1 While the authors shared comments on drafts 
of this article, Garot drafted the section on eth-
nomethodology, and Berard drafted the section on 
membership categorization analysis.
2 As Lynch and Sharrock (2003: vii) state: ‘Harold 
Garfinkel is one of a very few sociologists to have 
founded a program of sociological investigation, and 
is perhaps the only one to have done so in the late 
20th century’.
3 See Lemert (2002), Dingwall (2000: 890).
4 As Lynch and Peyrot (1992: 120) note: ‘What 
ethnomethodology is “about” comes less from read-
ing the literature than from engaging in the sorts of 
investigations exemplified in that literature. This 
could perhaps be said of any organized practice, but 
it is an explicit – indeed obsessive – concern in 
ethnomethodology’s pedagogy’. This explains why 
the substantive chapters of Garfinkel’s (2002) long-
awaited sequel to Studies consist primarily of tutorial 
problems for students. See Lynch (1999) for a telling, 
‘behind the scenes’ elucidation of the indifference of 
the leading lights of EM in regards to matters of 
theory and method.
5 As Garfinkel (1996: 7) states, ‘The principal 
formal analytic devices currently in hand, of paying 
careful attention to the use, the design, and admin-
istration of generic representational theorizing – 
models, for example, get a job done that with the 
same technical skills in administering them lose the 
very phenomenon that they profess’. Anderson and 
Sharrock (1983) point out how such techniques 
often use irony to make their case.
6 A short sample may suffice:
‘No inquiries can be excluded … . Procedures 
and results of water witching, divination, math-
ematics, sociology – whether done by lay per-
sons or professionals – are addressed according 
to the policy that every feature of sense, of fact, 
of method, for every particular case of inquiry 
without exception, is the managed accomplish-
ment of organized settings of practical actions, 
and that particular determinations in members’ 
practices of consistency, planfulness, relevance, 
or reproducibility of their practices and results – 
from witchcraft to topology – are acquired and 
assured only through particular, located organi-
zations of artful practices … . Thus, a leading 
policy is to refuse serious consideration to the 
prevailing proposal that efficiency, efficacy, 
effectiveness, intelligibility, consistency, planful-
ness, typicality, uniformity, reproducibility of 
activities – i.e., the rational properties of practi-
cal activities – be assessed, recognized, catego-
rized, described by using a rule or a standard 
obtained outside actual settings within which 
such properties are recognized, used, produced, 
and talked about by settings’ members. 
(Garfinkel, 1967: 32–3)
7 See Silverman (1998) for an account of the 
intellectual development of Harvey Sacks.
8 Prior indispensable volumes include Douglas 
(1970), Turner (1974), Coulter (1990), Button (1991), 
Watson and Seiler (1992), Volume 15, Numbers 2 
and 3 of Qualitative Sociology, and Volume 22, issue 
2/4, of Human Studies. 
9 http://www.paultenhave.nl/EMCA.htm, http://
www.paultenhave.nl/lists.htm, http://list.hum.aau.
dk/mailman/listinfo/languse.
10 O’Neill (2003 [1980]) provides a fascinating 
analysis of the ways in which misreading has been 
purposeful and constructive within the ethnometh-
odological tradition.
11 See O’Neil (2003 [1980]) and Anderson, 
Hughes and Sharrock (2003 [1985]) for cogent dis-
cussions of the intellectual relationships of Parsons, 
Schutz and Garfinkel. For further reading, see 
Parson’s and Schutz’s exchange of correspondence 
(Grathhoff, 1978) and its reviews (Coser, 1979; 
Giddens, 1979; Wagner, 1979; Heritage, 1984: 7–36).
12 Maynard (1996: 1) discusses how ‘social psy-
chology might well have been ethnomethodology’, 
had such a notion of the experientially-based gestalt 
phenomenon, that ‘the whole is more than its parts’, 
been accepted over the stimuli-based theories which 
forged the core of the discipline. 
13 Aron Gurwitsch (1964: 113) highlights a point 
from Merleau-Ponty (1962: 10) which is central for 
understanding radical reflexivity: ‘The figure-ground-
structure belongs to the very nature of perception 
and is not merely a contingent perceptual fact: …that 
without which a phenomenon cannot be called per-
ception. The perceptual something is always in the 
midst of things. It is always part of a field’. See 
Emerson and Messinger (1977) for an application of 
this insight to the definition of everyday troubles.
14 Now we get the pupil to continue a series 
(say +2) beyond 1000, and he writes 1000, 1004, 
1008, 1012. We say to him:
‘Look what you’ve done!’ – He doesn’t under-
stand. We say: ‘You were meant to add two: 
look how you began the series!’ – He answers: 
‘Yes, isn’t it right? I thought that was how I was 
meant to do it.’ – Or suppose he pointed to the 
series and said: ‘But I went on in the same way’. 
(para. 185)

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
135
15 See Heritage (1978 and 1984: 103–34) for a 
broader discussion of the importance of Wittgenstein 
for EM. 
16 The paradigmatic example of ethnomethodo-
logical work, which treats the incorrigible resource 
of talk as a topic, is conversation analysis, addressed 
in a separate essay (also see Heritage, 1984: 135–78 
and 232–92).
17 Note that, for ethnomethodologists, to treat 
meaning contextually ‘means that they endeavor 
analytically to unpack relational configurations that 
enable sense to be made and understood in situ. 
‘Context’ for ethnomethodologists is not a fixed 
set of social, cultural, environmental or cognitive 
‘factors’ impinging on specific instances of conduct 
as though from outside. Instead, the term describes 
a ‘reflexively’ constituted relationship between 
singular actions and the relevant specifications of 
identity, place, time, and meaning implicated by the 
intelligibility of those actions’ (Lynch and Peyrot, 
1992: 114).
18 See Heritage’s (1984: 142–50) discussion 
of ‘that’s a nice one’.
19 Cicourel (1970: 148–50) provides a list of 
such orderly properties as: the reciprocity of pers-
pectives, the et cetera assumption, normal forms, 
retrospective-prospective sense of occurrence, talk 
itself as reflexive, and descriptive vocabularies as 
indexical expressions. Also see Coulter (1973) for a 
cogent critique of structural semantics, in arguing 
that ‘human actions cannot logically be explained in 
terms of causal laws’ (ibid.: 174), and a thorough 
discussion, ranging from the Greeks to Wittgenstein, 
of the problem of applying the formulas of logic to 
language (Coulter, 1991).
20 Examples provided by Turner (1970: 170–1), 
from Austin’s (1962: 22) speech act theory, are: the 
words ‘I do’ in a marriage ceremony, ‘I apologize’ 
after stepping on your toe, ‘I name this ship the 
Queen Elizabeth’, ‘I bet you sixpence it will rain 
tomorrow’, or ‘I bequeath… ’.
21 See the section below on membership cate-
gorization analysis.
22 As Heap (1980: 103) notes, ‘Reflexivity is a 
solution to indexicality.’ For revealing studies of how 
indexicals are mundanely deproblematized, see 
Pollner (1984), Atkinson (1978) and Garfinkel (1967: 
18–24, 186–207).
23 CA has also become very international, but 
has developed rather more around American figures 
and contributions, compared with MCA.
24 See generally Hester and Eglin (1997: 1–23, 
including esp. fn. 9, 165–6.) The membership cate-
gory device ‘family’ is discussed by Hester and Eglin, 
following Sacks, as a primary example of a member-
ship category device which is more conventional or 
‘natural’ than many other devices, which are more 
obviously contextual or ‘topic-occasioned’. But the 
more important point, following Hester and Eglin, is 
that for EM all membership category devices can and 
should be studied with detailed reference to the 
occasions of their use. 
25 The problem of multiple description, briefly, 
is a pragmatic problem facing speakers when they 
engage in description, and can also be discussed as 
an analytic problem with respect to how analysts 
handle the same issues. There are typically many cor-
rect descriptions which could be offered by way of a 
description: for example, a person could be described 
in terms of gender, profession, age, nationality, race, 
etc., and the problem of multiple description is the 
problem of selecting from among the many available 
category devices and categories. Much of Sacks’ 
work on membership categories and membership 
category devices can be understood as illuminating 
the social logic displayed in the production and 
understanding of such selective descriptions of 
persons. 
26 Indeed, MCA scholarship on institutional set-
tings, EM studies of work and CA studies of talk at 
work already overlap significantly and often. Whereas 
CA generally brings more focus on such matters as 
conversational sequencing, the design of turns at talk 
and richly detailed transcripts, MCA stands to con-
tribute to EM and CA studies of institutional settings, 
especially insofar as MCA can contribute uniquely to 
the understanding of how institutional and profes-
sional phenomena, including work activities and 
specialized knowledges, are related to institutional/
professional identities, and can be understood better 
with knowledge of how institutional and profes-
sional identities are organized and accomplished.  
27 The extensive bibliographies of Bob Emerson, 
James Holstein and Gale Miller are examples of how 
an EM sensitivity may be incorporated in work that is 
not exclusively EM.
REFERENCES
Alexander, J. (1987) Twenty Lectures. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Anderson, D. C. and Sharrock, W. W. (1983) ‘Irony as 
methodological theory: a sketch of four variations’, Poetics 
Today 4(3): 565–79.
Anderson, R. J., Hughes, J. A. and Sharrock, W. W. (2003) 
‘The relationship between ethnomethodology and 
phenomenology’, in M. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds), 
Harold Garfinkel. London: Sage. pp. 135–50. (1st edn, 
1985.)
Atkinson, J. M. (1978) Discovering Suicide: Studies in the 
Social Organization of Sudden Death. London: Macmillan.
Austin, J. (1962) How to do Things With Words. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Berard, T. (2002) ‘“Japanese American” identity and the 
problem of multiple description: disjunctive versions of the 
Japanese exclusion order’, in S. Hester and W. Housley 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
136
(eds), Language, Interaction and National Identity: Studies 
in the Social Organization of Talk-in-Interaction. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate. pp. 144–68.
Berard, T. (2003) ‘Ethnomethodology as radical sociology: an 
expansive appreciation of Melvin Pollner’s “constitutive 
and mundane versions of labeling theory”’, Human Studies, 
26(4): 431–48.
Berard, T. (2005) ‘On multiple identities and educational 
contexts: remarks on the study of inequalities and discrimi-
nation’, Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 4(1): 
67–76.
Bittner, E. (1965) ‘The concept of organization’, Social 
Research, 32: 230–55.
Bittner, E. (1967) ‘Police discretion in emergency apprehen-
sion of mentally ill persons’, Social Problems, 14: 278–92.
Bjelic, D. and M. Lynch (1989) ‘The work of a [scientific] 
demonstration: respecifying Newton’s and Goethe’s theo-
ries of prismatic color’. Unpublished manuscript, Boston 
University.
Blissett, M. (1972) Politics in Science. Boston: Little, Brown.
Bloor, D. (1983) Wittgenstein: a Social Theory of Knowledge. 
New York: Columbia University Press.
Button, G. (ed.) (1991) Ethnomethodology and the Human 
Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Cicourel, A. (1970) ‘The acquisition of social language: toward 
a developmental sociology of language and meaning’, in 
J. Douglas (ed.), Understanding Everyday Life. Chicago: 
Aldine. pp. 136–68.
Clayman, S. (1995) ‘The dialectic of ethnomethodology’, 
Semiotica, 107(1–2): 105–23.
Coser, L. A. (1979) ‘A dialogue of the deaf’, Contemporary 
Sociology, 8: 680–2.
Coulter, J. (1973) ‘Language and the conceptualization of 
meaning’, Sociology, 7(2): 173–89.
Coulter, J. (ed.) (1990) Ethnomethodological Sociology. 
Brookfield, VT: Edward Elgar.
Coulter, J. (1991) ‘Logic: ethnomethodology and the logic of 
language’, in G. Button (ed.), Ethnomethodology and the 
Human Sciences. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 20–50.
Coulter, J. (2001) ‘Human practices and the observability of 
the “macro-social” ’, in T. Schatzki, K. Cetina and E. Von 
Savigny (eds), The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory. 
New York: Routledge. pp. 29–41,
Czyzewski, M. (2003) ‘Reflexivity of actors versus reflexivity of 
accounts’, in M. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds), Harold 
Garfinkel. London: Sage. pp. 227–33. (1st edn, 1994.)
Das, V. (1998) ‘Wittgenstein and anthropology’, Annual 
Review of Anthropology, 27: 171–95.
Dingwall, R. (2000) ‘Language law and power: ethnomethod-
ology, conversation analysis, and the politics of law 
and society studies’, Law and Social Inquiry, 25(3): 
885–911.
Douglas, J. (ed.) (1970) Understanding Everyday Life. Chicago: 
Aldine.
Eglin, P. and Hester, S. (1992) ‘Category, predicate and task: 
the pragmatics of practical action’, Semiotica, 88: 243–68.
Emerson, R. M. and Messinger, S. L. (1977) ‘The micro-politics 
of trouble’, Social Problems, 25: 121–34.
Fehr, B. J. and Stetson, J. with Mizukawa, Y. (1990) ‘A 
bibliography for ethnomethodology’, in J. Coulter (ed.), 
Ethnomethodological Sociology. Brookfield, VT: Edward 
Elgar. pp. 473–559.
Garfinkel, H. (1952) ‘The perception of the other: a study in 
social order’. PhD dissertation, Harvard University.
Garfinkel, H. (1963) ‘A conception of, and experiments 
with, “trust” as a condition of stable concerted actions’, 
in O. J. Harvey (ed.), Motivation and Social Interaction. 
New York: Ronald Press.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Oxford, 
UK: Polity Press.
Garfinkel, H. (1996) ‘Ethnomethodology’s program’, Social 
Psychology Quarterly, 59(1): 5–21.
Garfinkel, H. (2002) Ethnomethodology’s Program: Working 
Out Durkeim’s Aphorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield.
Garfinkel, H. (2005) Seeing Sociologically: The Routine 
Grounds of Social Action. Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.
Garfinkel, H. and Sacks, H. (1970) ‘On formal structures of 
practical actions’, in J. C. McKinney and E. A. Tiryakian 
(eds), Theoretical Sociology. New York: Appleton Century 
Crofts.
Garfinkel, H. and Wieder, D. L. (1992) ‘Evidence for locally 
produced ... phenomena of order* ... (IV): two incommen-
surable, asymmetrically alternate technologies of social 
analysis’, in G. Watson and R. Seiler (eds), Text in Context: 
Contributions to Ethnomethodology. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. pp. 175–206.
Giddens, A. (1979) ‘Schutz and Parsons: problems of meaning 
and subjectivity’, Contemporary Sociology, 8: 682–5.
Gilbert, G. N. and Mulkay, M. (1983) ‘In search of the action’, 
in G. N. Gilbert and P. Abell (eds), Accounts and Action: 
Survey Conferences on Sociological Theory and Method. 
Aldershot: Gower. pp. 8–34.
Goode, D. A. (2003) ‘On understanding without words: com-
munication between a deaf-blind child and her parents’, in 
M. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds), Harold Garfinkel. London: 
Sage. pp. 327–60. (1st edn, 1990.)
Grathoff, R. (1978) The Theory of Social Action: The 
Correspondence of Alfred Schutz and Talcott Parsons. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Gurwitsch, A. (1964) Field of Consciousness. Pittsburg: 
Duquesne University Press.
Gurwitsch, A. (1966) Studies in Phenomenology and 
Psychology. Evanston: Northwestern University Press.
Heap, J. L. (1980) ‘Description in ethnomethodology’, Human 
Studies, 3: 87–106.
Heap, J. L. and Roth, P. A. (2003) ‘On phenomenological 
sociology’, in M. N. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds), 
Harold Garfinkel. London: Sage. pp. 77–95. (1st edn, 
1973.)
Heritage, J. (1978) ‘Aspects of the flexibilities of natural 
language use: a reply to Phillips’, Sociology, 12: 79–103.
Heritage, J. (1984) Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology. 
New York: Polity Press.
Heritage, J. (1987) ‘Ethnomethodology’, in A. Giddens and 
J. H. Turner (eds), Social Theory Today. New York: Polity 
Press.

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY AND MCA
137
Hester, S. and Eglin, P. (eds) (1997) Culture in Action: Studies 
in Membership Categorization Analysis. Washington, 
DC: International Institute for Ethnomethodology and 
Conversation Analysis, and University Press of America. 
Jayyusi, L. (1984) Categorization and the Moral Order. Boston: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Kripke, S. A. (1982) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private 
Language: An Elementary Exposition. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Lemert, C. (2002) ‘The pleasure of Garfinkel’s indexical ways’, 
in Ethnomethodology’s Program: Working Out Durkheim’s 
Aphorism. Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield. 
pp. ix–xiii.
Livingston, E. (1987) ‘Pedestrian traffic flow’, in Making Sense 
of Ethnomethodology. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
pp. 21–7.
Lynch, M. (1991) ‘Method: measurement – ordinary and scien-
tific measurement as ethnomethodological phenomena’, in 
G. Button (ed.), Ethnomethodology and the Human Sciences. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 77–108.
Lynch, M. (1992) ‘Extending Wittgenstein: the pivotal move 
from epistemology to the sociology of science’, in 
A. Pickering (ed.), Science as Practice and Culture. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press. pp. 215–65.
Lynch, M. (1999) ‘Silence in context: ethnomethodology and 
social theory’, Human Studies, 22: 211–33.
Lynch, M. and Bogen, D. (1994) ‘Harvey Sacks’s primitive 
natural science’, Theory, Culture and Society, 11: 65–104.
Lynch, M. and Peyrot, M. (1992) ‘Introduction: a reader’s 
guide to ethnomethodology’, Qualitative Sociology, 15(2): 
113–22.
Lynch, M. and Sharrock, W. (eds) (2003) Harold Garfinkel. 
Vols 1–4. London: Sage.
MacBeth, D. (1988) ‘Basketball notes’, in Respecifying 
the Natural Sciences as Discovering Sciences of Practical 
Action. Vols. I and II. Unpublished manuscript, UCLA. 
pp.73–90.
Maynard, D. W. (1996) ‘Introduction of Harold Garfinkel for 
the Cooley-Mead award’, Social Psychology Quarterly, 
59(1): 1–4.
Maynard, D. W. and Clayman, S. E. (1991) ‘The diversity of 
ethnomethodology’, Annual Review of Sociology, 17: 
385–418.
Merleau-Ponty, M. (1962) The Phenomenology of Perception. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
O’Neill, J. (2003) [1980] ‘From phenomenology to ethno-
methodology: some radical “misreadings” ‘, in M. Lynch 
and W. Sharrock (eds), Harold Garfinkel. London: Sage. 
pp. 97–110.
Parsons, T. (1968) The Structure of Social Action. New York: 
The Free Press. (1st edn, 1937.)
Pollner, M. (1984) Mundane reason: Reality in Everyday and 
Sociological Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Pollner, M. (1991) ‘Left of ethnomethodology: the rise and 
decline of radical reflexivity’, American Sociological Review, 
56(June): 370–80.
Psathas, G. (2003) ‘Ethnomethodology as a phenomenologi-
cal approach in the social sciences’, in M. Lynch and 
W. Sharrock (eds), Harold Garfinkel. London: Sage. 
pp.111–28. (1st edn, 1977.)
Psathas, G. and Nasu, H. (1999) ‘Introduction’, Human 
Studies, 22: 135–7. 
Rawls, A. (2002) ‘Editor’s introduction’, in Ethnomethodology’s 
Program: Working Out Durkheim’s Aphorism. Boston: 
Rowman and Littlefield. pp. 1–64.
Sacks, H. (1972) ‘Notes on police assessment of moral charac-
ter’, in D. Sudnow (ed.), Studies in Social Interaction. 
New York: Free Press. pp. 280–93.
Sacks, H. (1995) Lectures on Conversation, Vols 1 and 2. 
Cambridge, MA: Blackwell. 
Sharrock, W. and Anderson, R. J. (1984) ‘The Wittgenstein 
connection’, Human Studies, 7: 375–86.
Sharrock, W. and Button, G. (1999) ‘Do the right thing! Rule 
finitism, rule scepticism and rule following’, Human Studies, 
22: 193–210.
Schutz, A. (1962) ‘Common-sense and scientific interpretation 
of human action’, in A. Schutz (ed.), Collected Papers I: 
The Problem of Social Reality. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff. 
pp. 3–47.
Sidnell, J. (2003) ‘An ethnographic consideration of rule 
following’, Journal of the Royal Anthropology Institute, 
9: 429–45.
Silverman, D. (1998) Harvey Sacks: Social Science and 
Conversation Analysis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Sudnow, D. (1978) Ways of the Hand. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Sudnow, D. (1979) Talk’s Body. New York: Knopf.
Sudnow, D. (1984) Pilgrim in the Microworld. New York: 
Warner Books.
Turner, R. (1970) ‘Words, utterances and activities’, in 
J. Douglas (ed.), Understanding Everyday Life. Chicago: 
Aldine. pp. 169–87.
Turner, R. (ed.) (1974) Ethnomethodology. Harmondsworth, 
UK: Penguin.
Wagner, H. (1979) ‘Theory of action and sociology of the life-
world’, Contemporary Sociology, 8: 685–7.
Watson, R. (1983) ‘The presentation of victim and motive in 
discourse: the case of police interrogations and interviews’, 
Victimology, 8(1–2): 31–52. 
Watson, R. (1997) ‘Some general reflections on “categoriza-
tion” and “sequence” in the analysis of conversation’, in S. 
Hester and P. Eglin (eds), Culture in Action: Studies in 
Membership Categorization Analysis. Washington, DC: 
International Institute for Ethnomethodology and 
Conversation Analysis & University Press of America. 
pp. 49–75.
Watson, G. and Seiler, R. M. (eds) (1992) Talk in Context: 
Contributions to Ethnomethodology. London: Sage.
Wieder, D. L. (1971) ‘On meaning by rule’, in J. Douglas 
(ed.), Understanding Everyday Life. London: Aldine. 
pp. 107–35.
Wieder, D. L. (1974) Language and Social Reality. The Hague: 
Mouton.
Wieder, D. L. (1999) ‘Ethnomethodology, conversation analy-
sis, microanalysis, and the ethnography of speaking 
(EM–CA–MA–ES): resonances and basic issues’, Research 
on Language and Social Interaction, 32(1, 2): 163–71.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
138
Wieder, D. L. (2003) ‘When is phenomenology sociological?’, 
in M. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds.), Harold Garfinkel. 
London: Sage. pp. 129–33. (1st edn, 1977.)
Wikler, L. and Pollner, M. (1985) ‘The social construction of 
unreality: a case study of a family’s attribution of compe-
tence to a severely retarded child’, Family Process, 24(2): 
241–54.
Wittgenstein, L. (1951) Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell.
Zimmerman, D. H. (1966) ‘Paper work and people work: 
a study of a public assistance agency’. Unpublished PhD 
dissertation, UCLA.
Zimmerman, D. H. (1969a) ‘Facts as a practical 
accomplishment’, in R. Turner (ed.), Ethnomethodology. 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Education.
Zimmerman, D. H. (1969b) ‘Record-keeping and the intake 
process in a public welfare agency’, in S. Wheeler (ed.), 
On Record: Files and Dossiers in American life. Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage.
Zimmerman, D. H. (1969c) ‘Tasks and troubles: the practical 
bases of work activities in a public assistance agency’, 
in D. A. Hansen (ed.), Explorations in Sociology and 
Counselling. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Zimmerman, D. H. and Pollner, M. (2003) ‘The everyday world 
as phenomenon’, in M. Lynch and W. Sharrock (eds), Harold 
Garfinkel. London: Sage. pp. 201–26 (1st edn, 1970.)
Zimmerman, D. H. and Wieder, D. L. (1971) ‘Ethnomethodology 
and the problem of order: comment on Denzin’, in 
J. Douglas (ed.), Understanding Everyday Life. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul. pp. 285–98.

The Power of Discourse 
and the Discourse 
of Power
J o s é  A n t o n i o  F l o r e s  F a r f á n 
a n d  A n n a  H o l z s c h e i t e r
10
10.1 INTRODUCTION
Power is an omnipresent facet of discourse and 
beyond. That is to say that in all semiotic proc-
esses such as (less studied) non-verbal communi-
cation there are power expressions. Yet most works 
that have discussed the relationship of discourse 
and power vary not only in their (usually implicit) 
definitions of what these phenomena are but also 
seldom explicate their particular perspective on 
power and its relationship to discourse. Regarding 
the type of relationship each establishes with the 
other, the intimate link between power and dis-
course invites a number of reflections, installing 
a series of open questions in the social sciences 
(e.g. Wodak, 1989), stemming from different 
research traditions, including discourse analysis 
and critical linguistics (Fairclough, 1989), linguis-
tic anthropology (Duranti, 2001), or sociolinguis-
tics (Labov, 1972a). For instance, in the latter 
tradition, also commonly known as quantitative 
sociolinguistics, power and discourse are treated 
as contiguous and interdependent phenomena. 
Yet more recently their interfaces are stressed as 
relational, dynamic and complex interactive phe-
nomena (e.g. van Dijk, 1993; Locher, 2004). Most 
scholars that have faced the question seriously 
would agree that power constitutes and repro-
duces discourse, while at the same being shaped 
and reshaped by discourse itself (e.g. Foucault, 
1981; Bourdieu and Wacquant, 1992). In other 
words, power constitutes and is reproduced via 
discourse, and vice versa. Therefore one interest-
ing development regarding the theoretical ques-
tion of the relationship of power and discourse 
is the discursive shaping and reshaping of power 
in discourse production. As we will see, power 
and discourse cannot be conceived as static 
phenomena, but as (hopefully!) ever changing 
constituents of social life in interactive, relational, 
contextual and constructivist ways (Gumperz, 
1982; Fairclough, 1989; Wodak, 1989).
All this suggests that the ecology of power and 
discourse encompasses a number of complex rela-
tionships that analytically and empirically still 
require finer distinctions and clarifications. The 
core questions guiding this chapter revolve around 
this complex interrelation between power and 
discourse, the way it manifests itself, and the 
approaches and methods by which it can be stud-
ied empirically. We will argue that there are differ-
ent conceptualizations of the interplay between 
power and discourse that relate to different levels 
of discourse and its analysis. On the one hand, 
discursive power is often understood as the power 
of discourses, i.e. large, historical meaning-
structures that shape and ‘govern’ human interac-
tion. On the other hand, many authors, e.g. those 
in the tradition of conversation analysis (Drew and 
Heritage, 1992; Linell, 1998) or discursive psy-
chology (Potter and Wetherell, 1987; Edwards and 
Potter, 1992; Potter, 2003) study discursive power 
by looking at concrete and very limited social 
settings in which a small number of individuals 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
140
seek to influence each other through communica-
tive interaction (power in discourse). Considering 
these two perspectives, we will therefore ask:
• How does the naturalization and institutionaliza-
tion of power occur through discourse?
• How are power and those who exert it legiti-
mized in discourse?
• How does the play of power in discourse pro-
duce relationships of domination, coercion and 
exclusion?
• How do sociolinguistic approaches and models 
expose the display and workings of power of/in 
discourse and how do they analyse it?
• How can an analytical model of power and dis-
course productively incorporate other interacting 
phenomena such as agency, gender, identity and 
the like? 
After a general discussion of these questions, 
and after an outline of some of the most influential 
sociolinguistic approaches to power, we will then 
go on to illustrate how the discipline of sociolin-
guistics has worked its way around a number of 
prominent empirical research areas in which the 
critical exploration of power relations has helped 
to uncover the exclusionary force of discourse and 
its, often, stigmatizing effects on human beings. 
Finally, we will argue that revisiting the issue of 
power and discourse also offers the possibility of 
advancing the sociolinguistic agenda in a number 
of ways. Academic research represents probably 
one of the most important forms of institutional-
ized power through discourse in which specific 
ways of perceiving, analysing and theorizing 
about the world and human action dominate and 
‘govern’ disciplines. Elaborating on the critical 
linguistics approach by Fowler, Fairclough and 
van Dijk – among others – (Fowler et al., 1979; 
Fairclough, 1989; van Dijk, 1993) we will show 
how the discipline of sociolinguistics itself poten-
tially acts as an authoritative, exclusionary ensem-
ble of discourses and social practices that 
contributes to the ‘silencing’ of specific research 
objects, subjects or perspectives. 
Illustrations will be presented of brief but cru-
cial discursive instances of power disclosure in the 
production of research, especially in the area of 
field linguistics. These illustrations suggest ways 
to go beyond disciplinary boundaries and develop 
a holistic approach to the interface of power and 
discourse. For these purposes, we will primarily 
call attention to what we find most interesting in 
the contemporary debate about power and dis-
course in the social sciences: namely, the role and 
place of sociolinguistic research in society as a 
whole. We will take the example of endangered 
languages as being emblematic of several power 
differentials which have come to reconfigure the 
discipline in the face of the notion of language 
revitalization (e.g. Tsunoda, 2002) and, more 
recently, developmental sociolinguistics (Djitév, 
2008).
Theories on the relationship between 
power and discourse 
Power is, perhaps, one of the most outstanding, 
fascinating and complex phenomena studied in 
the social sciences. The ways in which individual 
human beings aim to influence and control each 
other (either in subtle or more direct, offensive 
ways) or the ways in which social institutions, 
societal discourses and political authority con-
strain the behaviour of human beings have always 
attracted the attention of disciplines such as soci-
ology, political science, psychology, linguistics, 
media studies or economics. Thus, it is not sur-
prising that in sociolinguistics too, the study of 
power occupies a central place. Building heavily 
on the sociological theories of Bourdieu (1977), 
Habermas (1981), Foucault (1981) or Lukes 
(1974), this discipline has, over time, developed 
a whole range of different approaches that aim 
to translate abstract theory on the interplay 
between language and power into analytical 
frameworks for the study of the empirical mani-
festation of power in social life. Above all, it is the 
more critical branches of sociolinguistics that 
have emphasized the role of power in communica-
tion and discourse, and their potential exclusionary 
effects. 
Readers of this chapter might be pleased if we 
formulated a concise definition of power. Alas, 
power qualifies like few other concepts as an 
essentially contested concept. There are probably 
as many power concepts as there are authors writ-
ing about power. In general, however, it seems at 
least possible to distinguish between different 
understandings of power that relate to differing 
levels of analysis chosen for the study of social 
life. On the one hand, power is often seen – in its 
simplest form – as the capacity of an individual to 
pursue his or her interest even against the resist-
ance of another person (Dahl, 1957; Weber, 1978). 
Such a behaviouralist notion of power assumes 
that power is at play where one human being’s 
interests or will prevail over another’s. Related to 
discourse, such a perspective would, for example, 
look at the ways in which people seek to dominate 
others in language exchange and communication, 
the ways in which individuals attempt to silence 
others when talking or writing, the manifold 
ways in which human beings seek to gain control 
over discourses and to manipulate others using 
language, or the argumentative moves that people 
make to convince others that their opinion is right 

POWER AND DISCOURSE
141
and the other person’s wrong. On the other hand, 
power is also seen as a much more diffuse phe-
nomenon that is embodied in the social structures 
in which human interaction is integrated. These 
social structures, for example, in the form of insti-
tutions, ‘govern’ and discipline the interaction of 
human beings to a certain extent and, as such, act 
as powerful constraining forces in social life. Put 
in very simplistic terms, there is a fundamental 
difference between concepts of power that are 
located at the level of subjects or agents and those 
that are located at the level of social structures.
In sociolinguistics, however, discourse has offered 
itself as an interface that allows us to understand 
the emergence and effects of power relations 
through a complex co-constitutive relationship 
between agents and structures. Discourse is, on 
the one hand, seen as the most important location 
for the production of asymmetric relationships of 
power and, on the other hand, seen as the place 
where individuals are in a position to renegotiate 
or even level out relationships of power. Discourses 
in themselves act as powerful structures of social 
conventions (meaning-conventions) by limiting 
the potentially indefinite ways of talking about 
and perceiving social and material reality. Yet, it is 
also linguistic interaction which is seen as con-
stantly transforming and challenging dominant 
perceptions of this social and material reality. Every 
speech-act, thus, at the same time represents and 
transforms patterns of meaning. 
Among the most influential approaches on 
the intimate relationship between power and dis-
course that have been seized in sociolinguistic 
works on power are, without doubt, the writings 
of Habermas (1981) and Foucault (1981). Their 
critical thinking has highlighted the linkage 
between discourse, power and exclusion, albeit 
from very different angles. The writings of these 
two authors also reflect the different levels of 
analysis that an investigation of power in discourse 
follows: structures of meaning (Foucault) or com-
municative interaction (Habermas). Foucault’s 
(1981) perspectives on power continue to influ-
ence discourse analysis to this day – he sees dis-
course production as guided by large discursive 
formations which define what can and what 
cannot be uttered in a given society at a given 
historical point in time. Discursive formations are 
determined by historical formations, and such 
overarching determinism is of course in principle 
beyond the individual’s conscious will, weakening 
subjects’ possibilities of transforming society. 
Over time, certain ways of speaking about reality 
and seeing the world materialize, and slowly 
generate institutionalized practices that directly 
affect the lives of individuals in a society. Certain 
claims and utterances remain ‘said’ and valid 
much longer than just for the instant in which they 
were uttered – their lasting influence on human 
thought, speech and action becomes manifest in 
the constant repetition of similar arguments. 
For Foucault, discourses understood as conglom-
erates of larger systems of meaning are necessar-
ily powerful in that they ‘govern’ the everyday 
lives of subjects (Foucault, 1970, 1984a, 1984b, 
1992, 2003).
Yet the question of power and discourse cannot 
be limited to discursive formations. Individuals 
potentially have the possibility to interrupt such 
societal arrangements, basically although not 
exclusively via discourse (Habermas, 1981). The 
Habermasian understanding of discourse empha-
sizes the emancipatory potential of discursive 
interaction as a place where power relations can 
be challenged and renegotiated. His theory on 
communicative action formulates the ideal social 
setting for such a renegotiation in a counter-
factual thought experiment – the ideal-speech 
situation. By measuring any process of social 
interaction against the democratic or deliberative 
standards1 of this ideal speech-situation it is, 
according to Habermas, possible to observe and, 
potentially, rectify or at least contest the power 
asymmetries that characterize a specific social 
situation. While a Foucauldian understanding 
of discourse is, hence, associated with the under-
lying social conventions (the power of discourse) 
that give meaning to social interaction, the 
Habermasian concept of discourse relates to the 
quality of linguistic interaction, to the procedures 
and social settings that lead to the formulation and 
re-formulation of these social conventions (the 
power in discourse). Foucault’s theory of dis-
course is often misinterpreted with regard to the 
possibility of agents (not only ‘subjects’) con-
sciously confronting, challenging or transforming 
power in specific settings. Even though his think-
ing focuses on the powerful role of discourses 
and narratives in history, he does not deny the 
potentially transformative and emancipatory role 
of human beings. In other words, although the 
existence of discursive formations entails specific 
dynamics and realms of power microphysics, for 
Foucault power is constantly (re)defined as resist-
ance to hegemonic forces. However, it is particu-
larly the Habermasian notion of discourse that has 
become associated with the potential to confront the 
crude exercise of power in (quasi) argumentative 
terms (cf. Habermas, 1981). 
In Habermas’ (1981) theory of communicative 
action, discourse is understood as an instance that, 
by its very nature, installs the possibility of com-
municative universals, to which we all should 
have access. Yet there are always many ethical 
dilemmas posed by the exercise of power in dis-
course in specific fields which tend to block such 
open possibility. Similar a priori universals stem 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
142
from the Gricean categorical a priori postulate of 
the cooperative principle in conversation, which 
encompasses maxims such as quality and quantity 
(Grice, 1975). These idealizations are supposed 
to operate independently of the power contexts 
in which conversation always takes place. 
Such speakers’ idealizations are consonant with 
Habermas’ theory of communicative action, in 
which the individual’s intentionality and his or 
her right to argumentative justification plays an 
outstanding role in defining what can or cannot be 
uttered (Ducrot, 1984). In contrast, for Foucault, 
power depends on régimes du savoir as related 
realms of dominance in communication. In this 
sense, Foucault understands power as the ways in 
which human beings are transformed into sub-
jects, as compartmentalized instantiations of, for 
example, homo economicus, homo academicus or 
homo ludens. Powerful historical narratives draw 
lines of differentiation that impose a socially 
acceptable or inacceptable identity on human 
beings – dividing the sane from the insane, the 
normal from the deviant, etc. 
While Habermas (1981) and Foucault (1981) 
have emphasized – although from very different 
perspectives – the exclusionary dimensions of 
discourses, a range of sociological theories have 
highlighted the central effects of (social) institu-
tions on the relative power of individuals in and 
over discourse. Most important here are Bourdieu’s 
ideas on the linguistic market and symbolic 
violence, referring to the ways actors internalize 
and legitimize specific power arrangements 
(such as boss–secretary, husband–wife, colonizer–
colonized, etc.). Symbolic violence is accepted as 
part of certain habitus – a set of socially determined 
predispositions or preferences for certain linguis-
tic varieties considered more legitimate than 
others in a linguistic market. Thus, any ‘discursive 
field’ (Bourdieu, 1977, 1985) is characterized by 
expressions of asymmetry in which certain actors 
are more authoritative in the production of dis-
courses. Of course this approach obliges under-
standing linguistic competence not as a limited 
isolated technical capacity, but rather as a highly 
uneven, stratified materialization of discourse 
practices which, in turn, pertain to, and at the 
same time are relatively independent of, specific 
power arrangements and differentials (Bourdieu 
and Wacquant, 1992).
Similar to Bourdieu’s thinking on the ways in 
which power relationships are constituted through 
language and institutionalized in discursive fields, 
sociological theories on the multi-dimensional 
character of power have also strongly shaped cur-
rent sociolinguistic studies on the interplay 
between power and discourse. The conceptualiza-
tions of power of Bachrach and Baratz (1970) and 
Lukes (1974) are most prominent in this regard. 
As a consequence of their multi-dimensional 
nature, these conceptualizations challenge subject-
focused understandings of power as simply 
the ability to assert one’s will against another per-
son’s resistance. Even though they differ with 
regard to which dimensions they see as relevant, 
these authors point to the central role of institu-
tions in constituting and materializing power 
relationships between individuals. Bachrach 
and Baratz (1970) still adhere to two classical 
presuppositions of behavioural power theory: the 
supremacy of material resources as power assets 
and the belief in actors’ desire to have their 
interests fulfilled. However, they point to the 
importance of observing and analysing the role of 
institutional barriers or filters that make it difficult 
if not impossible for minority interests or the 
interests of the powerless (in the sense that they 
are ‘poor’, without material means) to be incorpo-
rated into collective decision-making processes. 
Thus, their two-dimensional understanding of 
power emphasizes that power analysis has to look 
beyond intra-personal relations of power and 
coercion and incorporate the norms and rules that 
precondition which issues and opinions can be 
addressed and are considered legitimate in a given 
social context. 
The play of power thus relates not only to 
the potential to threaten and coerce but also to 
struggles over institutional design and political 
and social agendas (Schattschneider 1975: 69; 
Bachrach and Baratz, 1977: 46). Analytical 
interest shifts from an identification of who is 
powerful to an investigation of why certain actors 
are better positioned in an institutional framework 
than others. Hence, what these authors make us 
aware of is the strong exclusionary dimension 
of social and political processes and the fact 
that every decision-making process is based on 
‘non-decisions’ and that no consensus would be 
possible without shunning those views or voices 
that greatly threaten this consensus. 
Like Bachrach and Baratz (1970), Lukes 
departs from a perspective on power that focuses 
on how individuals realize their will against the 
resistance of others. He stresses the necessity to 
take into account the influence of ‘collective 
forces and social arrangements’ in analysing power 
relations (Lukes, 1974: 22). Consequently, Lukes 
introduces his well-known third dimension of 
power that stresses the critical role of institutional 
frameworks in determining the relative position of 
individuals in communicative processes, as well 
as the selection and exclusion of specific topics, 
worldviews or modes of speaking. Lukes has 
paved the way for a perspective on power that 
accommodates the constraining influence of the 
situational, contextual framework within which 
social struggles take place. Despite the fact that 

POWER AND DISCOURSE
143
Lukes stops short of addressing the actual com-
municative processes that take place within pow-
erful institutional frameworks, he grants a decisive 
position to communicative interaction, the force 
of speech-acts, the legitimacy of speakers and the 
‘power of language’ in the endeavour to develop 
alternative conceptualizations of power politics. 
Here, power is an effect of exclusionary social 
practices and the limited accessibility of social 
structures. Most importantly, what both Bachrach 
and Baratz (1970) and Lukes (1974) have made us 
aware of is that the most effective workings of 
power do not find their expression in situations of 
conflict among individuals, but become particu-
larly obvious in situations in which no conflict 
arises (Lukes, 1974: 23). What the authors dis-
cussed here have emphasized in their study of 
power is the centrality of exclusion as both an 
effect of power relationships as well as, at times, 
a precondition for the unchallenged authority of 
individuals. It is this facet of the power–discourse 
nexus in particular that has become most promi-
nent in sociolinguistic research on discourse and 
that constitutes the core of critical thinking in 
sociolinguistics. 
While the authors mentioned above have 
inspired sociolinguistic thought on the relation-
ship between power and discourse from a pro-
nounced sociological standpoint, influential 
stimulus has also come from the field of linguis-
tics. Bakhtin’s (1981) theory on heteroglossia has 
also strongly influenced the conceptions of power 
and discourse in the literature beyond critical lin-
guistics, as manifested for example in linguistic 
anthropology. This approach allows an under-
standing of competing voices as part of the multi-
vocality of discourse, manifested for instance in 
opposing idealized conceptions of linguistic 
homogeneity or monoglot perspectives on lan-
guage (Bauman and Briggs, 2003) that prevail in 
received (not only orthodox formal) linguistic 
theories. This model allows, and at the same time 
remits to at times, extremely antagonistic social 
positions, for instance, exemplified in precisely 
the existence of received approaches on language, 
against its everyday use in social interaction in 
different (e.g. multilingual) settings. Bakhtin 
(1981) understands language as heterogeneously 
linked to specific ideologies conceived in a strug-
gle between different power and even individuals’ 
antagonistic relationships as expressed in different 
voices; of course, this requires a constant refer-
ence to utterances, not isolated words. This nec-
essarily makes reference to different speakers and 
previous (con)texts in a flow of intertextuality and 
interdiscourse, enacting specific social positions 
with respect to language in society. In this case, 
speakers are not porte-paroles but most of all 
agents of different conflicting voices in a given 
text, representing dominant or subordinated 
voices, linked to power differentials associated 
with heteroglot language(s), voices that are con-
stantly competing and present in each and every 
genre (Bakhtin 1973), ranging from everyday to 
political and of course, as we will suggest, even 
‘scientific’, academic discourse. 
In this sense, several approaches in linguistics 
and its idealizations are good examples of (mono-
lingual) prescriptive ideologies (Silverstein, 1979; 
Blommaert, 1999), manifested in the presumed 
homogeneous status of a language. This is evi-
denced in how several grammatical descriptions 
ironically resemble an ‘idiolectal’ or ‘private’ lan-
guage, which Jakobson (1976) or Wittgenstein 
(1988) demonstrated constitute a fiction. Moreover, 
ideolects are possible as extreme exercises of 
power linked to linguistic theories in which a 
power relationship between an ‘informant’ and the 
linguist operates, and are expressed in imposed 
categorizations and methods as interviews (see 
below) with their communicative hegemonies 
(Briggs 1983). Categorizations such as ‘acceptable’ 
and ‘grammatical’ expressions are absent of clari-
fication in ‘homogeneous’ monolingual ideologies. 
In field linguistics, ‘acceptable’, ‘grammatical’, 
‘correct’ forms of a language are connected to 
purism, which arises as a hypocritical contempt 
towards the researcher from the side of the speaker. 
Exacerbated in its written form, the issue of pos-
sible degrees of intelligibility also arises here, in 
which the operation of writing is a way of erasing 
the oral indigenous form of the language in an 
enigmatic world (Duranti and Goodwin, 1992). In 
this connection, access is very limited if at all 
granted to speakers themselves, a common power 
operation discursively materialized in (almost) 
unintelligible varieties from the actors’ point of 
view – not to speak of grammatical terminology.
In practice, similar issues stem from and 
frequently represent particular and absolutely 
decontextualized forms of social uses of a lan-
guage, and are of course linked to fairly unequal 
power interactions. As an overall effect, linguistic 
descriptions tend to inhibit and at the same time 
materialize the variable nature of language in its 
relation to power and discourse, as an eloquent 
expression of the direct link between linguistic 
variability and power. As the example of (e.g. 
formal) linguistics suggests, selecting one variety 
against discarding many others constitutes an 
egregious manifestation of social differentiation 
linked to hegemonic linguistic ideologies which 
frequently assert the linguistic purity of an imag-
ined ‘standard’ code. As we will see, the use of 
discourse marks a series of hierarchical power 
structures, materialized in such effects as those 
produced for instance in elicitation in the linguist 
‘informant’ encounter, differentiated along the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
144
lines of several linguistic varieties associated with 
specific power differentials.
In contrast to the radical assumption of conver-
sational analysis practitioners that society is 
constituted in verbal interaction itself (which 
obscures power relationships and treats discourse 
as independent with regards to more global struc-
tures), and although not necessarily using the spe-
cific terms power and discourse, several traditions, 
including that of linguistic anthropology ( Bauman 
and Briggs, 2003) touch upon power and discourse 
at least indirectly. Linguistic anthropologists ana-
lyse cross-discourse practices, that vary cross-
culturally, involving, for instance, the violation of 
presumed universal maxims such as those entailed 
in Grice’s principle of cooperation (1975). Such 
investigations include among many others Ochs 
(1988) on Madagascar and Haviland (1997) on 
Tzotzil (Maya).
In sum, critical social theories on the link 
between power and discourse have made us aware 
of two core, underlying assumptions in particular. 
First, discourse and power are co-constitutive. 
Discourse is constitutive of power by privileging 
certain perceptions of (social) reality and excluding 
others. Societal discourses shape and sustain dis-
criminatory and stigmatizing practices and, as 
such, bring about ‘disorders of discourses’ (Wodak, 
1996) in which some human beings are muted 
while the speaking authority of others is naturalized. 
Power relationships predispose which individuals 
are in a position to participate in and shape dis-
courses. Secondly, however, discourse is also seen 
as bearing emancipatory potential, being the place 
where power and authority might eventually be 
challenged and resisted. In general, therefore, 
language and communication as the primary dis-
cursive practices are perceived as playing a critical 
role both in the perpetuation as well as the trans-
formation of powerful discourses. In the following, 
we will show how empirical sociolinguistic 
research has sought to exemplify these core 
assumptions. We have chosen some of the most 
prominent fields of research in contemporary 
sociolinguistics, i.e. studies on national identity 
and racism, social conventions (such as politeness), 
field linguistics and academic research, in order 
to show how the discipline of sociolinguistics 
has approached the interplay between power and 
discourse. 
10.2  POWER IN THE TERRAIN: SOME 
PROMINENT EMPIRICAL FIELDS
The exploration of the issue of power and dis-
course includes a wealth of empirical studies 
which touch upon features such as the status, 
authority and variable nature and role of discourse 
in multiple settings where power is disclosed and 
the ways in which identities are created through 
powerful discourses, e.g. gender discourses (see, 
for example, Tannen, 1990; for a brief review see 
Gal, 2001). Much empirical research in this field 
can be classified as ‘political’ discourse research 
inasmuch as it investigates how power manifests 
itself in the discourses sustaining particular political 
institutions and systems as well as in their formal 
and informal discursive forums (e.g. Wodak 1989). 
As it is impossible to fully cover the wealth of 
empirical investigations that in one way or another 
deal with the topic at hand, we will only mention 
some illustrative key cases, ranging from investi-
gations on the expression of racism (cf. van Dijk, 
1989, 1993, 2005; Hill, 2001) to politeness as 
examples of the power of social conventions and, 
finally, of the power of linguistic research and its 
methods in shaping identities and ‘truths’. 
Racism, identity and ideology
The exclusionary, stigmatizing and ‘governing’ 
force of discourse has perhaps been most critically 
and thoroughly studied with regard to racist ide-
ologies and the construction and manipulation of 
national identities. For instance, van Dijk (1989), 
while studying the expression of racism in the 
British press, shows that the link between power 
and discourse includes a number of different types 
of interfaces for which consideration is required; 
these include representational devices that are 
presented as objective ‘facts’, as discursively 
constructed ‘truths’, which of course stem from 
ideological ‘white’ matrices (cf. Hill, 2001) that in 
turn surface as specific attitudinal representations 
of the social world. This and several other works 
on racism (e.g. Reisigl and Wodak, 2001) and its 
multiple linguistic expressions show how, through 
ethnic differentiation, elite ideologies pursue 
transmitting to public opinion, a way of perpetuat-
ing the status quo; this might include, for instance, 
identifying ‘blacks’ and ‘Latinos’ (e.g. migrants 
in the USA, especially Mexicans, Hill, 2001) as 
deviant, problematic and of course dangerous, 
violent, lazy, stupid and so on. For these groups, 
there are frequently specific derogatory termin-
ologies that exist, such as ‘greaser’ (for more 
details on this see below). Other recent studies 
on the discursive expression of racism as social 
differentiation and exclusion encompass macro 
and micro structures and their interfaces, explor-
ing the constitution and reproduction of diverse 
societal arrangements or power differentials 
linked to discourse and thus power naturalization 
(e.g. Reisigl and Wodak, 2001, and more recently, 
van Dijk, 2005). 

POWER AND DISCOURSE
145
A good example of how power linked to the 
expression of White racism against Latinos in the 
USA, especially Mexicans, as indexicalized in 
discourse, is presented in the work of Jane H. Hill 
(2001) on the semiotics of mock languages. 
Several Spanish terms in US English convey 
highly pejorative racist overtones, which are 
expressed in phrases such as hasta la vista baby 
by Schwarzenegger in Terminator 2, or comprende 
by Cameron Diaz in What Happens in Vegas? 
while instructing Ashton Kutchner to use the toilet 
cover. These are all forms of racist indexicality 
(Ochs, 1988) which encodes covert racist mean-
ings, elevating Whites’ superiority and reproduc-
ing stereotypical representations of Mexicans as 
lazy, stupid, corrupt, treacherous and the like. 
Given their very nature, these indexes are part of 
the ideologies of power that manifest themselves 
in everyday interactions. 
Other types of studies investigate bilingual 
diglossic conflicts – power and discourse here 
entail an indigenous tongue shift (Zimmerman, 
1992, Hamel, 1988 and Flores Farfán, 2003 on the 
asymmetrical relationship between Otomí and 
Spanish). Conflictive diglossia is outstandingly 
manifested in the high rates of penetration of 
Spanish over the indigenous tongues, in contrast 
to the effects of these on Spanish. The colonial 
language’s strong impact at all levels of linguistic 
analysis (Dorian, 1992) often produces obsoles-
cent forms, stylistic reduction and levelling of 
paradigms, among others. This is coupled with 
clear sequels of linguistic insecurity and stereo-
types considering indigenous languages to be 
‘inferior’, ‘corrupted’, etc., ideologies at times 
interiorized by speakers themselves, reaching the 
point at which Spanish is becoming the primary 
tongue of many of these communities, paradoxi-
cally producing pretty much stigmatized non-
standard versions of the hegemonic language.
In contrast to many of these traditions which 
focus on the relationship of language and society, 
although from different perspectives, such as 
sociolinguistics, linguistic anthropology and dis-
course analysis, linguistic’s conception of lan-
guage as an idealized uniform system conveys 
also a political stance which can be systematically 
criticized as having a close relationship to the 
emergence of national states, with their monolin-
gual ideologies, in which only one official lan-
guage is coupled with national identity and state 
formation. This is of course a power issue that 
presents a linguistic expression – namely, a 
monoglotic (idealized) presumed standard lan-
guage – whose gatekeepers are, precisely, aca-
demics. Take as an expression of this hegemony, 
for example, the fact that this chapter is written in 
English, and not say in Spanish, not to mention an 
indigenous tongue or other marginal varieties. 
In other words, discursive social differentiation 
already implies (other) specific power differen-
tials that are linguistically materialized such as the 
exclusion of certain social groups and their lan-
guages in favour of others. Thus, discursive ideo-
logical power stances entail a politics of exclusion 
as an expression of inequality as presented in 
terms of the space allocated and thus the visibility 
(or not) granted to speakers of non-standard 
varieties – not to speak of endangered languages 
(Bauman and Briggs, 2003). 
Examples of how identities are constructed and 
institutionalized through powerful discourses 
abound in the literature, even where, as suggested, 
they are not at times explicitly stated as such. 
Some of the most interesting examples of the 
power relationships in and via analysed discourse 
have been developed in the field of power and 
gender in which speakers reach unshared percep-
tions of confronted identities (e.g. Tannen, 1990) 
and the expression of racism in, for example, 
mock languages (Hill, 2001) or newspaper rheto-
ric (Van Dijk, 1993). Let us review another aspect 
which has permeated the discussion of power and 
discourse, namely, politeness.
Social conventions, discourse and 
power: the example of politeness 
We pointed to the centrality of institutions in 
sociolinguistic research on power and discourse 
earlier, seeing them both as concrete social venues 
in which power asymmetries can be studied 
(e.g. a school, a hospital, an office) and as social 
conventions that govern the everyday actions and 
interactions of individuals. Important studies have 
highlighted how power can be studied with regard 
to both of these dimensions of the notion of insti-
tution. By using the example of politeness, we 
will illustrate here how social conventions can be 
studied through discourse analysis. From a number 
of studies, we know that direct power confronta-
tions are, in principle, limited by politeness. 
Although its displays vary across different cul-
tures and, more importantly, its interpretation is 
open to a relational approach, politeness can 
be understood as a ritual procedure in which, in 
different ways, specific cultures mitigate the crude 
exercise of power, via its dulcification, a sort of 
masking strategy to keep positive face and not 
threaten the identity of participants in given inter-
actions. Thus, politeness has first been studied as 
an index to power and solidarity. Brown and 
Gilman (1968) studied power differentials 
expressed in systems of pronouns which imply 
different types of treatments; the pronouns ranged 
from the most ‘neutral’ to honorific ones in spe-
cific languages. Brown and Gilman also open the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
146
study of the interactive linguistic adjustments 
between speakers of different dialects in what they 
conceive as a solidarity strategy, and develop a 
theory of linguistic accommodation which, never-
theless, should confront specific power arrange-
ments. Yet the classic work on politeness is that of 
Brown and Levinson (1987) who examine the 
ways speakers construct positive and avoid nega-
tive face, limiting losing ground on imagined or 
imputed identities in specific settings. This work 
can be criticized precisely on the grounds of not 
taking power into consideration, and even from 
stemming from a Eurocentric viewpoint on dis-
course, which not only presumes its rational and 
individual performance but also tends to overstate 
it. Yet this is probably also its merit, since it can 
be thought of as an appeal to discourse, much in 
the way of a right that speakers can exert at any 
given moment, vindicating the chance of critical 
thinking. As we have seen, the right to discourse 
constitutes a strong premise when considering the 
nature of discourse, which it itself allows, against 
the crude exercise of power (Habermas, 1981). 
Moreover, analogous to the discursive defini-
tion of power, another criticism of this work stems 
from the idea that politeness is framed within 
specific contexts that are relationally negotiated, 
and cannot simply be equated to simplistic taken-
for-granted dichotomist oppositions such as posi-
tive versus negative face, directness versus 
indirectness, but rather on hic et nunc (here and 
now) interactive negotiations of appropriate or 
marked behaviour, based on the quest for balance 
between ‘involvement and independence’ of the 
speaker with respect to the hearer (Locher, 2004, 
passim). Such a recent approach conceives of 
politeness as part of a process in which partici-
pants in conversation aim at maintaining basic 
functions of discourse. These include the referen-
tial and the interactional levels, which in practice 
overlap and are subject to contextual interpreta-
tions and negotiations. Such interpretations take 
place within specific cultural and normative 
frames against which speakers judge different 
emergent behaviours as being appropriate or not, 
positive or negative, marked or unmarked.
All in all, politeness constitutes an intermediate 
level between communicative universals and 
direct strategic action or the exercise of power via 
discourse, inasmuch as it points to specific negoti-
ated identities that should contextually be main-
tained in order to allow for the ‘normal’ flow of 
conversation and interaction. 
Sociolinguistic research practice as 
an instantiation of discursive power 
A number of recent works have endeavoured to 
document the emergence of different coexistent 
voices in the making of research. Studies have 
stressed the active negotiation of sociolinguistic 
identities in research making (Garner et al., 2006) 
as heteroglossic performances in the realm of 
social interaction (Hill and Hill, 1986 on Mexicano 
translinguistics; Duranti and Ochs, 1986 on literacy; 
Cameron, 1992 on power and method; and Flores 
Farfán (2005, 2006) on co-authoring as empower-
ment). A most interesting approach to power and 
discourse, which is becoming more prominent due 
to its ethical relevance, relates to the sociolinguis-
tic models that investigate discourse and power 
trying to raise awareness for issues such as une-
qual social relations, linguistic discrimination or 
cultural ‘misunderstandings’ beyond the academic 
world (Gumperz, 1982; Philips, 1983; Scollon and 
Scollon, 2000). Collaborative or advocacy research 
in sociolinguistics (Cameron, 1992; Milroy and 
Gordon, 2003) are also present in public anthro-
pology in the USA (Hill, 2001), responsible 
(Hale, 1992), committed or even peace linguistics 
(Crystal, 2004), all of which aim for the greater  
visibility of the agency of actors in the construc-
tion of data and their social relevance. Such a 
stream of sociolinguistic research was developed 
as early as in the 1970s in studies on the expres-
sion of power in interethnic encounters in so-
called cultural crosstalk. Take for example South 
Asian immigrants and British nationals in the 
workplace or other public spheres (Jupp et al., 
1982), or the vindication of non-standard varieties 
of Black English (Labov, 1972b), the visibility of 
the power-discourse-nexus in fields such as lan-
guage and gender (Tannen, 1990), language and 
education (Crystal, 2004), or language revitaliza-
tion (Fishman, 1991; Tsunoda, 2002). In all of 
these areas of research, levelling power relation-
ships between actors has been an important meth-
odological development, summarized here 
as research co-authoring, conceived as emergent 
new (power) epistemologies between actors in 
the social sciences (e.g. Cameron, 1992; Flores 
Farfán, 2005). 
In fact, all contrasting antagonistic traditions in 
the study of language, as is made clear in, for 
instance, opposing systems (or structures) of dis-
course (or use) (e.g. Chomsky, 1957 vs Hymes, 
1972), entail a struggle for imposing a (re)con-
figuration of paradigms in the making of research, 
which of course depend on specific power arrange-
ments and the possibility of interrupting received 
paradigms via discourse:
… language is not a neutral medium that passes 
freely and easily into the private property of speak-
ers intentions; it is … overpopulated with the 
intentions of others. Expropriating it, forcing it to 
submit to ones own intentions and accents, is a 
difficult and complicated process (Bakhtin, 1981: 
299, quoted in Duranti, 2001: 23).

POWER AND DISCOURSE
147
The power of discourse in society is recognized 
in a number of works. Consider Goody’s discus-
sion of literacy as a step in the development of 
Western civilization, shifting from oral mythical 
narratives to rational historical modalities of 
thought (Duranti, 2001: 27). Yet literacy under-
stood as alphabetical (writing) praxis has been and 
is still linked to power in society, to perpetuating 
authority and to access and control of institutional 
(linguistic or not) resources. 
Yet there has been a thoughtful, albeit still 
incomplete, revision of the ways in which power 
is determined via discourse and vice versa. Recall 
that a basic premise is the uneven treatment that 
different, at times antagonistic, research traditions 
provide to the relationship between power and 
discourse. As we have suggested, it is the French 
philosophical tradition that has inspired more 
theoretical and empirical studies regarding con-
cepts such as power and discourse, particularly 
linked to the names of Foucault (1981) and 
Bourdieu (1977). This is especially reflected in a 
series of studies in the field of discourse analysis 
which concentrate on the written form of dis-
course, evoking the sociocultural membership of 
analysts to a given cultural matrix, a written one 
(e.g. Foucault, 1981). In contrast, the almost total 
omission of the concept or even the word power is 
characteristic of North American sociology, par-
ticularly linked to the ethnomethodological tradi-
tion, today represented by conversational analysis 
practitioners such as Sacks, Schegloff and 
Jefferson (1974), which has also become one nur-
turing contemporary analytical force at work in 
anthropological linguistics (Duranti, 2001). The 
constructive confrontation of these and other tra-
ditions seems a productive endeavour, since one 
probably underestimates and thus obscures what 
the other emphasizes (for an effort in this sense, 
see Flores Farfán, 2003). 
Let us recover what, in 2003, Flores Farfán 
called the ‘conversational paradox’, which draws 
attention to two outstanding instances of contrast-
ing viewpoints to suggest a discourse analysis 
model, represented by the names of, for example, 
Foucault (1981) on the one hand, and, for example, 
Habermas (1981), on the other. The study attempts 
to analyse prototypical market interactions in 
which Mestizo (the mainstream population in 
Mexico and most Latin America) brokers force 
their goods, verbally and non-verbally, from indig-
enous people, and it shows that even in these types 
of extreme exploitative situations, discourse is 
still an open resource to which, in principle, all 
human beings should have the right to access. 
This implies a communicative ethics of discourse 
that is always confronted by more down-to-earth 
approaches, or Foucault’s microphysics, which is 
where the deployment of power actually takes 
place, always confronted by such presumed 
ontogenetic and philogenetic principles of com-
munication which, after all, warrant or at least 
virtually allow the possibility of emancipation. 
The examples alluded to above illustrate how 
issues relating to historical or cultural back-
grounds, which guide and even to a certain extend 
determine (or at least influence) discourse produc-
tion, establish certain limits on what can and 
cannot be said within a specific context and a 
specific historical discursive formation (Foucault, 
1981; Bourdieu, 1977). Saville Troike (1982: 38) 
provides several examples, such as the fact that 
rural Cuban varieties acquired prestige after the 
revolution, together with a devaluation of the 
former educated standard, entailing a decline in 
use of former common religious terminologies 
and forms of address such as Dios or Jesus mio 
(my God), attributed to the introduction of Marxist 
criticism towards religion.
Another illustration of the close relationship of 
discourse and power is the relatively recent intro-
duction of gender-neutral language to mark politi-
cal correctness in the usage of politicians in public 
discourse in countries such as Mexico. Thus, 
expressions such as los niños y las niñas de 
Mexico ‘the boys and girls of Mexico’ and los 
hombres y las mujeres de nuestro pais ‘the men 
and women of our country’ have become trendy in 
the mouths of Mexican politicians.
However, one cannot deny the possibility that 
not only contingent circumstances but also con-
scious operations interrupt specific discourse and 
power arrangements, or even question specific 
economic, political and ideological formations as 
a whole. Take as an example the political action 
and militancy of Greenpeace against global warm-
ing, or the assertion of indigenous populations’ 
rights against total assimilation and destruction of 
their intangible heritage which has produced 
recent legislation in favour of indigenous people. 
This is precisely linked not only to the universal 
right to gain access to discourse but also to the 
specific possibilities of discourse itself in specific 
power arrangements, such as the political scenar-
ios of modern states’ policies in the face of eco-
nomic development and indigenous rights. Yet in 
countries such as Mexico, and even the United 
States, Greenpeace is weak in terms of its effective 
possibilities against, for example, ongoing defor-
estation, versus strong economic interests. This is 
of course also a power issue that has manifested 
itself in recent declarations of Greenpeace in 
Mexico regarding their inability to impact on envi-
ronmental protection of the country. 
From recent approaches to discourse and power, 
discourse is, and even should be thought of within 
the framework of critical thinking, to enable indi-
viduals to develop critical approaches to different 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
148
specific contexts, such as academia and political 
contestation. It is within the tradition of Norman 
Fairclough and his associates that this endeavour 
has been made possible in the last couple of dec-
ades, especially with regard to the role of academia 
in society (Fairclough, 1989). As an example, take 
Labov’s (1982) classic critique of a uniform (ide-
alized) homogeneous linguistic system, together 
with its political consequences regarding the vin-
dication of non-standard varieties, specifically the 
logic of Black vernacular English conceived of 
not as an impoverished, but rather as a separate 
legitimate variety in its own right. Or consider the 
recent efforts to develop the field of language 
revitalization linked to ideas on committed or 
responsible (Hale, 1992) or even preventive lin-
guistics (Crystal, 2004), aimed at reversing lan-
guage shift (Fishman, 1991), a process which 
most languages of the world are today experienc-
ing (Crystal, 2000) – all this along the lines of 
what has been called ‘advocacy research’ 
(Cameron, 1992). Yet this is not, of course, the 
dominant paradigm in linguistic research. Let us 
take a look at the exercise of power while investi-
gating endangered languages, as the most promi-
nent emergent field in linguistics these days. 
The ideologies of power in discourse: 
language and power in research 
methods
Another eloquent illustration of ideologies and 
discourses at work is the field of endangered lan-
guages, which turns out to be fairly telling of the 
politics of power in academia, especially, although 
of course not exclusively, in the field of linguis-
tics. The very existence of the emergent field of 
language documentation (Gippert et al., 2006), in 
and by itself, pinpoints to the reconfiguration of 
the field of linguistics in terms of its different 
interests, represented in its extreme poles by the 
interests of descriptive linguistics, on the one hand, 
and the interests of the members of the commu-
nity, on the other. Revisiting the field of language 
documentation requires a constructive critique in 
terms of its programme and the agenda in the field 
of language revitalization, an even more recent 
attempt to cope with the many dilemmas posed by 
the question of language endangerment, where 
other, different voices – apart from those of 
‘experts’ – emerge, especially those of indigenous 
people. Language revitalization is precisely 
about (re)balancing power relationships between 
researchers and, more generally, society and 
speakers of endangered languages. Thus, the field 
of language revitalization allows an interruption, 
of received linguistics approaches. Raising aware-
ness of the power entailed in the making of 
research, as manifested in research protocols, 
observation, documentation, cataloguing, classi-
fying and the like as ways of social control, would 
allow sociolinguistics to start making more sense 
of academic work in the face of communities’ 
interests and expectations. In contrast, the pre-
dominant approach is still pervasive in the social 
sciences, as manifested in the use of received 
methods such as questionnaires and interviews.
The deployment of power in research 
methods: interviews
Historically, interviews are certainly the best-
known example of the exercise of power, not only 
in academic praxis. In interviews, the structure of 
the whole interaction is defined by a hierarchical 
stratification in which a dominant voice, such as the 
researcher's, actively participates in the definition 
of, the situation from specific power arrangements 
(Kress and Fowler, 1979). In Western societies, 
interviews are a constitutive part of everyday dis-
cursive practices and a well-established genre. In 
these societies and its face-to-face encounters, such 
as employer–employee in the job industry or 
teacher–student in university settings, interviews 
are marked by clear asymmetries, guided by the 
existence of an authoritative voice which imposes a 
conversational lead in interaction, defining who 
speaks first, the interview's thematic structure, its 
duration, and the like. Kress and Fowler (1979) 
even formulate the hypothesis that all conversations 
are, in a way, types of interviews, inasmuch as all 
conversations present some type of asymmetry. 
Their examples even examine the reversing of roles 
between a young interviewer dealing with an expe-
rienced politician. Likewise, Hill and Hill (1986) 
show how Mexicano (Nahuatl) speakers question 
the dominant voice of the interview, opposing the 
authoritative role of a respected elder to an adoles-
cent status: all these are power issues.
In contrast, in the case of cross-cultural 
research, which often involves cultures that are 
relatively or totally unfamiliar with interviews, the 
literature alerts us that the asymmetrical structure 
as materialized in interview practices is evidenced 
by the imposition of a communicative hegemony, 
which obscures and even exerts violence on the 
native meta-communicative competence; in con-
trast, it highlights the observer’s communicative 
blunders or the ‘incompetence of fieldworkers’ 
(Briggs, 1983). In this sense, Briggs (op cit., 
24–5) concludes that interviews are of little value 
in the first stages of fieldwork, and recommends 
that the researcher positions and presents him/
herself as an apprentice of the communicative 
repertoire of the community in order to, at a later 
stage, be able to adapt the interview to the native 

POWER AND DISCOURSE
149
ways of speaking that are characteristic of diverse 
speech communities. This is something that the 
agency of speakers themselves exerts, often infil-
trating the logic of the interview itself as a coun-
ter-power to the imposition of foreign ways of 
communication, which are generally eyed with 
suspicion and distrust, and which can even lead to 
a total block on communication. Moreover, from 
the point of view of linguistic anthropology, inter-
views might even be discarded altogether, inas-
much as they distance the researcher from the 
ethnographic description of communicative com-
petence or an ‘emic’ point of view. At best, inter-
views would constitute a complementary strategy 
for the observation and description of the ‘native 
theory’ of communication and the cosmology 
associated that is of such great interest to the 
linguistic anthropology investigative agenda. 
In turn, in the sociolinguistic paradigm as 
launched by Labov (1972a, 1972b), interviews 
have been overwhelmingly used, paradoxically, 
to obtain samples of ‘spontaneous’ speech. 
Sociolinguistic interviews endeavour to obtain 
discourse not too affected by asymmetrical rela-
tionships, a difficulty formulated as the observer’s 
paradox by Labov himself. To overcome the 
authoritative voice that the interview conveys, 
techniques include questions allowing interview-
ees to forget symbolic power represented by the 
tape recorder: the famous question related to the 
fear of being dead. Other recent developments 
productively integrate features of the ethnography 
of communication, conceiving interviews as 
speech events to recover local forms of conveying 
information (the network modules appropriate to 
speakers themselves and organized as flexible con-
versational networks in Labov, 1984; Milroy and 
Gordon, 2003). A recent critique of this paradigm 
attacks the classical idea that actors are monitor-
ing their speech (represented by a tape recorder) 
and not so much the (power) identity attached to 
participants in the interview situation (the idea of 
audience design in Bell, 1984, 2001).
If the ethical and political dilemmas posed by 
interviews are indeed linked to a clear discursive 
deployment of power in face-to-face encounters, 
the need to develop more culturally-sensitive 
approaches to the organization of linguistic and 
cultural diversity entails levelling power relation-
ships developed in the making of research. An 
interesting effort in this sense, which is meant to 
have an impact on wider society, has been devel-
oped in the work of Jupp, Roberts and Gumperz 
(1982) with immigrant South Asian populations in 
London, specifically with Punjabis. As a most 
revealing investigation of the construction of 
racism and discrimination, which is based on the 
interactive unconscious confrontation of different 
sociolinguistic competences in encounters such as 
job interviews, the authors describe how different 
ways of speaking ‘crosstalk’ each other and how 
this provides grounds for cultural misunderstand-
ing, the reproduction of stereotypes and, of course, 
potential interethnic friction (the Gumperz video 
for the BBC, 1979, precisely entitled Crosstalk). 
For instance, in an interview for a librarian job 
where a South Asian applicant faces British inter-
viewers, when asked why he had an interest in the 
particular college, the interviewee follows a 
common pattern for Punjabis which first offers 
generalities of his personal desperate situation to 
find a job (plus his academic qualifications), a 
reply which shows that, in his culture, honesty is 
highly valued, while the British expect a specific 
answer related to the prestige and importance of 
the institution, even if it is a hypocritical one. 
Training the actors to become aware of such cul-
tural diverse ways of speech behaviour, including 
the ways that information is presented differen-
tially in terms of specific cultural-relevant matrices, 
values and styles, would hopefully allow opening 
productive power dialogues that could enable par-
ticipants to reflect positively on ongoing misun-
derstandings and even ‘solve’, or at least mitigate, 
deep-rooted historical interethnic conflicts. 
As a representative of a dominant voice in 
research and its symbolic rituals, the roles and 
status of participants are admittedly one-sided and 
defined by the researcher (e.g. Hill and Hill, 
1986). Several indexicals materialize authority 
relations as power differentials. Consider endan-
gered languages as eloquent indexicals of such 
power: purist presentations of the self trigger 
hypercorrection and neologisms designed to 
please the researcher, one of two types of attitudes 
in interviews identified in the literature. Another 
interesting example is the emergence of foreign 
talk (the case of aboriginal Australians, Evans, 
2001: 263). In contrast, in a non-cooperative 
attitude, speakers interrupt asymmetrical relation-
ships imposed by interviews. Such inverse investi-
gation or even contestation suggests interesting 
quests for the sociolinguistic research agenda 
(Flores Farfán, 2006). All this suggests that, in 
field 
linguistics, 
received 
prescriptive 
ideologies emerge, even creating new varieties of 
the language which very few people understand, 
which at times are even published in the form of 
complete grammars!
10.3 CONCLUDING REMARKS
As suggested, a number of research traditions 
have, in one way or another, faced the question of 
power and discourse, although not explicitly 
stated in such terms: traditions which do not 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
150
normally communicate with each other, at times 
even ignoring parallel developments, as has, 
until recently, mostly been the case between soci-
olinguistics and linguistic anthropology (for 
a discussion see Duranti, 2001). This is of course 
an example of how epistemological rearrange-
ments related to social facts can have an impact on 
the reconfiguration of the research agenda in lin-
guistic anthropology and sociolinguistics agenda, 
favoring cross-fertilization (Duranti, 2001: 19–20). 
Parallel to these works, in the tradition of textual 
linguistics, discourse analysis and of course criti-
cal linguistics (Fairclough 1989; van Dijk, 1993)
seek to bring together macro and micro levels in 
the investigation of the power-discourse-nexus. 
Such approaches show the ways in which power 
shapes and reshapes the uses of discourse as mani-
fested in specific discourses and linguistic varie-
ties such as hegemonic political discourse in 
the press. 
As power is discourse and discourse is the ulti-
mate expression of power, so discourse analysis is 
confronted with the multimodalities of its expres-
sion in, for example, grammatical, illocutionary 
and complex communicative forces and specific 
encounters. Yet, from our point of view, discourse 
analysis should really be about challenging 
received models and inviting a reorientation of 
academic practice to critical thinking, along the 
lines of critical linguistics (Fairclough, 1989). 
This can be done on the basis of recovering 
schemes from such scholars as Bourdieu (1977, 
1985) who suggest a critique of the commodifica-
tion, reification and technologization of discourse 
in areas such as linguistics. It can be done, as 
Fairclough (1989: 6) suggests, by revisiting 
schools as spaces for argumentation and critical 
thinking to invite effective ways of favouring dia-
logue, or through what is termed ‘peace linguis-
tics’ (Crystal, 2004). This approach does not rely 
on the referential function of language, but rather 
on its communicative and affective base, onto- 
and philogenetically speaking, and instantiates 
differences as an expression of linguistic and 
cultural diversity and heterogeneity. Of course 
these cannot be reduced to simple technical skills. 
Discourse is not an instantiation of received 
models and for this reason education cannot be 
viewed as, exclusively, a transmission of skills. 
The question of what counts as knowledge is 
contested to produce new knowledge and this is 
dependent on power instantiations of science. One 
brief example is the practice of field linguistics. 
Some of the most interesting analyses which 
revolve around the relationship of power and dis-
course in the making of research stem from the 
development of ‘advocacy’ research in linguistics 
and anthropology which interrupts previous 
conceptualizations and reminds us that the 
workings of power in discourse are present in our 
own work, inviting us to rethink new power epis-
temologies such as critical thinking.
As suggested, it seems reasonable to plead for 
more integrated relational and contextual 
approaches to these and other theoretical issues 
for a better comprehension of the layers of power 
involved in discourse production, suggesting a 
dialectical focus on the complex relationship of 
power and discourse. Therefore, at least two levels 
are present in the production of discourse: the 
contexts of power differentials that historically 
define specific societal arrangements, versus the 
presumed ontogenetic, universal counter-facts of 
communication, instances which are constantly 
confronted in actual discourse praxis. In other 
words, a more realistic or ecological approach to 
power and discourse will not reduce the question 
to one of these specific aspects, but would allow 
a much more complex view on the issue, incorpo-
rating both perspectives on the ecology of 
power and its co-constitutive relationship with 
discourse. 
NOTE
1 Bächtiger et al. (2004), for example, have 
developed what they call the ‘discourse quality index’ 
(DQI), which allows for quantitative assessment of 
the deliberative quality of political debates.
REFERENCES
Bachrach, P. and Baratz, M. S. (1970) Power and Poverty. 
Theory and Practice. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bachrach, P. and Baratz, M. S. (1977) Macht und Armut. 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Bächtiger, A., Spörndli, M., Steenbergen, M. R. and Steiner, J. 
(2004) ‘The study of deliberation in real world politics: the 
deliberative dimensions of legislatures and sketches of a 
future research agenda’, paper presented at the 2004 
Conference ‘Empirical Approaches to Deliberative Politics’, 
Florence, European University Institute. 
Bakhtin, M. (1973) Problems of Dostoevsky’s poetics. Ann 
Arbor, MI: Ardis.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination. Tr. C. Emerson 
and M. Holquist. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Bauman, R. and Briggs, C. L. (2003) Voices of Modernity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language 
in Society, 13(2): 145–204. 
Bell, A. (2001) ‘Back in style: reworking the audience design’, 
in P. Eckert and J. Rickford (eds), Style and Sociolinguistic 
Variation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp.  139–69.

POWER AND DISCOURSE
151
Blommaert, J. (1999) Language Ideological Debates. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. 
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Tr. R. Nice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Bourdieu, P. (1985) Distinction. Cambridge: Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. (1992) An Invitation to 
Reflexive Sociology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Briggs, C. L. (1983) ‘Learning how to ask’, Language in 
Society, 13(1): 1–27.
Brown, R. and Gilman, A. (1968) ‘The pronouns of power and 
solidarity’, in J. Fishman (ed.), Readings in the Sociology of 
Language. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 252–75.
Brown, P. and Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cameron, D. (1992) Researching Language: Issues of Power 
and Method. London: Routledge.
Chomsky, N. (1957) Syntactic Structures. The Hague: 
Mouton.
Crystal, D. (2000) Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Crystal, D. (2004) ‘Creating a world of languages’. Online ver-
sion: http://www.linguapax.org/congres04/pdf/crystal.pdf
Dahl, R. (1957) ‘The concept of power’, Behavioural Science, 
2: 201–15.
Djitév, P. (2008) The Sociolinguistics of Development in Africa. 
London: Multilingual Matters.
Dorian, N. C. (1992) Investigating Obsolescence: Studies in 
Language Contraction and Death. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (1992) ‘Analyzing talk at work’, in 
P. Drew and J. Heritage (eds), Talk at Work. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 3–65.
Ducrot, O. (1984) El decir y lo dicho. Buenos Aires: Hachette.
Duranti, A. (2001) Linguistic Anthropology. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Duranti, A. and Goodwin, C. (eds) (1992) Rethinking Context: 
Language as Interactive Phenomenon. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Duranti, A. and Ochs, E. (1986) ‘Literacy instruction in a 
Samoan village’, in B. B. Schieffelin and P. Gilmore (eds), 
Acquisition of Literacy: Ethnographic Perspectives. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 213–32.
Edwards, D. and Potter, J. (1992) Discursive Psychology. 
London: Sage.
Evans, N. (2001) ‘The last speaker is death: long live the last 
speaker!’, in P. Newman and M. Ratliff (eds), Linguistic 
Fieldwork. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 250–81.
Fairclough, N. (1989) Language and Power. London: 
Longman.
Fishman, J. (1991) Reversing Language Shift. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.
Flores Farfán, J. A. (2003) ‘Al fin que ya los cueros no van 
a correr: the pragmatics of power in Hñahñu (Otomi) 
markets’, Language in Society, 32: 629–58.
Flores Farfán, J. A. (2005) ‘Intervention in indigenous educa-
tion. Culturally-sensitive materials for bilingual Nahuatl 
speakers’, in M. Hidalgo (ed.), Mexican Indigenous 
Languages at the Dawn of the 21st Century. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 301–23.
Flores Farfán, J. A. (2006) ‘Who studies whom and who ben-
efits from sociolinguistic research?’, Journal of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Development, 27(1): 79–86.
Foucault, M. (1970) The Order of Things. London: Tavistock.
Foucault, M. (1981) Un diálogo sobre el poder. Madrid: 
Alianza Editorial.
Foucault, M. (1984a) ‘Docile bodies’, in P. Rabinow (ed.), The 
Foucault Reader. Harmondsworth: Penguin. pp. 179–87.
Foucault, M. (1984b) ‘The repressive hypothesis’, in 
P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin. pp. 301–29.
Foucault, M. (1992) ‘Die Anreizung zu Diskursen’, in 
M. Foucault (ed.), Sexualität und Wahrheit. Bd. I. Frankfurt 
am Main: Suhrkamp. pp. 27–49.
Foucault, M. (2003) Die Ordnung des Diskurses. Frankfurt am 
Main: Fischer.
Fowler, R., Hodge, R., Kress, G. and Trew, T. (1979) Language 
and Control. London: Routledge.
Gal, S. (2001) ‘Language, gender and power’, in A. Duranti 
(ed.), Linguistic Anthropology. Oxford: Blackwell. 
pp. 421–30.
Garner, M., Raschka, C. and Sercombe, P. (2006) 
‘Sociolinguistic minorities, research, and social relation-
ships’, in P. Sercombe, M. Garner and C. Raschka (eds), 
Sociolinguistic Research – Who Wins? Research on, with or 
for Speakers of Minority Languages, Journal of Multilingual 
and Multicultural Development, 27(1): 61–78.
Gippert, J., Himmelmann, N. P. and Mosel, U. (eds) (2006) 
Essentials of Language Documentation. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter.
Grice, P. H. (1975) ‘Logic and conversation’, in P. Cole and 
J. L. Morgan (eds), Syntax and Semantics 3, speech acts. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 41–58.
Gumperz, J. (1979) Crosstalk. Video for the BBC, London. 
London: Communication Documentary Series Broadcast on 
the BBC. 
Gumperz, J. (1982) (ed.) Language and Social Identity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Habermas, J. (1981) Theorie des Kommunikativen Handels. 
Frankfurt am Main: Verlag. 
Hale, K. (1992) ‘Endangered languages’, Language, 68(1): 
1–3.
Hamel, R. E. (1988) Sprachenkonflikt und Sprachverdrängung. 
Die 
zweisprachige 
Kommunikations-praxis 
der 
Otomí-Indianer in Mexico. Frankfurt: Verlag Peter Lang.
Haviland, J. B. (1997) ‘Shouts, shrieks, and shots: unruly 
political conversations in indigenous Chiapas’, Pragmatics, 
7(4): 547–73.
Hill, J. H. (2001) ‘Language, race and White public space’, 
in A. Duranti (ed.), Linguistic Anthropology. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 451–64.
Hill, J. H. and Hill, K. (1986) Speaking Mexicano. Dynamics of 
Syncretic Language in Central Mexico. Tucson, AZ: The 
University of Arizona Press.
Hymes, D. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in 
J. P. Pride and J. Holmes (eds), Sociolinguistics. 
Harmondsworth: Penguin. pp. 269–85.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
152
Jakobson, R. (1976) Nuevos ensayos de lingü í stica general. 
Mé xico: Siglo Veintiuno. 
Jupp, T. C., Roberts, C. and Cook-Gumperz, J. (1982) 
‘The hidden process’, in J. Gumperz (ed.), Language and 
Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 232–56.
Kress, G. and Fowler, R. (1979) ‘Interviews’, in R. Fowler 
et al. (eds), Language and Control. London: Routledge 
and Kegan. pp. 63–80.
Labov, W. (1972a) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1972b) Language in the Inner City. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1982) ‘Objectivity and commitment in linguistic 
science’, Language in Society, 11: 165–201.
Labov, W. (1984) ‘Field methods of the project on linguistic 
change and variation’, in J. Baugh and J. Scherzer (eds), 
Language in Use: Readings in Sociolinguistics. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp. 28–66.
Linell, P. (1998) Approaching Dialogue. Talk, Interaction and 
Contexts in Dialogical Perspectives. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Locher, Miriam A. (2004) Power and Politeness in Action. 
Disagreements in Oral Communication. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. 
Lukes, S. (1974) Power: A Radical View. London: MacMillan.
Milroy, L. and Gordon, M. (2003) Sociolinguistics. Method and 
Interpretation. London: Blackwell. 
Ochs, E. (1988) Culture and Language Development. Language 
Acquisition and Language Socialization in a Samoan 
Village. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Philips, S. U. (1983) The Invisible Culture. Communication in 
Classroom and on the Warm Springs Indian Reservation. 
New York: Longman.
Potter, J. (2003) ‘Discursive psychology: between method and 
paradigm’, Discourse and Society, 14(6): 783–4.
Potter, J. and Wetherell, M. (1987) Discourse and Social 
Psychology. Beyond Attitudes and Behaviour. London: Sage.
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. (2001) Discourse and Discrimination: 
Rhetorics of Racism and Anti-Semitism. London: Blackwell. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organization of turn taking in conversa-
tion’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Saville Troike, M. (1982) The Ethnography of Communication. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Schattschneider, E. E. (1975) The Semisovereign People. 
Hinsdale, IL: Dryden Press.
Scollon, R., and Scollon, S. B. K. (2000) Intercultural 
Communication: A Discourse Approach. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Silverstein, M. (1979) ‘Language structure and linguistic ideol-
ogy’, Proceedings of the 15th Annual Meeting of the 
Chicago Linguistic Society, 2: 193–247.
Tannen, D. (1990) You Just Don’t Understand: Talk Between 
the Sexes. New York: Morrow.
Tsunoda, T. (2002) Language Revitalization and Endangerment. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
van Dijk, T. A. (1989) ‘Mediating racism. The role of the media 
in the reproduction of racism’, in R. Wodak (ed.), Language, 
Power and Ideology. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 192–226.
van Dijk, T. A. (1993) ‘Principles of critical discourse analysis’, 
Discourse and Society, 4(2): 249–83.
van Dijk, T. A. (2005) Racism and Discourse in Spain and Latin 
America. Discourse Approaches to Politics, Society, and 
Culture. Vol. 14. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Weber, M. (1978) Economy and Society. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1988) Investigaciones filosóficas. Tr. A. 
Garcí a Suá rez, and C. U. Moulines. Mé xico: Instituto de 
Investigaciones Filosó ficas, Universidad Autó noma de 
Mé xico.
Wodak, R. (ed.) (1989) Language, Power and Ideology. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. London: 
Longman.
Zimmermann, K. (1992) Sprachkontakt, ethnische Identität 
und Identitätsbeschädigung. Aspekte der Assimilation der 
Otomí-Indianer an die hispanophone mexikanischeKultur. 
Frankfurt am Main: Vervuert.

Globalization Theory and 
Migration
S t e f  S l e m b r o u c k
11
11.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter engages with theories of globalization 
and migration through the lens of sociolinguistic 
inquiry. Globalization processes tend to be com-
monly talked about, sometimes celebrated and 
often contested, in terms of accelerated geograph-
ical reorderings in the fields of economic produc-
tion, in money flows and technological spread. 
This chapter, however, asserts the centrality of 
language and symbolic practices and it does so by 
attending to one salient aspect of contemporary 
globalization processes, namely migration, while 
discussing implications for sociolinguistics. Two 
further introductory points deserve mention and 
help set the scope of discussion. Contemporary 
forms of migration are nowadays understood as a 
dimension of globalization processes, but it is 
worth reminding ourselves that the study of 
migration is in fact a much older theme, both in 
social and economic studies and in sociolinguistic 
enquiry. In more than one respect, the theme of 
migration predates the present burgeoning of 
empirical and theoretical interest in boundary-
crossing processes, which are looked at through 
the lens of globalization phenomena (e.g. Thomas 
and Znaniecki, 1918, a pioneering work in the 
biographic approach to the sociology of migra-
tion). My second point therefore entails an his-
torical horizon: to connect the present concern 
with, for instance, heightened multilingualism, 
which has resulted from an unrivalled increase in 
contemporary human movement around the world, 
with earlier historical linguistic and sociolin-
guistic understandings of migration-connected 
language developments which concentrated on 
the genesis of historically-recognized languages, 
language families and functional varieties, often 
in a context of imperialist expansion and colonial 
settlement.
11.2  GLOBALIZATION AND THE 
LINGUISTIC CULTURAL TURN 
IN LATE MODERNITY
To talk and write about ‘globalization’ as a process 
of accelerated transformation of local and regional 
phenomena into ‘global’ ones raises both the 
question of its ‘naturalized’ upper limit (phenom-
ena that would truly cover the globe in its entirety) 
and its lower threshold (the extent to which phe-
nomena can no longer be exclusively understood 
in ‘local’ terms or – perhaps more prominently – 
escape the category and unit of the ‘nation-state’, 
which for quite some time has dominated the way 
in which sociopolitical and economic spaces have 
been inventorized, measured and regulated). The 
latter originated in the long-held assumption that 
societies would be coterminous with nation-states. 
Discussions about the upper limit of globalization 
are mostly invested with an idealized perspective. 
This is evident from the opposing teleologies of 
either a completely deregulated world economy or 
one driven by worldwide solidarity. Therefore, the 
stricter answer to the question (when it is posed 
from the ‘global’ end) is probably that we do not 
(as yet) inhabit a globalized world and it remains 
to be seen whether we ever will. As far as the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
154
lower threshold is concerned, one can conversely 
state the progressive evaporation of a sense of 
self-sufficient bounded locality (and, with it, the 
unit of the nation-state) in a range of transnational 
processes. One must add immediately here that 
what marks the present era as one of globalization 
is more a matter of degree, intensity and accelera-
tion in social geographic complexity than that it 
would be possible to clearly identify an earlier era 
as pre-globalization (cf. Robertson’s 1990 use of 
the term ‘glocalization’ to stress the tailoring 
effects of local conditions which interact with 
global flows). Globalization has been advocated 
as progress and advancement; it has also been 
denounced for its disruptive, de-authenticating and 
hegemonic effects. Boundary-crossing contact is 
probably as old as organized humanity itself, but 
this does not detract from the fact that the positing 
of the ‘transnational’ of course presumes the exist-
ence of geopolitical units that can be understood 
as nation-states, in itself a construction of moder-
nity. Moreover, understandings of contemporary 
geographical orderings in terms of a dynamics of 
neatly-nested spatial units prove insufficient, as 
the nation-state has by now been widely observed 
as being bypassed from two ends. This is captured 
in Lash and Urry’s (1994: 279) two-sided formu-
lation that ‘contemporary nation states are now 
too small for the big problems of contemporary 
social life and too big for the small problems’. See 
also Swyngedouw (1996), and Persson and Stråth 
(2007), on the hollowing out of the functions of 
the nation-state by supranational and subnational 
forms of organization that compete with it, in the 
case of Swyngedouw (1996) with particular 
reference to economic collapse and industrial 
conflict within the European Union (EU). 
Bypassing the state cannot however be equated 
with its erasure. Especially when one turns to 
migration, it must be observed how the state and 
its typical sectoral divisions into fields (e.g. 
health, education, law, politics, etc.) continue to 
function as major channels for official policy, 
research funding, and publically-regulated 
responses to migration.
Different but related understandings of globali-
zation phenomena have prioritized: (i) the agen-
tive role of people in transnational ‘networks of 
exchange’; (ii) the spread of goods, services and 
social categories such as labour, money, etc., via 
exchange relationships which are often captured 
conceptually as ‘flows’ (Appadurai, 1996); as well 
as (iii) resultant geographical demarcations of 
scope, distribution, circulation and uptake which 
are posited through the concept of ‘–scapes’ 
(Appadurai 1990) – a metaphorical use which 
originates in the term landscape. Appadurai 
distinguishes five different types of ‘scapes’, 
depending on the content that has a particular 
distribution (ethnoscapes, financescapes, techno-
scapes, mediascapes and ideoscapes; the category 
of ideoscapes particularly includes the interna-
tional spread of an European–American master 
narrative of capitalist democracy around which 
political cultures are organized). Appadurai also 
notes multi-centredness and increasing disjunc-
tion between the ‘scapes’ of different spheres. The 
underlying emphasis is on constructedness, includ-
ing how a ‘scape’ is always invested with view-
point, and the bigger challenge here is indeed one 
of sustained cartographic effort. Thus, as a first 
example: throughout the 1990s, the US–Swedish-
owned television station VT4 was cable-transmit-
ted throughout Flanders and broadcast in Dutch 
only (using subtitles for imported material); its 
television studios were situated near Brussels; yet, 
as the television station’s corporate seat was regis-
tered in Britain and the station was answerable 
to British courts of law, it succeeded in circum-
venting Flemish restrictions on the broadcasting 
of commercials during children’s programmes 
that would ‘normally’ apply to it (compare with 
Triandafyllidou et al., 2009 on the European 
media space). 
In facing the challenges posed by globalization, 
historians, geographers and linguists, etc., have 
mostly (some would argue: inevitably) embraced 
a cultural turn, as it is difficult to separate our 
specific understandings of the contemporary era 
of globalization from other significant sociocul-
tural shifts which originate in the latter half of the 
twentieth century: e.g. post-Fordist information 
economy (Bryson et al., 2000), risk society (Beck, 
1992), reflexive late modern subjectivity (Giddens, 
1991), etc., to name just three of these. Thus, 
accounts of deterritorialized finance and economy 
remain partial unless one also engages with the 
ways in which these are premised on particular 
culturalized communicative practices, as indeed is 
captured in the title of Lash and Urry (1994), 
Economies of Signs and Space. Similarly, a dis-
cussion of ‘risk society’ (in short: modern society 
is driven by its responses to particular types of risk 
which are intrinsic to modernization itself) will be 
at the heart of any analysis of durable economic, 
climatological and ecological development. 
Compare also with Giddens (2006) who anchors a 
proposed redefinition of the European ‘social 
model’ of the welfare state in the recognition of 
key shifts in sociocultural values.
Not surprisingly then, globalization has also 
been understood in more processual terms. For 
instance, ‘space/time-compression’ (Harvey, 
1990) is a term used to describe the condition of 
(near-)simultaneity despite physical distance. It 
refers to the diminished importance of distance 
during a given historical moment – both the 
shortening of time and the shrinking of space. 

GLOBALIZATION THEORY AND MIGRATION
155
The analytical imperatives that follow from it 
include the manifold complexities and incongrui-
ties that follow from resultant co-temporalities. A 
related concept is that of ‘space/time-distancia-
tion’ (Giddens, 1984, 1990), which refers to the 
interlacing of social relations at a distance with 
local contextualities. Such relations are increas-
ingly stretched across greater distances. For 
Giddens, social life is ordered across space and 
time. The problematic of ‘space/time-distanciation’ 
denotes a historical trajectory in the evolution of 
societies and it is central to understanding both 
globalization and late modernity: the increase in 
opportunity for human control that comes with 
space/time-distanciation is matched by a corre-
sponding increase in the relevance of larger-scale 
challenges (see: Callinicos, 1985; and Lash and 
Urry, 1994: 230ff. for a critical assessment). As 
Fairclough (2006: 94ff.) stresses, space-time dis-
tanciation brings out the intimate ties between 
mediated meaning-making and power. 
Finally, globalization has also been understood 
in terms of determinate relationships of inequality. 
The categories of ‘core’, ‘periphery’ and ‘semi-
periphery’ as developed in world-systems analysis 
(Wallerstein, 2004) here appear as yardstick con-
cepts of cultural-geographic proximity and dis-
tance. Inequality through dependency has been 
noted in relations of a global scope (e.g. inter- and 
intracontinental North/South-relations, or within 
smaller-scale units, e.g. a sharpened contrast 
between urban and rural spaces). In the latter 
example, the set of contrasts has entailed (again 
quoting Lash and Urry, 1994: 28) that the urban 
spaces, being information-soaked, service-rich 
and heavily-networked, come closer to inhabiting 
the highly ‘wired villages of non-contiguous com-
munities’ which by one definition would be called 
cosmopolitan and globalized. One must also 
immediately add here the ways in which such 
relations are being replayed in dislocated contrasts 
which involve diaspora and migration. Think for 
instance of the state-organized migration of the 
1960s which resulted in large sections of a rural 
Anatolian population in Turkey ending up in the 
urban periphery of cities such as Essen, Ghent, 
Rotterdam, etc.; or consider an example at the 
scale of particular institutions, e.g. how doctors 
with Third-World degrees find themselves 
employed in the pharmacy of a Brussels hospital 
and are occasionally called into the wards to act as 
interpreters during medical encounters with 
patients who share their first language (Collins 
and Slembrouck, 2009: 35–6). Coe and Yeung’s 
(2001: 368) observations in the context of eco-
nomic globalization can be extended to attendant 
sociolinguistic processes: globalization ‘is not 
spatially homogenizing, but instead depends upon, 
and contributes to uneven geographic development 
at different scales’. The same is true of increases 
in space-time distanciation. However, at the same 
time, the constructedness of these processes, 
including their potentially being encouraged, 
embraced, appropriated or resisted, does not come 
with an immutable inevitability, as globalization 
entails ‘a set of complex and conflicting tenden-
cies, the outcomes of which cannot be predicted 
a priori’.
Central to sociolinguistic enquiry here are 
questions of the (often simultaneous but diver-
gent) representations of (trans-)locality, as spatial-
ized and as inserted in time, and as struggled-over 
realities of person, place, group, object, etc. This 
has been the subject of much sociological enquiry, 
e.g. Fenton and Bradley’s (2002) study of the 
role of economic action in the articulation of 
co-occurring ethnic identities, while sociolinguis-
tic research has focused on representations of both 
élite and ordinary actors, representations distrib-
uted along mass media and high-tech channels or 
expressed in the secluded space of face-to-face 
encounters (e.g. Baynham and De Fina (2005) on 
experiential narratives of displacement and relo-
cation; Delanty et al. (2008) on the cultural 
resources, framing devices and repertoires of jus-
tification articulated in racial exclusion; Caldas-
Coulthard and Iedema’s (2008) on the effects of 
failure and uncertainty in people’s constructions 
of identity when they face change in diverse bor-
der-crossing contexts, including migration and 
asylum). The study of such representations and 
their circulation dynamics is however best not 
divorced from an analysis of sociolinguistic 
resources, understood in the widest sense 
possible: languages, registers, discourse formats, 
interactional set-ups, etc., which, in their own 
right, are often subject to (trans)local processes of 
recontextualization – appropriation, shift and 
transformation. In this, purchase in mobility and 
articulation at a higher scale are often at stake 
(cf. Haarstad and Fløysand, 2007 on ‘scale jumping’ 
and empowerment). Here are two fairly rudimen-
tary examples of ‘national’ articulation which 
attend to their reception at a higher scale and the 
role which sociolinguistic choices play in these: 
the ANC’s (African National Congress) choice for 
an anglophone articulation of the category Black 
(rather than ‘non-racial’ or ‘non-white’, see 
Howarth, 2000: 106) was both a unifying factor in 
South Africa’s struggle against apartheid and a 
tactical choice which facilitated uptake in news 
media around the world and in world political 
forums such as the UN. This can be contrasted in 
the post-apartheid era with, for instance, the rec-
onciliatory philosophy of Ubuntu (a mobilizing 
category borrowed from Nguni) which, since 
1994, has been frequently invoked as a specifi-
cally pan-African and racially-inclusive approach 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
156
to defining one’s humanity through that of others 
(cf. in Zulu, ‘Umuntu Ngumuntu Ngabantu’ means 
that ‘a person is a person through other persons’). 
As Haarstad and Fløysand (2007: 289) point out, 
‘it it is necessary to probe deeper into the power 
relationships that are produced by the restructur-
ing of relationships in time and space’. Let me 
now turn to migration.
11.3  MIGRATION, COLONIALISM 
AND THE FORMATION 
OF LINGUISTIC RESOURCES
Migration, then, specifically brings out the aspect 
of human movement. It is an old theme – tradi-
tionally discussed in relation to tribally-organized 
collectivities (e.g. Germanic migration within 
Europe in the first centuries; large-scale Bantu 
migration across Southern Africa from the 
fourteenth century onwards), or in terms of colo-
nial settlement which accompanied trade missions 
and military campaigns (e.g. Roman settlement 
across Europe or successive waves of European 
settlement in North America). The impact of such 
migrations on the formation of ‘languages’ as 
durable effects of sustained language contact is 
one theme within historical linguistics, e.g. sub-
stratal effects (Bynon, 1997: 252ff.) of local 
Germanic vernaculars on the language use of the 
Roman colonizers which underpin the transition 
from Latin to French (see also: Lass, 1997; 
Campbell, 1998). It has also been a theme within 
sociolinguistics: pidginization and creolization 
are typically associated with the colonization of 
the New World by European-based powers 
(Thomason and Kaufman, 1998 is a key reference 
in this area). Specific concepts and terminology 
thus reflect an interest in specific periods in his-
tory, though research, even where change has been 
presented as ‘contact-induced’ (Kaufman, 2003), 
has not necessarily been couched in an analysis of 
lived experiences of migration, while the distinc-
tion between ‘creoles’ and ‘languages’ has been 
challenged both on theoretical and empirical 
grounds (e.g. Ansaldo and Matthews, 2001). 
What marks the current era of globalization as 
different is, first of all, the unprecedented surge in 
human movement around the globe (refugees, 
displaced persons, migrants), mostly in the form 
of selective or collective responses to economic 
deprivation, war and conflict, political prosecution 
and genocide. This is the migration of the ‘have-
nots’ in search of a better or safer life elsewhere, 
often, though not exclusively, moving from rela-
tive ‘(semi)-periphery’ to the ‘core’. Note that 
what counts as ‘centre’ and ‘margin’ will be 
highly circumstantial and invites sophisticated and 
layered readings of ‘difference’. Secondly, there 
are the increasing flows around the world of a 
whole range of ‘haves’ who, in various functional 
modalities, spend time away from base localities 
because they can afford to do so, either travelling as 
tourists or as members of specific professional, 
occupational and retirement communities. Students 
can be found in both categories. The theme of 
migration invites inquiries into the positioning of 
groups in transformed labour relations (e.g. Lamont, 
2000) and a second important area of attention is of 
course that of minority rights, especially in relation 
to the institutional domains of the welfare state 
(e.g. Kymlicka, 1995, 2001). Experiences of migra-
tion are often continual or recursive processes 
(more than just one-way experiences), and may 
involve continued contact with, even physical 
movement between, contexts of ancestry and cur-
rent residence (Basch et al., 1994; Sassen, 1999; 
e.g. Galasin´ski and Galasin´ska, 2007 and 
Galasin´ska and Koslowska, 2009 for sociolinguis-
tic enquiries into how immigrants makes sense of 
evolving ‘parallel’ worlds; e.g. Budach, 2009 for 
how this may be tied up with the transnational 
exchange of commodities; e.g. Valentine et al., 
2009 for the effects of subsequent moves in a 
migration trajectory on functional distribution 
within specific sociolinguistic repertoires).
Typically, effects on the language use of indi-
viduals (as part of collectivities) is, in this area of 
inquiry, talked about in terms of ‘linguistic fate’, 
one of language maintenance – e.g. through herit-
age language programmes, language adaptation, 
shift, death or loss, patterns of code selection, 
code-switching and style shifting as discernible 
processes of (emergent) language change in suc-
cessive generations who are born in/outside the 
host country (Saville-Troike, 2003: 201ff.; see 
McConnell, 1997: 353ff on the structural variables 
of ‘status’, ‘demography’ and ‘institutional sup-
port’ which affect ethnolinguistic vitality). Three 
comments must be added here immediately:
1 The theme of language maintenance/loss brings 
together postcolonial contexts (in which the 
hegemony of the colonizer’s language is asserted) 
with contexts of migration (in which the migrant 
community’s language encounters a local lan-
guage which is established throughout the social 
spheres). Language dominance is probably a 
common factor. Note that some national con-
texts have both, e.g. the USA or New Zealand.
2 Language contact must also be put in the context 
of ‘return’. ‘Return’ here can mean ‘in person’ – 
when returning for a shorter or longer period of 
time (e.g. Zentella, 2003). This may come with 
a focus on ‘second languages’ (e.g. Taura, 2008 
on the retention/loss of English by returnees 
in a Japanese context). Return is also to be 

GLOBALIZATION THEORY AND MIGRATION
157
interpreted ‘symbolically’, often in processes of 
language learning and use which continue to 
assert the prestige of a collective language of 
ancestry (e.g. Heller (2003) on Franco-Ontarians 
for whom French-French plays a major role in 
the regulation of access to international jobs and 
Kirkpatrick (2007: 106ff.) who notes continued 
expectations of British RP for contemporary 
newsreaders in South Africa).
3 In addition, studies of migration have unprec-
edentedly resulted in the thematization of the 
social indexicalities and language ideological 
aspects of valuations which cluster around vari-
ous forms of code-switching, mixings, styliza-
tions, crossings, lingua franca uses and ethnicized 
accents (e.g. Rampton, 1995; Auer, 2007).
However, we still need to ask how the linguistic 
resources of individuals, resources we can see 
being used in actual interaction, can, be projected 
to the level of language communities, in view of 
pronouncements about the long-term directions in 
which linguistic resources develop (see below for 
a further discussion). In addition, we must ask 
what else is needed to come to terms with the 
complexities of language practice in contexts of 
contemporary migration. Set against the wider 
interest in globalization processes outlined in 
the previous section, the relationship between 
language and migration has, in some respects, 
been modelled further by drawing beneficially 
on the wide range of interests developed in 
various niches of linguistic and sociolinguistic 
enquiry and the specific contributions which these 
niches can make to studies of globalization and 
migration.
11.4  AN ON-THE-GROUND ANALYSIS 
OF MIGRANT-RELATED 
SOCIOLINGUISTIC DIVERSITY
Globalization and contemporary migration have 
pushed sociolinguistic researchers to question 
some of the received boundaries of their disci-
pline, as it has become difficult to ‘do’ sociolin-
guistics without taking on board some of the key 
themes of, just to name four ‘disciplines’ here: 
translation studies, language learning and educa-
tion, analysis of institutional and professional 
discourses, and literacy studies. The challenge 
also applies conversely.
Globalization and contemporary forms of 
migration have resulted in an exponential growth 
in translation and interpreting (Cronin, 2003) – up 
to a point where analyses of medical consultations 
or, more generally, social welfare encounters 
have to shrug off the boundedness of received 
monolingual contours. In recent years, one has 
equally witnessed a number of reorientations in 
language education and language pedagogical 
efforts which invite a sociolinguistic turn sensitive 
to aspects of bi- and trilingualism, emergent lan-
guage varieties, and the complex workings of 
language ideologies and sociolinguistic attitudes. 
For instance, national education departments have 
had to rethink their ‘national language curricu-
lum’, so as to include also the learning of official 
languages as a second language (a novel experi-
ence in quite a few Western European states). 
Research in this area has also noted the specific 
challenges of curricular design. In some contexts, 
this has meant facing highly diversified needs for 
X as a second language resulting from successive 
waves of immigration: e.g. newcomers who have 
just arrived with no X at all vs users with pre-
school neighbourhood experience in language X 
as a second language. At the same time, chal-
lenges of teacher recruitment have been posed by 
the organization of language courses in the immi-
grant languages when they are taught in the 
diaspora (Creese et al., 2008). These themes are 
not new in their own right, but they may well be 
unprecedented in contexts affected by recent 
waves of migration; the need to address them may 
also have come with greater urgency and increased 
complexity (e.g. hyperdiversity because many dif-
ferent language background are simultaneously at 
play, or the complexities of a situation in which 
the language learning needs of recently-arrived 
immigrants are being addressed through an estab-
lished second language learner curriculum for 
indigenous minorities). Similarly, professional 
and institutional discourse studies were previously 
very much a monolingual terrain, in which atten-
tion to diversity in linguistic resources was mostly 
restricted to matters of ‘lay speak’ vs ‘expert 
speak’ with some attention paid to social-class 
orientations in the coding of experience and 
degrees of client education. It has now become a 
terrain which ventures into the specifics of multi-
lingual institutional encounters in which profes-
sional–client communication is mediated through 
informal or professional interpretation, code-
switching, or by resorting to a lingua franca with 
varying levels of functional proficiency brought to 
the encounter (e.g. Collins and Slembrouck, 2006; 
Gotti and Salager-Meyer, 2006; Moyer (forthcom-
ing) on medical interaction; e.g. Benmaman, 
2000; Haviland, 2003 and Trinch, 2003 on legal 
contexts). Following these developments, ques-
tions of literacy have been posed, too – not only 
the more traditional questions raised in a context 
where professionals and institutional agents face 
clients who thus far have not acquired written 
language or who experience difficulties in manag-
ing it but also literacy in the use of IT-driven 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
158
technologies of communication, next to cross-na-
tional experiences in institutional literacy, literacy 
related to expert-systems as presupposed by the 
late modern ideal of self-governance, and literacy 
in response to institutional shifts in value which 
favour client-centredness, choice and the negotia-
tion of institutional courses of action (see chapter 
by Barton and Lee in this volume). The paradig-
matic shift towards ‘New Literacy Studies’ (e.g. 
Street, 1993; Collins and Blot, 2003) not only 
accords with these programmatic requirements 
but also is much necessitated by the complexities 
of the migrant experience. One specific theme that 
has often been noted in this area concerns the 
interactional deficits of decontextualized written 
solutions for the communicative gaps induced by 
language difference. That this is an area at the 
interstices of analysing institutional regimes of 
client-oriented communication and multilingual 
encounters underlines the importance stated ear-
lier of studying the language impact of migration 
in relation to contemporary value orientations in 
institutional cultures.
In a more general vein, Coupland states (2003: 
466) that ‘the qualities of linguistically mediated 
social experience that define “local” … all poten-
tially carry an imprint from shifting global struc-
tures and relationships’. Echoing Comaroff and 
Comaroff (1992: 32ff.), macro processes always 
‘have their feet on the ground’. There is a need for 
a sociolinguistic perspective which invites equal 
attention to representations of difference and the 
situated actions of individuals, both in the micro-
interactional spaces in which difference and diver-
sity are acted out and in the mediated spaces of 
mass communication. In practice, it is not possible 
to maintain a strict distinction between the two 
types of context. The difference is one of scale of 
inquiry, not one of priority. In fact, studies of mass 
media representations of globalization and migra-
tion are invited to pursue also the question of how 
situated individuals interactionally engage with 
such representations (adopting an actional per-
spective, alongside the more commonly adopted 
perspective of textual constitution which is char-
acteristic of much in media studies). Conversely, 
studies which prioritize the micro-sequential 
dynamics of face-to-face interaction are equally 
invited to address the larger-scale structuration 
effects brought about by mass media representa-
tions, as they permeate local sense-making in 
face-to-face interaction. Thus, representations in 
(inter)national media will tend to ‘dawn upon’ the 
neighbourhood experiences of migration which 
they cover, while neighbourhood experiences 
through national exposure impact upon the con-
struction of relevant socioeconomic realities in 
areas unaffected by migration flows. Expressed 
boldly: the notion of the global itself is best 
approached as articulated across interacting levels 
of social geographic reality. Burawoy (2001:148) 
adds the meta-reflection that the pulses of aca-
demic endeavour are equally implicated: inas-
much as for him the global invites ethnographic 
understanding, ethnography has gone global, too 
(anthropology in particular had for a long time 
already depended on a fundamental perception of 
border-crossing colonial relationships, whereas 
sociology mostly took for granted the nation-state 
as its natural unit of analysis).
Recent work in political, cultural and economic 
geography has thematized the problematic of 
interacting levels of analysis through the notion of 
‘scale’ itself (see above) –, the construction of 
spatial and temporal units and coordinates in 
socioeconomic processes and,  as sociolinguists 
will add, their articulation ‘in’ discourse. Scale is 
a very old concept in geography: in fact, it is hard 
to think about geographical units of analysis 
unless one deploys a concept of ‘scale’. More 
recent work emphasizes how scale is socially pro-
duced. In the words of Haarstad and Fløysand 
(2007: 292):
… the ‘scale question’ has been addressed in rec-
ognition of the increasing interconnectivity of 
social relations caused by time-space compression, 
which necessarily problematizes the spatial param-
eters of those relations and the geographical con-
text in which they occur …. Globalization does not 
merely detach social relations from space (deterri-
torializing), but also reinscribes these relations in 
new ways (reterritorializing).
Attention to ‘scale’ and processes of ‘scaling’ 
(‘upscaling’, ‘downscaling’, ‘rescaling’, etc.) 
allows us to circumvent some of the circularity 
that comes with received micro/macro-reasoning: 
communicative events are often best viewed as 
‘micro’, ‘meso’ and ‘macro’ at the same time – 
and much will depend here on whose interpreta-
tive viewpoint is given priority in analysis. Thus, 
the child’s limited Dutch displayed in a language-
immersion classroom in Ghent may, at one and the 
same time, represent (for the teacher) a recently-
arrived child who is coming to terms with a 
challenging new environment and who copes rea-
sonably well given that the parents do not speak 
the language either, and (for the visiting school 
inspector) yet another instance of a failing national 
policy of language integration for immigrants. 
The construction of contextual categories is sub-
ject to the indexicalities which are presupposed, 
played out or interactionally worked up at the 
moment of speaking (and, retroactively, when 
interpreting discourse, as an aspect of recontextu-
alization). Indexicalities can be viewed as ‘ordered’ 
(Silverstein, 2003). The use of ‘scale’ and ‘scaling’ 

GLOBALIZATION THEORY AND MIGRATION
159
can thus be extended to address a theoretical con-
cern with the effects of de/re-territorialization and 
dis/re-location on the construal of place, time and 
situational reference as they are interpretatively 
and interactionally ‘pinned down’ or exported to a 
new context of expression (Baynham, 2009). The 
following vignette is anecdotal but illustrates well 
the related point of ‘fractal recursivity’ (Irvine and 
Gal, 2000). A former colleague, who grew up in 
Dublin but has lived in Belgium for over 20 years, 
during a discussion of the concept of ‘scale’ inti-
mated how, when frequenting one and the same 
Irish pub in the centre of town, he embodied 
different units of reference for his interlocutors. 
This, he said, bore both on the topics attended to 
and the evaluative meanings exchanged on these: 
(i) ‘Ireland’, when he visited the pub with Flemish 
friends; (ii) ‘Flanders’, when meeting with visitors 
from Dublin or the Irish Republic; and (iii) the 
‘guys from the other side we never got to talk to’, 
when having a drink with a colleague from the UK 
who grew up in Ulster. Distinctions are applied 
recursively to a fraction of a unit, as meaningful 
distinctions are played out to constitute a smaller 
group or individual with presupposed ancestry in 
the larger-scale unit. 
Note, in addition, that the interest in scale takes 
up beyond this. As a further illustration, therefore, 
here is what Creese et al. (2008: 18) state about 
heritage language classes in the UK complemen-
tary schools they studied (complementary schools 
are voluntary schools which serve specific linguis-
tic, religious or cultural communities):
Young people in complementary schools negoti-
ated paths for themselves which were in some 
ways contrary to the ideologies of the teaching 
materials used in complementary schools. If teach-
ers and administrators held the view that students 
ought to learn a community language as an 
endowment of knowledge of a national history, 
nationalism, and identity, this was not necessarily 
accepted unproblematically. Rather, the young 
people’s attitudes to their languages, and their 
multilingual practices, constituted an urbane 
response to their place in the world, as they nego-
tiated subject positions which took them on a path 
through language ideological worlds constructed 
by others.
What is noteworthy about this instance is that the 
spatialization of the young learners which is pre-
supposed in the learning materials intersects with 
two timescales: that of heritage and that of urban 
adolescence. The latter contrast is organized hier-
archically in internally-conflicting directions: her-
itage as valuable tradition which is supported 
institutionally and urban adolescence as lived time 
valued by the adolescents. The net result is a 
social dynamics which is undecided and in flux 
(Creese et al., 2008: 18):
Young people found ways to parody the texts, 
their teachers and themselves, often questioning 
and sometimes ridiculing the folk stories, tradi-
tional rituals, ceremonies and festivals. At other 
times, young people showed a willingness and 
interest in the ‘heritage’ chosen by their teachers 
to focus on in class and assemblies and showed 
much enthusiasm in participating in community 
events such as Diwali festivities (Gujurati case 
study) and Children’s Day (Turkish case study).
The further point illustrated is that of certain ‘sites 
of engagement’ (Scollon, 1997) over others being 
particularly amenable to articulations of scale and 
even scale-shifting. 
One of the specific challenges posed to scalar 
analysis resides in the multiple uses of the term 
‘scale’. One can detect at least four uses:
1 Scale as a category rooted in experience and 
participant perception – refers to particular prac-
tices attended to by participants as reflecting and 
bearing upon particular time/space-scales?
2 Scale as a value-oriented gauge in the assessment 
of structured relationships – scale analysable 
as determinate relationships of inequality; as 
Fairclough (2006) stresses, this need not be 
transparent to those immediately involved.
3 Related to this, ‘scaling’ refers to a dynamic proc-
ess which connects situated phenomena with 
trans-situational power, purchase and mobility 
(or the lack of these).
4 Finally, there is scale in the way it is more tradi-
tionally understood by geographers, as by and 
large a matter of drawing on a set of decontex-
tualized units of analysis and inventory (calendar 
and clock time and units of square measure-
ment, together with received geopolitical and 
institutional-organizational units). 
One response to the challenges noted is that of 
multiple, interconnected readings and of adequacy 
in interpretation. The problem of interpretation is 
confounded by the inevitable dilemmas posed by 
Fairclough (2006: 5) when he draws attention to 
the paradox that, in practice, it is not possible to 
draw a strict separation between, on the one hand, 
discourses about globalization (which are often 
contested) and, on the other hand, globalization as 
real processes which are not necessarily recog-
nized by participants for what they are. The para-
dox is that processes can only be talked about by 
resorting to representations. The resultant pro-
gramme is threefold: it is one of developing an 
analytical-interpretative vocabulary which adequately 
captures process, does justice to experience and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
160
has purchase in the formulation of equitable 
policy and feasible intervention. In addition, what 
appears to be needed is not only that we dynami-
cally conceive of a large-scale process in direct 
relation to detailed analysis of local symbolic 
processes but also that we capture the scalar com-
plexities and contradictions that accompany the 
many different aspects of globalization. This way 
we may also succeed in capturing the unpredicta-
ble, push-pull effects of globalization which are 
easily missed in the sweeping manifestos. This 
calls for an ethnographic turn, much in the spirit 
of Burawoy (1991) and Gal and Kligman (2000) 
for whom ethnography counts as a specific 
engagement with ‘thick’ empirical detail which is 
oriented to the advancement of realistic social-
theoretically-informed understandings.
11.5  CHALLENGES POSED TO RECEIVED 
SOCIOLINGUISTIC NOTIONS 
AND THEORIZING 
The challenges posed by a sociolinguistics of 
globalization and migration invite multiple 
connections with long-standing sociolinguistic 
themes such as studying the effects of language 
contact. While stressing the continuities, there is 
also a need to think through the discontinuities 
which have been foregrounded in recent research. 
The shift from a sociolinguistics of ‘community’ 
to one of ‘contact’ is one of these (Clyne and 
Kipp, 2006; Collins et al., 2009; Rampton, 2009). 
Some definitions of speech communities have 
stressed commonality of language – the monolin-
gual paradigm (e.g. Lyons, 1970) – while other 
definitions go by regularity of interaction (e.g. 
Gumperz, 1962), in this way allowing bi/multilin-
gual speech communities. The impact of migra-
tion reaches further than the latter, as rather 
fundamental questions are raised about ‘contexts’ 
of interpretation, especially the temporal/spatial 
dimensions of language use and meaning-making 
(the shift towards a paradigm of spatialization and 
its central category of ‘scale’ discussed above 
bears testimony to this). Not surprisingly, this 
comes with conceptual challenges which extend 
to the category of ‘language’ itself (e.g. Blackledge 
and Creese, 2008). Migration has posed chal-
lenges of hybridity and the occurrence of selec-
tively emergent varieties with limited distribution 
as socially identifiable registers (e.g. the adoles-
cents of Maghreb descent in Jaspers’ (2005) field-
work who socially identify and regularly deploy 
stylizations of ‘newcomer Flemish’ and ‘Turkish 
Flemish’). Similarly, the theme of world lan-
guages, recast more recently into a debate about 
linguistic imperialism and imposition ‘from above’ 
(Mazrui, 1975; Phillipson, 1992; Canagarajah, 
2002; Holliday, 2005), has been addressed as one 
of local and global dominance through global cir-
culation (e.g. standard English as a colonial inher-
itance; standard English and its purchase in a 
transnational job market). At the same time, vari-
ous kinds of hybridization have been described as 
coming ‘from below’ (e.g. Alim et al., 2008 on hip-
hop registers; e.g. English learned and developed 
en route as a medium for articulating refugee expe-
riences). With this, questions of coexistence and 
competition with local languages have been raised 
for both postcolonial and diaspora contexts (e.g. 
Vigouroux and Mufwene, 2008). Note that com-
petitive coexistence is also a  major aspect of lan-
guage policy in supranational spaces such as the 
EU or globalized markets for mobile phones and 
software (Krzyz´anowski and Wodak, 2007 on the 
hegemonic multilingualism of a number of ‘core’ 
working languages in the EU; e.g. Cronin, 2003 
and House, 2008 on the implications of a growing 
distributional dynamics of ‘covert translation’: the 
need for fast global dissemination has resulted in 
simultaneous and automated access to a dominant 
anglophone source text and its translations for 
recipients in many different linguistic and cultural 
contexts.) In addition, questions such as, ‘What is 
English?’, in fact an old theme in the sociolinguis-
tics literature, have returned, now with more stress 
on the face-to-face contact between non-native 
Englishes. For instance, Maryns (2005) gauges the 
impact of different ‘Englishes’ as a dimension of 
the interactional and interpretative asymmetries 
which bear on the contact between bureaucrat and 
asylum seeker in which, say, a variety of English 
which builds on Krio from Sierra Leona meets 
‘face-to-face’ with the ‘outer circle’ secondary-
school English of the Flemish institutional repre-
sentative. The outcome of the contact is deeply 
consequential for the applicant. Attempts at formu-
lating workable (de-ethnicized and translocal) cri-
teria for ‘international English’ or ‘English as a 
lingua franca’ have given rise to intense debate. 
(Key tenets of this debate are captured in, for 
example, Rubdy and Saraceni, 2006.)
Less often dwelled upon are the challenges 
posed to the concept of ‘genre’. Genres are tradi-
tionally thought of as contained by a societally-de-
fined community of practice or a language 
community. Thus, the next step from locating 
discursive formats which are relatively more/less 
mobile across situational contexts (e.g. the in-
depth interview as a trans-situational discursive 
format) is to talk about genres which are better 
understood as ordered in transnational spaces of 
circulation (through processes of borrowing, 
appropriation, imposition and translation). Genres 

GLOBALIZATION THEORY AND MIGRATION
161
possess or lack transnational mobility. Certain 
genres can be thought of as almost ontogenetically 
connected to global landscapes (e.g. email), 
whereas other genres just appear to travel very fast 
(e.g. hip-hop). Questions of relative homogeneity 
across transnational landscapes and/or relative 
susceptibility to local adaptation and recontextu-
alization are very much at the forefront and under-
mine often-held assumptions that generic variation 
is mostly to be situated inside the space of a 
particular language or a community. (See research 
on the adoption of television formats worldwide: 
the use of a single language in the broadcasted 
artefact is often a mistaken indicator that the 
‘genre’ would belong to the ‘language community’; 
e.g. Slembrouck, 1998.)
In addition, it is also worth noting how a prevail-
ing logic of homogeneous language communities 
defined by language, ethnicity and nationality (now 
sized down to the scale of cities, regions, neigh-
bourhoods) in more than one respect has continued 
to inform both institutional-organizational responses 
to migration in education, health, etc., and along 
with this, many research initiatives. Research tends 
to be organized ethnolinguistically, often for heu-
ristic reasons of uniformity of sample and focus. 
Also, in this area we face challenges to a paradigm 
in which ‘the systematicity of language’ is perhaps 
too easily taken for granted (Rampton, 2009). 
Other methodological challenges to a sociolin-
guistics of migration and globalization pertain to 
the logistical difficulties involved when concen-
trating sociolinguistic and ethnographic effort 
across transnationally-constituted constituencies 
of text interpretation and sites of engagement. 
This has been noted earlier for analyses of media 
products which are consumed simultaneously 
(Hanks, 1996: 140ff. on television). Globalization 
has added the further challenge of transnational 
audiences who consume one and the same video 
artefact on CNN or Eurosport, a channel which 
provides simultaneous commentary in different 
languages, with advertisements during the breaks 
tailored to different audience segments (cf. 
Richardson and Meinhof, 1999). Where is the 
text? And, what is the best vantage point for 
observing interpretive practice? In a different 
variant, a similar set of heuristic and logistical 
problems presents itself when one is analysing 
institutional contact in a neighbourhood which is 
characterized by hyperdiversity, or indeed if one is 
to engage with linguistic ethnographies of tran-
snational mobility which invite the researcher to 
take part in a journey rather than do fieldwork 
within a single community space. (See also 
Marcus’s 1998 advocacy for multi-locale ethnog-
raphy which seeks to overcome some of the 
stifling effects of a straightforward micro–macro 
dichotomy; the advocacy is to be systems-
directed; ethnography can become more ‘flows’-
sensitive by actively participating in the complex 
connections between places, rather than being 
single-place focused.)
The question of ‘community’ as a unit of analy-
sis also surfaces in the need to revisit language/
class-analysis in contexts of migration – 
especially how social class connects to particular 
language experiences in institutional contexts (see 
chapters by Mallinson and Dodsworth in this 
volume). Collins and La Santa (2006: 1) observe 
how we currently ‘lack models which translate 
ethnicity and class, as social categories, into the 
processual and interactional concepts likely to 
generate insight into learning processes’. The 
concept of ‘social class’ has been much tied up 
with the sociology of the nation-state. It has 
tended to be absent from sociolinguistic efforts to 
come to terms with the sociolinguistics of the 
transnational, often replaced in this by ‘ethnicity’, 
‘culture’ and ‘ethno-national identity’ as catego-
ries which would be more easily amenable to 
transnationally-defined populations. 
Finally, the theme of the nation-state, although 
problematized, is far from absent in globalization 
and migration studies. The nation-state continues 
to be articulated in literature, film, discourses of 
government, popular events, etc. (e.g. Billig, 
1995). Especially in the context of migration stud-
ies, there are various indications of a continued 
role for the nation-state as a significant regulating 
force in how sectors of society (e.g. politics, 
health, education, etc.) respond to waves of migra-
tion. This brings us full circle, returning to the 
oldest theme in sociolinguistics, that of society 
and language use. What might we mean then by 
‘society’?
REFERENCES
Alim, H., Ibrahim, A. and Pennycook, A. (2008) Global 
Linguistic Flows: Hip Hop Cultures, Youth Identities, and 
The Politics of Language. New York: Taylor and Francis.
Ansaldo, U. and Matthews, S. J. (2001) ‘Typical creoles and 
simple languages. The case of Sinitic’, Linguistic Typology, 
5(2, 3): 311–26.
Appadurai, A. (1990) ‘Disjuncture and difference in the global 
culture economy’, Theory, Culture and Society, 7(2), 
295–310. 
Appadurai, A. (1996) Modernity At Large: Cultural Dimensions 
of Globalization. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota 
Press.
Auer, P. (ed.) (2007) Style and Social Identities. Alternative 
Approaches to Linguistic Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
162
Basch, L., Schiller, N. and Blanc, C. (1994) Nations Unbound: 
Transnational Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and 
Deterritorialized Nation-States. Langhorne, PA: Gordon 
and Breach.
Baynham, M. (2009) ‘“Just one day like today”: scale and the 
analysis of space/time orientation in narratives of displace-
ment’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck, and M. Baynham (eds), 
Globalization and Languages in Contact: Scale, Migration, 
and Communicative Practices. London: Continuum. 
pp. 130–47.
Baynham, M. and De Fina, A. (2005) Dislocations/Relocations. 
Narratives of Displacement. Manchester: St Jerome.
Beck, U. (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. 
New Delhi: Sage.
Benmaman, V. (2000) ‘The Spanish speaker + interpreter 
services = equal access to the judicial system: Is the equa-
tion accurate?’, in A. Roca (ed.), Research on Spanish in 
the United States: Linguistic Issues and Challenges. 
Somerville, MA: Cascadilla Press. pp. 82–94. 
Billig, M. (1995) Banal Nationalism. London: Routledge.
Blackledge, A. and Creese, A. (2008) ‘Contesting ‘language’ 
as ‘heritage’: negotiation of identities in late modernity’, 
Applied Linguistics, 29(4): 533–54.
Bryson, J., Daniels, P., Henry, N. and J. Pollard (2000) (eds) 
Knowledge, Space, Economy. London: Routledge.
Budach, G. (2009) ‘“Canada meets France”: recasting 
identities of Canadienness and Francité through global 
economic exchanges’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck and 
M. Baynham (eds), Globalization and Languages in Contact: 
Scale, Migration, and Communicative Practices. London: 
Continuum. pp. 209–32.
Burawoy, M. (1991) Ethnography Unbound: Power and 
Resistance in the Modern Metropolis. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Burawoy, M. (2001) ‘Manufacturing the global’, Ethnography, 
2(2): 147–59
Bynon, T. (1997) Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Caldas-Coulthard, C.-R. and Iedema, R. (2008) Identity trouble. 
Critical Discourse and Contested Identities. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Callinicos, A. (1985) ‘Anthony Giddens. A contemporary 
critique’, Theory and Society, 14(2): 133–66.
Campbell, L. (1998) Historical Linguistics. An Introduction. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Canagarajah, S. (2002) A Geopolitics of Academic Writing. 
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Clyne, M. and Kipp, S. (2006) Tiles in a Multilingual Mosaic: 
Macedonian, Somali and Filipino in Melbourne. Canberra: 
Pacific Linguistics.
Coe, N. M. and Yeung, H. W. C. (2001) ‘Geographical 
perspectives on mapping globalization’, Journal of 
Economic Geography, 1: 367–80.
Collins, J. and Blot, R. (2003) Literacy and Literacies: Texts, 
Power, and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Collins, J. and La Santa, A. (2006) ‘Analyzing class and ethnic-
ity as communicative practices: a case study of migration-
based multilingualism in Upstate New York’. Working 
Papers in Urban Language and Literacies, 40. London: 
King’s College. Available at http://www.kcl.ac.uk/schools/
sspp/education//research/groups/llg/wpull.html.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2006) ‘“You don’t know what 
they translate”: language contact, institutional procedure 
and literacy practice in neighbourhood health clinics in 
urban Flanders’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 16(2): 
249–68.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2009) ‘Goffman and globalisa-
tion: frame, footing and scale in migration-connected 
multilingualism’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck, and 
M. Baynham (eds), Globalization and Languages in Contact: 
Scale, Migration, and Communicative Practices. London: 
Continuum. pp. 19–41.
Collins, J., Slembrouck, S. and Baynham, M. (eds) 
(2009) Globalization and Languages in Contact: Scale, 
Migration, and Communicative Practices. London: 
Continuum.
Comaroff, J. and Comaroff, J. (1992) Ethnography and the 
Historical Imagination. Boulder, CO: Westview. 
Coupland, N. (2003) ‘Introduction: sociolinguistics and 
globalisation’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 7(4): 465–72.
Creese, A., Baraç, T., Bhatt, A., et al. (2008). Multilingualism 
in Complementary Schools in Four Linguistic Communities. 
University of Birmingham.
Cronin, M. (2003) Translation and Globalization. London: 
Routledge.
Delanty, G., Wodak, R. and Jones, P. (eds) (2008) Identity, 
Belonging and Migration. Liverpool: Liverpool University 
Press.
Fairclough, N. (2006) Language and Globalization. London: 
Routledge.
Fenton, S. and Bradley, H. (eds) (2002) Ethnicity and Economy. 
Race and Class Revisited. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Gal, S. and Kligman, G. (2000) The Politics of Gender After 
Socialism: A Comparative-Historical Essay. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Galasin´ski, D and Galasin´ska, A. (2007) ‘Lost in Communism, 
lost in migration: narratives of the post-1989 Polish 
migrant experience’, Journal of Multicultural Discourses, 
2(1): 47–62.
Galasin´ska, A. and Koslowska, O. (2009) “Either” and 
“Both”– the changing concept of living space among 
Polish post-communist migrants to the UK’, in J. Collins, 
S. Slembrouck, and M. Baynham (eds), Globalization and 
Languages In Contact: Scale, Migration, and Communicative 
Practices. London: Continuum. pp.170–88.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1990) The Consequences of Modernity. 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and Self-identity. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A. (2006) Europe in the Global Age. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Gotti, M. and Salager-Meyer, F. (2006) Advances in Medical 
Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written Contexts. Bern: Peter 
Lang.

GLOBALIZATION THEORY AND MIGRATION
163
Gumperz, J. (1962) ‘Types of linguistic community’, 
Anthropological Linguistics, 4: 28–40. 
Haarstad, H. and Fløysand, A. (2007) ‘Globalization and the 
power of rescaled narratives: a case of opposition to 
mining in Tambogrande, Peru’, Political Geography, 26: 
289–308.
Hanks, W. (1996) Language and Communciative Practices. 
Oxford: Westview Press.
Harvey, D. (1990) The condition of Post-Modernity. An Enquiry 
into the Origins of Cultural Change. Oxford: Blackwell. 
Haviland, J. (2003) ‘Ideologies of language: some reflections 
on language and U.S. Law’, American Anthropologist, 
105(4): 764–74.
Heller, M. (2003) Crosswords. Language, Education and 
Ethnicity in French Ontario. Berlin: Mouton.
Holliday, A. (2005) The Struggle to Teach English as an 
International Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
House, J. (2008) ‘Towards a linguistic theory of translation as 
re-contextualization and a Third Space phenomenon’, 
Linguistica Antverpiensia, 7: 149–75.
Howarth, D. (2000) Discourse. Buckingham: Open University 
Press.
Irvine, J. T. and Gal, S. (2000) ‘Language ideology and linguis-
tic differentiation’, in P. Kroskrity (ed.), Regimes of 
Language. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research 
Press. pp. 35–83.
Jaspers, J. (2005) ‘Linguistic sabotage in a context of 
monolingualism and standardization’, Language and 
Communication, 25: 279–97.
Kaufman, S. (2003) ‘What motivates changes that occur in 
pidgins and creoles’, Journal of Pidgin and Creole 
Languages, 18(1): 107–20.
Kirkpatrick, A. (2007) World Englishes: Implications for 
International Communication and English Language 
Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Krzyz´anowski, M. and Wodak, R. (2007) ‘Multilingual 
European institutions and the discourse of EU enlargement 
in the national public spheres’, a pilot study. Lancaster: 
Department of Linguistics and English Language, Lancaster 
University. Available at http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fass/doc_
library/linguistics/wodakr/DYLANWP2Lancasterfinal.pdf. 
Kymlicka, W. (1995) Multicultural Citizenship: A Liberal 
Theory of Minority Rights. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kymlikca, W. (2001) Politics in the Vernacular: Nationalism, 
Multiculturalism and Citizenship. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Lamont, M. (2000) The Dignity of Working Men. Morality and 
the Boundaries of Race, Class and Immigration. Harvard: 
Harvard University Press. 
Lash, S., and Urry, R. (1994) Economies of Signs and Space. 
London: Sage.
Lass, R. (1997) Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Lyons, J. (1970) New horizons in Linguistics. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.
McConnell, G. (1997) ‘Global scale sociolinguistics’, in 
F. Coulmas (ed.), The Handbook of Sociolinguistics. 
London: Blackwell. pp. 344–57.
Manda, D. S. (2009) Ubuntu philosophy as an African philoso-
phy for peace. Available at http://www.africafiles.org/
article.asp?ID=20359. Accessed 30 March 2009.
Marcus, G. (1998) Ethnography Through Thick and Thin. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Maryns, K. (2005) ‘Monolingual language ideologies and code 
choice in the Belgian asylum procedure’, Language and 
Communication, 25: 299–314.
Mazrui, A. (1975) The Political Sociology of the English 
Language: An African Perspective. The Hague: Mouton 
and Co.
Moyer, M. (forthcoming) ‘Language ideologies and multilin-
gual practices in a health care clinic in Barcelona’, Journal 
of Pragmatics.
Persson, H-A. and Stråth, B. (2007) ‘Time and space. 
Introduction to reflections on Europe as a political order’, 
in H. Persson, and B. Stråth (eds), Reflections on Europe. 
Defining a Political Order in Time and Space. Brussels: 
Peter Lang. pp. 11–34.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Preston, P. (2008) Making the News. Journalism and News 
Cultures in Europe. London: Routledge.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing. Language and Ethnicity Among 
Adolescents. London: Longman.
Rampton, B. (2009) ‘Speech community and beyond’, 
in N. Coupland, and A. Jaworski (eds), The New Sociol-
inguistics Readers. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. 
pp. 694–713.
Richardson, K. and Meinhof, U. (1999) Worlds in Common? 
Television Discourse in a Changing Europe. London: 
Routledge.
Robertson, R. (1990) ‘Mapping the global conditions: globali-
zation as the central concept’, Theory, Culture and Society, 
7(2, 3): 15–30. 
Rubdy, R. and Saraceni, M. (2006) English in the World: 
Global Rules, Global Roles. London: Continuum.
Sassen, S. (1999) Guests and Aliens. New York: The 
New Press. 
Saville-Troike, M. (2003) The Ethnography of Communication: 
An Introduction. (3 ed.) Oxford: Blackwell.
Scollon, R. (1997) ‘Handbills, tissues, and condoms: a site 
of engagement for the construction of identity in public 
discourse’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 1(1): 39–61.
Silverstein, M. (2003) ‘Indexical order and the dialectics of 
sociolinguistic life’, Language and Communication, 
23(3, 4): 193–229.
Slembrouck, S. (1998) ‘“Você decide”: formatting the 
commodified nation’, ALW Cahiers, 11: 11–21.
Street B. (1993) Social literacies: Critical Approaches to 
Literacy in Development, Ethnography and Education. 
London: Longman. 
Swyngedouw, E. (1996) ‘Reconstructing citizenship, the 
re-scaling of the State and the New Authoritarianism: 
closing the Belgian mines’, Urban Studies, 33: 
1499–521.
Taura, H. (2008) Language Attrition and Retention in Japanese 
Return Students. Sotokanda: Akashi Shoten.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
164
Thomas, W. and Znaniecki, F. (1918) The Polish Peasant in 
Europe and America. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Thomason, S. and Kaufman, T. (1988) Language Contact, 
Creolization and Genetic Linguistics. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Triandafyllidou, A., Wodak, R. and Krzyz´anowski, M. (2009) 
The European Public Sphere and the Media. London: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Trinch, S. (2003) Latinas’ Narratives of Domestic Abuse. 
Discrepant Versions of Violence. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Valentine, G., Sporton, D. and Bang Nielsen, K. (2009) ‘The 
spaces of language: the everyday practices of young Somali 
refugees and asylum seekers’, in J. Collins, S. Slembrouck,  
and M. Baynham (eds), Globalization and Languages in 
Contact: Scale, Migration, and Communicative Practices. 
London: Continuum. pp. 189–206.
Vigouroux, C. and Mufwene, S. (eds) (2008) Globalization and 
Language Vitality. London: Continuum.
Wallerstein, I. (2004) World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Zentella, A. (1990) ‘Returned migration, language, and iden-
tity. Puerto Rico bilinguals in two worlds/dos mundos’, in 
N. Gutmann, F. Rodríguez, L. Stephen and P. Zavella (eds), 
Perspectives on Las Américas: A Reader in Culture, History, 
and Representation. Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell. 
pp. 245–58.

Semiotics: Interpretants, 
Inference, and Intersubjectivity
P a u l  K o c k e l m a n
12
12.1 INTRODUCTION1
Charles Sanders Peirce (1839–1914) was an 
American philosopher, mathematician and logi-
cian. To sociolinguists, he is perhaps best known 
for his theory of semiotics, with its focus on logic 
and nature, and the ways this contrasted with 
Saussure’s semiology, with its focus on language 
and convention. In particular, he foregrounded 
iconic and indexical relations between signs and 
objects, theorizing the way meaning is motivated 
and context-bound. And he foregrounded inferen-
tial relations between signs and interpretants, 
foregrounding the role of abduction (or hypothesis) 
over deduction, and thereby the role of context 
over code. He inspired Roman Jakobson’s (1990) 
understanding of the role of shifters in language – 
which has provided a central insight for three 
decades of linguistic anthropology and discourse 
analysis: for example, Haliday and Hasan (1976) 
on cohesion, Brown and Gilman (1972 [1960]) on 
pronouns, and Silverstein (1995 [1976]) and Hanks 
(1990) on social and spatial deixis. He inspired 
George Herbert Mead’s (1934) understanding of 
the relation between selves and others, as gener-
ated by the unfolding of gestures and symbols – 
which grounded influential ideas in philosophy and 
biosemiosis (Morris 1938; Sebeok and Umiker-
Sebeok, 1992), conversational analysis (Sachs, 
Schegloff and Jefferson, 1974), sociolinguistics 
(Goffman, 1959; Labov, 1966), and even speech 
act theory (Austin, 2003 [1955]; Searle, 1969). 
This chapter explicates key terms from semiot-
ics and pragmatics, and uses these to reconceptu-
alize the relation between mental states, social 
statuses and speech acts. Section 12.2 lays out the 
fundamental features of semiotic processes 
through the lens of Peirce’s lexicon: sign, object, 
interpretant; iconic, indexical, symbolic; and so 
forth. It differs from the usual readings of Peirce 
by focusing on the interpretant (in contrast to the 
sign or object), and by focusing on inference (in 
contrast to indexicality). Section 12.3 uses these 
concepts to reframe the nature of social relations 
and cognitive representations. Starting out from 
the work of the Boasian, Ralph Linton, it theorizes 
social statuses and mental states through the lens 
of semiosis and intersubjectivity. Section 12.4 
uses this reframing to recast performativity and 
agency. By reading Mead through the lens of 
Peirce, and reading Austin through the lens of 
Mead, it widens our understanding of the efficac-
ity of speech acts to include sign events more 
generally. 
12.2  SEMIOSIS: THE PUBLIC FACE 
OF COGNITIVE PROCESSES
Semiotics is the study of semiosis, or ‘meaning,’ a 
process which involves three components: ‘signs’ 
(whatever stands for something else); ‘objects’ (what-
ever a sign stands for); and ‘interpretants’ 
(whatever a sign creates insofar as it stands for an 
object) – see Table 12.1 (column 2). 
In particular, any semiotic process relates these 
three components in the following way: a sign 
stands for its object on the one hand, and its inter-
pretant on the other, in such a way as to make 
the interpretant stand in relation to the object 
corresponding to its own relation to the object 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
166
(see Peirce, 1931–35). What is at issue in mean-
ingfulness, then, is not one relation between a sign 
and an object (qua ‘standing for’), but rather a 
relation between two such relations (qua ‘corre-
spondence’). The logic of this relation between 
relations is shown in Figure 12.1. 
For example, ‘joint-attention’ is a semiotic 
process. In particular, a child turning to observe 
what her father is observing, or turning to look at 
where her mother is pointing, involves an interpre-
tant (the child’s change of attention), an object 
(what the parent is attending to, or pointing 
towards) and a sign (the parent’s direction of 
attention, or gesture that directs attention). As 
Mead noted (1934), any ‘interaction’ is a semiotic 
process. For example, if I pull back my fist 
(first phase of an action, or the sign), you duck 
(reaction, or the interpretant) insofar as my next 
move (second phase of action, or the object) 
would be to punch you. Generalizing interaction, 
the ‘pair-part structures’ of everyday interaction – 
the fact that questions are usually followed by 
answers, offers by acceptances, commands by 
undertakings, assessments by agreements, and so 
forth (Goffman, 1981; Sachs et al., 1974) – consist 
of semiotic processes in which two components 
(the sign and interpretant) are foregrounded. 
In particular, a type of utterance (or action) gives 
rise to another type of utterance (or action) insofar 
as it is understood to express a proposition 
(or purpose). 
Indeed, the constituents of so-called ‘material 
culture’ are semiotic processes (Kockelman, 
2006a). For example, an ‘affordance’ is a semiotic 
process whose sign is a natural feature, whose 
object is a purchase, and whose key interpretant is 
an action that heeds that feature, or an instrument 
that incorporates that feature (so far as the feature 
‘provides purchase’). For example, walking care-
fully over a frozen pond (as an action) is an inter-
pretant of the purchase provided by ice (as an 
affordance), insofar as such a form of movement 
heeds the slipperiness of ice. An ‘instrument’ is a 
semiotic process whose sign is an artificed entity, 
whose object is a function, and whose key interpre-
tant is an action that wields that entity, or another 
instrument that incorporates that instrument 
(so far as it ‘serves a function’). For example, a 
knife (as an instrument) is an interpretant of the 
purchase provided by steel (as another instrument), 
insofar as such a tool incorporates the hardness 
and sharpness of steel. 
Table 12.1 Typology of distinctions (semiosis)
Categories
Semiotic 
process
Sign
Ground
Interpretant
Social 
relation
Agent
Community
Firstness
Sign
Qualisign
Iconic
Affective
Role
Control
Commonality
Secondness
Object
Sinsign (token)
Indexical
Energetic
Status
Compose
Contrast
Thirdness
Interpretant
Legisign (type)
Symbolic
Representational
Attitude
Commit
Consciousness
Interpretant
Object
Sign
(a)
(b)
(c)
correspondence
Figure 12.1 Semiosis as a Relation between Relations. A sign stands for its object on the one hand 
(a), and its interpretant on the other (b), in such a way as to bring the latter into a relation to the former 
(c), corresponding to its own relation to the former (a).

SEMIOTICS
167
Notice from these examples that signs can be 
eye-directions, pointing gestures, utterances, con-
trolled behaviours, environmental features and 
artificial entities. Objects can be the focus of 
attention, purposes, propositions and functions. 
And interpretants can be other utterances, changes 
in attention, reactions, instruments, and heeding 
and wielding actions. Notice that very few of 
these interpretants are ‘in the minds’ of the inter-
preters; yet all of these semiotic processes embody 
properties normally associated with mental enti-
ties: attention, desire, purpose, propositionality, 
thoughts and goals. Notice that very few of these 
signs are addressed to the interpreters (in the sense 
of purposely expressed for the sake of their inter-
pretants) – so that most semiotic processes (such 
as wielding an instrument) are not intentionally 
communicative. And notice how the interpretant 
component of each of these semiotic processes is 
itself the sign component of an incipient semiotic 
process – and hence the threefold relationality 
continues indefinitely. 
While many theorists take semiotic objects to 
be relatively ‘objective’ (things like oxen and 
trees), these examples show that most objects are 
relatively intersubjective (a shared perspective, 
turning on correspondence, in regard to a rela-
tively intangible entity – such as a proposition or 
purpose). An object, then, is whatever a signer and 
interpreter can correspondingly stand in relation 
to – it need not be continuously present to the 
senses, taking up volume in space, detachable 
from context, or ‘objective’ in any other sense 
of the word. And while many theorists take inter-
pretants – if they consider them at all – to be rela-
tively ‘subjective’ (say, a thought in the mind of an 
addressee), these examples show that most inter-
pretants are as objective as signs. Indeed, it may 
be argued that the typical focus on sign–object 
relations (or ‘signifiers’ and ‘signifieds’), at the 
expense of sign–interpretant relations, and this 
concomitant understanding of objects as ‘objective’ 
and interpretants as ‘subjective’ – and hence the 
assimilation of meaning to mind, rather than 
grounding mind in meaning – is the fatal flaw of 
twentieth-century semiotics (Kockelman, 2005, 
2006a). These claims will be further fleshed out in 
what follows.
Peirce theorized three kinds of signs (1955a). 
A ‘qualisign’ is a quality that could possibly be 
paired with an object: i.e. any quality that is acces-
sible to the human sensorium – and hence could 
be used to stand for something else (to someone). 
A ‘sinsign’ is a quality that is actually paired with 
an object (in some event) and is sometimes 
referred to as a ‘token’. A ‘legisign’ is a type of 
quality that must necessarily be paired with a type 
of object (across all events) and is sometimes 
referred to as a ‘type’ – see Table 12.1 (column 3). 
For example, in the case of utterances, a quali-
sign is a potential cry (say, what is conceivably 
utterable by a human voice); a sinsign is an actual 
cry (say, the interjection ouch uttered at a particu-
lar time and place); and a legisign is a type of cry 
(say, the interjection ouch in the abstract, or what 
every token of ouch has in common as a type). 
Any sinsign that is a token of a legisign as a 
type may be called a ‘replica’. Replicas, then, are 
just run-of-the mill sinsigns: any utterance of the 
word ouch. And, in keeping within this Peircean 
framework, we might call any unreplicable or 
unprecedented sinsign a ‘singularity’ – that is, any 
sinsign that is not a token of a type. Singularities, 
then, are one-of-a-kind sinsigns: e.g., Nixon’s 
resignation speech. One of the key design features 
of language may be stated as follows: given a 
finite number of replicas (qua individual signs as 
parts), speakers may create an infinite number of 
singularities (qua aggregates of signs as wholes).
Given the definition of semiotic process offered 
above, the object of a sign is really that to which 
all (appropriate and effective) interpretants of that 
sign correspondingly relate (Kockelman, 2005). 
Objects, then, are relatively abstract entities by 
definition. They should not be confused with 
‘objects’ in the Cartesian sense of res extensa. Nor 
should they be confused with the ‘things’ that 
words seem to stand for. Indeed, it is best to think 
of the object as a ‘correspondence-preserving 
projection’ from all interpretants of a sign. It may 
be more or less precise, and more or less consist-
ent, as seen by the dotted portion of Figure 12.2. 
For example, if a cat’s purr is a sign, the object 
of that sign is a correspondence-preserving pro-
jection from the set of behaviours (or interpretants) 
humans may or must do (within some particular 
community) in the context of, and because of, a 
cat’s purr: pick it up and pet it; stroke in under the 
chin; exclaim, ‘Oh, that’s so cute!’; offer a sympa-
thetic low guttural; stay seated, petting it even 
when one needs to pee; and so on. Needless to say, 
humans tend to objectify such objects by glossing 
them in terms of physiology (say, the ‘purr-organ’ 
has been activated), emotion (say, ‘she must be 
content’), or purpose (say, ‘she wants me to con-
tinue petting her’). 
While the abstract nature of objects is clearly 
true for semiotic processes like instruments and 
actions, it is less clearly true for words like ‘cat,’ 
or utterances such as ‘the ball is on the table,’ 
which seem to have ‘objects’ (in the Cartesian 
sense) as their objects (in the semiotic sense). 
In order to understand the meaning of such signs, 
several more distinctions need to be made. First, 
just as there are sin-signs (or sign tokens) and 
legisigns (or sign types), there are ‘sin–objects’ 
and ‘legi–objects’. Thus, an assertion (or a sen-
tence with declarative illocutionary force – say, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
168
‘the dog is under the table’) is a sign whose object 
type is a proposition, and whose object token is a 
state of affairs. A word (or a substitutable lexical 
constituent of a sentence – say, ‘dog’ and ‘table’) 
is a sign whose object type is a concept, and 
whose object token is a referent. Finally, the set 
of all possible states of affairs of an assertion – or 
what the assertion could be used to represent – 
may be called an ‘extension’. And the set of 
all possible referents of a word – or what the 
word could be used to refer to – may be called a 
‘category’ – see Table 12.2. As is well known, 
many battles have been fought over the vector of 
mediation: words mediating concepts and catego-
ries (‘nominalism’); concepts mediating words 
and categories (‘conceptualism’); and categories 
mediating words and concepts (‘realism’). In gen-
eral, contributions come from all sides.
Unlike other object types (say, the general 
function of a hammer across wieldings, or the 
general cause of a scream across utterances), 
propositions (and concepts) are inferentially 
articulated. In particular, there is a key species of 
conditional relationality which may be called 
logical relationality, where the object in question 
relates interpretants via inferential articulation 
(material and formal deduction and induction). 
And, hand in hand with this inferential articula-
tion, unlike other object tokens (say, the specific 
function of a hammer as wielded on some particu-
lar occasion, or the specific cause of a scream 
uttered on some particular occasion), states of 
affairs and referents are ‘objective’ – in that there 
seem to be actual events that an assertion ‘repre-
sents,’ or actual things that a word ‘refers to’. In 
short, as will be further developed below, sen-
tences and words have the property of aboutness 
that characterizes intentional phenomena more 
generally – not only speech acts like assertions 
and promises but also ‘mental states’ like beliefs 
and intentions. While all signs have a property of 
directedness by definition (i.e. they stand for 
objects), signs whose objects are propositions 
have received extensive characterization – for 
their objects seem to be ‘of the world’, and so 
metaphysical worries about mind-world media-
tion can flourish. 
In Peircean semiotics, the relation between the 
sign and object is fundamental, and is sometimes 
referred to as the ‘ground’ (Parmentier, 1994: 4; 
Peirce, 1955a). Famously, in the case of symbols, 
this relation is arbitrary, and is usually thought to 
reside in ‘convention’. Examples include words 
like boy and run. In the case of indices, this rela-
tion is based in spatiotemporal and/or causal 
contiguity. Examples include exclamations like 
‘ouch!’ and symptoms like fevers. And in the case 
of icons, this relation is based in similarity of 
qualities (such as shape, size, colour or texture). 
Examples include portraits and diagrams. 
Notice, then, that the exact same object may 
be stood for by a symbol (say, the word dogs), 
an index (say, pointing to a dog), or an icon 
(say, a picture of a dog). When Saussure speaks of 
the ‘arbitrary’ and the ‘motivated’ (1983 [1916]), 
he is really speaking about semiotic processes 
whose sign–object relations are relatively sym-
bolic vs relatively iconic–indexical – see Table 1 
(column 4). 
Object
(objectified as ‘pain’)
Interpretant #2
(assert, don’t be a sissy)
Interpretant #1
(ask, are you okay?)
Interpretant #3
(turn to look) 
Sign
(exclaim, ouch!)
Figure 12.2 Object as Correspondence-Preserving Projection. The object of a sign is that to which 
all appropriate and effective interpretants of that sign correspondingly relate. It may be understood as a 
correspondence-preserving projection from all interpretants.
Table 12.2 The objects of inferentially 
articulated signs
Sign
Sentence
Word
Object (type)
Proposition
Concept
Object (token)
State of affairs
Referent
Object (set of tokens) Extension (world) Category

SEMIOTICS
169
Another sense of motivated is the type of regi-
mentation that keeps a sign–object–interpretant 
relation in place – be it grounded in norms, rules, 
laws, causes and so on. In particular, for an entity 
to have ‘norms’ requires two basic capacities: it 
must be able to imitate the behaviour of those 
around it, as they are able to imitate its behaviour; 
and it must be able to sanction the (non-) imitative 
behaviour of those around it, and be subject to 
their sanctions (Brandom, 1979; Haugeland, 1998; 
Sapir, 1985 [1927]). Norms, then, are embodied in 
dispositions: one behaves a certain way because 
one is disposed to behave that way; and one is so 
disposed because of imitation and sanctioning. 
While ‘rules’ presuppose a normative capacity, 
they also involve a linguistic ability: a rule must 
be formulated in some language (oral or written); 
and one must ‘read’ the rule, and do what it says 
because that’s what it says (Haugeland, 1998: 
149). Rules, then, are like recipes; following a rule 
is like following a recipe; and to have and follow 
rules requires a linguistic ability. As used here, 
‘laws’ are rules that are promulgated and enforced 
by a political entity – say, following Weber (1978: 
54), an organization with a monopoly on the 
legitimate use of force within a given territory. 
Laws, then, typically make reference to the threat 
of violence within the scope of polity. Notice, 
then, that laws presuppose rules, and rules presup-
pose norms. Sometimes when scholars speak 
about motivation, they mean iconic and indexical 
grounds rather than symbolic ones; and some-
times they mean regimentation by natural causes 
rather than cultural norms (rules, laws or conven-
tions). The issues are clearly related; but they 
should not be conflated. 
Peirce distinguished between immediate objects 
and dynamic objects. By the ‘immediate object’, 
he means ‘the object as the sign itself represents 
it, and whose Being is thus dependent upon the 
representation of it in the Sign’ (4.536, cited in 
Colapietro, 1989: 15). This is to be contrasted 
with the ‘dynamic object’, which Peirce takes to 
be ‘the Reality which by some means contrives to 
determine the Sign to its Representation’ (ibid.). 
In short, the dynamic object is the object that 
determines the existence of the sign; and the 
immediate object is the object represented by the 
sign. Immediate objects only exist by virtue of 
the signs that represent them, whereas dynamic 
objects exist independently of the signs that stand 
for them. 
Importantly, every sign has both an immediate 
and a dynamic object, and hence involves both a 
vector of representation and a vector of determina-
tion. In certain cases, these immediate and dynamic 
objects can overlap – as least in lay understand-
ings. For example, an interjection ‘ouch!’ or a 
facial expression of pain may be understood as 
determined by pain (as their dynamic objects) and 
as representing pain (as their immediate objects): 
one only knows about another’s pain through 
their cry; yet their pain is what caused that cry. 
Indeed, a ‘symptom’ should really be defined as a 
sign whose immediate object is identical to its 
dynamic object. Dynamic objects, needless to say, 
often bear a primarily (iconic) indexical relation 
to their signs, whereas immediate objects often 
bear a primarily (indexical) symbolic relation 
to their signs. However, just as any semiotic proc-
ess is symbolic, indexical and iconic, so any sign 
is partially determined (having a dynamic object) 
and partially representing (having an immediate 
object). Stereotypically, however, one takes the 
grounds of signs to be symbolic and representing, 
rather than (iconic) indexical and determining.
Reframing Grice’s insights (1989; and see 
Strawson, 1954) in a semiotic idiom, there are 
at least four objects of interest in non-natural 
meaning:
1 My intention to direct your attention to an object 
(or bring an object to your attention).
2 The object that I direct your attention to (or bring 
to your attention).
3 My intention that you use (2), usually in conjunc-
tion with (1), to attend to another object.
4 The object that you come to attend to.
There are several ways of looking at the details 
of this process. Focusing on the relation between 
(2) and (4), there are two conjoined semiotic proc-
esses, the first as means and the second as ends. 
Using some kind of pointing gesture as a sign, I 
direct your attention to some relatively immediate 
object in concrete space (indexically recoverable); 
and this object, or any of its features, is then used 
as a sign to direct your attention to some relatively 
distal object in abstract space (inferentially recov-
erable). In other words, the first sign (whatever 
initially points) is a ‘way marker’ in a relatively 
concrete environment; and the second sign (what-
ever is pointed to by the first sign, and subse-
quently points) is a ‘way marker’ in a relatively 
abstract environment. Loosely speaking, if the first 
sign causes one’s head to turn, the second sign, 
itself the object of the first sign, causes one’s mind 
to search. Relatively speaking, the first path taken 
is maximally concrete-indexical; and the second 
path taken is maximally abstract-inferential. 
Objects (2) and (4), then, are relatively fore-
grounded. They are immediate objects in Peirce’s 
sense: objects which signs represent (and hence 
which exist because the sign brought some inter-
preter’s attention to them). Objects (1) and (3) are, 
in contrast, relatively backgrounded. They are 
dynamic objects: objects which give rise to the 
existence of signs (and hence which are causes of, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
170
or reasons for, the signer having expressed them). 
In other words, whenever someone directs our 
attention there are two objects: as a foregrounded, 
immediate object, there is whatever they direct 
our attention to (2); and as a backgrounded, 
dynamic object, there is their intention to direct 
our attention (1). Grice’s key insight is that, for 
a wide range of semiotic processes, my interpre-
tant of your dynamic object is a condition for my 
interpretant of your immediate object. In other 
words, learning of your intention to communicate 
is a key resource for learning what you intend to 
communicate. Loosely speaking, whereas the 
object is revealed by what the point ostends (or by 
what the utterance represents), the intention is 
revealed by the act of pointing (or by the act of 
uttering).
While many linguists and anthropologists are 
familiar with Peirce’s distinction between icons, 
indices and symbols, most are not familiar with 
his threefold typology of interpretants – and so 
these should be fleshed out in detail. In particular, 
as inspired by Peirce, there are three basic types of 
interpretants (1955c: 276–7; Kockelman, 2005). 
An ‘affective interpretant’ is a change in one’s 
bodily state. It can range from an increase in 
metabolism to a blush, from a feeling of pain to a 
feeling of being off-balance, from sweating to an 
erection. This change in bodily state is itself a sign 
that is potentially perceptible to the body’s owner, 
or others who can perceive the owner’s body. And, 
as signs themselves, these interpretants may lead 
to subsequent, and perhaps more developed, inter-
pretants. ‘Energetic interpretants’ involve effort, 
and individual causality; they do not necessarily 
involve purpose, intention or planning. For exam-
ple, flinching at the sound of a gun is an energetic 
interpretant; as is craning one’s neck to see what 
made a sound; as is saluting a superior when 
she walks by; as is wielding an instrument (say, 
pounding in a nail with a hammer); as is heeding 
an affordance (say, tiptoeing on a creaky floor). 
And ‘representational interpretants’ are signs 
with propositional content, such as an assertion 
(or explicit speech act more generally). Thus, to 
describe someone’s movement as he raised his 
hand, is to offer an interpretant of such a control-
led behaviour (qua sign) so far as it has a purpose 
(qua object). And hence while such representa-
tions are signs (that may be subsequently inter-
preted), they are also interpretants (of prior signs). 
Finally, it should be emphasized that the same sign 
can lead to different kinds of interpretants – some-
times simultaneously and sometimes sequentially. 
For example, upon being exposed to a violent 
image, one may blush (affective interpretant), 
avert one’s gaze (energetic interpretant), or say 
‘that shocks me’ (representational interpretant) – 
see Table 12.1 (column 5).
Finally, each of these three types of interpre-
tants may be paired with a slightly more abstract 
double, known as an ultimate interpretant (cf. 
Peirce, 1955c: 277). In particular, an ‘ultimate 
affective interpretant’ is not a change in bodily 
state per se, but rather a disposition to have one’s 
bodily state change – and hence is a disposition to 
express affective interpretants (of a particular 
type). Such an interpretant, then, is not itself a 
sign, but is only evinced in a pattern of behaviour 
(as the exercise of that disposition). Analogously, 
an ‘ultimate energetic interpretant’ is a disposition 
to express energetic interpretants (of a particular 
type). In short, it is a disposition to behave in 
certain ways – as evinced in purposeful and non-
purposeful behaviours. And finally, an ‘ultimate 
representational interpretant’ is the propositional 
content of a representational interpretant, plus all 
the propositions that may be inferred from it, 
when all of these propositions are embodied in 
a change of habit, as evinced in behaviour that 
conforms to these propositional contents. For 
example, a belief is the quintessential ultimate 
representational interpretant: in being committed 
to a proposition (i.e. ‘holding a belief’), one is 
also committed to any propositions that may be 
inferred from it; and one’s commitment to this 
inferentially articulated set of propositions is 
evinced in one’s behaviour: what one is likely or 
unlikely to do or say insofar as it confirms or con-
tradicts these propositional contents. Notice that 
these ultimate interpretants are not signs in them-
selves: while they dispose one toward certain 
behaviours (affective, energetic, representational), 
they are not the behaviours per se – but rather 
dispositions to behave in certain ways. Ultimate 
interpretants are therefore a very precise way of 
accounting for a habitus: which, in some sense, is 
just an ensemble of ultimate interpretants as 
embodied in an individual, and as distributed 
among members of a community (cf. Bourdieu, 
1977 [1972]). 
While such a six-fold typology of interpretants 
may seem complicated at first, it should accord 
with one’s intuitions. Indeed, most emotions 
really involve a complicated bundling together of 
all these types of interpretants (Kockelman, 
2006b). For example, upon hearing a gunshot (as 
a sign), one may be suffused with adrenaline 
(affective interpretant); one might make a fright-
ened facial expression (relatively non-purposeful 
energetic interpretant); one may run over to see 
what happened (relatively purposeful energetic 
interpretant); and one might say ‘that scared the 
hell out of me’ (representational interpretant). 
Moreover, one may forever tremble at the sight of 
the woods (ultimate affective interpretant); one 
may never go into that part of the woods again 
(ultimate energetic interpretant); and one might 

SEMIOTICS
171
forever believe that the woods are filled with 
dangerous men (ultimate representational inter-
pretant). In this way, most so-called emotions 
may be decomposed into a bouquet of more basic 
and varied interpretants. And, in this way, the 
seemingly most subjective forms of experience 
are reframed in terms of their intersubjective 
effects.
Putting all the foregoing ideas together, a set of 
three-fold distinctions may be enumerated. First, 
any semiotic process has three components: sign, 
object, interpretant. There are three kinds of signs 
(and objects): quali-, sin- and legi-. There are 
three kinds of sign–object relations, or grounds: 
iconicity (quality), indexicality (contiguity) and 
symbolism (convention). And there are three 
kinds of interpretants: affective, energetic and 
representational (along with their ultimate vari-
ants). Finally, Peirce’s categories of firstness, 
secondness and thirdness (1955b), while notori-
ously difficult to define, are best understood as 
genus categories, which include the foregoing 
categories as species – see Table 12.1 (column 1). 
In particular, firstness is to secondness is to 
thirdness, as sign is to object is to interpretant, 
as iconic is to indexical is to symbolic, as affective 
is to energetic is to representational. Thus, 
firstness relates to sense and possibility; second-
ness relates to force and actuality; and thirdness 
relates to understanding and generality. Indeed, 
given that thirdness presupposes secondness, 
and secondness presupposes firstness, Peirce’s 
theory assumes that human-specific modes of 
semiosis (thirdness per se) are grounded in modes 
of firstness and secondness. Peirce’s pragmatism, 
then, is a semiotic materialism – one in which 
meaning is as embodied and embedded as it is 
‘enminded’. 
12.3  SOCIAL RELATIONS AND 
COGNITIVE REPRESENTATIONS
Ultimate (representational) interpretants deserve 
further theorization. For the Boasian, Ralph Linton 
(1936), a ‘status’ (as distinct from the one who 
holds it) is a collection of rights and responsibili-
ties attendant upon inhabiting a certain position in 
the social fabric: i.e. the rights and responsibilities 
that go with being a parent or child, a husband or 
wife, a citizen or foreigner, a patrician or plebian, 
and so forth. A ‘role’ is any enactment of one’s 
status: i.e. the behaviour that arises when one puts 
one’s status into effect by acting on one’s rights 
and according to one’s responsibilities. And, while 
untheorized by Linton, we may define an ‘atti-
tude’ as another’s reaction to one’s status by 
having perceived one’s role. Many attitudes, then, 
are themselves statuses: upon inferring your status 
(by perceiving your role), I adopt a complemen-
tary status. 
Roles, statuses and attitudes, then, are three 
components of the same semiotic process – map-
ping onto signs, objects and interpretants, respec-
tively – see Table 12.1 (column 6). Indeed, one 
cannot perceive a status (which is just a collection 
of rights and responsibilities); one can only infer 
a status from a role (any enactment of those rights 
and responsibilities); and one may therefore adopt 
an attitude towards a status. In this way, a status 
may be understood in terms similar to an ultimate 
interpretant: a disposition or propensity to signify 
and interpret in certain ways. A role may be 
understood as any sign of one’s propensity to sig-
nify and interpret in particular ways – itself often 
a particular mode of signifying or interpreting. 
And an attitude, qua complementary status, may 
itself just be an embodied sense of what to expect 
from another, itself often an ultimate interpretant, 
where this embodied sense is evinced by being 
surprised by or disposed to sanction non-expected 
behaviours. The basic process is therefore as fol-
lows: we perceive others’ roles; from these per-
ceived roles, we infer their statuses; and from 
these inferred statuses, we anticipate other roles 
from them which would be in keeping with those 
statuses. In short, a status is modality personified, 
a role is personhood actualized, and an attitude 
is another’s persona internalized. Here, then, we 
may understand social relations, and identity more 
generally, in terms of semiotic processes.
With these basic definitions in hand, several 
finer distinctions may be introduced, and several 
caveats may be established. First, Linton focused 
on rights and responsibilities, with no indication 
of how these were to be regimented. For present 
purposes, the modes of permission and obligation 
that make up a status may be regimented by any 
number of means: while typically grounded in 
norms (as commitments and entitlements), they 
may also be grounded in rules (as articulated 
norms) or laws (as legally-promulgated and 
politically-enforced rules). 
While the three classic types of status come 
from the Politics of Aristotle (husband/wife, 
master/slave, parent/child), statuses are really 
much more varied and much more basic. For 
example, kinship relations involve complementary 
statuses: aunt/niece, father-in-law/daughter-in-law, 
and so forth. Positions in the division of labour 
are statuses: spinner, guard, nurse, waiter, etc. 
Positions within civil and military organizations 
are statuses: CEO, private, sergeant, secretary. 
Goffman’s ‘participant roles’ (1981) are really 
statuses: speaker and addressee; participant and 
bystander. What Marx called the ‘dramatis perso-
nae’ of economic processes (1967: 113) are also 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
172
statuses: buyer and seller, creditor and debtor, 
broker and proxy. Social categories of the more 
colourful kind are statuses: geek, stoner, slut, bon 
vivant, as are social categories of the more politi-
cal kind: male, black, Mexican, rich, gay. Finally, 
and quite crucially, any form of possession is a 
status: one has rights to, and responsibilities for, 
the possession in question: i.e. to own a home (qua 
use-value), or have $50.00 (qua exchange-value), 
is a kind of status. 
Just as the notion of status can be quite compli-
cated, so can the role that enacts it. In particular, a 
role can be any normative practice – and hence 
anything that one does or says, any sign that one 
purposely gives or unconsciously gives off (cf. 
Goffman, 1959). It may range from wearing a 
particular kind of hat to having a particular style 
of beard, from techniques of the self to regional 
cooking, from standing at a certain point in a soccer 
field to sitting at a certain place at a dinner table, 
from deferring judgment to a certain set of people to 
praying before certain icons, from having various 
physical traits to partying on certain dates, from 
expressing certain desires to espousing certain 
beliefs. More generally, a role can be any sign that 
one gives (off) for others to interpret, and any inter-
pretant of the signs others give (off). 
Just as statuses are no more mysterious than 
any other object, attitudes are no more mysterious 
than any other interpretant. Hence attitudes 
may be affective interpretants (blushing when 
you learn your date used to be a porn star), 
energetic interpretants (reaching for your pistol 
when you learn your date is a bounty hunter), or 
representational interpretants (saying ‘you can’t 
be serious’ when your date makes his or her 
intentions known). In particular, attitudes may 
themselves be ultimate interpretants, and hence 
statuses: i.e. my status might be regimented by 
others’ attitudes towards my status, which are 
themselves just statuses. 
Given that others may use any sign or interpre-
tant that one expresses as a means to infer one’s 
status, and given that one inhabits a multitude of 
constantly changing statuses, there is much ambi-
guity: not only does the same person inhabit many 
statuses and many persons inhabit the same status 
but also many different roles can indicate the 
same status and the same role can indicate many 
different statuses. For these reasons, the idea of 
an ‘emblematic role’ should be introduced. For 
example, wearing a uniform (say, that of a ser-
geant in the army) is probably the exemplary 
emblematic role. It is minimally ambiguous and 
maximally public. Members of a status have it in 
common; it contrasts them with members of other 
statuses; and members of all such statuses are 
conscious of this contrastive commonality. It may 
only and must always be worn by members of a 
certain status. And finally, it provides necessary 
and sufficient criteria for inferring that the bearer 
has the status in question – see Table 12.3. While 
most statuses don’t come with uniforms, they 
nonetheless have relatively emblematic roles – or 
roles which satisfy some, but not all, of these 
criteria. 
In addition to emblematic roles, there are sev-
eral other key means by which statuses are distin-
guished, perpetuated, explicated and objectified. 
While the emphasis so far has been on the 
commitments and entitlements that constitute a 
particular status, this is merely the substance of a 
status: what anyone who holds that status has in 
common with others who hold that status. As 
implicit in Linton’s definition, any status is also 
defined by its contrast to other statuses (its com-
mitments and entitlements in relation to their 
commitments and entitlements): husband versus 
wife, parent versus child, etc. And finally, though 
not remarked upon by Linton, anyone who inhabits 
a status usually has a second-order, or ‘reflexive’ 
understanding of this contrastive commonality – 
typically called self-consciousness. These are 
often structured as stereotypes, and they may be 
the crucial locus for the expectations underlying 
another’s behaviour: he must be a waiter, because 
he has a stereotypic sign of being a waiter; and 
if he is a waiter, then he should behave in further 
stereotypic ways – not so much grounded in 
commitments and entitlements, as similar to some 
culturally-circulating exemplar or prototype of a 
waiter. 
Table 12.3 The four dimensions of relatively emblematic roles
Phenomenological
A role which is maximally public (i.e. perceivable and interpretable); and a role which is 
minimally ambiguous (i.e. one-to-one and onto)
Relational
A role which all members of a status have in common; a role by which members of different 
statuses contrast, and a role of which all members are conscious
Normative
A role which may (only) be expressed by members of a particular status; and a role which 
must (always) be expressed by members of a particular status
Epistemic
A role which provides necessary and sufficient criteria for inferring (and/or ascribing) the 
status in question

SEMIOTICS
173
In short, a status should be defined as a collec-
tion of commitments and entitlements to signify 
and interpret in particular ways; a role should 
be defined as any mode of signification or inter-
pretation that enacts these commitments and entitle-
ments; and an attitude should be defined as 
any interpretant of a status through a role – 
usually itself another status. Here, then, is where 
modality (entitlement and commitment) is most 
intimately tied to meaning (signification and 
interpretation).
It should be emphasized, then, that the defini-
tion of status being developed here should not be 
confused with the folk-sociological understanding 
of status as relative prestige, qua ‘high status’ and 
‘low status’. Moreover, the definition of role being 
developed here should not be confused with the 
folk-sociological sense of ‘status symbols’.
So far the discussion has been about social 
statuses as particular kinds of object, or ultimate 
interpretants. However, the entire analysis can be 
extended to cover mental states – or what might 
best be called ‘intentional statuses’ – as particular 
kinds of ultimate (representational) interpretants. 
For example, believing it will rain, or intending to 
go to the store, or remembering that one had 
bacon for breakfast can each be understood as an 
inferentially articulated set of commitments and 
entitlements to signify and interpret in particular 
ways: normative ways of speaking and acting 
attendant upon being a certain sort of person –  a 
believer that the earth is flat, or a lover of dogs. A 
role is just any enactment of that status: actually 
putting one or more of those commitments and 
entitlements into effect; or speaking and acting in 
a way that conforms with one’s mental states. And 
an attitude is just another’s interpretant of one’s 
mental state by way of having perceived one’s 
roles: I know you are afraid of dogs, as a mental 
state, insofar as I have seen you act like someone 
afraid of dogs; and as a function of this knowledge 
(of your mental state through your role), I come to 
expect you to act in certain ways – and perhaps 
sanction your behaviour as a function of those 
expectations (where such sanctions are often 
the best evidence of my attitude towards your 
mental state).
The real difference, then, between social statuses 
and mental states, is that mental states are inferen-
tially articulated (their propositional contents 
stand in logical relation to other propositional 
contents) and indexically articulated (their propo-
sitional contents stand in causal relation to states 
of affairs). For example, and loosely speaking: 
beliefs may logically justify and be logically justi-
fied by other beliefs; perceptions may logically 
justify beliefs and be indexically caused by states 
of affairs; and intentions may be logically justified 
by beliefs and be indexically causal of states of 
affairs (Brandom, 1994; Kockelman, 2006c). 
Table 12.4 orders what are perhaps the five most 
basic mental states as a function of their prototypic 
inferential and indexical articulation: memory, 
perception, belief, intention and plan.
Finally, there are relatively emblematic roles of 
mental states: behaviours (such as facial expressions 
and speech acts) which provide relatively incon-
trovertible evidence of one’s mental state. This 
means that the so-called privateness of mental 
states is no different from the privateness of social 
statuses: each is only known through the roles that 
enact them, and only incontrovertibly known 
when these roles are emblematic. Such a fact is 
captured in the phrase to wear one’s heart on 
one’s sleeve. As we will take up in detail, speech 
acts such as I believe it’s going to rain are rela-
tively emblematic signs of both the propositional 
mode (belief) and the propositional content (that 
it’s going to rain). Moreover, the so-called subjec-
tivity of mental states arises from the fact that 
they may fail (normatively speaking) to be logi-
cally justified (or logically justifying), and they 
may fail (normatively speaking) to be indexically 
causal (or indexically caused). There are non-
sated intentions, false beliefs, invented memories, 
non-veridical perceptions, plans that fall through, 
and so forth. In short, mental states have been 
theorized from the standpoint of social statuses, 
on the one hand, and speech acts, on the other. 
This is the proper generalization of Peirce’s 
Table 12.4 Inferential and indexical articulation of intentional statuses
Couched as semiotic process
Observation
Assertion
Action
Couched as mode of commitment
Empirical
Epistemic
Practical
Couched as mental state
Memory
Perception
Belief
Intention
Plan
Stand as reason
×
×
×
Stand in need of reason
×
×
×
Caused by state of affairs
×
×
Causal of state of affairs
×
×
Non-displaced causality
×
×
Displaced causality
×
×

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
174
understanding of ultimate representational inter-
pretants – when grounded in a wider theory of 
sociality and linguistics.
Another way to characterize all these ultimate 
(representational) interpretants is as ‘embodied 
signs’. In particular, ultimate (representational) 
interpretants, and mental states and social statuses 
more generally, have the basic structure of semi-
otic processes: they have roots leading to them 
(insofar as they are the proper significant effects, 
or interpretants, of other signs); and they have 
fruits following from them (insofar as they give 
rise to modes of signifying and interpreting, or 
roles, that may be interpreted by others’ attitudes). 
The key caveat is that the mental state or social 
status itself is non-sensible or ‘invisible’: one 
knows it only by its roots and fruits, the sign and 
interpretant events that lead to it and follow from 
it. For example, any number of sign events may 
lead to the belief that it will rain tomorrow (you 
hear it on TV, your farmer friend tells you, the sky 
has a certain colour, you hear the croaking of the 
toads, etc.), and any number of sign events may 
follow from the belief it will rain tomorrow 
(you shut the windows, you tell your friends, you 
buy an umbrella, you take in the washing, etc.). 
Thus, intentional statuses are inferentially and 
indexically articulated: they may logically lead 
to and follow from other intentional statuses; 
and they may causally lead to and follow from 
states of affairs. In this way, so-called ‘mental 
states’ may be understood as complex kinds of 
embodied signs that humans are singularly adept 
at tracking. And so-called ‘theory of mind’ is 
really just a particular mode of the ‘interpretation 
of signs’.
More generally, the attitudes of others towards 
our social statuses and mental states are evinced in 
their modes of interacting with us: they expect 
certain modes of signification and interpretation 
from us (as a function of what they take our social 
statuses and mental states to be); and they sanc-
tion certain modes of signification and interpreta-
tion from us (as a function of these expectations). 
Thus, we perceive others’ attitudes towards our 
social statuses and mental states in their modes of 
interacting with us (just as we perceive others’ 
social statuses and mental states by their patterns 
of behaviour). In this way, if one wants to know 
where social statuses and mental states reside, or 
where ultimate (representational) interpretants are 
embodied and embedded, the answer is as 
follows: in the sanctioning practices of a sign-
community, as embodied in the dispositions of its 
members, and as regimented by reciprocal atti-
tudes towards each others’ social statuses and 
mental states (as evinced in each other’s roles). If 
you think this is circular, you’re right; if you think 
circularity is bad or somehow avoidable, you’re 
wrong. Indeed, if there is any sense to the slogan 
meaning is public, this is it. 
12.4  PERFORMATIVITY REVISITED: 
SEMIOTIC AGENTS AND 
GENERALIZED OTHERS
The ‘signer’ is the entity that brings a sign into 
being – that is, brings a sign into being (in a par-
ticular time and place) such that it can be inter-
preted as standing for an object, and thereby give 
rise to an interpretant. It is often accorded a maxi-
mum sort of agency, such that not only does it 
control the expression of a sign but also it com-
poses the sign–object relation, and commits to the 
interpretant of that relation. As will be used here, 
to control the expression of a sign means to 
determine its position in space and time. Loosely 
speaking, one determines where and when a sign 
is expressed. To compose the relation between a 
sign and an object means to determine which sign 
stands for the object and/or which object is stood 
for by the sign. Loosely speaking, one determines 
what a sign expresses and/or how this is expressed. 
To commit to the interpretant of a sign–object 
relation, means to determine what its interpretant 
will be. This means being able to anticipate what 
the interpreter will do – be the interpreter the 
signer itself (at one degree of remove), another 
(say, someone other than the signer), or ‘nature’ 
(in the case of regimentation by natural causes 
rather than by cultural norms): see Table 12.1, 
column 7. Phrasing all these points about residen-
tial agency in an Aristotelian idiom, the committer 
determines the end, the composer determines the 
means, and the controller determines when and 
where the means will be wielded for the end. In 
this way, one may distinguish between ‘undertaker-
based agency’ (control: when and where), ‘means-
based agency’ (composition: what and how), and 
‘ends-based agency’ (commitment: why and to 
what effect). 
Notice, then, that there are three distinguishable 
components of a signer (controller, composer and 
committer), corresponding to three distinguisha-
ble components of a semiotic process (sign, object 
and interpretant). When the sign involves verbal 
behaviour, and the signer controls, composes and 
commits, the signer is usually called a ‘speaker’. 
And when the sign involves non-verbal behaviour, 
and the signer controls, composes and commits, 
the signer is usually called an ‘actor’. In both 
cases, responsibility for some utterance or action – 
some ‘word’ or ‘deed’ – is usually assigned as a 
function of the degree to which the signer con-
trols, composes and commits. And, as a function 
of this responsibility, the signer may be rewarded 

SEMIOTICS
175
or punished, praised or blamed, held accountable 
or excused, and so on. 
One understanding of agency would locate it at 
the intersection of these dimensions of control, 
composition and commitment. In particular, it 
may be shown that each of these three dimensions, 
or statuses, is not usually simultaneously inhab-
ited by identical, individual, human entities. For 
example, the signer need not an individual (nor 
need be any of its individual components – con-
troller, composer, committer). It may be some less 
than or larger than individual entity – say, a super-
individual (e.g. a nation-state) or a sub-individual 
(e.g. the unconscious). The signer need not be 
human. It may be any sapient entity (e.g. a rational 
adult person or an alien life form with something 
like natural language), sentient entity (e.g. a dog 
or fish), responsive entity (e.g. a thermostat or 
pinwheel), or even the most unsapient, unsentient 
and unresponsive entity imaginable (e.g. rocks 
and sand as responsive only to gravity and 
entropy). More generally, these signers may be 
distributed in time (now or then), space (here or 
there), unity (super-individual or sub-individual), 
individual (John or Harry), entity (human or non-
human) and number (one or several). In this way, 
agency involves processes which are multi-dimen-
sional, by degrees, and distributed. Accountability 
scales with the degree of agency one has over each 
of these dimensions.
For the moment, it is enough to focus on the 
last of these three dimensions. By ‘commitment’ 
is meant that a signer can ‘internalize’ another’s 
interpretant. More carefully phrased, to commit to 
the interpretant of a sign means that one is able to 
anticipate what sign the interpreter will express, 
where this anticipation is evinced in being surprised 
by and/or disposed to sanction, non-anticipated 
interpretants. Mead (1934), for example, made a 
famous distinction between the gestural and the 
symbolic (and see Vygotsky, 1978). In particular, 
he says that
The vocal gesture becomes a significant symbol … 
when it has the same effect on the individual 
making it that it has on the individual to whom 
it is addressed or who explicitly responds to it,
and thus involves a reference to the self of the 
individual making it. (Mead, 1934: 46)
That is, for Mead, symbols are inherently self-
reflexive signs: the signer can anticipate another’s 
interpretant of a sign insofar as the signer can 
stand in the shoes of the other, and thereby expect 
and/or predict the other’s reaction insofar as they 
know how they themself would respond in a simi-
lar situation. In this way, the symbolic for Mead is 
the realm of intersubjective behaviour in which 
one can seize control of one’s appearance – and 
thereby act for the sake of others’ interpretants. 
For example, in Mead’s terms, using a hammer to 
pound in a nail is gestural, whereas wielding a 
hammer to (covertly) inform another of one’s 
purpose (rather than, or in addition to, driving a 
nail through a board) is symbolic.
Crucially, while Mead’s distinction between 
the gestural and the symbolic relates to Peirce’s 
distinction between index and symbol, they should 
not be confused. Moreover, Mead’s terms should 
not be confused with the everyday meaning of 
gesture (say, in comparison to verbal language). 
Indeed, for Mead, the features of a semiotic proc-
ess that really contribute to its being a symbol 
rather than a gesture are whether the ground (or 
sign–object relation) is symbolic rather than 
indexical, and whether the sign is symmetrically 
accessible to the signer’s and interpreter’s senses: 
i.e. signs with relatively conventional grounds 
(in Peirce’s sense) are more likely to be symbols 
(in Mead’s sense); and signs with relatively 
indexical grounds (in Peirce’s sense) are more 
likely to be gestures (in Mead’s sense). And by 
symmetric is meant that the sign appears to the 
signer and interpreter in a way that is sensibly 
identical: both perceive (hear, see, smell, touch) 
the sign in a relatively similar fashion. For exam-
ple, spoken language is relatively symmetric and a 
facial expression is relatively asymmetric, with 
sign language being somewhere in the middle. 
(Mirrors are one of the ways we endeavour to 
make symmetric relatively asymmetric signs.) 
In short, taking Mead’s cues, semiotic processes 
whose signs are relatively symmetric, and whose 
grounds are relatively symbolic, are easier to 
commit to than semiotic processes whose signs 
are relatively asymmetric, and whose grounds are 
relatively iconic-indexical. And commitment is 
crucial because it allows for self-reflexive semio-
sis, in which a signer has internalized – and hence 
can anticipate – the interpretants of others. 
Commitment, then, is fundamental to reflexivity 
as a defining feature of selfhood.
As used here, an addressed semiotic process is 
one whose interpretant a signer commits to, and one 
whose sign is expressed for the purpose of that 
interpretant. Address may be overt or covert 
depending on whether or not the interpreter is 
meant to (or may easily) infer the signer’s commit-
ment and purpose. These distinctions (committed 
and non-committed, addressed and non-addressed, 
overt and covert) cross-cut pre-theoretical distinc-
tions such as Mead’s distinction between ‘gesture’ 
and ‘symbol’ (1934), and Goffman’s distinction 
between signs ‘given’ and signs ‘given off’ (1959). 
Needless to say, the ability to commit to an interpre-
tant of a sign – and thereby address one’s semiotic 
processes and/or dissemble with one’s addressed 
semiotic processes – turns on relatively peculiar 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
176
cognitive properties of signers, social properties of 
sign communities and semiotic properties of signs. 
Just as one can commit to others’ interpretants 
of one’s signs, one can commit to others’ attitudes 
towards one’s roles: i.e. one can anticipate what 
attitude the interpreter will adopt, where this antici-
pation is evinced in being surprised by and/or 
disposed to sanction, non-anticipated attitudes. In 
a Meadian or Vygotskian idiom, one can ‘internal-
ize’ another’s attitude (towards one’s status). And, 
in cases of self-reflexive semiosis, where this 
other is oneself, one can self-sanction one’s own 
behaviour as conforming or not with one’s status. 
This is, of course, a crucial aspect of selfhood.
For the moment, it should be noted that it is 
both a relatively human-specific and a relatively 
sign-specific capability. In particular, it seems that 
only humans, and only humans at a particular age, 
can commit to others’ attitudes (i.e. affect certain 
roles such that others will take them to have cer-
tain statuses as evinced in these others’ attitudes); 
and this commitment is differentially possible as a 
function of what kind of role, and hence sign, is 
being committed to (e.g. relatively symbolic 
semiotic processes are easier to commit to than 
relatively indexical semiotic processes, and 
emblematic roles are relatively easy to commit to 
almost by definition). Indeed, this relative ability 
to commit to others’ attitudes may lead to three 
sorts of discrepancies:
• cases where the attitudes of others take us to 
have statuses our own attitudes don’t;
• cases where our own attitudes take us to have 
statuses the attitudes of others don’t;
• and cases where neither our own attitudes, 
nor the attitudes of others, take us to have 
statuses we seem to have (insofar as our 
behaviour evinces it as a regularity, though per-
haps not a norm). 
Some senses of the term ‘unconscious’ turn on 
exactly these kinds of discrepancies. 
Each individual has many statuses, and each of 
these statuses is regimented via the attitudes of 
different sets of others (cf. Mead, 1934; Linton, 
1936). Usually, these sets are institution-specific 
(indeed, this is one of the key criteria of any insti-
tution). For example, as a mother, my status is 
regimented by the attitudes of my children, my 
husband, the babysitter, several close friends, 
my own parents, and so forth. As a bank-teller, my 
status is regimented by the attitudes of my boss, 
my co-workers, my customers, and so forth. As a 
shortstop (baseball fielder), my status is regi-
mented by the attitudes of the pitcher, the base-
men, the other fielders, the batter, the fans, and so 
forth. As someone committed to the claim that 
you had ice-cream for dessert last night, my status 
is regimented by your attitude (insofar as you just 
informed me of this), and perhaps the attitudes of 
any other participants in the speech event, and so 
forth. And, within each of these institutions, my 
attitudes regiment the statuses of my children and 
husband, my boss and customers, my basemen 
and batters, the participants in our speech event. In 
short, for each of our statuses, there is usually a 
set of others whose attitudes regiment it, and 
whose statuses our attitudes help regiment. The 
speech event is perhaps the minimal generalized 
other: a speaker and an addressee, each regiment-
ing the social statuses and mental states of the 
other; what we intersubjectively know about each 
other given the immediate context; what we inter-
subjectively know about each other given the 
ongoing discourse; and what we intersubjectively 
know about each other given our shared culture.
In cases where one has committed to the regi-
menting attitudes of sets of others towards one’s 
status (within some institution), the sets of com-
mitted to (or ‘internalized’) attitudes may be 
called a ‘generalized other’, loosely following 
Mead’s famous definition (1936: 154). (Indeed, 
we can say that a status is that to which all atti-
tudes conditionally relate.) Most of us have an 
infinity of generalized others, some being wide 
enough to encompass all of humanity (say, our 
status as a person – at least we hope so), some 
being so narrow as to encompass only our lovers 
(say, as holding a certain awkward desire that we 
have shyly informed them of). And sometimes we 
have statuses, as regimented by the attitudes of 
others, that we have not internalized. These form 
part of what may be called our unconscious self. 
These questions – of different kinds of multiply 
overlapping generalized others, and of conscious 
and unconscious selves (via committed to and 
uncommitted to, or internalized and uninternal-
ized attitudes) – are crucial for understanding 
agency and selfhood. Here, then, the true impor-
tance of emblematic roles comes to the fore: they 
are our best means of securing mutual recogni-
tion, or rather intersubjective attitudes.
Putting all these ideas together we may revisit 
Austin’s understanding of performativity. For a 
sign event to be felicitous it must be appropriate in 
context and effective on context. And sign events 
are only appropriate insofar as participants already 
have certain social statuses and mental states (or in 
which a space of intersubjectively recognized 
commitments and entitlements is already in place), 
and are only effective insofar as participants come 
to have certain social statuses and mental states (or 
by which a change in the space of intersubjectively 
recognized commitments and entitlements takes 
place). Thus, just as we comport within 
a given space of commitments and entitlements, 
our comportment changes the space of commit-
ments and entitlements. Finally, Austin made a 

SEMIOTICS
177
distinction between relatively explicit and rela-
tively implicit speech acts – usually signs with 
propositional content and illocutionary force (e.g. 
shut the door or sixpence it won’t rain). Indeed, his 
real focus is on ‘explicit performatives’, or verbal 
utterances whose illocutionary force has proposi-
tional content (e.g. I order you to shut the door or 
I bet you sixpence that it won’t rain). In the idiom 
of Brandom, such primary performatives make 
explicit the action being performed and hence, in 
the idiom introduced above, count as relatively 
emblematic signs of already existing and subse-
quently existing social statuses and mental states.
But prior to Austin’s understanding of perfor-
mativity in terms of explicitness/implicitness and 
appropriateness/effectiveness, and the legions of 
scholars influenced by it, Mead (1934) made a 
distinction between the me versus the I on the one 
hand, and symbols versus gestures on the other. 
As already discussed, the symbol/gesture distinc-
tion is really a distinction between semiotic proc-
esses whose interpretants one can or cannot 
commit to (and hence is a question of relative 
degrees of self-reflexivity, emblemeticity, and/or 
explicitness). And, for Mead, ‘The “I” is the 
response of the organism to the attitudes of the 
others; the “me” is the organized set of attitudes of 
others which one himself assumes’ (1934: 175). 
That is, the me is the status of the self as regi-
mented by the attitudes of some generalized other. 
And the I is the role of the self that transforms the 
generalized other. Or, in the idiom introduced 
above – a semiotic and temporal reading of 
Linton, Mead and Austin – the me is the self as 
appropriating, having taking into account others’ 
attitudes towards its social and intentional sta-
tuses; and the I is the self as effecting, enacting 
social and intentional roles that change others’ 
attitudes.
NOTE
1 This essay is a highly abridged and slightly 
extended version of Kockelman, P. (2005) ‘The 
semiotic stance’, which appeared in Semiotica, 
157(1): 233–304.
REFERENCES
Austin, J. L. (2003 [1955]). How to do Things with Words. 
2nd edn. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1977 [1972]) Outline of a Theory of Practice. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brandom, R. (1979) ‘Freedom and Constraint by Norms’. 
American Philosophical Quarterly, 16(3): 187–196.
Brandom, R. (1994) Making it Explicit: Reasoning, 
Representing, and Discursive Commitment. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Brown, R. and Gilman, A. (1972 [1960]) ‘The pronouns of 
power and solidarity’, in P. P. Giglioli (ed.), Language and 
Social Context. New York: Penguin. pp. 252–82.
Colapietro, V. M. (1989) Peirce’s Approach to the Self: A 
Semiotic Perspective on Human Subjectivity. Albany, NY: 
State University of New York Press.
Goffman, E. (1959) The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. 
New York: Anchor Books, Doubleday.
Goffman, E. (1981) ‘Footing’, in Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press. pp. 124–59.
Grice, P. (1989) Utterer's meaning and intentions. In Studies 
in the Ways of Words, Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press. pp. 86–116.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. 
London: Longman.
Hanks, W. F. (1990) Referential Practice. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press.
Haugeland, J. (1998) ‘The Intentionality All-Stars’. In Having 
Thought: Essays in the Metaphysics of Mind, Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press pp. 127–170.
Jakobson, R. (1990). ‘The speech event and the functions of 
language’. In On Language, L. R. Waugh and M. Monville-
Burston (eds) Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
pp. 69–79.
Kockelman, P. (2005) ‘The semiotic stance’, Semiotica, 157: 
233–304.
Kockelman, P. (2006a) 'Residence in the World: Affordances, 
instruments, actions, roles, and identities‘, Semiotica, 
162(1): 19–71.
Kockelman, P. (2006b) 'Representations of the World: 
Memories, perceptions, beliefs, plans, and intentions', 
Semiotica, 162(1): 72–125.
Labov, W. (1966) ‘Hypercorrection by the lower middle class 
as a factor in linguistic change’. In W. Bright (ed), 
Sociolinguistics: Proceedings of the UCLA Sociolinguistics 
Conference, 1964. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 84–113.
Linton, R. (1936) The Study of Man. Appleton, Century, and 
Crofts.
Marx, K. (1967) Capital, Vol. 1. New York: Free Press.
Mead, G. H. (1934) Mind, Self, and Society From the 
Standpoint of a Social Behavioralist. Edited by Charles S. 
Morris. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Morris, C. W. (1938) Foundations of the Theory of Signs. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Parmentier, R. J. (1994) ‘Peirce divested for nonintimates’ in 
Signs in Society: Studies in Semiotic Anthropology. 
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.  pp. 3–22.
Peirce, C. S.  (1931–35) Collected Papers of Charles Sanders 
Peirce, 6 volumes. Edited by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Peirce, C. S. (1955a) ‘Logic as semiotic: the theory of signs’, 
in Justus Buchler (ed) Philosophical Writings of Peirce. 
New York: Dover Publications. pp. 98–119.
Peirce, C. S.  (1955b) ‘The principles of phenomenology’, in 
J. Buchler (ed.), Philosophical Writings of Peirce. New York: 
Dover Publications. pp. 74–97.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
178
Peirce, C. S. (1955c) ‘Pragmatism in retrospect: a last formu-
lation’, in J. Buchler (ed.), Philosophical Writings of Peirce. 
New York: Dover Publications. pp. 269–89.
Sachs, H., Schegloff, E. A. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conver-
sation’, Language, 50, 696–734.
Sapir, E. (1985 [1927]) ‘The unconscious patterning of behav-
ior in society’, in D. G. Mandelbaum (ed.), Selected 
Writings in Language, Culture, and Personality. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press. pp. 544–59.
Saussure, F. de (1983 [1916]) Course in general linguistics. 
La Salle, IL: Open Court Press.
Searle, J. R. (1969) Speech Acts. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sebeok, T. A. and Umiker-Sebeok, J. (eds) (1992) Biosemiotics. 
The Semiotic Web 1991. Berlin and New York: Mouton de 
Gruyter.
Silverstein, M. (1995 [1976]). ‘Shifters, linguistic 
categories, and cultural description’, in B. G. Blount 
(ed.), Language, Culture, and Society: A Book of 
Readings. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press. 
pp. 187–221.
Strawson, P. F. (1971 [1954]) ‘Intention and Convention 
in Speech Acts’, in J. Rosenberg and C. Travis (eds.), 
Readings in the Philosophy of Language, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. pp. 599–614.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978) ‘Tool and symbol in child development’, 
in M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner and E. Souberman 
(eds), Mind and Society: The Development of Higher 
Psychological Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press. pp. 19–30.
Weber, M. (1978) Economy and Society, Vol. 1, G. Roth, and 
C. Wittich (eds). Berkeley: University of California Press.

PART 3
Language Variation 
and Change


13
13.1 INTRODUCTION
Some of the greatest controversies taking shape 
today in sociolinguistics focus on the relationship 
between the individual and the community. How 
do individuals’ language patterns and individuals’ 
language ideologies fit into society-wide patterns 
of usage and change? The mechanisms relating 
individual behaviour to community-wide pattern-
ing provide the material for both enduring and new 
debates within our field. These debates may, for 
various scholars, take the form of familiar dual-
isms such as langue/parole, grammar/usage, struc-
ture/agency, society/praxis, macro/micro, emic/
etic (defined by participants vs defined by research-
ers; see an especially relevant discussion in 
Coupland, 2001). This chapter takes as its domain 
some of the major areas of sociolinguistics and 
seeks to adumbrate the controversies surrounding 
the dualisms mentioned above. Despite a concilia-
tory desire to provide a middle way between the 
dualisms, I will argue that holding these dualisms 
in tension gives us analytical affordances that 
might otherwise be lost. In discussing the history 
of the field of sociolinguistics from what I have 
termed Type I, II, and III variationist analyses 
(Mendoza-Denton, 2002), roughly corresponding 
to Eckert’s three waves (2005), I also aim to eluci-
date how studies engaging the constructs of prac-
tice, performance and identity have emerged as 
pivotal in modern understandings of the relation-
ship between individuals and communities.
13.2 THE SPEECH COMMUNITY
Much of the study of quantitative sociolinguistics 
hinges on accounting for the coherence of individual 
behaviour as it is nested within larger and larger 
sociocultural structures. We go from individuals to 
small units, like families or households, to pro-
gressively larger and larger units, such as com-
munities of practice and speech communities, all 
the way out to major sociopolitical aggregates 
such as the city or nation-state, and beyond to 
virtual communities that involve no face-to-face 
interaction across members and which must in 
effect be imagined (Anderson, 2006 [1983]; 
though Anderson makes the point that both cities 
and nation-states are imagined communities 
as well).
Carpenter and Hilliard (2005) and Meyerhoff 
and Walker (2007) and Bayley and Langman 
(2004) all follow Guy (1980) in identifying the 
relationship of the group to the individual as one 
of the central issues in the study of language vari-
ation and change. Differences in production, basic 
physical perception and social evaluation are the 
hallmarks of language in use, and the fact that 
these dimensions exhibit variation both across 
individuals in a community, as well as within 
single individuals, remains a challenge in model-
ling collectivities at various levels of abstraction.
The term ‘speech community’ is a hallmark of 
the twentieth-century innovations in the study of 
language by anthropologists, sociologists and lin-
guists, and was in use well before these fields had 
drifted into separate academic entities in the 
United States (for an excellent extended review of 
the concept of speech community, see Patrick, 
2002). This section will consider the beginnings 
of the concept of speech community as it arose 
from the joint theorizing of linguists and anthro-
pologists in the 1960s and 1970s.
Leonard Bloomfield, considered both a linguist 
and an anthropologist, in 1933 offered the follow-
ing definition: ‘A speech community is a group of 
Individuals and Communities
N o r m a  M e n d o z a - D e n t o n

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
182
people who interact by means of speech … differ-
ences of speech within a community are due to 
differences in the density of communication ... 
sub-groups are separated by lines of weakness in 
this net of oral communication’ (1933: 153–4). 
Within this definition, two aspects must be noted. 
The first aspect is that the reference to the density 
of communication effectively prefigures – down 
to suggestions for social networking diagrams – 
the later developments in understanding commu-
nities of speakers as social networks (see Vetter, 
this volume). The second aspect is that such a 
definition sidesteps the sometimes politically- and 
historically-motivated, more general notions of 
‘language’ and ‘dialect’, focusing less on the lin-
guistic object and more on the people using it. 
Dell Hymes underlines this aspect of the term, 
going so far as to consider it a prime for analysis: 
Speech community is a necessary, primary concept 
in that … it postulates the unit of description as a 
social, rather than a linguistic, entity. One starts 
with a social group and considers the entire 
organization of linguistic means within it, rather 
than start with some partial, named organization 
of linguistic means, called a “language’’ (Hymes, 
1974: 47).
(See also Johnstone and Marcellino, this volume.)
In privileging social collectivities over linguis-
tic entities, Hymes erected a sustained challenge 
to the emerging core of the field of linguistics that 
focused on the abstract faculty of language rather 
than language in use (Chomsky, 1965), privileging 
Saussurean langue over parole, and taking as its 
domain the architecture of grammar over speak-
ers’ actual usage (see Guy, this volume). It is in 
the focus on speakers’ usage that Hymes found 
commonalities with the work of another emerging 
figure in linguistics, William Labov.
Variationist starting points: Labov 
One of the earliest and most influential statements 
with regard to speech communities in what was 
then the nascent field of quantitative sociolinguis-
tics was made in the work of William Labov. In 
his groundbreaking 1972 study of social stratifica-
tion in the speech of New Yorkers, he advances a 
definition of the speech community: ‘the speech 
community is defined … by participation in a set 
of shared norms; these norms may be observed in 
overt types of evaluative behavior, and by the 
uniformity of abstract patterns of variation which 
are invariant with respect to particular levels of 
usage’ (Labov, 1972: 120). The latter portion 
of this definition, the phrase ‘particular levels 
of usage’, can be understood as having a double 
referent: on the one hand, it refers to levels within 
the speech of individuals (further explained below 
when we talk about styles) and, on the other hand, 
it refers to levels within the community as a 
whole: social stratification. For Labov, social 
stratification means that: ‘the normal workings of 
society have produced systematic differences 
between certain institutions or people, and that 
these differentiated forms have been ranked in 
status or prestige by general agreement’ (1972: 72).
In Labov’s model of the speech community, 
members of the community share social evalua-
tion by means of ranking performances relative to 
each other, despite the fact that they do not all 
produce the whole spectrum of styles. In Labov’s 
framework, production differences are expected 
precisely because of the stratification of the popu-
lation (not everyone has access to the same lan-
guage resources), but the key in this framework is 
that members of the community judge particular 
performances in the same way, orienting to lin-
guistic features as producing the same status 
matrix. It is precisely the uniformity of their ori-
entation that constitutes the speech community. 
Some scholars (Rickford, 1986; Williams, 1992; 
Bucholtz, 1999; Dodsworth, 2005) have argued 
that Labov puts forth a structural-functionalist, 
consensus-based model of language, one that 
stresses underlying agreement and solidarity, priv-
ileging structure over agency (for a sociological 
precursor to this view, see e.g. Durkheim, 1893; 
Parsons, 1964). Dodsworth explains: 
Labov … notes that there is inherent individual 
variation which is usually too constrained to inter-
fere with the regularity of the community pattern 
… [individuals] are grouped together so that gen-
eralizations can be made, and individuals who 
skew the generalizations are considered aberrant. 
Social types, in other words, are considered robust’ 
(2005: 18).
An important feature of the Labovian frame-
work for speech communities is that it allowed for 
the quantitative operationalization and replication 
of his basic findings: by relying on sociodemo-
graphic characteristics to divide the community 
(the social categories in the second column), and 
making those demographic characteristics rela-
tively uniform (usually based on widely-used 
multi-index scales of social class), Labov intro-
duced a new way of thinking about social attributes 
and about the place of individuals in the social 
matrix. Indeed, in his study of the distribution of 
(r) in New York City, Labov advances the follow-
ing strong hypothesis: ‘If any two subgroups 
of New York City speakers are ranked in a scale
of social stratification, then they will be ranked in 
the same order by their differential use of (r)’ 

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
183
(Labov 1972: 44). It was the testability and repli-
cability of these initial bold hypotheses that 
allowed the Labovian paradigm to emerge as a 
contender in the newly-emergent field of sociolin-
guistics. This etic classificatory approach, aiming 
for scientific objectivity, allowed for a methodo-
logical independence from the particulars of com-
munities and led to a focus on the internal 
workings of social structures, yielding such con-
cepts as hypercorrection (the tendency of some 
groups of speakers to talk above their station, as it 
were, using greater percentages of features ordi-
narily associated with a higher social class), and 
the lower middle class crossover (a related phe-
nomenon where the lower middle class overgener-
alizes the production of the linguistic features that 
carry prestige, effectively overshooting the most 
prestigious target). Broad psychological attribu-
tions and motivations such as a group’s linguistic 
insecurity (the purported reason for hypercorrec-
tion) were advanced, though it was at that level that 
the testability of the claims ceased. The paradigm 
established by these studies is what I call Type I: 
sociodemographic variation (Mendoza-Denton, 
2002), see also Eckert’s first wave (2005).
Ethnography of speaking/ethnography 
of communication: Gumperz and Hymes
Shortly before Labov began work on developing 
his framework based on the linguistic analysis of 
urban dialects on the East Coast of the United 
States, anthropologists Dell Hymes and John 
Gumperz, working within the discipline of anthro-
pology at Berkeley, were contributing to the 
development of the ethnography of speaking 
approach (proposed by Hymes in a 1962 essay), a 
new approach within linguistic anthropology that 
sought to go beyond traditional grammatical 
descriptions of ‘exotic’ languages to put emphasis 
on the uses to which language was put. (See also 
chapters by Johnstone and Marcellino, and by 
Gordon, this volume.) Ethnography of speaking 
was concerned with describing speaking in its 
own right, and looked to bounded events and ritual 
performance as descriptive starting points. Thus, 
instead of focusing exclusively on the rules of 
grammar, or the possible grammaticality of sen-
tences, or even on the collective agreement of 
social evaluations of particular features (as Labov 
did), ethnographers of speaking sought to discover 
ways of speaking through in-depth investigations 
within the community, starting with analyst-
determined etic approaches, but always seeking to 
uncover, through ethnography, participants’ emic 
categories. Discovering ways of speaking might 
involve finding out what counts as a refusal, 
which situations require a greeting, how one 
marks irony or politeness, what might be the 
appropriate length of a pause – in short, the cultur-
ally-specific ways that speech use above the level 
of the sentence might be organized. This allowed 
ethnography of speaking to conceptualize not only 
a Sprachbünd ‘language area’ (German: ‘language 
bond’), where despite having different languages 
an area might share language features in common 
(the Balkan Sprachbünd has for instance morpho-
syntactic commonalities that obtain in languages 
from different families), but also to identify a 
Sprechbünd (‘speech area’: Neustupný, 1978), 
where ways of speaking could be shown to be 
commonly held, even though these crossed lan-
guage boundaries and even families: in Hymes’ 
example (1974: 49), Austria, Czechoslovakia, 
Southern Germany and Hungary might form a 
Sprechbünd, and a non-German speaking Czech 
might display some communicative competence, 
understanding the pragmatics and speech appro-
priateness of German hosts despite an inability 
to speak the language. A recently-emerging 
Sprechbünd would be the current popularity and 
spread of hip-hop musical and linguistic forms 
around the globe, where people from radically 
different languages participate in commonly-held 
ways of speaking and aesthetic practices. And yet, 
neither Sprachbünde nor Sprechbünde are speech 
communities: ‘a speech community [is] defined 
through the concurrence of rules of grammar and 
rules of use’ (Hymes 1974: 120). Note that in this 
conception, there is nothing preventing more than 
one language from applying within a speech com-
munity. Indeed, one of the hallmarks of the 1970s 
ethnography-of-speaking approach is that bilin-
gual and multilingual aggregates could be concep-
tualized as speech communities (Gumperz, 1962: 
16). Although having more than one language in a 
speech community is not completely inconsistent 
with the Labovian framework, in practice, the 
focus on phonological variable patterning has 
meant that the variants must indeed be quite close 
to each other so as to form part of a single phonol-
ogy (see also Kerswill, 1994: 34–6). 
Gumperz’s (1958, 1968, 1972 [1962]) work in 
India, and his work in Norway with Jan Petter 
Blom (Blom and Gumperz, 1972), set the standard 
for talking about multilingual communities in 
which diglossia (India) and code-switching 
(Norway; though see Mæhlum, 1996) were 
present. In cases of diglossia, specifically in a 
community such as Khalapur in Northern India 
which was divided into stable caste/occupational 
groups, Gumperz found that it was not Bloomfield’s 
frequency of interaction that was predictive of dif-
ferences, but rather the nature of these interac-
tions: he found more pressures toward uniformity 
and similarity in the speech of people who were in 
friendship groups than among people of the same 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
184
caste or of the same status (touchable/untoucha-
ble) (1958: 681). In his later work (1996), Gumperz 
does take the notion of social networks as building 
blocks for speech communities, in which ‘inter-
pretive strategies are embedded … and passed on 
as shared communicative traditions’ (Gumperz 
1996: 362). Similarly, Hymes observes (1974: 47) 
that relying solely on frequency of interaction 
might not be enough, since it is the ‘definition of 
situations in which, and identities through which, 
interaction occurs [that] is decisive’. In practice, 
this would mean that a quotidian service interac-
tion with a mere acquaintance might have less 
of an effect on an individual’s speech, despite 
greater frequency, than occasional contact with an 
important friend.
Duranti (2003), in a sweeping essay reviewing 
the history of linguistic anthropology, credits the 
Hymes/Gumperz ethnography of communication 
approach for putting the speech community front 
and centre as a unit of analysis along with speech 
events and genres. Today, the basic tenets of eth-
nography of speaking and ethnography of com-
munication have become part of the way that 
modern discourse-analytic sociolinguists and lin-
guistic anthropologists carry out their work 
(regrettably, space constraints prevent me from 
fully covering developments in linguistic anthro-
pology). However, now that these ideas have been 
incorporated into the basic assumptions of linguis-
tic anthropology and some branches of ethno-
graphically-oriented sociolinguistics, relatively 
few scholars still label their work ethnography of 
speaking/communication. Part of the reason is 
that anthropology itself (though not linguistics) 
has lost much of its taxonomic drive. In 1974, 
Bauman and Sherzer could write of ethnography 
of speaking as 
Consistent with the current views and purpose of 
ethnography, … [EoS is research] directed toward 
the formulation of descriptive theories of speaking 
as a cultural system. In order to formulate such 
theories we need to describe the range of things 
that might enable us to comprehend the organiza-
tion of speaking in social life … (Bauman and 
Sherzer, 1974: 98; my emphasis).
Now firmly in a postcolonial, postmodern and 
post-positivist era, the aims of anthropology are 
no longer cultural taxonomy or cultural compari-
son (see Epistemologies in Herzfeld, 2001); rather, 
the focus has moved to analyses of circulation, 
power, ideologies, reflexivity and identities (for a 
linguistic anthropological example of this kind of 
analysis regarding the making of the nation-state 
as community, see Eisenlohr, 2007).
And yet the modern reflexes and contemporary 
consequences of the ethnography of speaking 
approach are dramatic and perduring: a major 
contribution of this approach has been definitively 
liberating sociolinguists and linguistic anthro-
pologists from a narrow descriptive, syntax-
and-phonology-based view of language patterns 
and linguistic variation, and fomenting multiple 
new foci such as pragmatic patterns, intonational 
inventories, discourse structures, conversational 
routines and face-to-face interaction. Imagining 
community as taking place beyond the construc-
tional blocks of a segmental feature (or even the 
productive combination of several) has allowed 
the investigation of: 
• political oratory patterns that travel with mod-
ernist leanings in Madagascar (Keenan, 1974; 
Jackson, 2006);
• the diversity of oratory, puberty rites and ways of 
speaking among the Kuna (Sherzer, 1983);
• language socialization and its imagining of kin-
ship structure in Papua New Guinea (Schieffelin, 
1984).
Work on the ethnography of communication also 
laid the groundwork for the consideration of non-
linguistic material (such as silences and their 
symbolism (Bauman, 1983)), and of the ways that 
discourse and other semiotic modes such as ges-
ture and intonation work in concert to produce 
specific speech events (Mendoza-Denton and 
Jannedy, forthcoming).
Cross-cultural applications of concepts 
of the speech community
The generality of the initial challenge of both the 
Labovian and the Hymes/Gumperz notions of 
speech communities lent itself to cross-cultural 
exploration: Could this basic unit of analysis hold 
up cross-linguistically? As speech communities 
have continued to be theorized, there has emerged 
a general notion that ‘agreement on the social 
meaning of various linguistic parameters’ 
(Kerswill, 1994: 24) is important, and yet there is 
still no consensus on how to treat individual per-
formances in the distribution of community norms. 
The Labovian speech community is nowadays 
defined and tested by the agreement on social 
meaning implicit in the patterned production of 
variables that is the outcome of research designs 
such as that outlined above.
We are still left with a thorny question origi-
nally raised by Bickerton (1971): Is it the case that 
what looks like community variation is the dispa-
rate idiolects of individuals, lumped together by 
the analysts? Gumperz (1982: 24) remarks on the 
flip side of this question: that patterns that seem 
‘irregular at the level of the individual nonetheless 

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
185
show systematic regularities at the level of social 
facts’. 
Meyerhoff and Walker (2007) explicitly address 
some of these issues by testing different models of 
creole grammars in their study of the Caribbean 
community of Bequia, a small creole-speaking 
island in St. Vincent and the Grenadines that 
exhibits patterns of circular migration to cities in 
the United Kingdom and Canada. Meyerhoff and 
Walker conclude that, despite sometimes long 
absences, the urban sojourners from Bequia 
largely share the grammatical constraints of their 
specific villages of origin within the island, pat-
terns which can be distinguished by the ordering 
of insertion/deletion of the copula be. They pro-
pose that the degree of embeddedness in strong 
social networks (for more on social networks, see 
Vetter, this volume) both before and during the 
sojourn will affect an individual sojourner’s reten-
tion of features and constraint rankings in their 
specific, localized variety of Caribbean English. 
This hypothesis remains a challenge in quantita-
tive studies of migrants.
Santa Ana and Parodi (1998) sought to address 
the evaluation aspect of the quantitative speech 
communities framework, and proposed some 
modifications to Labov’s original concept, in par-
ticular questioning the notion of agreement on 
evaluation of forms across the speech community. 
They sampled a rural Mexican population in El 
Bajío, Michoacán, where they were unable to 
argue for a single unified speech community in 
the classical sense, but rather found that some 
community members ‘demonstrated no awareness 
of any of the social evaluation patterns of lan-
guage variation’ (1998: 26). They hypothesized 
that it was possible for single individuals to be 
part of such tight-knit social networks that they 
would be relatively unaware of the stigma of their 
own speech forms, even when surrounded by 
community members who perceived the stigma. 
Santa Ana and Parodi follow Kerswill’s (1994) 
idea of nestedness of speech communities (and 
propose four nested levels), focusing on defining 
speech communities only in reference to the lin-
guistic variable, setting aside all considerations of 
the social function of language (1998: 33). This 
particular criterion turns out to be a major differ-
ence in the definition of the role that individuals 
play in linguistic communities. Is it the case that 
the use of linguistic variables and the presence of 
associated evaluative behaviours (following 
Labov) are the primary criteria for delimiting 
speech communities? As was discussed above, 
scholars working from an ethnographically- or 
historically-oriented perspective might disagree: 
social functions of language such as participation 
in speech genres, cross-cutting discourse styles, 
self-identification and feelings of ethnolinguistic 
identity would certainly be some of the criteria for 
community membership according to scholars 
conducting ethnographic work (Spitulnik, 1997; 
Lo, 1999; Ahlers, 2006; Hill, 2006; Levon, 2007). 
On the other hand, some quantitative linguists 
would agree with Santa Ana and Parodi, not only 
Guy (1980), who argued that the relationship 
between the group and the individual would reveal 
that, given enough data, individuals would mirror 
the rank ordering and constraints of their commu-
nities; in addition, recent developments in com-
parative sociolinguistics have advocated both 
historical and contemporary grouping and differ-
entiation of speech communities precisely on 
the basis of the ranking and ordering of variable 
constraints (Poplack and Tagliamonte, 1991; 
Poplack 2001; Horvath and Horvath, 2003; for a 
review of method see Tagliamonte, 2002). Still 
other scholars, especially in historically-oriented 
creole studies, follow a mixed method of triangu-
lating variable constraint analysis with historical 
events that refer to the social life of language in 
the community (Rickford, 1999). Carpenter (2005) 
goes so far as to divide the age groups of her 
speakers according to major historical events in 
the community that distinguished various phases 
of racism and contact for African-Americans. 
Here the epistemological status of emic vs etic 
classifications begins to emerge; we will return 
to this point in the section on communities of 
practice.
Kerswill (1994) tests the Labovian model of 
speech communities further, this time challenging 
the assumption that members of a speech com-
munity must share a uniform structural [language] 
base (Labov, 1989: 2), a criterion that would 
exclude persons who are not originally from the 
community, community members in contact with 
other varieties, as well as communities undergo-
ing language shift (Romaine, 1992; Dorian, 1994; 
Ahlers, 2006). In his study of rural Stril migrants 
to the city of Bergen, Norway, Kerswill makes the 
argument that migrants, despite their variable 
realizations in the production of Bergen variables, 
nevertheless interpret the production of Bergen 
features relative to their own Strilelandet phonol-
ogy, and in fact construct some of their own pres-
tige norms. For example, the lowering of schwa, 
ordinarily a non-standard feature in native Bergen 
production, is reinterpreted by Stril migrants as a 
prestige feature (they use more of it in formal 
contexts), perhaps giving a sense of sounding 
more like a true Bergener (Kerswill, 1994: 144–5). 
Not only is this shift in production creating a sort 
of micro-speech community, since the Stril 
migrants all agree on the direction of this style-
shifting, but this production norm differentiates 
Stril migrants from Bergeners as well as from 
non-migrated Strils. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
186
Crucially, however, this interpretation would be 
unavailable if one studied migrated Strils sepa-
rately from Bergeners: Kerswill argues for the 
necessity of interpreting variation in the whole 
community rather than restricted parts of it. We 
might understand these studies as a means of dis-
covering micro-norms and emergent innovations 
which, if understood through the close analysis of 
individual speech, can shed light on the processes 
of actuation of linguistic change (Weinreich, 
Labov and Herzog, 1968). 
13.3 THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALS
The close, contextually-rich analysis of individu-
als’ speech advocated by Kerswill (1994) has been 
a growing part of quantitative sociolinguistics 
(though seeded from the beginning in Labov’s 
earliest work), with the growth attributed by some 
(Johnstone, 1996; Coupland, 2001; Dodsworth, 
2005) to a shift from more structure-based to more 
agency-based theories of language, and roughly 
from macro-oriented to micro-oriented approaches 
(Mendoza-Denton, 2002). An ethnographic turn 
within quantitative sociolinguistics (Bayley, 2002) 
as well as the rapprochement between sociolin-
guistics and linguistic anthropology (Duranti, 
2003) have contributed to this shift as well. One of 
the main features of the trend toward studying 
individuals has been the re-theorization of Labov’s 
original concept of style. 
Theorizing style
From the perspective of sociolinguistics, linguistic 
style has been largely understood in a statistical-
correlational frame, and variously viewed as a 
class-stratified byproduct of formality and atten-
tion paid to speech (Labov, 1972) – as a phenom-
enon where speakers actively design their speech 
for a specific audience (Coupland, 1980; Bell, 
1994), or as the codified reflex of repetition and 
habituation. A more recent line of work in this 
area (Eckert, 2000; Mendoza-Denton, 2002; Half 
Moon Bay Collective, 2007; Podesva, 2008) has 
sought to expand sociolinguistic understanding by 
viewing style as a jointly-accomplished perform-
ance between interlocutors, and by taking its 
study beyond social stratification to look at com-
munities of practice and beyond single linguistic 
units to include discourse and interaction-level 
processes. 
In theorizing style beyond the dualisms of 
formality and informality, Coupland (1980) and 
Bell (1984) both investigate the ways in which 
individuals (a travel agent and a newsreader, 
respectively) deploy the linguistic resources avail-
able to them to accommodate and reflect their 
audience’s expectations. Bell (1984) called it 
audience design, and took us beyond the construct 
of attention paid to speech, which had been used 
by Labov (1972) to explain the difference between 
formal and informal styles within a single speaker 
(the more attention paid to speech, the more 
formal the style), to new territory where one could 
imagine that individual speakers were actively 
planning and calibrating how they were going to 
sound to different interlocutors, whether they 
were addressees, auditors or overhearers. Bell 
assumed that ‘persons respond mainly to other 
persons, that speakers take the most account of 
their hearers in designing their talk’ (Bell, 1984: 
159). After this point, the study of individuals and 
their stylistic dimensions became a productive 
new area that allowed varying combinations of 
Coupland’s social-psychological approach of 
accommodation with the in-depth case study 
methods that were more reminiscent of anthropol-
ogy than the sociologically-oriented random-
sample urban studies that had been dominant 
through the 1970s and early 1980s. Johnstone 
(1996) effectively spearheads the call for more 
attention to individuals in language, while 
Rickford and McNair-Knox (1994) provided fur-
ther confirmation of Coupland and Bell’s claims 
by showing that a single speaker, whom they nick-
named Foxy Boston, would style-shift not only in 
response to different addressees, but also style-
shift across different topics in an interview. 
Mendoza-Denton, Hay and Jannedy (2003) show 
that the talk show host Oprah Winfrey similarly 
style-shifts according to the ethnicity of referees 
(persons she is referring to) in her deployment of 
variably monophthongized /ay/, an African-
American English variable.
Radical changes in how we think about indi-
viduals and communities become necessary if we 
are to incorporate the findings of new studies of 
style. Here, individuals command more than just 
formal and informal styles, and there is no 
community-wide agreement on a hierarchy of 
which styles are more prestigious, since even 
informal styles are thought to be performed and 
involve attention paid to speech (Schilling-Estes, 
1998, 2002). A crucial point in the new studies of 
style is that individuals may belong to more than 
one subcommunity, and in many cases the sub-
communities themselves will be defined in terms 
of networks or practices and will merge, overlap 
or otherwise coalesce to form even larger com-
munities. Podesva (2008) follows Eckert (2003) 
and Irvine (2001) in advancing the claim that 
styles take meaning in relation to one another. In 
his study of the stylistic resources of a gay San 
Francisco doctor named Heath, Podesva shows 

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
187
how the phonetic features of stop release and fal-
setto differ in distribution and combine with other 
features to create at least two distinct styles, or 
personae, for Heath: caring doctor, while he is 
interacting with his patients; and gay diva, when 
he is at a barbecue with friends (2008: 4–5). Heath 
is thus part of two subcommunities (let’s call them 
communities of practice): San Francisco medical 
professionals and San Francisco middle-class gay 
men. These two subcommunities would be part of 
the larger San Francisco Bay Area community. 
Hence we find that the relationships between 
styles, individuals and communities described by 
the Labovian framework are quite different from 
the relationships envisioned in current studies of 
individual styles. These differences are most 
apparent for the researchers known as the third 
wave of variation theory (Eckert, 2005), often 
working in the framework of communities of 
practice.
13.4 COMMUNITIES OF PRACTICE
In addition to speech communities and social net-
works, the concept of communities of practice 
(CofP) is one of the main analytic tools used to 
understand communities in sociolinguistics. 
Pioneered by Lave and Wenger (1991), with 
strong roots in the practice theory of Bourdieu 
(1978), the Cofp framework has been elaborated 
in Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (1992) and 
Wenger (1998) (for a review see Meyerhoff, 
2001). Communities of practice can be defined via 
three criteria (Wenger, 1998: 73–83): (a) mutual 
engagement, (b) a joint enterprise and (c) a shared 
repertoire. Broadly speaking, CofPs are composed 
of individuals who routinely interact in a joint 
activity (a practice that structures their engage-
ment), and it is through the routine and recurrent 
engagement in these practices that they develop a 
shared repertoire, linguistic and non-linguistic. A 
CofP typically describes a small, locally-relevant 
group such as a family, or a card-playing group, or 
a corporate subculture. The classic examples are 
the apprentice tailors studied by Lave and Wenger 
and the high school students studied by Eckert 
who labelled themselves jocks and burnouts, and 
had correspondingly different behaviour toward 
school norms and vowels to match.
Members of a CofP can name and recognize 
each other as being engaged in the practice, 
and crucially this emic (member-categorizing) 
perspective is also shared with social network 
theorists, and contrasts with the etic (researcher-
categorizing) perspective adopted in most other 
quantitative sociolinguistic work. Both Eckert 
(2000) and Wagner (2008), for instance, created 
elaborate social network diagrams, from partici-
pant observation and by interviewing students at 
high schools in Detroit and Philadelphia, respec-
tively. It would be fair to say that, within sociolin-
guistics, one of the hallmarks of CofP work is an 
emphasis on ethnographic methods, often result-
ing in the combination of participant-observation 
methodology with quantitative linguistic work 
that is characteristic of variation’s third wave.
Although some scholars (Bucholtz, 1999) reject 
speech communities as a language-based unit of 
analysis which is incapable of more broadly 
addressing social theory, in fact CofPs encompass 
a wider range of phenomena (including non-
linguistic phenomena) than speech communities 
and can thus make different predictions. This cre-
ates an interesting tension that I will illustrate with 
reference to my own work.
The disjunct between what might be found in a 
CofP analysis vs a speech community framework 
is especially striking. At the outset I will state that 
I do not believe that one or other framework is 
‘right’, or that one provides consistently better 
results than the other. Most of the time, there is no 
way to evaluate the different predictions that 
speech communities vs social network analyses vs 
CofPs might make because researchers ordinarily 
collect their data within a single set of assump-
tions. I myself have collected the data I present 
below ethnographically and within the CofP 
framework (for reasons explained in Mendoza-
Denton (2008) where a full quantitative account 
is presented), but here I will stress some of the 
ethnography-language data mismatches for 
expository purposes.
For my analysis of two communities of prac-
tice, the Norteña and Sureña female gang mem-
bers of Sor Juana High School in Northern 
California, I conducted in-depth ethnography over 
the course of more than two years on the high 
school campus and in the community. Through 
participant observation and interviews, I was able 
to identify CofPs corresponding to different 
groups of young Latinos in the high school; for 
the linguistic measurements I focused primarily 
on the girls. The most vigorously marked and 
defended oppositions were between the core 
Norteña and the core Sureña gang members, each 
identifying with different aspects of the Mexican-
American migration experience. The Sureñas 
claimed a recent-immigrant, Mexico-oriented cul-
tural identity, whereas the Norteñas saw them-
selves as being American minorities, but wholly 
American. These distinctions permeated every 
aspect of their recorded discourse and observable 
behaviour. Semiotically opposed, they claimed 
not only separateness but outright hostility. 
Norteñas and Sureñas wore colour-coded clothing 
(red and blue, respectively), listened to different 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
188
symbolic music, had differing language ideolo-
gies and got into fights with each other. But were 
they really so different? Although real violence 
was at stake in their claims, and they protested at 
the suggestion of being compared to each other, 
the purely linguistic data on tensing and raising of 
/I/ > [i] told a different story: core Norteña and 
Sureña girls had very similar linguistic behaviour, 
both with high rates of /I/ raising, and the groups 
that exhibited differences from them were girls 
who did not share the gang networks, the Latina 
Jocks and some girls who called themselves the 
Disco Girls and who were participating in African-
American oriented hip-hop culture. The Latina 
Jocks and the Disco Girls, who named each other 
in friendship networks, would not have shown up 
as different in a classic Labovian social-index 
scale, even if we took their parents’ education and 
social-class background into account: too many of 
the Latina Jocks’ parents had migratory histories 
indistinguishable from those of the Sureñas, earn-
ing the same amount of money and living in the 
same neighbourhoods (though as Kerswill (1994) 
points out, perhaps looking into parental social-
class background – and racialized status in Mexico, 
I would add – prior to migration might yield some 
different results). The point here is that the ‘social 
facts’ gathered here were complicated by the 
‘sociolinguistic facts’. As I mentioned before, one 
is not better or worse, and with triangulation a 
fuller picture has emerged. It is entirely possible 
that the variable measured was simply not very 
sensitive to the Norteña/Sureña identity dimen-
sion, and that other variables still lurk in the data 
that would show this opposition more robustly 
(see an especially relevant discussion by Bayley, 
2002). In any case, the CofP analytic framework 
uncovered rich patterning that would have been 
ignored in a traditional speech communities anal-
ysis. For Labov, the problem of actuation is 
... not a search for individuals, but rather for social 
locations and social types. The leaders of linguistic 
change are not individual inventors of a certain 
form, but rather those who, by reason of their 
social histories and patterns of behavior, will 
advance the ongoing change most strongly (Labov, 
2001: 34). 
In focusing on the positioning of individuals with 
respect to broad sweeping changes (are they ahead 
of or behind the curve?), this perspective misses 
the importance of clustering in the construction of 
styles and personae.
A feature of Cofp work is that, because it can 
concentrate on the styles that are built up around 
specific features, it allows for the historical inves-
tigation of styles, something that is not currently 
possible in the speech communities framework. 
Certainly speech-community modelling is the 
bedrock of the historical investigation of language 
change, but recognizing overtly-named, and sali-
ent, styles or personae has allowed a completely 
new kind of inquiry. Zhang (2005) looks histori-
cally to find that speakers draw on preexisting 
resources to establish the social meaning of lin-
guistic variation, and that sociolinguistic mean-
ing-making is a cumulative endeavour. She traces 
Beijing rhotacization back to Qing-dynasty litera-
ture in the construction of a specific social 
type, the Beijing smooth operator, who is a male, 
working-class, Beijing vernacular speaker with a 
high degree of rhotacization. Looking historically 
at styles and personae is a novel development 
within third-wave variationist sociolinguistics, 
one that can find productive synergy with histori-
cal linguistics and the study of language change.
13.5  PERFORMANCES: DO WE ALWAYS 
NEED TO PICK A VARIABLE?
One further productive point of tension in the lit-
erature arises from the classic definition of a vari-
able, ‘a construct that unites a class of fluctuating 
variants within a language set’ (Wolfram, 1991: 
23). In this conceptualization, a variable reflects a 
decision point at which a speaker chooses between 
alternative ways of saying the same thing. But 
what if, in performance, individuals did not 
always need to pick a variable? What if the vari-
ants did not have to fluctuate, but could be used 
simultaneously? Quantitative sociolinguistics 
does not have a way of modelling this kind of 
situation, but it is worthwhile to draw attention to 
the phenomenon Woolard terms bivalency, ‘the 
use by a bilingual of words or segments that could 
“belong” equally, descriptively and even prescrip-
tively, to both codes’ (Woolard, 1999: 7). This 
particular strategy in bilingualism calls attention 
to forms that resolutely belong to both of the 
source languages. Woolard argues that this is an 
agentive, and underanalysed, strategy on the part 
of bilingual speakers. Woolard provides an exam-
ple from a Catalan comedian whose comedy lies 
precisely in not resolving for the audience whether 
he is speaking Castilian or Catalan, creating ideo-
logical uncertainty in a sociolinguistic situation in 
which language choice is fraught with tension. A 
somewhat different example comes from Kerswill 
(1994: 141–2) who, in his study of rural–urban 
migration in Norway, identified novel pronuncia-
tions by Stril migrants of Bergen words with mid-
front vowels. Thus, the word for ‘freedom’, 
/fri:hεit/ in Stril dialects and /fri:he:t/ in Bergen, 
becomes /fri:hε:t/ in the speech of Stril migrants 
to Bergen, despite the existence of /e:/ in 

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
189
Stril dialects. The use of /ε:/ can be interpreted as 
a strategy of neutrality, this vowel being much 
more frequent in Stril than /e:/ – the inverse being 
the case in Bergen. Together with the assignment 
of a new sociolinguistic function to the Bergen 
lowering of schwa, this ‘mixed’ strategy adds evi-
dence to the argument of the creation of a new 
micro-community that takes elements from both 
its source and target linguistic varieties.
Some researchers have understood these syn-
cretic elements as ‘substratal interference’, but I 
follow Woolard in arguing for a deeper analysis 
that looks at the interactional context of bivalent 
utterances to understand what speakers are actively 
constructing as they creatively and aesthetically 
combine linguistic elements (see also Johnstone, 
1996; Schilling-Estes, 1998). 
Not only do the variants not need to fluctuate 
but also we find that a specific variable usage 
could have a different social indexicality depend-
ing on the context and the time course of the 
event. Agha (1994), in a discussion of honorifica-
tion and T/V forms, observes 
… no two tokens of T or V can necessarily be inter-
preted as alike. Consequently, even if an individual 
consistently uses T forms over an entire stretch of 
discourse, different tokens of T may reflect distinct 
configurations of situational variables at different 
points in the same discourse. Silverstein suggests 
that the data of honorific usage does not permit 
any kind of ‘social semantic’ calculus at all. Rather, 
the norms of usage in some particular community 
indexically associate linguistic categories with mul-
tiple, alternative configurations of contextual fac-
tors that become apparent only in the T or V usage 
responding to the one at issue, confirming, as it 
were, or disconfirming its invoked social dimen-
sions ‘in play’ (Agha, 1994: 280).
Conceiving of styles in performance – creative, 
agentive, and unfolding through time, legible to 
addressees and still with enough room for innova-
tion – is a hallmark of modern sociolinguistics’ 
view of how individuals use and shape language.
13.6 CONCLUSION
This chapter has traced some of the current issues, 
tensions and controversies in sociolinguistics 
regarding the constitution of communities and the 
relationship of individuals to communities. We 
have covered the variationist beginnings of the 
notion of speech communities, as well as the 
understanding of the term in the tradition of eth-
nography of speaking. Putting that notion to the 
test, we found that various scholars working with 
non-homogeneous speech communities found it 
necessary to expand the definition, calling for 
attention to the individuals that make up the com-
munities. Retheorizing style in variation theory 
has been a consequence of the attempt to under-
stand how individual repertoires fit into larger 
social patterns, and these questions have also 
given rise to new frameworks such as the com-
munity of practice concept. We have noted the 
dearth of work that can compare predictions 
and findings made under the speech communities 
or social networks or community of practice 
approaches. New understandings of style and indi-
vidual variation allow for the ambiguity and biva-
lency of some linguistic variables, and place an 
emphasis on clustering, historicity and the unfold-
ing of stylistic aggregates either through time or 
as the accretion of stylistic moves into personae. 
Future directions include further exploration of 
the historical dimensions of styles and personae, 
placing those histories side by side with accounts 
of language variation and change.
REFERENCES
Agha, A. (1994) ‘Honorification’ Annual Review of 
Anthropology 3: 277–302.
Ahlers, J. (2006) ‘Framing discourse: creating community 
through native language use’, Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 16(1): 58–75.
Anderson, B. (2006) Imagined Communities. London, 
New York: Verso. (1st edn, 1983.)
Bauman, R. (1983) Let Your Words be Few: Symbolism of 
Speaking and Silence Among Seventeenth-Century 
Quakers. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Bauman, R. and Sherzer, J. (eds) (1974) Explorations in the 
ethnography of speaking. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bayley, R. (2002) ‘The quantitative paradigm’, in P. Trudgill, 
J. Chambers and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), Handbook of 
Language Variation and Change. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bayley, R. and Langman, J. (2004) ‘Variation in the group and 
the individual: Evidence from second language acquisition’, 
International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language 
Teaching. Volume 42, Issue 4, Pages 303–18.
Bell, A. (1984) ‘Language style as audience design’, Language 
in Society, 13: 145–204.
Bickerton, D. (1971) ‘Inherent variability and variable rules’, 
Foundations of Language, 7: 457–92.
Blom, J. and Gumperz J. J. (1972) ‘Social meaning in linguistic 
structure: Codeswitching in Norway’. In John Gomperz and 
Dell Hymes (eds.) Directions in Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Holt, Reinhart and Winston, pp. 407–34.
Bloomfield, L. (1933) Language. New York: Henry Holt And 
Company.
Bourdieu, P. (1978) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
190
Bucholtz, M. (1999) ‘Why be normal? Language and Identity 
Practices in a Community of Nerd Girls’, Language in 
Society, 28: 203–23.
Carpenter, J. (2005) ‘The invisible community of the lost 
colony: African American English on Roanoke Island’, 
American Speech, 80(3): 227–55.
Carpenter, J. and Hilliard, S. (2005) ‘Shifting parameters of 
individual and group variation: African American English on 
Roanoke Island’, Journal of English Linguistics, 33: 
161–84.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Coupland, N. (1980) ‘Style-shifting in a Cardiff work setting’, 
Language in Society, 9(1): 1–12.
Coupland, N. (2001) ‘Introduction: sociolinguistic theory and 
social theory’, in N. Coupland, S. Sarangi and C. Candlin 
(eds), Sociolinguistics and Social Theory. London: Addison-
Wesley Longman.
Dodsworth, R. (2005) ‘Linguistic variation and sociological 
consciousness’. PhD dissertation, Ohio State University.
Dorian, N. C. (1994) ‘Varieties of variation in a very small 
place: social homogeneity, prestige norms, and linguistic 
variation’, Language, 70: 631–96.
Duranti, A. (2003) ‘Language as culture in U.S. anthropology’, 
Current Anthropology, 44: 323–35.
Durkheim, E. (1893) De la division du travail social: étude de 
l’organisation des sociétés supérieures. Paris: Félix Alcan.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. (2003) ‘The meaning of style’. Texas Linguistic 
Forum, 47: 41–53.
Eckert, P. (2005) ‘Variation, convention, and social meaning’, 
plenary address delivered at the Linguistic Society of 
America annual meeting. Downloaded 30 May 2009 from 
http://www.stanford.edu/~eckert/thirdwave.html.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992) ‘Think practically 
and look locally: language and gender as community-
based practice’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 21: 
461–90.
Eisenlohr, P. (2007) ‘Creole publics: language, cultural citizen-
ship, and the spread of the nation in Mauritius’, Comparative 
Studies in Society and History, 49(4): 968–96.
Gumperz, J. J. (1958) ‘Dialect differences and social stratifica-
tion in a North Indian Village’, American Anthropologist, 
60(4): 668–81.
Gumperz, J. J. (1962) ‘Types of linguistic communities’, 
Anthropological Linguistics, 4: 28–40. (Reprinted (1972) in 
J. A. Fishman (ed.), Readings in the Sociology of Language. 
The Hague: Mouton. pp. 460–72.)
Gumperz, J. J. (1996) in J. J. Gumperz and S. C. Levinson 
(eds), Rethinking Linguistic Relativity (Introduction to part 
IV). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 359–73.
Gumperz, J. J. (1968) ‘The speech community’, in D. L. Sills 
(ed.), International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences. 
New York: Macmillan. pp. 381–6.
Guy, G. R. (1980) ‘Variation in the group and the individual: 
the case of final stop deletion’, in W. Labov (ed.), Locating 
Language in Time and Space. New York: Academic Press. 
pp. 1–36.
Half Moon Bay Collective (2007) ‘The elements of style’, 
poster presented at New Ways of Analyzing Variation 
Conference, Philadelphia, PA.
Herzfeld, M. (2001) Anthropology: Theoretical Practice in 
Culture and Society. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hill, J. H. (2006) ‘The ethnography of language and language 
documentation’, in J. Gippert and N. Himmelmann (eds), 
Essentials of Language Documentation. Berlin: Walter de 
Gruyter.
Horvath, B. M. and Horvath, R. J. (2003) ‘A closer look at the 
constraint hierarchy: order, contrast, and geographic scale’, 
Language Variation and Change, 15(2):143–70.
Hymes, D. (1962) ‘The ethnography of speaking’, in 
T. Gladwin and W. Sturtevant (eds), Anthropology and 
Human Behavior. Washington, DC: Anthropological Society 
of Washington. pp. 13–53.
Hymes, D. H. (1974) Foundations of Sociolinguistics. 
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Irvine, J. (2001) ‘“Style” as distinctiveness: the culture 
and ideology of linguistic differentiation’, in P. Eckert and 
J. R. Rickford (eds), Style and Sociolinguistic Variation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 21–43.
Jackson, J. (2006) Getting an edge in wordwise: the social and 
productive role of political oratory and cartooning in 
Malagasy democratic political process. PhD Dissertation, 
Yale University.
Keenan, E. O. (1974) ‘Norm-makers, norm-breakers: uses of 
speech by men and women in a Malagasy community’, in 
R. Bauman and J. Sherzer (eds), Explorations in the 
Ethnography of Speaking. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Kerswill, P. (1994) Dialects Converging: Rural Speech in Urban 
Norway. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnstone, B. (1996) The Linguistic Individual: Self-Expression 
in Language and Linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1989) ‘The exact description of the speech 
community: short-a in Philadelphia’, in R. Fasold and 
D. Schiffrin (eds), Language Change and Variation. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 1–57.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change: Social 
Factors. Malden and Oxford: Blackwell. 
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Levon, E. (2007) ‘National discord: language, sexuality and 
the politics of belonging in Israel’. PhD dissertation, 
New York University.
Lo, A. (1999) ‘Codeswitching, speech community member-
ship, and the construction of ethnic identity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 3(4): 461–79.
Mæhlum, B. (1996) ‘Code-switching in Hemnesberget – myth 
or reality?’, Journal of Pragmatics, 25: 749–61.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2002) ‘Language and identity’, in 
P. Trudgill, J. Chambers and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 475–99.

INDIVIDUALS AND COMMUNITIES
191
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008) Homegirls: Language and 
Cultural Practice Among Latina Youth Gangs. London: 
Blackwell.
Mendoza-Denton, N., Hay, J. and Jannedy, S. (2003) 
‘Probabilistic sociolinguistcs: beyond variable rules’, in 
R. Bod, J. Hay and S. Jannedy (eds), Probabilistic Linguistics. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. pp. 98–138.
Mendoza-Denton, N. and Jannedy, S. (forthcoming) ‘Semiotic 
layering through gesture and intonation: a case study of 
complementary and supplementary multimodality in politi-
cal speech’.
Meyerhoff, M. (2001) ‘Dynamics of differentiation: on social 
psychology and cases of language variation’, in 
N. Coupland, S. Sarangi and C. N. Candlin (eds), Sociolingui-
stics and Social Theory. Harlow: Longman. pp. 61–87.
Meyerhoff, M. and Walker, J. (2007) ‘The persistence of vari-
ation in individual grammars: copula absence in ‘urban 
sojourners’ and their stay-at-home peers, Bequia (St 
Vincent and the Grenadines)’, Journal of Socioling uistics, 
11(3): 346–66.
Neustupný, J. V. (1978) Post-structural Approaches to 
Linguistics. Tokyo: University of Tokyo Press.
Parsons, T. (1964) Essays in Sociological Theory. New York: 
Free Press.
Patrick, P. L. (2002) ‘The speech community’, in J. K. 
Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), The 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 573–602. 
Podesva, R. (2008) ‘Three sources of stylistic meaning’, Texas 
Linguistic Forum. Proceedings of the Symposium about 
Language and Society – Austin, 15(51): 1–10.
Poplack, S. (2001) African American English in the Diaspora. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Poplack, S. and Tagliamonte, S. (1991) ‘African American 
English in the diaspora: evidence from old-line Nova 
Scotians’, Language Variation and Change, 3: 301–39.
Rickford, J. R. (1986) ‘The need for new approaches to social 
class analysis in sociolinguistics’, Language and 
Communication, 6(3): 215–21.
Rickford, J. R. (1999) African American Vernacular English. 
London: Blackwell.
Rickford, J. R. and McNair-Knox, F. (1994) ‘Addressee- and 
topic-influenced style shift’, in D. Biber and E. Finegan 
(eds), Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 235–76.
Romaine, S. (ed.) (1992) Sociolinguistic Variation in Speech 
Communities. London: Edward Arnold.
Santa Ana, O. and Parodi, C. (1998) ‘Modeling the speech 
community: configurations and variable types in the 
Mexican Spanish setting’, Language in Society, 27: 23–51.
Schieffelin, B. (1984) ‘Ade: a sociolinguistic analysis of a 
relationship’, in J. Baugh and J. Sherzer (eds), Language in 
Use: Readings in Sociolinguistics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. pp. 229–43.
Schilling-Estes, N. (1998) ‘Investigating “self-conscious” 
speech: the performance register in Ocracoke English’, 
Language and Society, 27: 53–83.
Schilling-Estes, N. (2002) ‘Investigating stylistic variation’, in
J. K. Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), The 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 375–401.
Sherzer, J. (1983) Kuna ways of speaking: An ethnographic 
perspective. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Spitulnik, D. (1996) ‘The social circulation of media discourse 
and the mediation of communities’, Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 6: 161–87.
Tagliamonte, S. (2002) ‘Comparative sociolinguistics’, in J. K. 
Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), The 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 729–63.
Wagner, S. (2008) Linguistic change and stabilization in the 
transition from adolescence to adulthood. PhD Dissertation, 
University of Pennsylvania.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. (1968) ‘Empirical 
foundations for a theory of language change’, in 
W. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for Historical 
Linguistics, Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
pp. 97–195.
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of Practice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Williams, G. (1992) Sociolinguistics: a Sociological Critique. 
London: Routledge.
Wolfram, W. (1991) ‘The linguistic variable: fact and fantasy’, 
Journal of American Speech, 66(1): 22–32.
Woolard, K. (1999) ‘Simultaneity and bivalency as strategies 
in bilingualism’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 8(1): 
3–29.
Zhang, Q. (2005) ‘A Chinese yuppie in Beijing: phonological 
variation and the construction of a new professional 
identity’, Language in Society, 34(3): 431–56.

14
14.1 INTRODUCTION
The first empirical linguistic studies to consider 
social class sought to demonstrate that language 
variation is structured at the community level. 
Although variability in language may appear 
unpatterned at the level of the individual speaker, a 
clear picture of structured variation emerges when 
groups of speakers are investigated together. 
‘Structure’ in this rubric refers, in part, to the social 
patterning of language variation; in the case of 
class, it refers to the correlation between a speak-
er’s location in a socioeconomic system and use of 
standard or non-standard language features.
For the purpose of quantitative analysis, social 
class was originally, and generally continues to be, 
represented as a set of discrete locations in a socio-
economic hierarchy. Although this approach carries 
several methodological and theoretical disadvan-
tages, it allowed the discovery of some patterns that 
persist across languages and settings. Later sociolin-
guistic approaches to class have produced new kinds 
of explanations for these patterns, also exploring 
non-economic components of class. Section 14.2 of 
this chapter describes early methods and theory, fol-
lowed by critiques in Section 14.3 and emerging 
sociolinguistic approaches to class in Section 14.4. 
Future directions are considered in Section 14.5.
14.2 EARLY APPROACHES
One of the earliest discussions of the relationship 
between language and social class is to be 
found in the extensive work of Basil Bernstein 
(1971), who posited a broad distinction between 
working-class and middle-class children’s dis-
course. Working-class children, Bernstein claimed, 
grow up speaking a ‘restricted’ or ‘context-spe-
cific’ code by virtue of their family and class cul-
ture, whereas middle-class children natively use 
an ‘elaborated’ or ‘context-independent’ code. 
While the concepts of restricted and elaborated 
codes evolved throughout Bernstein’s work, partly 
in response to linguists’ (mis-)reading of restricted 
as ‘deficient’, a basic distinction between them is 
that restricted codes are not used as often to 
express ‘universal’ meanings, showing a bias 
toward meanings that are tied to particular, imme-
diate situations. Because an elaborated code is the 
norm in academic institutions, middle-class stu-
dents have an inherent advantage relative to 
working-class students. Ivinson (Chapter 3) offers 
a detailed description of Bernstein’s view of social 
class and its relationship to semantic space (see 
Kerswill, 2007: 58–60 for a discussion of the evi-
dence for restricted and elaborated codes).
Within variationist sociolinguistics, William 
Labov largely established the early methods in the 
investigation of class through his quantitative 
studies of linguistic variation in New York City 
(NYC) and Philadelphia. Labov (1966a) hypoth-
esized that the variable deletion of word-final or 
preconsonantal /r/ in words such as four and park, 
and ultimately several other linguistic variables, 
would exhibit the following distribution in New 
York City: ‘given any groups of New York speak-
ers who are ranked in a scale of social stratifica-
tion, these groups will be ranked in the same order 
by their differential use of (r)’ (38). This hypoth-
esis offers the beginnings of the class model that 
dominated the early investigations of linguistic 
variation as a function of socioeconomic status. 
In particular, it implies that a ‘scale of social 
stratification’ is a useful model of the NYC social 
space, a perspective that led to compelling empir-
ical results but which was later challenged.
Social Class
R o b i n  D o d s w o r t h

SOCIAL CLASS
193
The hypothesis was first tested through the 
analysis of (r) as spoken by salespeople in three 
NYC department stores: Saks, the most expensive 
and fashionable; Macy’s, moderately priced; and 
Klein, the least expensive. Citing the sociologist 
C. Wright Mills’ (1951) assertion that salespeople 
appropriate their customers’ prestige, Labov took 
the salespeople as representatives of three broad 
socioeconomic groups. To elicit instances of word-
final and preconsonantal /r/, Labov approached a 
total of 264 salespeople, posing as a customer, and 
asked for the location of a department located on 
the fourth floor. After hearing the initial response 
of fourth floor, Labov leaned forward and said, 
‘Excuse me?’, thereby eliciting another answer of 
fourth floor spoken in ‘careful style’ (1966a: 46). 
Through this method, each speaker provided two 
instances of preconsonantal /r/ in fourth and two 
instances of word-final /r/ in floor. The results are 
shown in Figures 14.1 and 14.2, omitting tokens 
that were judged to have neither a fully constricted 
nor fully absent rhotic consonant.
The results confirm Labov’s hypothesis insofar 
as the salespeople associated with the highest 
socioeconomic status pronounce [r] at the highest 
rates, and those associated with the lowest class 
have the highest deletion rates. In addition, there 
is a trend towards more frequent pronunciation of 
[r] in careful as opposed to casual speech.
The results of the department-store survey 
motivated a large-scale study of five phonological 
variables through sociolinguistic interviews in the 
Lower East Side of NYC. The class model used in 
this study replicates, with some revisions, the 
model developed in 1961 by the Mobilization for 
Youth project, a federally-funded programme 
intended to address juvenile delinquency in NYC. 
Class is represented as a socioeconomic scale 
combining the three components of education 
level, family income and occupational rank.1 
Uniting three class indicators was considered 
advantageous, both in Labov’s NYC and 
Philadelphia studies, on the grounds that it would 
achieve more consistent results than any single 
indicator and would simultaneously tap multiple 
dimensions of socioeconomic status (cf. Labov, 
2001: 60). Trudgill (1974) uses a similar combined-
class scale but considers occupation the most 
important class indicator because, although eco-
nomic mobility is possible, class identity and the 
associated behaviours tend to remain constant: 
‘even the most affluent manual workers retain the 
values, ideas, behaviour patterns and general 
culture of the working class, and there has been 
little embourgeoisement of the British working 
class’ (Trudgill, 1974: 4). Macaulay (1977) takes 
Trudgill’s reliance on occupation to its extreme by 
constructing a class scale for Glasgow, Scotland, 
based only on occupational rank. This was done 
for several reasons: occupational data is relatively 
easy to collect and is not as sensitive a topic as 
income; the local schools kept records of each 
student’s father’s occupation; and there was no 
recent demographic survey of Glasgow that 
could serve as the background for constructing a 
combined-class index.
In fact, Labov’s Philadelphia study includes a 
comparison of the combined-class index with the 
individual components of occupation, education 
and house value: which shows the strongest, most 
consistent correlations with stable sociolinguistic 
variables? Multiple regression analyses of three 
stable sociolinguistic variables, with casual and 
careful speech treated separately, show occupation 
to be a more consistent predictor of linguistic 
variation than education or house value. However, 
the combined index outperformed any of the indi-
vidual class indicators. For that reason, a six-
category combined-class index was used in the 
subsequent analysis of linguistic changes in 
progress (Labov, 2001: 185–6).
Figure 14.1 Casual Speech (Based on Labov, 
1966a: 50).
70
60
50
40
30
Percent [r]
20
10
0
Sak’s
Macy’s
Klein
fourth
floor
Department Store
Figure 14.2 Careful Speech (Based on Labov, 
1966a: 50).
70
60
50
40
30
Percent [r]
20
10
0
Sak’s
Macy’s
Klein
fourth
floor
Department Store

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
194
The combined-class index, in various forms, 
has persisted in studies of sociolinguistic variation 
since Labov’s NYC study, as have many of the 
methods for constructing it. The occupation com-
ponent of the NYC class scale has four categories, 
derived from US Census categories and shown in 
Table 14.1.
Not directly represented in Table 14.1, but 
present in Labov’s sample, are women who do not 
work outside the home, and students. To assign 
occupational ranks to these speakers, Labov used 
the following procedure: 
(1) Husband’s occupation was used for all married 
women except in cases where the wife is working 
and the husband is retired; (2) widows who do not 
work were classified by their dead husband’s occu-
pation; (3) college students were assigned the 
highest occupational rank to represent their prob-
able occupational destinations (Labov, 1966a: 
178, endnote 5).
The education component is also a set of four 
categories (Table 14.2). In this case, each indi-
vidual’s educational achievement was used.
The family income component of the class 
scale (Table 14.3) controls for number of adults 
and number of children. 
For each speaker, occupational, educational 
and income rank were combined to produce a 
score between 0 and 9 on a linear class scale. 
Although this 10-point scale is divided into groups 
in various ways to show linguistic patterns, Labov 
broadly designates groups 0–2 as the ‘lower 
class’, groups 3–5 as the ‘working class’, groups 
6–8 as the ‘lower middle class’, and group 9 as the 
‘upper middle class’ (1966: 143).
Five primary phonological variables are exam-
ined in NYC:
1 Word-final or preconsonantal /r/ as described 
above.
2 The height of (eh) before voiced stops, voiceless 
fricatives and nasals, as in bag, pass and ham.
3 The height of (oh) as in caught, talk and dog.
4 The (th) as in thing, which is variably realized as 
a stop (ting) or fricative (thing).
5 The (dh) as in then, also realized as a stop (den) 
or fricative (then).
In addition, the alveolarization of the nasal in 
the (-ing) suffix (talkin vs talking), the fronting of 
(aw) as in how, and the raising and backing of (ay) 
as in why are investigated.
The results are consistent with the hypothesis 
that the variables would show class stratification, 
though several different patterns emerge. The first 
pattern, found for the variables (th), (dh) and 
(-ing), and idealized in Figure 14.3, is associated 
with ‘stable’ sociolinguistic variables,: i.e., those 
carrying social meaning but not undergoing 
change.2 The horizontal axis shows speaking tasks 
in the sociolinguistic interview that were designed 
to elicit speech at different locations along a care-
ful/casual continuum, style A being the most 
casual and D the most careful. The highest social 
classes show the least overall use of non-standard 
variants and, for all classes, rates of the non-
standard variant decline at approximately the 
same rate as formality increases. The gradual 
decline in the use of the standard linguistic form 
across styles has been understood as evidence that 
all speakers view the standard form as more pres-
tigious or proper; i.e. speakers from different class 
groups may show quantitative linguistic differ-
ences, but there exists a shared sociolinguistic 
norm concerning which forms are prestigious. 
Stable sociolinguistic variables may also pattern 
into two broad class groups – roughly working 
class and middle/upper class – as is the case for 
(th) and (dh) in NYC, rather than showing fine 
class gradations, as in Figure 14.3. Regardless of 
the number of discernible class groups, women 
Table 14.2 Educational rankings used in 
the linguistic survey of the Lower East Side 
of New York City
Educational rank
Description
IV
Completed some college or more
III
Finished high school
II
Completed some high school
I
Finished grade school or less
Source: Labov (1966a: 139)
Table 14.1 Occupational rankings used in the linguistic survey of the Lower East Side of 
New York City 
Occupational rank
Description
IV
Professionals, managers, and officials (salaried and self-employed)
III
Clerks and salesmen
II
Craftsmen and foremen; self-employed white- and blue-collar workers
I
Operatives, service workers, labourers, and permanently unemployed persons
Source: Labov (1966a: 139)

SOCIAL CLASS
195
generally show higher rates of the standard vari-
ants relative to men.
Some stable variables show ‘hypercorrection’, 
also called ‘crossover’, wherein the second-highest 
class shows lower rates of the non-standard vari-
ant than the uppermost class in formal speech 
contexts. This pattern is often considered evidence 
of linguistic insecurity, and general social insecu-
rity, by extension, on the part of the second-high-
est class. Other types of explanations are available, 
however. For example, Chung (2006) reports 
anecdotal evidence of Taiwanese Mandarin speak-
ers’ hypercorrect use of the standard Beijing 
Mandarin retroflex word-initial consonants 
zh-, ch- and sh- in words that normally have the 
vernacular dental forms z-, c- and s-, respectively. 
While the use of retroflex consonants does appear 
to reflect linguistic insecurity or an attempt at 
formality in some cases, in other cases Chung 
considers it an emphatic device, carrying true 
pragmatic meaning.
As Labov (2001: 81–2) observes, the basic pat-
tern for stable variables has been replicated in 
numerous, regionally-diverse studies, with varia-
bility in the magnitude of difference between 
classes and in the steepness of slopes along the 
stylistic axis.
A second type of variable, very similar in pat-
tern to stable sociolinguistic variables, is known 
as ‘change from above’, led by the uppermost 
social class and to some extent available for con-
scious evaluation. In NYC, (r) is a change from 
above; the prestige variant, [r], rises with class 
level, and each class also shows a roughly linear 
rise in percentage of [r] as speaking style becomes 
more careful. Because changes from above oper-
ate within public consciousness, they often show 
more pronounced hypercorrection relative to 
stable variables, particularly for women, and the 
female lead in the prestige form may be similarly 
more dramatic (Labov, 2001: 274–5). 
A third pattern is found for the variable (oh) in 
NYC and is associated with variables undergoing 
change ‘from below’, meaning below public con-
sciousness. Here the working class, or lower middle 
class, shows higher rates of the non-standard form 
Table 14.3. Educational rankings used in the linguistic survey of the Lower East Side of NYC 
New York City
Income rank
Description
Adjusted weekly income 
per equivalent adult
IV
More than nation’s median
$37.32 and above
III
More than Lower East Side median, but less than nation’s median
$25.01 to $37.31
II
More than minimum wage, but less than Lower East Side median
$18.01 to $25.00
I
Less than minimum wage
$18.00 and less
Source: Labov (1966a: 140)
Figure 14.3 Class pattern for stable linguistic variables.
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
Percent non-standard variant
Speaking style
30
20
10
0
A
B
C
D
lower
working
lower middle
upper middle
upper

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
196
than both the lower and middle classes, except in 
the most careful style (Figure 14.4). Labov terms 
this the ‘curvilinear’ pattern (1966a: 147).
The Philadelphia study, in fact, sets out to test 
the hypothesis that changes from below show the 
curvilinear pattern early in their progression. This 
hypothesis represents a shift away from previous 
claims that the highest socioeconomic classes 
lead language change. As Labov (1980) explains, 
the curvilinear hypothesis was motivated by 
parallel findings in three independent studies: 
the raising of (oh), (ay) and (aw) in NYC (Labov, 
1966a); the lenition of /ch/ in Panamanian 
Spanish (Cedergren, 1973); and the backing of 
(e), as in bet, before [l] in Norwich English 
(Trudgill, 1974).
The Philadelphia study class index combines 
occupation, education and house value; house 
upkeep and social mobility (i.e. head of house-
hold’s occupation relative to that of his/her par-
ents) are also examined but not included in the 
class index. The dependent variables include eight 
phonological changes in progress (Labov, 2001: 
165). Two of the eight are found to be the newest 
and most vigorous changes: the fronting of the 
(aw) nucleus as in how, and the fronting of the 
preconsonantal (ey) nucleus as in take. The results 
of multiple regression, including the independent 
variables of gender, age and class, show the upper 
working class to lead both of the new variables, 
though the significance level is weak in both cases 
( p < 0.10). By contrast, the changes nearing com-
pletion, particularly the fronting of (ae) before 
voiceless fricatives, nasal consonants and voiced 
stops (treated as three distinct variables), show no 
significant differentiation across the lower, middle 
and upper working classes, dropping off gradually 
in the lower middle, upper middle and upper 
classes (Labov, 2001: 168, Table 5.4). In other 
words, the older changes in progress have reached 
a working-class vs. middle-class distinction, while 
the newer changes show an overall upper-work-
ing-class lead. These findings are consistent with 
the curvilinear hypothesis.
Stable sociolinguistic variables, as noted, show 
a monotonic (linear) class distribution rather than 
the curvilinear pattern. However, the distinction is 
reliable only for adult speakers because adoles-
cent speakers tend to show disproportionately 
high rates of stigmatized variants for both stable 
variables and changes in progress. For that reason, 
Labov ultimately restates the curvilinear hypoth-
esis (2001: 460): ‘Stable sociolinguistic variables 
combine a flat age distribution for adults with a 
monotonic social class stratification; changes in 
progress combine a monotonic distribution in 
adult age groups with a curvilinear pattern in the 
socioeconomic hierarchy’.
Not every change in progress, from below, 
shows the curvilinear pattern; the social trajectory 
of a variable depends on several factors in addi-
tion to class, including the indexical meaning of 
the variable as it diffuses in time and space (e.g. 
Johnstone and Kiesling, 2008).
Generalizing Labovian methods 
and patterns
Several early large-scale urban studies both con-
firmed and extended Labov’s methods and results. 
Figure 14.4 Curvilinear pattern for changes from below.
60
50
40
30
20
Percent non-standard variant
10
lower
working
lower middle
upper
middle
upper
Social class
0

SOCIAL CLASS
197
Wolfram (1969), for example, investigated 48 
speakers of African-American English in Detroit, 
building a class model on the criteria of education, 
occupation, income and residency. Residency 
included the number of rooms in the speaker’s 
residence, the average number of rooms per 
person on the block and the percentage of houses 
with plumbing facilities. The resulting index 
scores were collapsed into four class categories: 
upper middle, lower middle, upper working and 
lower working. The linguistic variable of conso-
nant cluster reduction (CCR) – whereby words 
such as most are pronounced without the final 
consonant, as in mos’ – shows a linear class pat-
tern, with the highest classes showing the lowest 
CCR rates. Females show lower rates of CCR than 
males except in the upper working class, where 
the difference is reduced for monomorphemes 
such as mist and reversed for bimorphemes such 
as missed. This finding supports Labov’s conclu-
sion that women are more sensitive to socially-
diagnostic linguistic processes.
A second variable, theta-stopping – the pronun-
ciation of words like them as dem – shows a large 
distinction between the middle classes and work-
ing classes, a finding repeated in other work dis-
cussed below. Two further variables, the deletion 
or devoicing of final [d] and the deletion of final 
[r], show nearly linear class patterns. On the basis 
of these results, Wolfram concludes that class dif-
ferences are generally quantitative rather than 
qualitative; i.e. middle-class and working-class 
dialects differ chiefly in their frequencies of non-
standard linguistic forms, rather than in the pres-
ence or absence of those forms.
The findings reported in Trudgill’s (1974) 
study of linguistic variation in Norwich, England, 
follow patterns similar to those of Labov and 
Wolfram.3 The analysis of 60 speakers in Norwich 
employs a class model based on occupation, 
income, education, father’s occupation, type of 
housing and neighbourhood; the occupational 
categories were informed by the 1966 Registrar-
General occupational ranking. A total of 30 initial 
class categories were collapsed, based on linguis-
tic results, resulting in five class categories: 
middle middle class, lower middle class, upper 
working class, middle working class and lower 
working class. Third person singular –s deletion 
(she talk vs she talks) and 14 phonological varia-
bles show (often fine-grained) class sensitivity, 
with the lower classes using higher rates of non-
standard linguistic forms. In addition, some of the 
changes from below, including the lowering/back-
ing of (e) and the raising and diphthongization of 
(ae), show evidence of an upper-working-class or 
middle-working-class lead, consistent with the 
curvilinear hypothesis.
Macaulay (1977) offers yet more evidence for 
the structured nature of the relationship between 
language and class through a sociolinguistic survey 
of Glasgow. Following both the Registrar-General’s 
ranking of occupations and Kellas’ (1968) class 
model for Scotland, Macaulay uses a four-category 
class scale to categorize 48 speakers. Classes I and 
IIa correspond to the middle class, or non-manual 
labourers, while classes IIb and III correspond to 
working class/manual labourers. The linguistic 
variables examined are the vowels in hit, book, hat 
and now, plus the glottalization of the intervocalic 
or coda stop in words such as better and get. All of 
the variables show class stratification, with the 
largest quantitative gap generally found between 
the middle and working classes. Further, the sex 
and age groups (men, women, girls aged 15, boys 
aged 15, girls aged 10, boys aged 10) show nearly 
perfect in-group patterning of individuals by class, 
with the age 10 girls showing the only notable 
divergence from this pattern. Macaulay’s findings 
provide support for the use of occupation as a sole 
class indicator, and they are consistent with previ-
ous findings in showing a middle/working-class 
distinction.
Covert prestige
All of the preceding studies found higher rates of 
the non-standard linguistic forms produced by the 
lower classes, and yet both Labov and Trudgill – 
and many others – also found that in formal 
speech settings, most speakers’ rates of the stand-
ard forms increased significantly. Further, Labov’s 
speakers tended to overreport their use of standard 
forms. Labov takes these results as evidence of 
shared linguistic norms within the community: all 
speakers assign prestige to the standard linguistic 
forms. But why does the shared norm fail to result 
in uniform speech across socioeconomic classes? 
If everyone recognizes the standard forms as pres-
tigious, why do some of them use the non-stand-
ard forms at high rates, even in formal speech 
settings? Labov (1966b: 108) argues that in addi-
tion to the prestige of standard linguistic forms:
… One can’t avoid the implication that in New 
York City we must have an equal and opposing 
prestige for informal, working-class speech – a 
covert prestige enforcing this speech pattern. We 
must assume that people in New York City want to 
talk as they do, yet this fact is not at all obvious in 
any overt response that you can draw from inter-
view subjects (emphasis added).
The label ‘covert prestige’ implies that more 
than one kind of status drives the distribution of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
198
linguistic variables; the mainstream value of 
standard linguistic forms competes with some 
other value which is perhaps not legitimate at the 
top of the economic hierarchy. Specifically, Labov 
hypothesizes that working-class speech carries 
masculine or ‘tough’ connotations, desirable 
attributes for some. Trudgill (1972) provides evi-
dence for this position, and for covert prestige 
generally, through Norwich speakers’ self-reports 
of language use. Unlike Labov, Trudgill finds that 
men under-report their use of standard forms, 
while women over-report, and men’s self-reports 
are more accurate than women’s. He concludes 
that ‘privately and subconsciously, a large number 
of male speakers are more concerned with acquir-
ing prestige of the covert sort and with signaling 
group solidarity than with obtaining social 
status, as this is more usually defined’ (Trudgill, 
1972: 188).
Although the overt/covert dichotomy was later 
refined to allow for more variegated social mean-
ing and practice (Section 14.4), the basic insight 
that speakers employ linguistic variables toward 
multiple social ends remains a critical element in 
the interpretation of class-based variation.
Evidence for the productivity of the Labovian 
approach to class – categorical, economic, hierar-
chical and represented as a composite index – has 
been found through many studies of linguistic 
variation across languages and geographic regions, 
including: strong and weak palatalization of stops 
in Cairene Arabic (Haeri, 1996); the diphthongi-
zation of several vowels in Quebecois French 
(Santerre and Milo, 1978); the merger of unstressed 
mid-back vowels and the phonemic splitting of a 
post-alveolar fricative in a northern Russian dia-
lect (Kochetov, 2006); and others cited in Kerswill 
(2007). In addition to the large-scale urban studies 
already cited, see those in: Ottawa (Woods, 1979); 
Paris (Lennig, 1978); Belo Horizonte, Brazil (de 
Oliveira, 1983); Amman (Abdel-Jawad, 1981); 
Buenos Aires (Lavandera, 1975); San Juan 
(Cameron, 1991); Tokyo (Hibiya, 1988); Seoul 
(Chae, 1995); and others cited in Labov (2001).
Nevertheless, criticisms of the assumptions 
underlying the Labovian class paradigm, and 
alternatives to it, have called into question the 
explanatory power of these findings.
14.3  CRITIQUES OF THE EARLY 
CLASS MODELS
The use of ordered-class categories to investigate 
patterns of linguistic variation has met with several 
areas of criticism. A basic shortcoming which may 
be seen as having particular relevance for small 
communities is that the class categories determined 
by the researcher are not recognizable social 
groups from the perspective(s) of community 
members. This criticism need not imply that the 
class categories have no value, but that their 
explanatory power is limited. Milroy (1980: 14) 
argues this point, observing that a composite-class 
scale: 
… obviously does reflect social reality to a certain 
extent and is a sensible way of ordering large 
amounts of data such as those collected from a 
large sample of speakers in New York City. But we 
must not lose sight of the fact that the groups we 
end up with by segmenting our scale – such as 
‘lower class’, ‘working class’, ‘middle class’ – do 
not necessarily have any kind of objective, or even 
intersubjective, reality. … Membership of a group 
labelled ‘lower middle class’ does not necessarily 
form an important part of a person’s definition of 
his social identity.
Rickford (1986), drawing on Macaulay’s (1977) 
justification of occupation as a sole-class indica-
tor, similarly argues that a composite-class scale 
fails on ethnographic grounds, ignoring locally 
meaningful distinctions in socioeconomic (or 
other types of) status that vary by region and com-
munity. Despite the community-external validity 
of composite-class scales – people do indeed 
have varying levels of income, occupation and 
education – other types of status indicators may 
hold greater relevance for sociolinguistic patterns. 
Linguistic variation within a community arises not 
only from differential access to the standard lan-
guage but also from the symbolic marking of 
locally-recognized social identities. 
Rickford argues further that composite-class 
scales place too much importance on status or 
prestige, thereby ‘failing to take the economic 
relations and power asymmetries between classes 
into account’ (1986: 216). Class scales imply con-
sensual hierarchy: all community members recog-
nize wealthy and educated people as having the 
highest status. By contrast, conflict-based class 
theories (Marx, 1906; Weber, 1947) prioritize the 
antipathy between classes stemming from mate-
rial and ideological differences. For sociolinguis-
tic analysis, this paradigm predicts that members 
of the lower classes may aspire to different lin-
guistic standards than those in the middle and 
upper classes, in symbolic pursuit of in-group 
allegiance, rather than accommodating to upper-
class prestige standards.4 As Milroy (1980: 19) 
explains:
Thus, instead of positing a sociolinguistic contin-
uum with a local vernacular at the bottom and a 

SOCIAL CLASS
199
prestige dialect at the top, with linguistic move-
ment of individuals in a generally upward direc-
tion, we may view the vernacular as a positive 
force: it may be in direct conflict with standardized 
norms, utilized as a symbol by speakers to carry 
powerful social meanings and so resistant to exter-
nal pressures.
Here we return to the notion of ‘covert prestige’ 
but give it overt status: there are types of publicly 
acknowledged prestige that are not acquired 
through, and in fact may be compromised by, 
economic status. A hierarchical class model that 
ignores this ideological class conflict may pro-
duce valid empirical results but fail to engage the 
social processes that motivate them. More gener-
ally, Rickford and others (including Ash, 2002; 
Mallinson, 2007; Romaine (1984); Williams, 
1992; Woolard, 1985) argue for more purposeful 
and reflective incorporation of social theory in 
sociolinguistic approaches to class (see also 
Mallinson, this volume). Milroy and Milroy, refer-
ring to the uncritical importation of the traditional 
consensus-driven class model from sociology, 
even contend that ‘although many impressively 
consistent patterns of variation have emerged 
from urban sociolinguistic work, an adequate 
social framework within which to interpret the 
results is still lacking’ (1992: 2).
Rickford’s study of grammatical forms in Cane 
Walk, Guyana, illustrates the explanatory value of 
a conflict-based view of class, also showing that 
lower-class speakers may perceive that no per-
sonal gain will come from using standard linguis-
tic forms because the class structure is too rigid. 
Workers in the sugar plantation fields, members of 
the Estate Class, use standard English forms 
including first person pronoun ai with an average 
frequency of 18%, preferring non-standard forms 
such as the basilectal mi. By contrast, members of 
the Non-Estate Class, who tend to be skilled 
labourers or foremen, use ai with an average fre-
quency of 83%. This dramatic linguistic differ-
ence, Rickford contends, results from the rejection 
of standard English by the Estate Class, who have 
not experienced it as a means to upward mobility; 
they believe socioeconomic improvement will 
only be achieved through class struggle, rather 
than accommodation to the standard.
The assumption that all classes accommodate 
towards a single norm was motivated by the stylis-
tic patterns cited in Section 4.2, wherein speakers 
of all classes show higher frequencies of standard 
forms in formal speech settings. But as Rickford 
and others observe, shared ideology – knowing 
which linguistic forms are prestigious – need not 
result in shared accommodation to the prestige 
variety. In addition, sociolinguistic change, par-
ticularly change from below, can be viewed as 
evidence in support of a conflict model because 
social change generally results not from commu-
nity consensus but from some sort of tension 
(Milroy and Milroy, 1992: 3).
Another shortcoming of early approaches to 
class pertains to the classification of women. 
Typically, women were assigned the class level of 
their husbands (‘heads of household’) without 
independent justification for assuming that women 
derive their class identity from their husbands 
(Nichols, 1983). Unmarried women were given 
either the class rank of their fathers or evaluated 
on the basis of their own socioeconomic informa-
tion. The latter option has the disadvantage that 
women, to an even greater extent at the time of the 
early studies, tended to be excluded from prestig-
ious and high-paying occupations. As Nichols and 
others observe, these methods preclude the true 
comparison of women’s and men’s language, and 
they call into question the validity of the aggregate 
results. The problem here is inherent to the struc-
ture of the early class models; with a near-exclu-
sive focus on production (see Labov, 1966a: 138), 
the class index renders marginal anyone without a 
paid occupation.
There are several additional well-known prob-
lems with the early class indices. First, what justi-
fies the placement of boundaries between classes 
on the scale that results from combining income, 
education, occupation, etc.? Labov essentially treats 
the boundaries as artificial, using multiple class 
groupings to show sociolinguistic patterns. We may 
instead look for an approach to class that does not 
require the analysts themselves to create class 
boundaries in the absence of community-internal 
evidence. Secondly, discrete class groupings can be 
seen as overly static, not allowing for individual 
mobility. Labov (2001) does include mobility as a 
function of current occupation and father’s occupa-
tion, but in general an individual’s class position is 
treated as fixed rather than dynamic. Finally, the 
early class models defined class in isolation from 
other dimensions of social identity such as gender, 
ethnicity, age and geographic location. This prac-
tice is a particular problem in non-Western and 
Third-World societies, which have been the subject 
of relatively little quantitative investigation.
14.4  ALTERNATIVES TO THE EARLY 
CLASS MODELS
In response to the weaknesses of the early 
approaches to class, some alternative methods and 
perspectives emerged, though none has yet led to 
a full framework for analysing class-based lin-
guistic variation that has definitively replaced 
Labov’s paradigm.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
200
The linguistic market(s)
Sankoff and Laberge (1978) contend that group-
ing speakers according to their positions in a 
purely economic hierarchy neglects the fact that 
economic positions carry varying linguistic 
demands. For example, although a secretary in a 
high-profile firm may not occupy the upper middle 
class in terms of income, education or residence, 
the secretary must consistently use standard lan-
guage as a representative of the firm when talking 
to clients (cf. Macaulay, 1977: 115 for comments 
to this effect from a Glasgow personnel manager). 
A speaker’s use of standard language forms, 
Sankoff and Laberge argue, should be measured 
directly against the speaker’s need for the stand-
ard. Drawing from contemporary social/cultural 
theorists, they devised a ‘class’ index to serve this 
goal:
Adapting the notion of linguistic market devel-
oped by Bourdieu and Boltanski (1975), we under-
took to construct an index which measures 
specifically how speakers’ economic activity, taken 
in its widest sense, requires or is necessarily associ-
ated with, competence in the legitimized language 
(or standard, elite, educated, etc., language) 
(Sankoff and Laberge, 1978: 239).
For 120 Montreal French speakers, eight judges 
were asked to rate ‘the relative importance of the 
legitimized language in the socioeconomic life of 
the speaker’ (Sankoff and Laberge, 1978: 241) on 
the basis of life histories and the judges’ familiar-
ity with Montreal’s socioeconomic space. On this 
basis, each speaker was assigned a score on the 
‘linguistic market’ index. Three grammatical vari-
ables were examined: the indefinite plural subject 
pronoun ils/on, the auxiliary verb avoir/être, and 
qu’est-ce que/ce que as the syntactic head for 
dependent clauses and other embedded phrases. 
The speakers who were judged to occupy low 
positions on the linguistic market index, and thus 
to have little need for standard language forms, 
also used lower rates of the standard forms. These 
results (see also Sankoff et al., 1989) support the 
use of a linguistic market index as a substitute for 
the traditional economic class index.
In highlighting the varying economic relevance 
of standard language forms across positions in the 
socioeconomic system, the linguistic market index 
allows for a conflict-based approach to class, as 
championed by Rickford (1986). It also takes as 
given that the value of standard language is deter-
mined by the community’s socioeconomic system, 
thereby centralizing local social facts rather than 
imposing an externally constructed ‘class’ dimen-
sion. Woolard (1985) contends that the value of 
linguistic forms across mutually antipathetic 
social classes requires the assumption of ‘alterna-
tive linguistic markets’. In this view, instead of a 
single prestige-based market, the linguistic space 
consists of multiple markets associated with dif-
ferent social groups and thus attaching different 
values to the various available linguistic forms. 
The multiple values of a given linguistic variant 
therefore directly spring from class conflict and 
the local social space.
Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (1999) use a lin-
guistic market perspective to account for Labov’s 
(1990) findings in Philadelphia that among 
unskilled workers, women use higher rates of the 
non-standard (fronter) forms of (ae) and (aw) than 
men, but among professionals, women use lower 
rates of the non-standard variables. The same 
basic pattern emerges in Eckert’s (1989, 2000) 
data from Detroit-area high school speakers’ (uh) 
backing and (ay) raising: middle-class ‘jock’ girls 
show lower rates of the new, stigmatized variants 
than boys, while the working class ‘burnout’ girls 
use higher rates than the burnout boys. They con-
clude, ‘Such data suggest an extension of the 
generalization that women have to do much more 
than men simply to maintain their place in the 
standard language market. … women may have to 
use linguistic extremes in order to solidify their 
place, wherever it may be’ (Eckert and McConnell-
Ginet 1999: 195–196).
The linguistic market is also central to Eckert’s 
explanation of the curvilinear pattern. She observes 
that ‘there is an interpretation of [the curvilinear] 
pattern that suggests that the lower middle class 
constitutes the buffer between the opposed lin-
guistic markets, demonstrating a tension between 
participation in the standard and the vernacular 
markets’ (Eckert, 2000: 26). Conscious of this 
‘buffer’ status and also their (often) working-class 
roots, members of the lower middle class are lin-
guistically insecure.
Life-modes, networks and 
communities of practice
The role of local social realities in defining class, 
and evidence for the relevance of class conflict/
tension for sociolinguistics, are even more promi-
nent in subsequent approaches. Milroy and Milroy 
(1992) argue that an adequate model of sociolin-
guistic variation will link social class with infor-
mation about the density and multiplexity of 
social networks (for an overview of language and 
social networks, see Vetter, this volume). For 
example, they contend that the curvilinear pattern 
cited above, in which the middle socioeconomic 
groups lead linguistic changes from below, is 
explicable in terms of network structure. Both the 
lower and upper classes tend to have the most 

SOCIAL CLASS
201
dense and multiplex social networks, which stifle 
linguistic change among their members. (But see 
Kerswill and Williams’ 2005 study of working-
class residents of a newly-formed town for an 
example of the co-occurrence of uniplex network 
ties and low socioeconomic status.) The relatively 
weak and uniplex ties that characterize middle-
class networks enact no such conservative force, 
and so the middle classes are able to lead linguistic 
changes. 
More generally, Milroy and Milroy argue that 
the demonstrated correlations between network 
type and social class ‘suggest a route for con-
structing a two-level sociolinguistic theory, link-
ing small-scale structures such as networks, in 
which individuals are embedded and act purpo-
sively in their daily lives, with larger scale and 
more abstract social structures (classes) that deter-
mine relationships of power at the institutional 
level’ (1992: 16).
In view of the links between network and class, 
and the demonstrated importance of both for pat-
terns of linguistic variation, Milroy and Milroy 
posit the anthropologist Thomas Højrup’s (1983) 
concept of ‘life-mode’ as a useful integrated tool. 
Højrup recognized three life-modes in Western 
Europe, each resulting from the macroeconomic 
structure and defined partly in opposition to the 
others:
• Life-mode 1 describes those who are self-
employed in family businesses, where strong and 
multiplex network ties are essential to economic 
success.
• Life-mode 2 is that of unskilled or low-skilled 
wage earners – the working or lower middle 
class, using traditional terms. As long as these 
workers experience some economic insecurity, 
their class solidarity will ensure dense, multiplex 
networks.
• People with life-mode 3 are highly skilled wage 
earners, likely to have some managerial func-
tions and possess considerable career ambition. 
Because those in life-mode 3 are likely to be indi-
vidually competitive and geographically mobile 
and to separate work and family life, they are 
more likely to have loose-knit networks of the 
sort that do not impede linguistic change.
The concept of life-mode, Milroy and Milroy 
argue, represents the organic linking of network 
and class while also engaging class conflict, par-
ticularly in the distinction between life-modes 2 
and 3. The difference between strong and weak 
ties, they contend, and the economic determina-
tion of network features, ‘will further enable us to 
specify the conditions in which the linguistic 
norms of the groups are likely to be focused or 
diffuse, and the conditions in which they are open 
to, or resistant to, change’ Milroy and Milroy, 
1992: 241. With the notable exception of Lane 
(1998, 2000), subsequent research has not 
employed the life-mode approach to class.
Many of the insights derived from social net-
work studies are combined with the notion of lin-
guistic markets in the community of practice 
approach formulated by Eckert (2000).5 In this 
perspective, communities of practice are linked to 
class structures inasmuch as ‘people’s access and 
exposure to, need for, and interest in different 
communities of practice are related to where they 
find themselves in the world, as embodied in such 
things as class, age, ethnicity, and gender’ (Eckert, 
2000: 39). Stated differently, class and other 
macro-social structures are viewed as being 
instantiated by daily practices: ‘Ultimately, cate-
gories such as age, class, ethnicity, and gender are 
produced and reproduced in their differential 
forms of participation in communities of practice. 
And these categories are not produced separately, 
but co-produced’ (Eckert, 2000: 40). Therefore, 
class-related linguistic practices must be analysed 
in the context of locally meaningful social groups 
that are small enough for interactions – ‘the proc-
ess of making meaning’ – to be observed (Eckert, 
2000: 42). In this approach, the relationship 
between linguistic variables and economic status, 
as measured by traditional indicators, is still 
worthy of evaluation to the extent that it provides 
a foundation for the analysis of social meanings 
produced when linguistic forms are used in the 
contexts of communities of practice. However, 
economic status as such is considered secondary 
to class identity, which is the primary motivator 
of linguistic patterns.
Eckert demonstrates the value of this paradigm 
with an investigation of vowels produced by the 
members of two communities of practice in a 
Detroit high school, jocks and burnouts: jocks 
affiliate with school culture and activities, valuing 
academic achievement; burnouts, by contrast, 
affiliate with an urban culture, which stands in 
opposition to school-based institutional activities 
and achievements. Although there is a correlation 
between jock/burnout identity and parents’ socio-
economic status, particularly father’s occupation 
and father’s socioeconomic index (a composite of 
education, occupation and home value), there is 
considerable mobility in jock/burnout member-
ship. Examining five Northern Cities vowels – 
(oh), (o), (ae), (e) and (uh) – as well as (ay) and 
negative concord, Eckert finds that only negative 
concord and the raising of the nucleus of (ay) cor-
relate at p < 0.05 with any of the parents’ socioe-
conomic indicators. The older Northern Cities 
variables, (ae) raising and (o) fronting, are corre-
lated only with gender (girls leading), and not 
with jock/burnout identity. However, the newer 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
202
Northern Cities variables, (e) and (uh) backing, 
correlate only with jock/burnout identity, not with 
gender and not with parents’ socioeconomic status. 
The burnouts, who show higher rates of (e) and 
(uh) backing than the jocks, embrace and rein-
force the backed variants’ urban, working-class 
meaning. In doing so, they symbolically repro-
duce the supralocal category of ‘working class’.
The relevance of this picture of variation for 
sociolinguists’ approach to class is that the newest 
and perhaps most symbolically potent variables 
only indirectly index class as it has been tradition-
ally conceived. The jock and burnout communities 
of practice spring from and reproduce middle-
class and working-class identities in Eckert’s 
argument, but the pattern of linguistic variation is 
tied to the local high school identities, not macro-
social class categories. This finding reinforces 
claims the early class studies found valid statisti-
cal patterns but not adequate explanations; lin-
guistic variation is an element in the symbolic 
construction of class-sensitive local identities.
In an original approach that follows Eckert in 
foregrounding locally meaningful practices, 
Mallinson (2007) adopts a broadly relational 
view of class, wherein ‘class is defined by peo-
ple’s relationships to various income-generating 
resources or assets’ (Mallinson, 2007: 153). This 
approach differs from the use of a gradational 
class scale insofar as it focuses not on locations of 
economic production within a class system but 
rather on access to resources – in short, a con-
sumption- rather than production-based view. This 
is in contrast with Labov (1966a: 138), who 
explicitly chooses a production-centred class 
model. Specifically, Mallinson follows the soci-
ologist Joan Acker’s (2006a) class framework, in 
which an analysis of class entails:
… first, thinking about social relations and struc-
tures as active practices, occurring in specific his-
torical and geographic places; second, beginning 
the exploration of class from the standpoints of 
women and men located differently from white 
male class actors; third, clarifying the meaning of 
gendering and racializing; and fourth, broadening 
the understanding of the economic relations that 
constitute class and extending the analysis of 
gendering and racializing processes beyond pro-
duction (Acker, 2006a: 45–46, cited in Mallinson, 
2007: 154).
A significant implication of this perspective is that 
class as a concept and analytical tool cannot be 
confined to economic status, in two respects. First, 
class is viewed as inextricable from gender and 
race.6 Secondly, economic status is distinct from 
the processes that lead to status, and these proc-
esses, or class mechanisms, lend greater insight as 
to the nature of the class system. Mallinson (2007)
adapts Acker’s framework for empirical investiga-
tion by:
… paying attention to class-related social divisions, 
which are constituted by norms, lifestyle, status 
displays, and consumption habits. Second, we can 
observe and measure how images and symbols 
(language is included here) also constitute and 
reinforce these class-related social divisions. Third, 
we can focus on how these class-related social 
divisions are created, are gendered and raced 
(etc.), and change over time. Finally, we can inter-
pret how these class-related divisions connect to 
what Acker calls ‘regimes of inequality’, or extralo-
cal relations that shape social practice and that are 
constituted with different bases of inequality, 
degrees of visibility, legitimacy, hierarchy, partici-
pation, and ideology (Mallinson, 2007: 154).
In Mallinson’s (2007; see also Mallinson, 2006; 
Mallinson and Childs, 2008) investigation of 
African American English (AAE) in the small 
rural community of Texana, North Carolina, this 
approach to class leads to a greater explanatory 
role for class than traditional sociolinguistic 
inquiry would have found. The study focuses on 
two communities of practice, both consisting 
entirely of African-American women: the upright, 
proper ‘church ladies’ and the more laid-back 
‘porch sitters’. The two groups are nearly identical 
in terms of educational achievement and neigh-
bourhood of residence. However, they have mark-
edly different lifestyle habits, including hair and 
dressing styles, religious observance (or lack 
thereof), attitudes toward smoking and parenting 
styles. Furthermore, the two groups favour differ-
ent types of occupation: the church ladies tend to 
hold ‘pink collar’ service-sector jobs, typically 
occupied by women, while the porch sitters work 
in more industrial jobs such as tool-making. 
Employing Acker’s terminology, Mallinson con-
cludes that the porch sitters’ jobs ‘afford them less 
access to economic, cultural and social capital, 
and they communicate little concern about adher-
ing to institutional expectations or norms’ 
(Mallinson 2007: 158).
The linguistic differences between the two 
groups are consistent with their lifestyle differ-
ences. The church ladies show significantly lower 
rates of five grammatical features associated with 
AAE: third person singular –s absence, as in she 
walk; singular copula absence, as in she hungry; 
plural copula absence, as in they hungry; and 
levelling of were and weren’t to was and wasn’t, 
as in we was/wasn’t home. The porch sitters 
also use more expletives than the church ladies. 
The church ladies therefore use standard (non-
AAE) linguistic features consistent with their 

SOCIAL CLASS
203
institutional legitimacy as churchgoers and non-
manual labourers, while the porch sitters’ use of 
AAE features constructs a class/gender identity 
not dependent on institutional power. Furthermore, 
gendered practices such as hairstyle choices are 
bound to class identities; the church ladies’ ‘femi-
nine’ style is a component of their class identity as 
‘pink collar’ workers and church leaders. In 
Acker’s framework, Mallinson argues, all of the 
social – including linguistic – practices that distin-
guish the two groups are components of their class 
identities, ‘ … we thus see language use as one of 
multivariate, intersecting symbols and practices 
that construct class-related social divisions within 
the stratification system’ (Mallinson, 2007: 161). 
Following Acker’s rejection of class positions 
in favour of class processes and relations to the 
distribution of resources, Mallinson does not 
attempt to delineate Labov-style class categories. 
The statistical analysis is shaped by the commu-
nity of practice boundaries, and those boundaries, 
in turn, are determined in part by differential 
access to material resources. Class identities are 
understood as being constructed by a range of 
processes, including linguistic practices, as in 
Eckert’s analysis. 
These post-Labovian, identity-based approaches 
to class may be viewed as problematic in two 
ways. First, they do not seem to be about class 
anymore, if we understand class as an economic 
phenomenon. If ‘class’ refers not just to one’s 
relationship to the means of production and/or 
consumption but also to the use of locally and 
globally meaningful linguistic and non-linguistic 
symbols, membership in local social groups and 
the possession of ideologies, then does it truly 
address the intuitively clear (if nebulous) social 
fact of material inequality? Secondly, and related 
to the first point, is that identity-based approaches 
appear to ignore the fine-grained stratificational 
patterns that Labov (1966a, 1966b, 1972a, 1972b, 
2001) finds for variables such as (r) and (-ing), yet 
surely those patterns must be accounted for by any 
sociolinguistic class model.
The rejoinder to both concerns is that ‘class’ as 
an economic position/set of relations remains, but 
with an interactional layer. Sociolinguistic varia-
bles do not simply reflect economic stratification; 
they are symbols representing social meanings, 
and manipulated actively by speakers from one 
setting to the next. For that reason, sociolinguists 
pursuing the socioeconomic dimensions of varia-
tion are most directly interested not in economic 
inequality but rather in the social divisions that 
stem from it. Identity-driven approaches thus 
recognize social patterns as mediating between 
linguistic variation and economic reality. Labov-
style patterns are understood as reflecting very 
potent social meanings associated with linguistic 
variables, rather than directly indexing economic 
inequality. 
Recent approaches to class in 
discourse analysis
Whereas studies of linguistic variation have con-
sistently uncovered and sometimes explained 
quantitative relationships between language and 
class, the quantitative paradigm alone has limited 
power to explore issues such as class conscious-
ness, the representation and construction of class 
in discourse and the intersection of class with 
other aspects of social identity. Recent qualitative 
inquiry has begun to fill these gaps. Whereas some 
discourse studies elucidate class ideologies and 
identities, focusing chiefly on the content of talk, 
others ask what the linguistic forms present in 
situated discourse contribute to the performance 
and construction of class.7
Bucholtz (2007) is of the former type, investi-
gating class ideologies through a discourse analy-
sis of talk about clothing consumption among 
middle-class and upper-middle-class American 
teenagers. Like Mallinson, Bucholtz approaches 
class from a consumption rather than production 
standpoint. However, Bucholtz takes the addi-
tional position that an adequate analysis of con-
sumption patterns requires both a top-down 
(position within the economic structure) and a 
bottom-up perspective. The latter perspective is 
available through ethnographic observation of 
interaction related to consumption, in this case, 
discourse about consumption. On the basis of 
interviews with the teenagers and observed con-
versations among them, Bucholtz concludes that 
discourse about clothing consumption is a strategy 
for constructing class, gender and race identity. 
On the one hand, the teenagers consciously avoid 
ostentatious symbols of wealth, but on the other 
hand, they want to be perceived as having a cer-
tain level of access to material resources. Thus, 
the class conflict/consensus dichotomy emerges in 
discourse. Bucholtz also finds that the teenagers, 
and people generally, show greater willingness to 
talk explicitly about the association of clothing 
styles with ethnic/racial identities than with class 
positions; therefore, class identities are often 
racialized in discourse.
Messing (2007) similarly reveals the racializa-
tion of class and of socioeconomic change in dis-
course about socioeconomic and technological 
improvement in indigenous communities in the 
Mexican state of Tlaxcala. Two distinct ideologi-
cal stances emerge from discourse concerning 
both material improvement and language shift 
from Mexicano to Spanish. One type of discourse 
denigrates indigenous culture and people, setting 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
204
up indigenous ways of life as being in opposition 
to economic improvement. This theme ‘is particu-
larly vocalized by the upper classes, or by anyone 
who has internalized racist attitudes, reproduced 
from outside their community’ (Messing, 2007: 
561). The competing ‘pro-indigenous’ discourse 
questions the negative attitudes toward indigenous 
culture and values the Mexicano language. In 
practice, the two discourses are mingled in the 
community, creating a complex, class- and race-
based ideological space that, Messing argues, is 
critical to an understanding of the ongoing lan-
guage shift toward Spanish.
The interplay of class with race, gender, sexual-
ity and other dimensions of identity is central to 
other recent qualitative studies that examine the 
construction of these aspects of identity through 
discourse. For example, Hall (2005) investigates 
the discursive construction of marginal sexual 
identities in India. Kotis, cross-dressing males 
who have wives and children but who also engage 
in sexual relations with men, distinguish them-
selves from hijras, eunuchs (by birth or castration) 
who occupy the quasi-legitimate (and paid) role of 
bestowing blessings at ritual events such as wed-
dings. Kotis are often scorned as fake hijras, but 
they discursively carve out their own identity as 
distinct from both hijras and gay men. Broadly 
speaking, kotis’ use of Hindi places them in oppo-
sition to gay men in terms of both sexual and class 
identity:
… an educated English-speaking gay identity has 
developed in Indian urban centers that rejects the 
transgendered stance associated with its hijra 
predecessors, perceiving their forays into feminin-
ity as a marker of lower-class sexuality. Hindi and 
English, as languages infused with class associa-
tions, have accordingly become symbolic of these 
identity distinctions, with the use of English index-
ing a cosmopolitan gay sexuality and the use of 
Hindi a more traditional transgender sexuality. But 
whereas gay men view the use of Hindi as sexually 
backward, kotis view the use of English as overly 
modest (Hall, 2005: 127).
Whereas kotis’ choice of language marks them 
as distinct from urban, higher-class gay men, 
they discursively construct hijras as below them 
in the socioeconomic system. This is accom-
plished in part during public imitations of hijras, 
when kotis use discourse features including high 
pitch and volume, nasalization, elongated and 
high-pitched vowels at the end of intonational 
units, intimate pronouns and address terms, 
sexual innuendo, and vocabulary associated with 
uneducated, rural speakers (Hall, 2005: 133–4). 
By rejecting the English of upper-class gay men 
and portraying hijras as lower class, ‘the kotis 
establish a fissure between lower-class and upper-
class sexualities, thereby suggesting themselves 
as the desirable alternative to two extremes of 
undesirability’ (135).
As exemplified by Hall’s study of kotis, a chief 
insight emerging from sociolinguistic discourse 
studies is that social identities, while linked to 
macro-social structures such as class, gender and 
ethnicity, are partly (some would say wholly) 
constructed in interaction. The situated, strategic 
choices of even solitary but meaningful linguistic 
forms can create a complex array of class-related 
meanings that would not be accessible to purely 
quantitative analysis. Rampton (2001; see also 
1995) takes this perspective in examining the dis-
cursive construction of class through ‘speech 
stylization’, ‘the intensification or exaggeration of 
a particular way of speaking for symbolic and 
rhetorical effect’ (cf. Bakhtin, 1981) (Rampton,  
2001: 85). In an analysis of working-class London 
adolescent boys’ interaction at school, Rampton 
finds several stylized uses of Cockney features 
that stand in contrast to the standard speech set-
ting of the classroom. In one case, a 14-year-old 
boy uses Cockney phonology when greeting a 
friend. In another, he uses a ‘hyper-Cockney’ pro-
nunciation of okay to call his friends’ attention to 
schoolwork: 
Here it contributed to a more collectively oriented 
effort to get his peers to focus on school-related 
activities, and rather than apologetic self-mitiga-
tion, switches like these looked more like attempts 
at the vernacularization of school knowledge 
itself. 
 Small acts of stylization like these can be seen as 
part of a low-level but insistent struggle against 
the dominant meanings of sociolinguistic stratifi-
cation, an effort to extract school and education 
from the complex of social factors which created 
the differences between ‘Cockney’ and ‘posh’ 
(Rampton, 2001: 90).
Rampton concludes that ‘while quantitative anal-
ysis usefully points to the reproduction of socio-
linguistic class structure in relatively routine 
speech, stylization can display a range of more 
heterodox perspectives on what it might mean to 
be a young lower-class Londoner’ (Rampton, 
2001: 94–5). In fact, Rampton’s study demon-
strates the complementary relationship between 
quantitative and qualitative approaches: preceding 
the discourse analysis is a set of quantitative 
results showing that the speaker uses vernacular 
features chiefly during informal talk among 
friends, style-shifting almost entirely to standard 
features during an academic assessment activity 
(Rampton, 2001: 86–7). These results lay the 
foundation for the later interpretation of Cockney 

SOCIAL CLASS
205
features as contributing to a ‘struggle against the 
dominant meanings of sociolinguistic stratifica-
tion’ (Rampton, 2001: 90). 
If quantitative sociolinguistic studies involving 
class ask in what ways class identities both deter-
mine and are constituted by linguistic variation, 
then discourse studies ask what class identities 
mean and how they are negotiated in talk. As 
Rampton and others (cf. Mendoza-Denton, 2002) 
demonstrate, combining variationist and dis-
course-analytic methods, though still rare, prom-
ises insights into the relationship between language 
and social class. 
14.5 FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In the germinal investigations of language and 
class by Labov and others, the essential goal was 
to uncover the structured nature of linguistic vari-
ation at the community level. More recent work 
has fleshed out the goal to include questions of 
social motivation; to some extent, theory and 
methods have evolved accordingly. However, the 
sociolinguistic study of class is perhaps still 
awaiting its revolution. 
Significant progress can be made from two 
complementary directions. First, some basic but 
critical empirical questions posed in the early 
work can be revisited. For example, Labov, 
Trudgill and Macaulay all contend that occupation 
is the best single-class indicator, though Labov 
and Trudgill opt for combined-class scales as 
described in Section 14.2. Most subsequent class 
studies in linguistics have followed their lead in 
amalgamating class indicators, with the result that 
very few outside of Labov’s work have directly 
compared one single indicator with another. The 
primary benefit of systematic comparison would 
not be the conclusion that occupation (for exam-
ple) tends to correlate more closely with linguistic 
variation than other indicators; in any case, the 
results would likely differ from one community to 
another and one variable to another. Instead, the 
main benefit would be the individual patterns 
themselves: precisely because the different indica-
tors measure distinct aspects of class identity, 
as Labov observed, they each have something 
different to teach us about linguistic variation. 
Close attention to the results for each separate 
indicator, for a single set of linguistic data, could 
promote a more nuanced definition of class for 
sociolinguistics. 
Another long-standing but somewhat forgotten 
empirical question is the relationship between 
socioeconomic indicators and network structures. 
At present, the majority of network and commu-
nity of practice studies in sociolinguistics treat 
class as a related but separate phenomenon, hence 
statements like ‘the working class is characterized 
by dense, multiplex networks’. While it does not 
seem necessary or advisable to merge network 
and class as concepts, the empirical relations 
between them, where linguistic variation is con-
cerned, must be more complex than currently 
understood. More advanced quantitative network 
techniques offer one avenue for pursuing this link, 
particularly for the analysis of observable interac-
tion in local settings.
The second and complementary direction 
involves, and transcends, more aggressive ques-
tions concerning the ways in which class, defined 
as relational and intersectional, is manifest in 
local and regional identities. Several researchers 
cited in this chapter take significant steps along 
these lines. Although the combined top-down 
(aggregate) and bottom-up (grounded) nature of 
this type of approach is often cited as its chief 
advantage, it is also applauded for allowing con-
siderable variation in how class is defined. 
Characteristics without direct economic import, 
such as hairstyle and swearing, can be class indi-
cators. But another perspective is also possible for 
a specifically sociolinguistic approach to class: 
the intricate and often noisy linguistic patterns 
resulting from the construction of these hybrid 
economic/non-economic class categories point to 
the need for a more intersectional, relational view 
of social space altogether. Few current sociolin-
guists would deny that the separate but interacting 
independent variables of class, gender, age, eth-
nicity, etc., are a collective, statistically-conven-
ient approximation of a more complex social 
space. Emerging and future approaches to class 
are likely to reject this approximation by not look-
ing for ‘class’ per se but rather for the nebulous 
identities, such as ‘porch sitter’, that provide both 
robust empirical linguistic patterns and satisfying 
sociocultural explanations. Under an extreme – 
but perhaps productive – version of this approach, 
identifying social-class boundaries would no 
longer be a goal independent of identifying other 
types of social boundaries.
This holistic approach would not devalue the 
kinds of more traditional empirical questions that 
began this section. With the two agendas com-
bined, and assisted by the continued incorporation 
of cross-disciplinary theory and methods, the 
sociolinguistic study of class may yet encounter 
new questions altogether.
NOTES
1 Notably, the scale includes only production 
variables, purposely excluding consumption variables 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
206
such as clothing choices. We return to this issue in 
Section 14.4.
2 For a fuller description of stable sociolinguistic 
variables, see Labov, 2001: 80–1.
3 Trudgill (1974) also discusses the complications 
confronting any attempt at defining and operational-
izing class in Western industrialized settings. Notably, 
contemporary sociological work, including Mayer 
(1955) and Goldthorpe and Lockwood (1963), is cited 
throughout this discussion. Macaulay (1977: 55) also 
cites sociological literature to the effect that occupa-
tion is considered the best single class indicator.
4 However, as Eckert (2000: 32) observes, ‘ …
the consensual and conflict models of social class are 
not entirely incompatible – upward economic mobil-
ity and class loyalty frequently go together as well – 
and the tension between the two may be an 
important source of complex social meaning’.
5 For discussion of communities of practice, see 
Chapter 13 of this volume.
6 Ethnicity is, both ideologically and observably, 
a stronger correlate of linguistic variation in US 
English than in British English or other Western 
European languages (Milroy, 2001a,b).
7 Socioeconomic facts have even been claimed 
to have impact on the types of parent–child dis-
course that occur day to day. Heath (2006) reports 
that middle-class, dual-income families facing lim-
ited time with their children talk to them with a 
narrow range of discourse patterns, largely confined 
to directives, present-tense observations about the 
immediate surroundings and gratification of chil-
dren’s desires. Discussion of past events, and longer 
narratives, are relatively rare. This truncated linguis-
tic interaction occurs not only because both parents 
work outside the home, as is the case for many 
working-class families, but also by virtue of a par-
ticularly middle-class ambition for children to be 
heavily involved in extracurricular activities that 
stand in place of family dinnertime and evenings at 
home.
REFERENCES
Abdel-Jawad, H. (1981) ‘Phonological and social variation 
in Arabic in Amman’. University of Pennsylvania 
dissertation.
Acker, J. (2006a) Class Questions: Feminist Answers. 
New York: Rowman and Littlefield.
Acker, J. (2006b) ‘Inequality regimes: gender, class, and race 
in organizations’, Gender and Society, 20: 441–64.
Ash, S. (2002) ‘Social class’, in J. K. Chambers, P. Trudgill, 
and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), The Handbook of Language 
Variation and Change. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. 402–22.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination. Austin, TX: 
University of Texas Press.
Bernstein, B. (1971) Class, Codes and Control 1, Theoretical 
Studies Towards a Sociology of Language. London: 
Routledge.
Bourdieu, P. and Boltanski, L. (1975) ‘Le fétichisme de la 
langue’, Actes de la Recherche en Sciences Sociales, 4: 
2–32.
Bucholtz, M. (2007) ‘Shop talk: branding, consumption, and 
gender in American middle-class youth interaction’, in 
B. McElhinny (ed.), Words, Worlds, and Material Girls: 
Language, Gender, and Globalized Economy. Mouton de 
Gruyter. pp. 371–402.
Cameron, R. (1991) Pronominal and null subject variation in 
Spanish: constraints, dialects and functional compensation. 
University of Pennsylvania dissertation.
Cedergren, H. (1973) ‘The interplay of social and linguistic 
factors in Panama’. Cornell University dissertation.
Chae, S. (1995) ‘External constraints on sound change: the 
raising of /o/ in Seoul Korean’. University of Pennsylvania 
dissertation.
Chung, K. S. (2006) ‘Hypercorrection in Taiwan 
Mandarin’, Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 16(2): 
197–214.
Eckert, P. (1989) ‘The whole woman: sex and gender differ-
ences in variation’, Language Variation and Change, 1: 
245–67.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1999) ‘New generaliza-
tions and explanations in language and gender research’, 
Language in Society, 2: 185–201.
Goldthorpe, J. H. and Lockwood, D. (1963) ‘Affluence and the 
British class structure’, Sociological Review, 11(2): 
133–63.
Haeri, N. (1996) The Sociolinguistic Market of Cairo: Gender, 
Class, and Education. London: Kegan Paul International.
Hall, K. (2005) ‘Intertextual sexuality: parodies of class, 
identity, and desire in liminal Delhi’, Journal of Linguistic 
Anthropology, 15: 125–44.
Heath, S. B. (2006) ‘Building the micros toward seeing the 
macro’, Text and Talk, 26(4–5): 627–34.
Hibiya, J. (1988) Social stratification of Tokyo Japanese. 
University of Pennsylvania dissertation.
Højrup, T. (1983) ‘The concept of life-mode: a form-specifying 
mode of analysis applied to contemporary Europe’, 
Ethnologia Scandinavica, 1–50.
Johnstone, B. and Kiesling, S. F. (2008) ‘Indexicality and expe-
rience: exploring the meanings of /aw/-monophthongiza-
tion in Pittsburgh’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12(1): 
5–33.
Kellas, J. G. (1968) Modern Scotland. New York: Praeger.
Kerswill, P. (2007) ‘Social class’, in C. Llamas, L. Mullany and 
P. Stockwell (eds), The Routledge Companion to 
Sociolinguistics. New York: Routledge. pp. 51–61.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2005) ‘New towns and koineiza-
tion: linguistic and social correlates’, Linguistics, 43(5): 
1023–48.
Kochetov, A. (2006) ‘The role of social factors in the dynamics 
of sound change: a case study of a Russian dialect’, 
Language Variation and Change, 18(1): 99–119.

SOCIAL CLASS
207
Labov, W. (1966a) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 
Labov, W. (1966b) ‘Hypercorrection by the lower middle class 
as a factor in linguistic change’, in W. Bright (ed.), 
Sociolinguistics. The Hague: Mouton. pp. 84–113.
Labov, W. (1972a) Language in the Inner City: Studies in the 
Black English vernacular. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1972b) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1980) ‘The social origins of sound change’, in 
W. Labov (ed.), Locating Language in Time and Space. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 251–65.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change: Social 
Factors. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Lane, L. A. (1998) ‘Emergence and transformation of a dialect: 
Thyboronsk (Danish)’. University of Chicago dissertation.
Lane, L. A. (2000) ‘Trajectories of linguistic variation: emer-
gence of a dialect’, Language Variation and Change, 12(3): 
267–94.
Lavandera, B. (1975) ‘Linguistic structure and sociolinguistic 
conditioning in the use of verbal endings in ‘SI’ clauses’. 
University of Pennsylvania dissertation. 
Lennig, M. (1978) ‘Acoustic measurement of linguistic change: 
the modern Paris vowel system’. University of Pennsylvania 
dissertation.
Macaulay, R. K. S. (1977) Language, Social Class, and 
Education: A Glasgow Study. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Mallinson, C. (2006) ‘The dynamic construction of race, class, 
and gender through linguistic practice among women in a 
Black Appalachian community’. North Carolina State 
University dissertation.
Mallinson, C. (2007) Social Class, Social Status, and 
Stratification: Revisiting Familiar Concepts in Sociolin-
guistics. Penn Working Papers in Linguistics, 13 (2): 149–163.
Mallinson, C. and Childs, B. (2008) ‘Communities of practice 
in sociolinguistic description: analyzing language and iden-
tity practices among Black women in Appalachia’, Gender 
and Language, 1: 173–206.
Marx, K. (1906) Capital. Chicago: Kerr.
Mayer, K. (1955) Class and Society. New York: Doubleday 
& Co.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2002) ‘Language and identity’, in
 J. K. Chambers, P. Trudgill, and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), 
The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell. pp. 475–99.
Messing, J. (2007) ‘Multiple ideologies and competing 
discourses: language shift in Tlaxcala, Mexico’, Language 
in Society, 36: 555–77.
Mills, C. W. (1951) White Collar: the American Middle 
Classes. New York: Oxford University Press.
Milroy, L. (1980) Language and Social Networks. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Milroy, L. (2001a) ‘The social categories of race and class: 
language ideology and sociolinguistics’, in N. Coupland, 
S. Sarangi and C. N. Candlin (eds), Sociolinguistics and 
Social Theory. Harlow: Pearson. pp. 235–60.
Milroy, L. (2001b) ‘Britain and the United States: two nations 
divided by the same language (and different language 
ideologies)’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 10: 
56–89.
Milroy, L. and Milroy, J. (1992) ‘Social network and social 
class: toward an integrated sociolinguistic model’, 
Language in Society, 21(1): 1–26.
Nichols, P. (1983) ‘Linguistic options and choices for Black 
women in the rural South’, in B. Thorne, C. Kramerae, and 
N. Henley (eds), Language, Gender, and Society. Boston: 
Heinle and Heinle. pp. 54–68.
Oliveira, M. de (1983) ‘Phonological variation in Brazilian 
Portuguese’. University of Pennsylvania dissertation.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity Among 
Adolescents. London: Longman.
Rampton, B. (2001) Critique in internation. Critique of 
Anthropology 21: 83–107.
Rickford, J. R. (1986) ‘The need for new approaches to social 
class analysis in sociolinguistics’, Journal of Communication, 
6: 215–21.
Romaine, S. (1984) ‘The status of sociological models and 
categories in explaining linguistic variation’, Linguistische 
Berichte, 90: 25–38.
Sankoff, D. and Laberge, S. (1978) ‘The linguistic market and 
the statistical explanation of variability’, in D. Sankoff (ed.), 
Linguistic Variation: Models and Methods. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 239–50.
Sankoff, D., Cedergren, H. J., Kemp, W., Thibault, P. and 
Vincent, D. (1989) ‘Montreal French: language, class, and 
ideology’, in R. Fasold and D. Schiffrin (eds), Language 
Change and Variation. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 107–18.
Santerre, L. and Millo, J. (1978) ‘Diphthongization in Montreal 
French’, in D. Sankoff (ed.), Linguistic Variation: Models 
and Methods. New York: Academic Press. pp. 173–84.
Trudgill, P. (1972) ‘Sex, covert prestige and linguistic 
change in urban British English’, Language in Society, 
1: 179–95.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The Social Differentiation of English in 
Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Weber, M. (1947) The Theory of Social and Economic 
Organization. Tr. A. M. Henderson and T. Parsons. New 
York: The Free Press.
Williams, G. (1992) Sociolinguistics: a Sociological Critique. 
London: Routledge.
Wolfram, W. (1969) A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit 
Negro Speech. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Woolard, K. (1985) ‘Language variation and cultural hegemony’, 
American Ethnologist, 12: 738–48.
Woods, H. (1979) ‘A socio-dialectology survey of the English 
spoken in Ottawa: a study of sociological and stylistic vari-
ation in Canadian English’. University of British Columbia 
dissertation.

15
15.1  THE DEVELOPMENT OF SOCIAL 
NETWORKS PERSPECTIVES IN 
THE SOCIAL SCIENCES
Social network analysis is concerned with under-
standing the relationships between social entities 
such as individual actors, sets of individuals, groups 
or organizations, and the patterns and implications 
of these relationships. The network approach pos-
tulates that social entities create ties which pro-
vide a meaningful framework for problem-solving 
(Mitchell, 1986: 74). Its fundamental assumption 
is that the patterning of the social ties in which 
these social entities are embedded ‘has important 
consequences’ for them (Freeman, 2004: 2). From 
this it follows that a wide range of empirical phe-
nomena can be explored from social networks 
perspectives.
Although the social network approach received 
its initial impetus from sociology and anthropol-
ogy (e.g. Simmel, 1908; Radcliffe-Brown, 1940; 
Bott, 1957; Mitchell, 1973) as well as sociometry 
(Moreno, 1934), its applications and methodo-
logical refinements have always transcended dis-
ciplinary boundaries. Very different disciplines 
such as economics, marketing, industrial engi-
neering or geography have adopted a network 
approach and have contributed to its characteristic 
profiles (in the respective disciplines) or some-
times even built up schools of network research.
In the 1950s, the Manchester School of anthro-
pologists (John A. Barnes, Elizabeth Bott, J. 
Clyde Mitchell) began to introduce the network as 
a systematic (and non-metaphorical) concept into 
the social sciences. These anthropologists contrib-
uted to the description of networks by elaborating 
on network features such as density, clusterability 
or connexity. It was, however, at Harvard that the 
‘crucial breakthrough’ (Scott, 2000: 33) occurred: 
with the development of algebraic models of 
groups and of multidimensional scaling, the 
Harvard group (Harrison White and his disciples 
Stephen Berkowitz, Mark Granovetter, Ronald 
Breiger, Francois Lorrain and Barry Wellman) 
established social network analysis as a method of 
structural analysis from the 1960s onwards (White 
et al., 1976; White, 1992). Further work in the 
area (Lorrain and White, 1971; Boorman and 
White, 1976; White et al., 1976) built on Simmel 
and Durkheim and established social network 
analysis as a theoretical paradigm distinct from 
both positivistic survey-based research and the 
structural functionalism of Talcott Parsons.
The success of the social network is strongly 
linked to the so-called ‘structural analysis’ of 
Harrison White and his group. However, it cannot 
be reduced to the developments initiated by the 
Harvard group for at least three reasons. First, 
influential network analysts, such as e.g. Ronald 
Burt and Linton Freeman, were not based in 
Harvard. Secondly, network analysis has been 
spread over a large geographic area through its own 
scientific networks: In 1979 Barry Wellman founded 
the International Network of Social Network 
Analysts (INSNA, http://www.insna.org/), which, 
alongside its other responsibilities, is in charge of 
the organization of an annual conference, the 
International Sunbelt Social Network Conference.
The network community has also produced 
scholarly journals, such as Connections (founded 
by Barry Wellman), Social Networks (founded by 
Lin Freeman) and Social Structure (founded by 
David Krackhardt). Network analysis is thus 
influenced by different research clusters, which 
becomes evident through the growing interest in 
social networks since 1990 (Wasserman et al., 
Social Network
E v a  V e t t e r

SOCIAL NETWORK
209
2005: 1) and the considerable technical and 
formal sophistication associated with this growth 
(Wasserman and Faust, 1994; Scott, 2000; 
Freeman, 2004; Carrington et al., 2005; Marsden, 
2005; Jansen, 2006).
Thirdly and most important, although structural 
analysis probably constitutes the most prominent 
branch of the networks perspective, it cannot 
cover the heterogeneity of this scientific area. An 
example for this dilemma is network research 
outside the English-speaking world, in particular 
the research conducted by Michel Forsé and his 
peers in France (Degenne and Forsé, 1994 [2004]; 
Forsé and Langlois, 1997; Forsé 2002; Mercklé, 
2004; Forsé, 2008). These researchers in their 
structural interactionism the network approach 
combines with the theory of rational choice in the 
broader sense. Concurrently, German-language net-
work researchers are trying to sound out the poten-
tial of qualitative data collection and analysis of 
networks in different research areas, for example 
biographical research, literature and politics (see 
e.g. Hollstein and Straus, 2006). However, the 
connections between the different research clusters 
are not always bidirectional: comparing the refer-
ence lists for the work done in France and Germany 
with the work being done in and around Harvard, 
there is – unsurprisingly – a strong asymmetry.
Despite this heterogeneity of the networks 
approach and theoretical as well as methodologi-
cal differences between the various schools of 
thought, some central principles of the network 
perspective can be derived, to which a large part 
of the researchers subscribe: 
1 Actors and their actions are viewed as interde-
pendent (and not independent). 
2 Linkages between actors are channels for 
resource transfer (material and non-material).
3 The network structure provides opportunities for 
or constraints on individual action.
4 Network models conceptualize structure (social, 
economic, political… ) as lasting patterns of rela-
tions among actors (Wasserman/Faust, 1994: 4). 
These principles appear to constitute the 
common ground of the modern social networks 
perspective and to indicate that a social network 
is far more than a metaphor for relationships 
among individuals – but less than a unified 
research paradigm.
15.2 NETWORKS IN SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Main research areas
In sociolinguistics, the network approach is most 
commonly applied in order to explain linguistic 
variation or language choice from a diachronic as 
well as synchronic perspective. Sociolinguistic net-
work research is based on the assumption that the 
traditional macro-scale categories such as social 
class or gender cannot explain linguistic features 
in an adequate or sufficient way and that networks 
may constitute supplementary explanatory devices. 
In their overview of sociolinguistic network 
research, Schenk and Bergs (2004) identify four 
core areas in which sociolinguistic networks are 
applied: synchronic variationist sociolinguistics 
(urban dialectology and research into vernacu-
lars), diachronic sociolinguistics (language change 
and maintenance), code-switching and language 
acquisition/loss. In other words, linguistic varia-
tion and language choice come out as the main 
areas of investigation – from a snapshot, as well as 
from a change-in-time perspective. Sociolinguistic 
network research approaches this rather ambitious 
research agenda from synchronic and diachronic 
perspectives, whether the object of investigation is 
historical or present-day language use.
A brief history of the interest in networks in 
sociolinguistics would normally begin in the 
1960s or 1970s, although some authors go as far 
back as the turn of the previous century (Gauchat, 
1905; cited in Milroy, 2002: 553). Variationist 
research, in particular Labov’s study of Martha’s 
Vineyard (1963) and on ‘being a lame’ (Labov, 
1972), and Blom and Gumperz’s (1972) 
Hemnesberget study are generally considered as 
early and rather intuitive sociolinguistic applica-
tions of the network approach. With Lesley 
Milroy’s (1980) Belfast study, the first systematic 
account of the relationship between social net-
work and language variation, the social network 
ultimately found its way into sociolinguistics and 
has been used extensively since then (for an over-
view see Milroy, 2002; Wiklund, 2002; Marshall, 
2004; Schenk and Bergs, 2004; Schlobinski, 
2005).
Areas of application include linguistic variation 
within a language (e.g. Milroy, 1980; Bortoni-
Ricardo, 1985; Marshall, 2004), and also language 
choice in multilingual contexts with regional 
minorities (e.g. Gal, 1979; Rindler-Schjerve, 
1987; Vetter, 1997) and migrants (e.g. Labrie, 
1988; Dabène and Moore, 1995; de Bot and 
Stoessel, 2002; Hulsen et al., 2002). More recently, 
in addition to these areas, the impact of networks 
on language proficiency has become an important 
topic (e.g. Zentella, 1997; Raschka et al., 2002; 
Wiklund, 2002). While studies to date have mainly 
investigated face-to-face interaction, the increase 
in virtual communication networks has expanded 
the potential scope of sociolinguistic network 
research to new contexts (e.g. Paolillo, 1999, 
2001; Bergs, 2006) and has opened a large new 
area for future investigation.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
210
Like virtual communication networks, histori-
cal sociolinguistic research lacks data from face-
to-face interactions. As a number of studies have 
shown, however, historical sociolinguistics 
presents interesting research perspectives and thus 
provides a burgeoning research agenda for net-
works (Tieken-Boon van Ostade et al., 2001; 
Bergs, 2005).
Theoretical background
Despite the popularity of network research, a 
number of studies, particularly comparative 
studies, point to the notable lack of theoretical 
work in the area (e.g. Salancik, 1995; Schlobinski, 
2005). These studies show that different and not 
always compatible theoretical foundations are 
pursued within sociolinguistics. In particular, 
establishing a firm connection between using the 
network as an analytical tool and embedding it in 
a broader theoretical framework represents a 
major challenge.
Network researchers often draw on the work of 
the sociologist Georg Simmel. Some go further, 
and see Durkheim, Tarde or Weber as the van-
guard of the network approach. These attempts 
focus particularly on Durkheim’s category of ego-
istic suicide (in ‘Le suicide’), which is interpreted 
as a forerunner of social network theory since it 
shows the influence of structural properties of 
social groups on individual behavior (Degenne 
and Forsé, 1994; Forsé and Langlois, 1997). 
Nevertheless, it is far more common for research-
ers to look back to Georg Simmel, explicitly or 
otherwise (e.g. Moreno, 1960; Burt, 1982, 1992; 
Forsé, 2002; Bergs, 2005: 24), despite the fact that 
Simmel himself never used the term ‘network’. To 
be precise, the connection to networks was first 
made explicit by Simmel’s student Von Wiese 
(1932). Simmel provides a theory for a taxonomy 
of social structures that are based on relationships 
between individuals. It is these relationships and 
not individuals or their characteristics that are the 
objects of sociological investigation for Simmel. 
Thus, Simmel’s concepts of ‘door’ and ‘bridge’ 
intuitively preempt the assumptions that underlie 
network research (Javeau, 1986) and his concept 
of the stranger is seen as an impetus for the devel-
opment of geometric methods for calculating 
social distance (Raphael, 1986). The obvious 
compatibility with the basic assumptions underly-
ing contemporary network research is the reason 
why theoretical links to Simmel are so frequently 
(re)constructed.
A further, albeit rather peripheral, theoretical 
strand is symbolic interactionism. This is linked 
to Gumperz’s conception of the network as an 
interactive concept, itself a reaction to perceived 
shortcomings in Labovian variationist linguistics 
(Gumperz, 1994). For Gumperz, linguistic differ-
ences reflect differences in networks of human 
relations. Individuals who are bound up in long-
term and goal-oriented networked relationships 
share a common background and have similar 
communicative experiences. Gumperz argues that 
in workplaces, families, and voluntary clubs or 
associations, which are typical examples of net-
works, particular linguistic conventions with spe-
cific meanings develop (Gumperz, 1994: 624). 
However, the links to symbolic interactionism are 
not followed through in much network research 
(see also critiques by Rindler-Schjerve, 1991: 225 
and Vetter, 1997, which may be seen as attempts 
to ground the network as an interactive category in 
symbolic interactionism and apply it to a minority 
group situation). Within sociolinguistics, this the-
oretical approach is yet peripheral and has not 
been systematically developed.
The breakthrough of the network approach in 
sociolinguistics is usually seen as Lesley Milroy’s 
Belfast study (1980, 2001), which enjoys wide 
acceptance, is usually seen as the breakthrough in 
drawing on the use of networks as analytical con-
cepts in anthropological and sociological research 
(Barnes, 1954; Mitchell, 1969; Boissevain and 
Mitchell, 1973; Boissevain, 1974), on exchange 
theory (Homans, 1958) and on the theory of tie 
strength (Granovetter, 1973).
From the perspective of exchange theory, social 
networks emerge from repeated exchanges 
between individuals. Individuals who interact 
frequently thereby develop positive feelings of 
mutual reciprocity. Their relationship can be seen 
as a kind of resource that may be useful to them. 
In Homans’s exchange theory, individuals tend to 
repeat behaviours that provide the best overall 
reward/cost outcomes. Within social networks, 
costs and rewards flow through specific channels 
and individuals repeat satisfying exchange trans-
actions over and over again. These repetitive 
exchanges reflect habits and routines that people 
develop in order to avoid the costs (time, emo-
tional energy and other resources) of exploring 
other alternatives and the risk that new choices 
may be less rewarding than the old ones. Therefore, 
network structures are often characterized by a 
general stability. The opportunity for and quality 
of interaction within networks depends upon the 
exchange patterns: social exchanges between 
close friends are based on more intense emotional 
bonds than more casual network exchanges, for 
example. Despite the general stability of net-
works, relationships are at the same time open to 
changes over time, as a result of changes in peo-
ple’s social locations and because individuals 
reassess the costs and benefits periodically 
(Johnson, 2008: 201).

SOCIAL NETWORK
211
In his theory of strong and weak ties, Granovetter 
(1973) postulates that weak ties, i.e. those with 
low-frequency, low-transactional content and a 
low degree of reciprocity, are important channels 
for the flow of information between dense net-
works. This assumption is particularly prevalent 
within sociolinguistics in connection with lan-
guage change and linguistic innovation (e.g. 
Milroy and Milroy, 1985; Bergs, 2005).
To sum up, sociolinguistic network research 
tends to see networks as analytical categories. 
This differs from other disciplines, in which net-
works tend to be seen as models or theoretical 
constructs, and in which human behaviour is 
explained in terms of the characteristics of net-
works (e.g. Wasserman and Faust, 1994). The 
question concerning the theoretical foundations of 
social networks in sociolinguistics can give rise to 
several different answers. Even if this question is 
not at the heart of most sociolinguistic research, 
its methodological implications can be far-reach-
ing. Based on their underlying theoretical frame-
work, interactionist network studies can be 
differentiated from variationist ones. While the 
former tend to use qualitative data, the latter rather 
opt for standardized and quantifiable data. Thus, it 
is important to note that the different theoretical 
assumptions underlying sociolinguistic network 
research may have far-reaching implications.
15.3 NETWORK PROPERTIES
Networks are generally described on the basis of 
specific characteristics which refer on the one hand 
to the researchers’ perspective (see the distinction 
between personal and total networks) and to the 
network properties (emerging/latent, lose/open 
and a catalogue of structural and interactional 
characteristics commonly used within sociolin-
guistic research).
Scholarly perspectives on networks can be 
divided into two groups: egocentric personal net-
works starting with individual actors and their 
relations, and total networks involving an attempt 
to capture all the connections within a networked 
system, for example the relationships between all 
the pupils in a particular class. Both perspectives 
are represented in sociolinguistic research.
Personal egocentric networks start from the 
‘anchor’ of the network, ‘ego’, and those with 
whom ego directly interacts. To capture the con-
stituents and structure of the entire personal net-
work, information about these first-order ties is 
supplemented by further information on second-
order ties, i.e. about relationships between the 
people with whom ego interacts, but is not directly 
involved with, for example, friends of a friend. 
Sociolinguistic interest generally focuses on the 
first-order network ties and less on the ties of the 
second order. The precise description of relation-
ships depends on data that give information about 
their structural and interactional properties, allow-
ing researchers to differentiate between different 
types and strengths of ties. Sociolinguistic studies 
in the variationist tradition usually elicit informa-
tion about a certain amount of personal networks 
and give their members different scores depending 
on the properties and structures of their respective 
networks. These network scores are then correlated 
with data on language use (such as phonological 
variables). Many classic sociolinguistic studies, and 
in particular the most-cited ones in both present-
day and historical linguistic variation (e.g. Milroy, 
1980; Bortoni-Ricardo, 1985; Lippi-Green, 1989; 
Bergs, 2005) are based on the analysis of personal 
networks.
Unlike personal egocentric networks, total net-
works can only be analysed as part of a specific, 
clearly defined system. Only once all the members 
involved in the system (e.g. an organization or 
school class) are identified can the total network, 
i.e. all the existing relationships in the network, be 
accounted for. Once again, the structural and 
interactional properties of ties can be used to 
describe the network. Those members with similar 
patterns of social relationships can be compared 
even if they are not directly connected to each 
other. Sociolinguistic analyses of total networks 
have been conducted in primary school classes 
(e.g. Berthele, 2000) and in Internet chat-rooms 
(e.g. Paolillo, 2001).
In differentiating between emerging and latent 
networks, what is important is not so much the 
researcher’s perspective but rather the properties 
of the networks themselves. The emerging/latent 
distinction was first described by Watts (1991) 
and later taken up by Bergs (2005) and by Schenk 
and Bergs (2004). Latent networks are potentially 
available and have yet to be activated, while emer-
gent networks result from a concrete communica-
tive event and are discursively negotiated by 
actors with particular social roles.
A further distinction, which was adopted from 
early sociolinguistic research, is that between open 
and closed networks. In the Hemnesberget study, 
it is postulated that members of open networks have 
had more varied experiences because they meet 
each other as members of different categories such 
as students and members of the élite, or as friends. 
These additional relationships are manifested as 
style shifts (Gumperz, 1975: 162), whereas closed 
networks are characterized by more homogeneous 
linguistic practices. Lippi-Green (1989) supports 
this view and distinguishes between open personal 
networks, which extend outside the established 
networks in the community, and closed networks.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
212
A basic model of a social network is easy to 
visualize. It consists of points (dots, nodes, verti-
ces) and links (lines, connections, edges, arcs) to 
indicate the relationships between individual enti-
ties. Further characteristics of relationships such 
as those mentioned above (and others) can then be 
added to the model. Sociolinguistic studies usually 
follow Boissevain’s (1987: 164–9) suggestion to 
distinguish between structural components (size, 
density, centrality and cluster-formation) and 
interactional components (multiplexity, transac-
tional content, direction, frequency and duration).
The density of a network is the number of 
actual links divided by the number of potential 
links. A density of 1 would indicate that everyone 
knows everyone else in the network. Centrality 
describes the degree of social integration or isola-
tion of individuals within a network: the more 
first- and second-order contacts an individual has 
(in comparison to other individuals within that 
network), the more central this person is. Clusters 
or cliques are defined as subgroups with high 
partial density. Individuals who link one network 
or subgroup with another are frequently called 
bridges or structural holes (Burt, 1992). These 
structural components are essentially based on 
graph theory (relational approach), whereas the 
interactional (content) criteria relate back to 
exchange theory (positional approach).
Multiplexity, transactional content, reciprocity 
and symmetry, duration, frequency and intensity 
are the most commonly mentioned interactional 
criteria. Multiplexity indicates the number of 
social functions or roles that two individuals fulfil 
in their relationship. If they know each other only 
as friends, their link is uniplex. But as friends, 
neighbours and members of the same sports club, 
they would have a multiplex relationship. The 
transactional content of the exchange between 
network members can be of a material (money 
transfer) or a non-material (emotional backup, 
gossip,...) nature. Milroy draws on Milardo (1988: 
26–36) in this respect, who distinguishes between 
exchange and interactive networks: personal 
exchange networks consist of persons with whom 
ego exchanges direct aid, advice, criticism and 
support. Interactive networks, on the other hand, 
are only based on (frequent) interaction and not on 
the exchange of material or symbolic resources, 
e.g. the relationship between a store owner and a 
customer. Milroy and Li (1995) and Li (1994) find 
this distinction useful, while others (e.g. Lanza 
and Svendson, 2007) find it hard to operational-
ize. The strength of network relationships is also 
connected to their quality, which is usually 
described in terms of duration, frequency and 
intensity (in combination with multiplexity). 
Frequent and intensive exchanges are typical of 
multiplex relationships and indicate strong ties. 
The interactional criterion of reciprocity is also 
relevant here, i.e. the question of whether an 
exchange is uni- or bidirectional. Strong ties are 
often bidirectional, whereas unidirectional asym-
metric ties normally relate to social inequality.
Figure 15.1 illustrates the most important 
characteristics of networks. The first-order 
personal network of anchor X is a dense and 
multiplex network with strong network ties, 
while the second-order network is more open and 
uniplex.
Figure 15.1 First- and second-order network.
X
B
A
E
D
C
S
Z
D
D
First-order ties
Second-order ties

SOCIAL NETWORK
213
15.4 COLLECTING NETWORK DATA
Sociolinguistic network studies deal with three 
different kinds of data: attribute, linguistic and 
relational. Attribute data comprise the attributes of 
people and the individuals with whom they inter-
act. Usually demographic information about indi-
viduals such as age, sex and place of residence is 
collected and it is assumed that these have some 
influence on personal networks. Precisely what 
information is collected depends on research 
questions and on the context in which the research 
is carried out. Thus, Gal (1979), for example, 
determined the relative ‘peasantness’ of the net-
work members. More recent studies use diverse 
and extensive attribute data: e.g. in the work of 
Marshall (2004), who collected data on mental 
urbanization, attitude to dialect and national 
pride.
In his historical study of language variation in 
the Late Middle English Paston letters, Bergs 
(2005) establishes a tentative network checklist 
for Late Medieval England, based upon categories 
such as gender, education, literacy, marital status, 
place of living, reference group or travel activities. 
The manner in which these attributes affect per-
sonal networks in England in the Late Middle 
Ages are illustrated by Bergs through two ficti-
tious, extreme positions: a well-educated bach-
elor, member of several committees, groups and 
organizations, who holds important political posi-
tions and travels frequently throughout the whole 
country can be expected to have a rather loose-
knit network with many uniplex ties; an unedu-
cated peasant, married with children, who has 
never left his village and who is not involved in 
politics, would have a very close-knit network 
with few, but multiplex ties. Bergs concludes that 
marriage would decrease the number of ties an 
individual has and increase the multiplexity of the 
ties because married actors supposedly assume 
more roles. Education and gender would similarly 
correlate with network size: males and more-
educated individuals would have more ties than 
females and less-educated individuals and their 
networks are at the same time presumed to be 
more multiplex because they assume more social 
roles (Bergs, 2005: 57ff.). 
The second kind of network data, linguistic 
data, also hold information about the properties of 
individuals, and can thus be seen as a type of 
attribute data. In sociolinguistic research, they 
are compared with other attribute data and with 
relational data, and are thus given particular 
emphasis as a dependent variable. Generally, lin-
guistic data investigated in these studies relate to 
a wide range of phenomena related to language. 
For example, Milroy’s Belfast study (1980) con-
centrates on eight phonological variables that are 
clearly indexical of the Belfast urban speech com-
munity. In his Huntly study, Marshall identifies 
phonological, morphological and lexical variables 
that have two variants: the north-eastern Scots 
variant and the Scottish Standard English one 
(Marshall, 2004: 102). In Bergs’s (2005) historical 
study, in this case, the linguistic data thus com-
prise personal pronouns, relativizers and light 
verb constructions.
Relational data refer to the links between the 
members of a network and may stem from observ-
ing or questioning the actor(s) under investigation. 
Researchers can note who interacts with whom, 
how, and for what purpose. These observations 
will provide for a ‘slice-of-life picture’ (Meyerhoff, 
2009: 186) of the community or ego-network at 
the time of research. Another way of gaining rela-
tional data is to ask the actors about their net-
works. ‘Who are your best friends?’ or ‘Name all 
the people that you had a conversation with yes-
terday’ may constitute a good starting point. 
Fischer’s instrument can be used as a standardized 
method of establishing relational data based on 
10 network stimuli. It contains questions such as 
‘With whom do you discuss personal affairs and 
worries?’ or ‘Who looks after your house or apart-
ment when you are away?’ (Fischer, 1982). 
Reciprocity of namings might constitute an issue 
and researchers have to decide if they will only 
count reciprocal namings (e.g. Eckert, 2000; 
Meyerhoff, 2009) or build up the social networks 
based on responses regardless of whether the 
naming is reciprocal.
Precisely which methods of data collection are 
used in a given study depends largely on the con-
text and the research design. In sociolinguistic 
network research, different kinds of question-
naires, informants’ self-reports, ethnographic 
methods or triangulation of various methods (e.g. 
Lanza and Svendsen, 2007) are all used. 
Researchers agree that a thorough knowledge of 
the networks under investigation is required, 
which suggests that at least some ethnographic 
observation is required.
Often, and particularly in the tradition of 
Milroy’s network approach (Milroy, 1980), net-
work strength scales are used to evaluate data. 
These are based on a range of questions used to 
assess network characteristics. Individuals are 
assigned scores that can be compared to linguistic 
data. As in other fields, sociolinguistic studies 
often use statistical methods to assess network 
strength.
The social sciences as a whole have developed 
various criteria and extensively described methods 
for the description, visualization and analysis 
of network relations (Wasserman and Faust, 
1994; Scott, 2000; Carrington et al., 2005, see 
also the latest issues of network journals such as 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
214
Social Networks). Clear definitions of network 
properties are given in order to develop and test 
(formal) models. However, this potential is not 
(yet) exploited in sociolinguistic research.
15.5  BASIC ASSUMPTIONS 
IN SOCIOLINGUISTIC 
NETWORK ANALYSES
Milroy’s (1980) Belfast study makes plain the 
basic assumptions in sociolinguistic network anal-
ysis that have, since then, been the focus of dis-
cussions in this area. Milroy uses the social 
network as an analytical tool to account for sys-
tematic differences in language use between indi-
viduals and between subgroups within the 
community under investigation. In her study, a 
social network is seen as a mechanism for 
exchanging goods and services, as well as for 
imposing obligations and conferring privileges. 
Individuals who want to maintain their network 
relations have to account for the network’s system 
of rights and obligations from which the network’s 
norm-enforcement mechanism can be derived. 
Milroy’s network strength scale, which she allo-
cates to each of the 46 speakers from three low-
status urban working-class communities, is based 
upon five indicators relating to two properties of 
networks (see below), multiplexity and density. A 
person with a high score (1) is a member of a 
high-density, territorially-based group (e.g. a 
bingo or card-playing group); (2) has substantial 
ties of kinship with more than two households in 
the neighbourhood; (3) works at the same place as 
at least two others from the same neighbourhood; 
and (4) works at the same place as at least two 
others of the same gender from the same neigh-
bourhood; (5) associates voluntarily with work 
mates in leisure hours (Milroy, 1980: 54). As a 
result of the statistical correlation between the 
network scores and the eight phonological varia-
bles, Milroy claims to find strong evidence that a 
dense and multiplex social network closely relates 
to the maintenance of vernacular norms.
More generally, sociolinguistic network 
research assumes a strong correlation between the 
properties of social networks and language varia-
tion and choice. Strong network relationships lead 
to strong normative pressure, whereas weak rela-
tionships facilitate language change (Granovetter, 
1973). If the structure of the whole network 
changes, this has linguistic consequences. For 
example, if networks become more open, this 
reduces the pressure on networks. This pressure 
is seen as responsible for the maintenance of 
vernacular and minority varieties, and any reduc-
tion thus leads to a shift away from these varieties, 
e.g. language shift. This basic assumption – that 
normative pressures result from strong network 
relationships – has been confirmed in different 
areas of application within sociolinguistic net-
work research, albeit not without intensive debate 
(e.g. Rindler-Schjerve, 1987; Vetter, 1997; 
Meyerhoff, 2009: 184–200). This has ultimately 
contributed to further developments in the field.
15.6 DISCUSSION
To sum up, the far-reaching discussions and fur-
ther applications of the network perspective within 
sociolinguistics have challenged the explanatory 
power of social networks and have led to a differ-
ent understanding of the relationship between 
networks and linguistic behaviour. The most 
important changes can be seen as associated with 
three broad themes. First, the focus on the explicit 
application of networks in macro-social contexts 
enhances the importance of categories like gender, 
age, social class and the question of agency for 
social networks. Secondly, the paradigm shift in 
identity research has led to different understand-
ings of the link between networks and language. 
Thirdly, there has been an increased interest in 
investigating the influence of networks on lan-
guage proficiency.
Within sociolinguistic network research it has 
never been claimed that networks should replace 
the analysis of the social, economic or political 
frameworks constraining individual behaviour. 
The network has never been interpreted as being 
in conflict with social categories such as social 
class (Milroy, 2002: 500). Thus, Gumperz (1982), 
for example, connects changes in networks with 
the shift from subsistence farming to a primarily 
service economy. Social network analysis may be 
seen as an attempt to examine more closely indi-
viduals’ language behaviour and social interaction 
without ignoring the broader context. In this 
sense, social networks can be regarded as a buffer 
between macro-sociolinguistic concepts and 
micro-sociolinguistic interaction.
This leads to the paradox that network studies 
are often chosen because of the shortcomings of 
traditional social categories (e.g. Bortoni-Ricardo, 
1985; Lippi-Green 1989), although they cannot be 
seen as independent of these macro-social catego-
ries. Often the efficacy of networks is only shown 
when they are combined with macro-scale catego-
ries. This means that the work of networks is hard 
to disentangle from other categories, particularly 
gender (Marshall, 2004: 28) It has become clear 
that networks are only a part of what makes 
people behave linguistically the way they do and 
that networks generally have to be interpreted 

SOCIAL NETWORK
215
against the background of the wider social con-
text. The establishment of explicit links between 
networks and macro-structural contexts can be 
seen as a product of the past three decades of 
sociolinguistic network research.
The influence of gender was established by 
Cheshire (1982) on the basis of heterogeneous 
results for individual linguistic variables. She 
ascribes this to their differing and strongly gen-
der-related functions: some features of non-stand-
ard English function as markers of vernacular 
loyalty for girls, boys, or both, while others func-
tion as sex markers and some function as markers 
of both loyalty and sex. Docherty et al. (1997) 
and Milroy (1999) also point to gender-specific 
differences. 
Similarly, Kerswill und Williams (1999) also 
draw attention to the importance of the category of 
social class. They too confirm the basic assump-
tion of normative pressure in social networks, 
although somewhat differently from others: 
mobile low-status groups and mobile high-status 
groups are both characterized by weak networks, 
but differ in terms of linguistic behaviours, ascrib-
able in this case to differing orientations to the 
prevailing language ideologies of the UK. Studies 
of virtual networks also give a very differentiated 
picture that cannot be explained by the network 
alone. The function of linguistic variables as 
markers of social position is seen as particularly 
important (Paolillo 1999, 2001).
In a later study, Milroy and Milroy (1993) further 
tease out this micro–macro link and relate net-
works to wider social contexts via Højrup’s (1983) 
life-mode concept. This suggests that macro-level 
factors are responsible for assigning individuals to 
particular modes of production, which then leads 
to differing strengths of network ties.
Bergs’ analysis of historical networks also 
comes to different conclusions. Following the 
observation that individual linguistic variables 
behave very differently, he finds that linguistic 
variation is a much more conscious and goal-ori-
ented process than is commonly assumed (Bergs, 
2005: 264). He does not call into question the 
heuristic value of networks, but suggests that the 
questions of when, how and for which purposes 
particular linguistic forms are employed should 
also be given due importance. Marshall even goes 
one step further since he generally calls into ques-
tion the validity of social networks as an analytical 
tool. In his study in a rural community, attitudinal 
factors turn out to be more significant factors in 
the use of phonological and morphological varia-
bles than a network integration index. He con-
cludes that the presence of network norms may 
serve as a stimulus, but that the response of the 
individual is mediated by other factors such as 
attitudes (Marshall, 2004: 231).
To sum up, sociolinguistic network research 
since 1980 has clearly shown that network indices 
alone cannot account for linguistic variation and 
language choice. A comprehensive framework 
that both integrates networks into wider social 
contexts and also accounts for the agency of 
speakers has not yet been developed, and may be 
seen as a challenge for future research.
A second contentious area results from the 
paradigm shift in identity research, which has not 
yet been adequately transferred to network 
research. Sociolinguistic network research faces 
criticism because it assumes a ‘natural’ or iconic 
link between language and ethnic identity (Lanza 
and Svendsen, 2007). It is particularly recent 
research in multilingualism that rejects this essen-
tialization of identity and argues that fluidity of 
identities is more applicable: multilinguals have 
multiple identities, not just ethnic but also other 
identities, which are negotiated in contact situa-
tions. A sense of belonging need not be achieved 
through language, but can also be achieved through 
other means. A multiplicity of identities can be at 
play in specific interactions, for example with 
children, as Lanza and Svendsen (2007) have 
shown for Filipinos in Oslo. Govindasamy and 
Nambiar (2003) arrived at similar results in their 
study of the Malayalees, an Asian community 
coming from Kerala (India) to Malaysia.
That identity plays a central role in linguistic 
behaviour is shown in a study that has been highly 
acclaimed by sociolinguistic network researchers: 
Eckert’s (2000) long-term study of the speech of 
teenagers in Belten High School. She conceives of 
style as an individual and communal endeavour 
and as a means of negotiating meanings in the 
world. Moreover, she argues that variationist stud-
ies should focus on the relation between variation 
and identity. Eckert prefers the notion of a com-
munity of practice to that of a network. 
Communities of practice are a smaller unit than 
networks and can be characterized by mutual 
engagement, a jointly negotiated enterprise and a 
shared repertoire. In this sense, they can be con-
sidered as a specific kind of highly local networks 
(Meyerhoff, 2009: 289) which constitute a good 
framework for negotiating identity.
The third area of contention relates to the 
expansion of the explanatory power of networks 
for language proficiency. Networks have tended to 
be seen as a key to understanding the linguistic 
behaviour of individuals. In their study of three 
generations of Dutch migrants in New Zealand, 
however, Madeleine Hulsen, Kees de Bot and Bert 
Welten (2002) argue that limited contact with the 
first language leads to changes in the way lexical 
items are retrieved from the mental lexicon. 
Zentella (1997) drew similar conclusions in her 
study of ‘the Puerto Rico language learning 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
216
connection’, which is based on continuing net-
work ties. She sees these as an important reason 
for the strong position of Spanish in New York 
City. The limited language proficiency in the com-
munity language of the younger generation thus 
leads to code-mixing and code-switching. A rela-
tionship between the nature and orientation of 
social networks and competence in the target lan-
guage is established in Wiklund’s (2002) study of 
children from various migration contexts attend-
ing a secondary school in Sweden. Language 
proficiency and processing are research areas that 
will be further explored in the future; it goes with-
out saying that network data cannot be the only 
explanation for observed phenomena in these 
areas either.
To sum up the discussions in the field, simple 
correlations between a single independent social 
variable and dependent linguistic variables are 
always problematic – the network approach does 
not provide a remedy. The rich tradition of socio-
linguistic research has shed light on concepts that 
are closely related to networks, in particular macro-
social contexts, agency and questions of identity. 
This sets the scene for further discussions that 
may lead to advances in the application of 
networks to areas like language processing and 
competence.
15.7 OPEN QUESTIONS
The discussion so far was intended to show that 
social networks constitute neither a stable concept 
nor a coherent research paradigm in sociolinguistics. 
There are many open questions and future research 
promises to give rise to interesting discussions. 
Three lines of inquiry are immediately apparent: 
definitions of terminology and theoretical concepts; 
theoretical influences on the field; and the relation-
ship between sociolinguistics and sociology.
The clarity of the network concept can only be 
enhanced by critical comparison with concepts 
like speech community and community of prac-
tice. The first questions that must be asked relate 
to how the differences between the concepts can 
be identified and what gives each concept its 
explanatory power. These questions cannot be 
discussed without reference to underlying theo-
ries. The interactionist approach pioneered by 
Gumperz may well turn out to be compatible with 
the concept of the community of practice, and this 
may lead to a research perspective which succeeds 
both concepts. But even in the correlational para-
digm the theory of networks is vague. Most socio-
linguists seem to agree that the network is not a 
theory. However, the theoretical foundations 
which gave rise to the concept should be discussed 
above and beyond the limits set by the pioneers in 
the field. This will also lead to further methodo-
logical developments.
It seems that the problematization of these 
issues is a prerequisite for engaging in discussion 
with those disciplines with a long history of network 
research. This is not to suggest a simple applica-
tion of the rich inventory of formal research meth-
ods from these disciplines. Rather, based on a 
theoretically-grounded and differentiated concept 
of a social network in sociolinguistics, a critical 
comparison with sociological network research 
could enrich the sociolinguistic methodological 
inventory. Nevertheless, the concept of the net-
work may eventually be clearly differentiated 
from concepts in other disciplines. Without enlarg-
ing the horizon of network research beyond socio-
linguistics, however, it is most difficult to seriously 
confront the critisism that there are discrepancies 
in the quality of network studies between sociol-
ogy and sociolinguistics (Schlobinski, 2005).
REFERENCES
Barnes, J. A. (1954) ‘Class and committees in a Norwegian 
Island parish’, Human Relations, 7: 39–58.
Bergs, A. (2005) Social Networks and Historical Sociolinguistics: 
Studies in Morphosyntactic Variation in the Paston Letters, 
1421–1503. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Bergs, A. (2006) ‘Analyzing online communication from a 
social network point of view: questions, problems, perspec-
tives’, Language @ Internet. Available at: http://www.
languageatinternet.de/articles/2006/371/index_html.
Berthele, R. (2002) Sprache in der Klasse: eine dialektologisch-
soziolinguistische Untersuchung von Primarschulkindern in 
multilingualem Umfeld. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Blom, J.-P. and Gumperz, J. J. (1972) ‘Social meaning 
in linguistic structures: code-switching in Norway’, in 
J. J. Gumperz, and D. Hymes (eds), Directions in 
Sociolinguistics. The Ethnography of Communication. 
New York: Holt-Rinehart-Winston. pp. 407–34.
Boissevain, J. (1974) Friends of Friends: Networks, 
Manipulators and Coalitions. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Boissevain, J. (1987) ‘Social networks’, in U. Ammon, 
N. Dittmar and K. J. Mattheier (eds), An International 
Handbook of the Science of Language and Society. Vol. 1. 
1st edn. Berlin: de Gruyter. pp. 164–9.
Boissevain, J. and J. C. Mitchell (eds) (1973) Network Analysis: 
Studies in Human Interaction. The Hague: Mouton.
Boorman, S. A. and White, H. C. (1976) ‘Social structure from 
multiple networks. II. Role structures’, American Journal of 
Sociology, 81(6): 1384–1446.
Bortoni-Ricardo, S. M. (1985) The Urbanisation of Rural 
Dialect Speakers: a Sociolinguistic Study in Brazil. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bott, E. (1957) Family and Social Network. London: 
Tavistock.

SOCIAL NETWORK
217
Burt, R. S. (1982) Toward a Structural Theory of Action. 
Networks Models of Social Structure, Perception and 
Action. New York: Academic Press.
Burt, R. S. (1992) Structural Holes. The Social Structure of 
Competition. Cambridge, CA: Harvard University Press.
Carrington, P. J., Scott, J. and Wasserman, S. (eds) (2005) 
Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis. 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Cheshire, J. (1982) Variation in an English Dialect: a 
Sociolinguistic Study. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dabène, L. and Moore, D. (1995) ‘Bilingual speech of migrant 
people’, in L. Milroy, and P. Muysken (eds), One speaker, 
two languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 17–44.
de Bot, K. and Stoessel, S. (2002) ‘Introduction’, International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language, 153: 1–7.
Degenne A. and Forsé, M. (eds) (2004) Les réseaux sociaux. 
2nd edn. Paris: Armand Colin. (1st edn, 1994).
Docherty, G., Foulkes, P., Milroy, J., Milroy, L. and 
Walshaw, D. (1997) ‘Descriptive adequacy in phonology: 
a variationist perspective’, Journal of Linguistics, 33: 1–36.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Fischer, C. (1982) To Dwell Among Friends. Personal Networks 
in Town and City. Chicago: University Press of Chicago.
Forsé, M. (2002) ‘Les réseaux sociaux chez Simmel: les fonde-
ments d’un modèle individualiste et structural’, in 
L. Deroche-Gurcel and P. Watier (eds), La sociologie de 
Georg Simmel. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
pp. 63–107.
Forsé, M. (2008) ‘Définir et analyser les réseaux sociaux. 
Les enjeux de l’analyse structurale’, CAIRN 147 (2008/3). 
Available at: http://www.cairn.info/revue-informations-so-
ciales-2008-3-page-10.htmn.
Forsé, M. and Langlois, S. (1997) ‘Réseaux, structures et 
rationalités’, L’Année sociologique 47(1), 27–35.
Freeman, L. C. (2004) The Development of Social Network 
Analysis: A study in the Sociology of Science. Vancouver, 
BC: Empirical Press.
Gal, S. (1979) Language Shift. Social Determinants of Linguistic 
Change in Bilingual Austria. New York: Academic Press.
Gauchat, L. (1905) ‘L’unité phonétique dans le patois d’une 
commune’, in Aus Romanischen Sprachen und Literaturen. 
Festschrift Heinrich. Morf:. Halle: Niemeyer. pp. 175–232.
Govindasamy, S. and Nambiar, M. (2003) ‘Social networks: 
applicability to minority communities in multilingual 
settings’, IJSL, 161: 25–45.
Granovetter, M. (1973) ‘The strength of weak ties’, American 
Journal of Sociology, 78: 1360–80.
Gumperz, J. J. (1975) Sprache, lokale Kultur und soziale 
Identität. Düsseldorf: Schwann.
Gumperz, J. J. (1982) ‘Social network and language shift’, in 
J. J. Gumperz (ed.), Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 38–58.
Gumperz, J. J. (1994) ‘Sprachliche Variabilität in interaktions-
analytischer Perspektive’, in W. Kallmeyer (ed.), 
Kommunikation in der Stadt. Teil 1. Exemplarische Analysen 
des Sprachverhaltens in Mannheim. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
pp. 611–39.
Højrup, T. (1983) ‘The concept of lifemode: a form-specifying 
mode of analysis applied to contemporary western Europe’, 
Ethnologia Scandinavica, 1–50.
Hollstein, B. and Straus, F. (eds) (2006) Qualitative 
Netzwerkanalyse. Konzepte, Methoden, Anwendungen. 
Wiesbaden: VS-Verlag.
Homans, G. C. (1958) ‘Social behavior as exchange’, American 
Journal of Sociology, 63(6): 597–606.
Hulsen, M., de Bot, K. and Welten, B. (2002) ‘Between two 
worlds. Social networks, language shift, and language 
processing in three generations of Dutch migrants in New 
Zealand’, International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language, 153: 27–52.
Jansen, D. (2006) Einführung in die Netzwerkanalyse. 
3rd edn. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften. 
(1st edn, 1999.)
Javeau, C. (1986) ‘Georg Simmel et la vie quotidienne: Tür et 
Brücke et socialité’, in P. Watier (ed.), Georg Simmel, la 
sociologie et l’expérience du monde moderne. Paris: 
Méridiens Klincksieck. pp. 177–88.
Johnson, D. P. (2008): Contemporary Sociological Theory. An 
Integrated Multi-Level Approach. New York: Springer.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (1999) ‘Mobility versus social 
class in dialect levelling: evidence from new and old towns 
in England’, Cuadernos de Filologia Inglesa, 8: 47–57.
Labov, W. (1963) ‘The social motivation of a sound change’ 
Word, 19: 273–309.
Labov, W. (1972) ‘The linguistic consequences of being 
a lame’, in W. Labov (ed.), Language in the inner city. 
Philadelphia: 
University 
of 
pennsylvania 
Press. 
pp. 255–92.
Labrie, N. (1988) ‘Social networks and code-switching: a 
sociolinguistic investigation of Italians in Montreal’, in 
N. Dittmar and P. Schlobinski (eds) The Sociolinguistics of 
Urban Vernaculars. Berlin: de Gruyter. pp. 217–32.
Lanza, E. and Svendsen, B. A. (2007) ‘Tell me who your friends 
are and I might be able to tell you what language(s) 
you speak: social network analysis, multilingualism, and 
identity’, International Journal of Bilingualism, 11(3): 
275–300.
Li, W. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family. 
Language Choice and Language Shift in a Chinese 
Community in Britain. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Lippi-Green, R. (1989) ‘Social network integration and lan-
guage change in progress in an alpine rural village’, 
Language in Society, 18: 213–34.
Lorrain, F. and White, H. C. (1971) ‘  The structural equiva-
lence of individuals in social networks’, Journal of 
Mathematical Sociology, 1: 49–80.
Marsden, P. V. (2005) ‘Recent developments in network 
measurement’, in P. J. Carrington, J. Scott and 
S. Wasserman (eds), Models and Methods in Social 
Network Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 8–30.
Marshall, J. (2004) Language Change and Sociolinguistics. 
Rethinking Social Networks. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Mercklé P. (2004) Sociologie des réseaux sociaux. Paris: La 
Découverte.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
218
Meyerhoff, M. (2009) Introducing Sociolinguistics. New York: 
Routledge.
Milardo, R. M. (1988) ‘Families and social networks: an over-
view of theory and methodology’, in R. M. Milardo (ed.), 
Families and Social Networks. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
pp. 13–47.
Milroy, L. (1980) Language and Social Networks. Blackwell: 
Oxford.
Milroy, L. (1999) ‘Women as innovators and norm-creators: 
the sociolinguistics of dialect leveling in a northern English 
city’, in S. Wertheim, A. C. Bailey and M. Corston-Oliver  
(eds), Engendering Communication, Proceedings of the 
Fifth Berkeley Women and Language Conference. Berkeley: 
Berkeley Women and Language Group. pp. 361–76.
Milroy, L. (2001) ‘Bridging the micro–macro gap: social 
change, social network and bilingual repertoires’, in 
J. Klatter-Folmer and P. van Avermaet (eds), Theories on 
Maintenance and Loss of Minority Languages: Towards a 
More Integrated Explanatory Framework. Munich: 
Waxmann. pp. 39–64.
Milroy, L. (2002) ‘22. Social networks’, in J. Chambers, and 
N. Schilling-Estes (eds), Handbook of Language Variation 
and Change. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 549–73.
Milroy, L. and Li, W. (1995) ‘A social network approach to 
codeswitching’, in L. Milroy and P. Muysken (eds), One 
speaker, two languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 136–57.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1985) ‘Linguistic change, social net-
work and speaker innovation’, Journal of Linguistics, 21: 
339–84.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1993) ‘Mechanisms of change in 
urban dialects: the role of class, social network and 
gender’, International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 3(1): 
57–78.
Mitchell, J. C. (ed.) (1969) Social Networks in Urban Situations. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Mitchell, J. C. (1973) ‘Networks, norms and institutions’, in 
J. Boissevain and J. C. Mitchell (eds), Network Analysis; 
Studies in Human Interaction. The Hague: Mouton. 
pp. 2–35.
Mitchell, J. C. (1986) ‘Network procedures’, in D. Frick, 
H. W. Hoefert, H. Legewie, R. Mackensen and R. K. Silbereisen 
(eds), The Quality of Urban life. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
pp. 73–92.
Moreno, J. L. (1934) Who Shall Survive? A New Approach to 
the Problem of Human Interrelations. Washington, DC: 
Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing.
Moreno, J. L. (1960) ‘Political prospects of sociometry’, 
International Journal of Sociometry and Society, 2: 3–6.
Paolillo, J. (1999) ‘The virtual speech community: social net-
work and language variation on IRC’, Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 4(4). Available at: http://jcmc.
indiana.edu/vol4/issue4/paolillo.html.
Paolillo, J. (2001) ‘Language variation on Internet Relay Chat: 
a social network approach’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
5(2): 180–213.
Radcliffe-Brown, A. R. (1940) ‘On social structure’, Journal of 
the Royal Anthropological Society of Great Britain and 
Ireland, 70: 1–12.
Raphael, F. (1986): ‘“L’etranger” de Georg Simmel’, in 
P. Watier (ed.), Georg Simmel, la sociologie et l‘expérience 
du monde moderne. Paris: Méridiens Klincksieck. 
pp. 257–78.
Raschka, C., Li, W. and Sherman, L. (2002) ‘Bilingual 
development and social networks of British-born Chinese 
children’, International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language, 153: 9–25.
Rindler-Schjerve, R. (1987) Sprachkontakt auf Sardinien. 
Soziolinguistische Untersuchung des Sprachenwechsels im 
ländlichen Bereich. Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Rindler-Schjerve, R. (1991) ‘Ethnolinguistic and interpretative 
concepts in explaining language shift’, in J. Verschueren 
(ed.), Levels of Linguistic Adaptation. Selected Papers of 
the International Pragmatics Conference, Antwerp 1987. 
Philadelphia: Benjamins. pp. 223–33.
Salancik, G. R. (1995) ‘Wanted: a good network theory of 
organization’, Administrative Science Quarterly, 40: 345–9.
Schenk, M. and Bergs, A. (2004) ‘55. Netzwerk/Network’, in 
U. Ammon, N. Dittmar and K. J. Mattheier (eds) An 
International Handbook of the Science of Language and 
Society. 2nd edn. Berlin: de Gruyter. pp. 438–43. (1st edn, 
1987.)
Schlobinski, P. (2005) ‘143. Netzwerk-Untersuchungen. 
Research on networks’, in  U. Ammon, N. Dittmar and 
K. J. Mattheier (eds), An International Handbook of the 
Science of Language and Society. 2nd edn. Berlin: de 
Gruyter. pp. 1459–69. (1st edn, 1987.)
Scott, J. (2000) Social Network Analysis: A Handbook. 2nd 
edn. London: Sage. (1st edn, 1991.)
Simmel, G. (1908) Soziologie. Untersuchungen über die 
Formen der Vergesellschaftung. 1992 edited by Otthein 
Rammstedt. Vol. 11. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp.
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I., Nevalainen, T. and Caon, L. 
(eds) (2001) Social network theory and the history of 
english (special issue of the European Journal of English 
Studies).
Vetter, E. (1997) Nicht mehr Bretonisch? Sprachkonflikt in der 
ländlichen Bretagne. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
Von Wiese, L. (1932) ‘Sociologie relationnelle’, Revue interna-
tionale de sociologie, I-II: 23–56.
Wasserman, S. and Faust, K. (1994) Social Network Analysis: 
Methods and Applications. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Wasserman, S., Scott, J. and Carrington, P. (2005) 
‘Introduction’, in P. J. Carrington, J. Scott and S. Wasserman  
(eds), Models and Methods in Social Network Analysis. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–7.
Watts, R. (1991) Power in Family Discourse. New York: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
White, H. C. (1992) Identity and Control: A Structural Theory 
of Social Action. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
White, H. C., Boorman, S. A. and Breiger, R. R. (1976) ‘Social 
structure from multiple networks: I. blockmodels of roles 
and positions’, American Journal of Sociology, 81: 
730–80.
Wiklund, I. (2002) ‘Social networks from a sociolinguistic 
perspective’, IJSL, 153: 53–92.
Zentella, A. C. (1997) Growing up Bilingual. Oxford: Blackwell.

16
16.1  SOCIAL APPROACHES TO 
LANGUAGE CHANGE
Taking a sociolinguistic approach to the explana-
tion of language change has two consequences. 
The first is that, with the exception of a growing 
body of work in historical sociolinguistics (see 
Nevalainen, this volume), the subject matter is 
restricted in time to the rather brief period, leading 
up to the present, during which extensive and reli-
able records of natural speech have been available 
– or sociolinguistically valid simulations of such 
speech. The second is that sociolinguistics is a 
young discipline, and in its ‘variationist’ guise is 
mainly the brainchild of a single scholar, William 
Labov. Particularly in its approach to language 
change (mainly on the phonological level), varia-
tionist sociolinguistics has been dominated by 
Labov. The by now ‘classical’ variationist approach 
to change, as set out in Weinreich, Labov and 
Herzog (1968) and encapsulated in Labov’s New 
York City (NYC) study (1966), sits alongside his 
own development of that paradigm (Labov, 1994; 
2001; Labov, Ash and Boberg, 2006) as well as 
other distinct research enterprises which are 
mostly post-Labovian, though some (in cognitive 
linguistics and experimental phonetics) are not 
specifically informed by his work. The develop-
ment of Labov’s ideas is discussed in detail in 
Hazen (this volume). Here, I focus on the way his 
work sheds light on the central subject matter of 
historical linguistics, namely change in the lin-
guistic system (the transition from state A to state 
B in the same language across a given period of 
time). But in their wider concern for patterning 
in naturally-occurring speech, sociolinguists 
interested in change tend to debate the locus 
of that change. This discussion can be seen as 
involving two independent dichotomies: the indi-
vidual vs the group, and system vs use. In the 
course of this chapter, we will touch upon these 
concerns, too.
Labov (1994: 19) traces the origin of his 
approach to Gauchat (1905), who conducted a 
study of a Swiss village using what is now known 
as the ‘apparent-time’ method, i.e. inferring 
change from differences between the speech of 
older and younger people (see Romaine, 1988). 
Despite the interest in variation and change in 
both urban and rural dialects in Scandinavia in the 
early twentieth century (e.g. Larsen and Stoltz, 
1911–12; Skautrup, 1921), Gauchat’s study was 
unique in combining empiricism with an explicit 
theoretical language-change agenda, in this case 
attempting to refute the Neogrammarians’ regular-
ity hypothesis. It is only with Labov’s Martha’s 
Vineyard study (1963; see Hazen, this volume) 
that a closely-related data/theory combination 
reappears. As for datasets gathered according to 
sociolinguistic principles, it is obvious that as 
time goes on there will be increasing scope for 
studies of real-time change (revisiting a commu-
nity, say, a generation later in order to gauge 
change). Notable studies are by Cedergren (1987; 
Panama) and Sundgren (2009; Eskilstuna). 
Nevertheless, pessimism about the time depth of 
variationist sociolinguistics is very much tem-
pered by the routine use of older data collected by 
other means and for other purposes, notably by 
Labov himself who used data from the Linguistic 
Atlas of New England, collected in 1933 in loca-
tions including Martha’s Vineyard. The series of 
Sociolinguistic Approaches to 
Language Change: Phonology
P a u l  K e r s w i l l

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
220
studies of New Zealand English by Gordon, 
Trudgill and others are based on recordings of 
elderly speakers made in the 1940s, as well as of 
more recent data (Gordon et al., 2004; Trudgill, 
2004). In both the Martha’s Vineyard and New 
Zealand cases, we see a combination of apparent- 
and real-time methods which, after some triangu-
lation, provide a reliable picture of change over 
some 150 years – at least at the micro-level of 
individual phonetic features. Ongoing large-scale 
projects making extensive use of both old and new 
material in Germany (Schwartz and Streck, 2009) 
and Denmark (Gregersen, Maegaard and Pharao, 
2009) are promising. An interesting perspective is 
afforded by so-called ‘language islands’, where 
populations are isolated from their linguistic 
homelands and so do not take part in mainstream 
changes (Rosenberg, 2005: 222; Loudon, 2006). 
We return to the issue of time and the transmission 
of dialect in the final section.
Historical linguistics is a much older discipline 
and has the advantage of being able to take a long 
view of change, over several centuries, and with 
outcomes clearly visible. The age of the discipline 
brings with it huge changes in perspective, how-
ever. In the late eighteenth to early twentieth cen-
turies, ‘outcomes’ were often identified with the 
endpoint of a teleological process which had 
striven for, and achieved, perfection. Thus, the 
early nineteenth-century German linguist Jakob 
Grimm, following Herder, saw the High German 
Consonant Shift as ‘an early assertion of inde-
pendence on the part of the ancestors of the 
German peoples’ (Robins, 1990: 190). Much later, 
H. C. Wyld was of the opinion that English dia-
lects could be ignored except insofar as they 
‘throw light on those forms of our language which 
are the main objects of our solicitude, namely the 
language of literature and Received Standard 
Spoken English’(1927: 16; cited in Crystal, 2004: 
5). Nowadays, these opinions are seen by histori-
ans of linguistics in a critical light, as embedded 
in their time and place. Sociolinguists, however, 
recognize that similar views remain firmly 
entrenched today as everyday ideologies. The 
manifestation of this, particularly in developed 
countries, is a so-called ‘standard ideology’
(J. Milroy, 2000): a common-sense view of the 
essential, even moral, rightness of the standard 
language. This sociolinguistic insight is actually 
one component of the explanation of a particular 
type of linguistic change – standardization and 
dedialectalization – to which we will return. 
However dispassionate sociolinguists would 
like to be, as observers of linguistic behaviour, a 
lesson from these earlier scholars’ work is that 
objectivity remains mediated by the observer’s 
stance. Among variationist sociolinguists, there is 
now an acceptance that language change can be 
‘observed’, replacing earlier linguists’ pessimism 
on this point (Labov, 1994: 44). Labov’s speech 
community model (2006a [1966]) shows that, 
even if it is difficult to observe change directly 
across a speaker’s lifetime, the social stratification 
of linguistic features, coupled with age differenti-
ation in the same features, gives us a way of 
understanding how change can proceed in a 
manner that is indirectly observable. (See Wolfram, 
this volume, for a discussion of the speech com-
munity concept.) The discovery of socially-pat-
terned variation and, crucially, the inference of a 
mechanism of change underlying this patterning 
have been fundamental to thinking about language 
change since the early 1960s. Because of this pat-
terning, which is quantitative in nature (i.e. it is 
rarely a question of categorical presence vs 
absence of a feature, but differing frequencies or 
differing positions on a continuous phonetic 
scale), Labov believes that systematicity is greater 
at the group level than at the individual level: ‘We 
find that in New York City, most idiolects do not 
form a simple, coherent system: on the contrary, 
they are studded with oscillations and contradic-
tions ... ’ (2006a [1966]: 5). Later, he refines this 
position as follows: 
Many writers on sociolinguistic themes ... have 
argued that the major focus of sociolinguistic 
analysis should be placed on the individual speaker 
rather than the group ... . If the net result of such 
a policy is to plunge more deeply into the internal 
workings of the group, then it is likely to be pro-
ductive. (2001: 33) ... . [T]his unique object, the 
individual speaker, can only be understood as the 
product of a unique social history, and the inter-
section of the linguistic patterns of all the 
social groups and categories that define that 
individual [my emphasis – PK] (Labov, 2001: 34).
The uniqueness of an idiolect is not random, 
but is the product of the speaker’s various group 
affiliations and exposure, over a lifetime, to those 
groups’ distinctive ways of speaking. This is rela-
tively uncontroversial. What may be considered 
problematic is the positivism implied by Labov’s 
work. First, he uses a hierarchical social model, 
strongly influenced by the functionalism of 
Parsons (Kerswill, 2007a: 52). Secondly, this 
model is composed of predetermined categories, 
especially social class. The quotation above can, 
then, easily lead to the view that speakers respond 
to their socioeconomic position as if they were 
automata. Whatever the criticisms, Labov presents 
a broad-brush picture of language variation at the 
speech community level. As we shall see below, 
the model’s great benefit is that it allows for intri-
cate social patterns to be uncovered in the mecha-
nism of language change; the implication is that if 

PHONOLOGY
221
language is the property of the group, then change 
should be explained at the level of the group. 
Labov’s work is often referred to as representa-
tive of ‘first-wave’ variation studies, giving us the 
backdrop to variation. (Eckert (2005) gives an 
excellent overview of the ‘waves’ of language 
variation studies.) ‘Second-wave’ studies are con-
cerned with explaining the link between social 
categories – which this time need not be imposed 
by the researcher, but may be allowed to emerge 
from the local context – and people’s linguistic 
behaviour; in other words, the research investi-
gates ‘how ways of speaking are imbued with 
local meaning’ (Eckert, 2005: 5). The focus is 
very much on the individual speaker, and ethno-
graphic rather than survey methods are preferred. 
A prime exemplar is the Milroys’ research on 
Belfast English (L. Milroy 1980 (2nd edition, 
1987); J. Milroy 1992). Here, the researchers 
quickly realized that social class could not account 
for variation in inner-city lower-working-class 
neighbourhoods – the speakers were all objec-
tively in the same bracket. Instead, they found that 
variation seemed related to differences in the way 
individuals were connected socially with their 
own local community and extended families. The 
mechanism involved is the social network: ‘the 
aggregate of relationships contracted with others, 
a boundless web of ties which reaches out through 
social and geographical space linking many indi-
viduals, sometimes remotely’ (Milroy and Gordon, 
2003: 117; see also Vetter, this volume). We will 
turn later to the way in which a network analysis 
contributes to the explanation of language change. 
For now, we can note that a close-knit network 
serves as a powerful norm-enforcement mecha-
nism, inhibiting change, while a looser-knit one 
allows, or even promotes, change. 
Despite its focus on individual behaviour, the 
social network concept, too, has been considered 
overly deterministic, even as early as Romaine 
(1982: 269–70). ‘Third-wave’ variation studies 
compensate for this by focusing firmly on the 
social meaning of variant forms, showing how 
they are combined by speakers into ‘styles’ index-
ing identities and personae (see Eckert, 2005 for 
discussion). Interest in language change varies 
strongly across third-wave studies: Eckert (2000) 
deals with vocalic variables in a Detroit suburban 
high school, investigating how they are manipu-
lated to index identities within the school popula-
tion, while relating this indexation to the progress 
of a vowel shift known as the Northern Cities 
Shift (Labov, Yaeger and Steiner, 1972; Labov, 
1994; and below). For some other broadly third-
wave studies, language change is not a central 
concern. Focusing on the vocalic variable (aw), as 
in mouth in Pittsburgh, Johnstone and Kiesling 
(2008) use a series of interviews with Pittsburghers 
to explore differences in the way the local, 
monophthongal realization of this vowel indexes a 
local Pittsburgh identity, in the process becoming 
stereotyped. By contrast, Moore (2003, 2006), 
who explored adolescent peer groups in a Bolton 
secondary school, did not relate the use of varia-
bles to ongoing change. 
At this point in the history of variationist sociolin-
guistics, we can detect an incipient bifurcation. 
Although some third-wave studies do relate their 
findings to language structure and change, probably 
a larger number are more closely allied to interpre-
tive, interactional and constructivist sociolinguistic 
approaches represented by Gumperz, Scollon and 
Kotthoff (see Kotthoff, this volume]). However, first- 
and second-wave studies of change continue una-
bated (e.g., Baranowski, 2007; Kerswill, Torgersen 
and Fox, 2008), but in the early twenty-first century 
their central focus on language change has been 
extended, not by the next ‘wave’, but by usage-based 
and cognitive models of language acquisition and 
language change. Some of these are firmly within 
the Labovian tradition (Clark, 2008; Docherty, 2008; 
Hay, 2008), while others do not use his methods 
or frameworks at all (Bybee, 2000, 2002; 
Pierrehumbert, 2003; Hollmann and Siewierska, 
2008). Although integration between the variationist 
and cognitive/usage-based research traditions has 
yet to be achieved, the synergy between them is 
likely to be fruitful. I briefly discuss the work of 
Clark and Bybee in section 16.4, below.
16.2 SOUND CHANGE
Much variationist work has been on sound change, 
and this work has become field-defining. Perhaps 
not surprisingly, most of the social (as opposed to 
linguistic) mechanisms of change apply equally to 
change in other linguistic components. The cen-
tral concept of the ‘linguistic variable’ is well 
suited to phonology because variation in the reali-
zation of a variable is meaning-preserving – cf. 
the variable ‘(t)’ in British English, which usually 
refers to the use of the glottal stop as a variant, 
alongside alveolar [t], of intervocalic /t/. This 
concept can be applied to other types of structural 
linguistic change as well, particularly in morpho-
syntax. (Kerswill (2004: 24–7) contains a discus-
sion of the variable and the limits of its 
meaning-preserving properties; Cheshire (2007) 
presents a variationist analysis of discourse mark-
ers, where the strict delimitation of the variants of 
the variables is not possible and the preservation 
of meaning must be interpreted, using pragmatic 
analyses, as rough functional equivalence.) We 
will return to the variable in the Neogrammarian 
context at the end of this section.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
222
Sound change was central to nineteenth-century 
linguistic thinking, and was an important motiva-
tion for the new discipline of dialectology in the 
last quarter of that century. Methodologically, 
variationist sociolinguistics shares much with 
dialectology, non-standardized speech being 
placed centre-stage. In both, strict criteria for 
speaker selection are set, with some notion of 
‘nativeness’ being significant; for dialectology, 
speakers must be as local as possible with a low 
level of education in order for the ‘true’ dialect to 
emerge (see Chambers and Trudgill, 1998: 29 for 
discussion); for variationists, speakers should 
have spent most of their years, especially the early 
ones, in the location (though practice varies). 
They differ in that dialectology considers only 
geographical space, in order to examine better the 
spread of a feature, while variationism operates at 
the community level – social space, in other 
words. In many respects, the two disciplines can 
now be seen as modelling complementary sides of 
the same reality (Trudgill, 1992; Britain, 2004), 
and their combination increases the explanatory 
power of each.
We begin with the motivation of sound change. 
The comparative method (Hock, 1991: 556–80) 
relies heavily on the notion of ‘regular’ sound 
change in its reconstruction of hypothetical past 
states of language, establishing ‘genetic’ relation-
ships between ‘daughter’ languages. Thus, the 
following set of phonetically and semantically 
related words (which can be greatly multiplied) 
suggests such a relationship between Norwegian 
and English:
is [i:s]   
ice [aIs]
smile [smi:l@]  
smile [smaIl]
mil [mi:l]  
mile [maIl]
Other evidence tells us that the vowel [aI] in 
English was formerly pronounced [i:], and that 
this change took place in Late Middle/Early 
Modern English – many centuries after the ances-
tor languages of Norwegian and English split off 
from each other. This is an example of a regular 
(or Neogrammarian) sound change. The dictum is 
that ‘phonemes change’ (Bloomfield 1933: 353–4): 
every instance of phoneme A is affected in the 
same way in the same period of time in the same 
geographical area (see Hock, 1991: 34–91). There 
appear to be exceptions, however. In French, 
Proto-Romance /k/ before /a/ was shifted to [S], 
yielding modern French champ ‘field’, chat ‘cat’, 
chandelle ‘candle’, chanson ‘song’, etc. (Bynon 
1977: 181). In Normandy French dialects, /k/ 
was preserved. However, dialectology showed 
that standard French /S/ has encroached on the 
/k/ region in certain words more than others, 
namely chandelle, chanson and chaîne ‘chain’ 
(Bynon 1977: 182). Such findings as these led 
to the alternative slogan: ‘each word has its own 
history’. 
There are several issues surrounding sound 
change which need to be resolved in the face of 
this contradictory evidence. Two issues that have 
exercised scholars since the late nineteenth cen-
tury are (1) whether sound change is phonetically 
gradual or abrupt and (2) whether it is lexically 
abrupt (covering all lexical items, and hence regu-
lar), or gradual (proceeding by lexical diffusion, 
as, apparently, in the French k→S shift). As 
I noted earlier, in more recent times, scholars have 
asked (3) whether such change is ‘observable’ and 
(4) whether change is a property of the individual 
or of the community. Finally (5): Is sound change 
internally motivated (as a consequence of 
structural properties of the language), or is it the 
consequence of external motivation (i.e. contact-
induced)? Following Farrar and Jones (2002: 1), 
one should additionally ask if ‘extra-linguistic 
(i.e. sociopolitical and economic)’ factors bear on 
change – though we will not be concerned with 
these factors here.
Sound changes appear to be divided into those 
which have a clear phonetic, i.e. articulatory, 
basis, and those for which there is no such clear 
motivation available. An example comes from the 
development of Spanish, where Latin /p/, /t/ and 
/k/ when they occurred between vowels were leni-
ted (weakened). An example is Latin pacatum, in 
which we assume /k/ and /t/ first changed to [g] 
and [d] and then to [G] and [ð], with the additional 
possibility of deletion. This gives the presumed 
chronological sequence:
[pakatum] → *[pagado] → [paGaðo] (→ dialectal 
[paGao], with deletion of /ð/) ‘pleased’ (‘*’ stands 
for ‘unattested’; adapted from Hock, 1991: 81)
where the two medial consonants gradually take 
on phonological features from the surrounding 
vowels, viz. +voice and then +continuant, before 
(in some varieties) being deleted, i.e. fully assimi-
lated to the vowels, leaving no trace. The initial 
/p/, being word initial, was not affected. The 
change of intervocalic plosives to voiced fricatives 
is regular in Spanish, in that all cases have shifted. 
A well-documented lenition in present-day 
Spanish is that of the affricate /tS/ to [S] in Panama 
(Cedergren, 1987; Tagliamonte and D’Arcy, 2009: 
60). Another example, this time involving vowels 
and the process of assimilation, is the fronting of 
back vowels /u/, /o/ and /a/ in Germanic to [y], [ø] 
and [ε], respectively, before a syllable containing 
the high front vowel /i/ (the vowels assimilate the 
front property of /i/): reflexes of this ancient 
change (‘Umlaut’; Hock, 1991: 66–8) still appear 
in German morphology in, e.g. Buch – Bücher 

PHONOLOGY
223
(‘book’ – ‘books’). The question which arises, of 
course, is why the lenition of /p/, /t/ and /k/ didn’t 
happen in the other daughter languages of Latin, 
and why Umlaut happened in the other Germanic 
languages but not in Gothic; and we must ask why 
the changes happened just when they did and 
not at some other time, given that they were 
phonetically motivated and hence ‘natural’, and so 
should apply whenever the phonological condi-
tions were right.
To try to gain an understanding of how lenitions 
and assimilations become fully-fledged changes in 
the language, we need to know how they reached 
this state, from having been ‘connected speech 
processes’ (CSPs). CSPs are the range of reduc-
tions affecting phonological segments in normal, 
fluent speech (Nolan and Kerswill, 1990). They 
result from conflicts between different articulatory 
gestures for adjacent sounds and (related to this) 
the failure of articulators to reach targets, such as 
that of forming a stop closure. As such, CSPs 
occur in all speech most of the time, depending on 
speech style – whether slow, careful, or fast, 
casual. They are phonetically gradual. Dressler 
and Wodak (1982) offer one approach to the tran-
sition to ‘sound change’, at the same time offering 
a model of dialect switching (between dialect and 
standard) to account for the linguistic behaviour 
of speakers of Viennese German. Each variety 
(dialect or standard) is associated with a set of 
reduction rules (lenitions), as well as fortitions 
(clarification processes characteristic of slow, 
careful speech). Dressler and Wodak conceptual-
ize phonological change as ‘the spread of optional 
PRs [phonological rules – PK] from casual speech 
to more formal phonological styles until they 
become obligatory for all styles’ (1982: 350). In 
other words, CSPs, which are characteristic of 
everyday speech, begin to be used in more formal 
speech, and then become fossilized as permanent 
features of the phonology. However, Spanish leni-
tion and German Umlaut are today not gradual and 
variable, but discrete and obligatory. Experimental 
methods can be applied in order to see how gradu-
alness gives way to discreteness. An indication of 
this is given by Wright (1989) and by Kerswill and 
Wright (1990). Using electropalatography to 
record tongue contact with the palate, they discov-
ered that a typical CSP, regressive place assimila-
tion affecting final /d/ before velars, giving 
[bæggaI] for bad guy, was phonetically gradual in 
local Cambridge English, with many intermediate 
articulations between [d] and [g]. It was suscepti-
ble to speaking rate, but not socially evaluated. On 
the other hand, another CSP, the vocalization of 
syllable-coda /l/ as in bell or milk, was applied 
almost categorically and was only weakly affected 
by speaking rate, but was socially (negatively) 
evaluated. The assumption is that regressive assim-
ilation is not (yet) a sound change in English 
(though it might be), while l-vocalization, 
a common CSP, is a sound change nearing 
completion in south-east England (Johnson and 
Britain 2007). 
I mentioned social evaluation in relation to a 
CSP becoming an established change. This turns 
out to be of central importance to more main-
stream variationist treatments of sound change 
(and language change generally). Variationist 
studies of vowels deal with the various shifts, 
diphthongizations and monophthongizations 
which take place in all languages. They are gener-
ally unconditioned: i.e. they occur in all instances 
of the particular vowel and not in restricted pho-
nological environments – the diphthongization of 
Middle English /i:/ is a case in point. Perhaps 
because of the absence of an obvious phonetic 
motivation, these became the focus of much vari-
ationist work, starting in particular with Labov’s 
NYC study (2006a [1966]). Figure 16.1 shows 
data for the fronting of the vowel (aw), as in 
mouth, in Philadelphia, from Labov’s later, 1970s 
project. As explained by Guy (2003: 366), the 
y-axis is a coefficient relating to the second 
formant of the vowel, measured in Hertz; the 
higher the value, the greater the fronting. 
The x-axis represents five socioeconomic classes, 
from lowest to highest. The fact that there is, 
Figure 16.1 The variable (aw), referring 
to the fronting of /aU/ (as in mouth) in 
Philadelphia: regression coefficients 
for socioeconomic classes (adapted 
from Labov, 1980: 261; reproduced from Guy, 
2003: 387).
0–5
−200
−100
Regression coefficients (Hz)
0
100
200
p < 0.10
p < 0.05
p < 0.01
p < 0.001
(aw)
F2
6–9
SEC
10–12
13–14
16

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
224
additionally, a strong negative correlation between 
age and the value of the second formant (younger 
people front the vowel more) shows that the 
feature is increasing with time (Labov, 2001: 
165). It is one of the internal classes, in this case 
the upper working class, which uses the feature 
the most. These facts taken together lead Labov to 
conclude that this social class is leading in this 
change. He calls this the ‘curvilinear pattern’, and 
it is typical of ‘change from below’ – i.e. the intro-
duction of a feature which is not standard or 
overtly valued, but is non-standard and potentially 
stigmatized. 
There is no natural connection between this 
fronted vowel and the social group which uses it 
the most (compare the ‘natural’ lenitions and 
assimilations noted earlier); social evaluation is, 
therefore, arbitrary. This begs the causal question: 
‘why does sound (or, more widely, feature) X have 
social connotation Y?’, and this remains unan-
swerable. There is, however, some headway to 
be made through an exploration of a feature’s 
‘salience’ – the property of being noticeable to 
the extent that it can be socially evaluated. 
Trudgill (1986) sets out the following predictors 
of salience:
1 The variable (i.e. variable feature) has at 
least one variant (realization) which is overtly 
stigmatized.
2 The variable has a high-status variant reflected in 
the orthography.
3 The variable is undergoing linguistic change.
4 Variants are phonetically radically different.
5 Variants are involved in the maintenance of 
phonological contrasts in the accommodating 
speaker’s variety (in the case of a speaker 
attempting to acquire another variety).
 
(adapted from Trudgill, 1986: 11)
The salience concept is potentially valuable 
because it could bring together factors which 
make a feature available for social marking. 
Ultimately, as an explanatory concept in change it 
is unhelpful because of the circularity of the first 
two predictors, because it cannot predict the 
polarity of social evaluation (either negative or 
positive) (Kerswill, 2002; Kerswill and Williams, 
2002), and because it does not deal with the initial 
phase of a change – how a sporadic innovation is 
communally selected as a change. 
Returning to the lenition of /tS/ in Panamanian 
Spanish, which we assume is phonetically moti-
vated but on the way to becoming a fully-
established change, we find the same negative 
correlation with age and the same curvilinear 
social distribution as with Philadelphia (aw) 
(Cedergren, 1987: 52). This strongly suggests that 
factors other than phonetic ones drive all sound 
changes, phonetically motivated or not. That said, 
the directionality of phonetically-motivated 
changes is not random, unlike the case, appar-
ently, for unconditioned change. Even here, how-
ever, there are very strong tendencies for vowels 
to move in some directions, and not others, and for 
vowels to shift as whole systems. Variationist 
work demonstrates this. Based on an inspection of 
cases in a number of languages, Labov established 
three Principles of Vowel Shifting, related to the 
important phenomenon of the chain shift, by 
which two or more vowels change in lockstep over 
time, always maintaining the same or a similar 
phonetic distance from each other. The Principles 
are as follows (Labov, 1994: 116): 
Principle I
In chain shifts, long vowels rise
Principle II
In chain shifts, short vowels fall
Principle IIA
In chain shifts, the nuclei of upgliding diphthongs 
fall
Principle III
In chain shifts, back vowels move to the front
Figure 16.2 shows a partial chain shift involv-
ing three short vowels of London English: /U/ as in 
FOOT, /æ/ as in TRAP and /∧/ as in STRUT, plus the 
long vowel /u:/ as in GOOSE (keywords in small 
capitals relate to the lexical sets of English as 
outlined by Wells, 1982).
The basic shift is very much in line with 
Labov’s Principles II and III (indeed, he estab-
lished these before he was aware of this London 
shift). The arrows show the movement of the 
vowels in ‘apparent time’ (see Section 16.6, below), 
the circles representing the mean normalized form-
ant 1/formant 2 values for 8 working-class lifelong 
residents (4 female, 4 male) aged over 70, the dia-
monds representing working-class residents aged 
17/18. (See Cheshire et al., 2008 for details.) This 
is a bald summary diagram: change is clearly 
mapped out, but there is no sociolinguistic detail. 
This is provided in Table 16.1.
The Age column of the table simply confirms 
that the age-related shifts shown by the arrows 
in Figure 16.2 are statistically significant. 
The Ethnicity column refers to the young speakers 
only, and shows that GOOSE is more fronted 
and more raised for speakers of ‘non-Anglo’ 
origin – these are Londoners with origins 
outside the British Isles, mainly in developing 
countries. Likewise, the STRUT vowel is more 
raised among this group. The Network column 
refers to the ethnic make-up of the Anglo young 
people’s friendship networks. Those with strongly 
non-Anglo networks follow the non-Anglo speakers’ 

PHONOLOGY
225
Table 16.1 Statistical effects on 
monophthongs in the inner-city London 
borough of Hackney
Vowel
Age
Ethnicity
Network
FOOT
p <0.05 (F2)
ns
ns
GOOSE
p <0.001 (F2)
p <0.005 (F1) 
p <0.05 (F2)
p <0.05 (F1)
p <0.05 (F2)
TRAP
p <0.001 (F1)
p <0.001 (F2)
ns
ns
STRUT
p <0.001 (F1)
p <0.001 (F2)
p <0.05 (F1)
p <0.05 (F2)
Source: from Cheshire et al. (2008)
2500
2000
1500
1000
500
800
650
500
F1 (Hz)
350
200
F2 (Hz)
æ
e
u:
æ
e
u:
Figure 16.2 Anti-clockwise monophthong shift in inner-city working-class London speech, 
late twentieth century (see text for explanation) (from Cheshire et al., 2008).
GOOSE vowel in being more fronted and raised 
than that of Anglos with mainly Anglo networks. 
Similarly, there is a significant effect of network 
for STRUT, in a direction which brings the pronun-
ciation close to that of the non-Anglos. In terms of 
change, it appears to be the non-Anglos, particu-
larly in fact the males, who are in the lead. This 
seems to be true at least in inner-city multiethnic 
districts of London. This pattern is unusual, since 
changes ‘from below’ are almost always female-
led (Tagliamonte and D’Arcy, 2009). Notably, the 
fronting of the GOOSE vowel is led by young 
females outside London (Kerswill and Williams, 
2005), leading to speculations as to why two very 
different social groups should be in the lead in the 
same change in different parts of the south-east of 
England (Kerswill et al., 2008); we will examine 
this data in the final section. The tentative conclu-
sion is that patterns of innovation are very differ-
ent in metropolises with heavy concentrations of 
people with non host-language backgrounds.
The use of ethnicity and network represents the 
first two ‘waves’ mentioned above. Ethnicity, 
being a fixed speaker-variable used to sample the 
population and to aggregate data across speakers, 
very much fits into a first-wave approach, in that 
a broad picture is given. Network information 
was obtained through careful interviewing, and 
each individual allocated a score of 1–5 depend-
ing on the proportion of non-Anglos in her or 
his network. These individual scores were placed 
into ‘low’ vs ‘high’ scoring groups. Thus, the 
network variable combines a first-wave method 
(speakers being aggregated) with a second-wave 
approach (data being qualitative in origin but 
‘reduced’ to a quantitative measure). The 1970s 
participant-observation study by the Milroys in 
Belfast likewise produced a five-point network 
measure, based in their case on indicators of 
integration 
into 
neighbourhood 
networks 
(L. Milroy, 1980). 
Eckert (1989, 2000) investigated sociolinguis-
tic factors in another vowel shift, the Northern 
Cities Shift (Labov, 1994: 177–201), illustrated 
in Figure 16.3. Using ethnographic methods in a 
Detroit high school, Eckert was able to establish 
that the interaction of gender and distinct cultures 
based on orientation towards or away from 
organized school-based activities patterned with 
whether or not young people were advanced in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
226
their use of the new, shifted vowels. For Eckert, 
the ‘community of practice’ is where cultural and 
linguistic styles emerge (see Vetter, this volume). 
Her study is representative of the ‘third-wave’ 
approach to language variation.
16.3  VARIATIONIST SOCIOLINGUISTICS 
AND THE LOCUS OF 
NEOGRAMMARIAN CHANGE
Variationist conceptualizations reveal a particular 
stance towards the organization of variation – and 
this is especially clear in the context of phonology. 
The notion of the variable seems to be closely tied 
in with the Neogrammarian notion of a ‘sound’, 
which is subject to ‘laws’. Variants of the variable 
(aw) in Philadelphia are not conditioned prima 
facie by linguistic environment, provided the vari-
able is properly phonologically delimited: pre-
variationist work would have referred to them as 
‘free variants’. The theoretical implication that 
linguistic units may vary in form further implies 
the presence of ‘inherent variation’, as opposed to 
the alternation between invariant and discrete lin-
guistic systems (Labov, 1969; see discussion in 
Fasold and Preston, 2007). The idea of variability 
being immanent was anathema to phonologists 
(and grammarians), for whom the main concern 
was the theoretical possibility of a form being 
produced, not its frequency in actual use or its 
range on a continuous phonetic scale (see discus-
sion in Guy, this volume). The corollary is that, 
for phonological features, there is a concept of a 
Neogrammarian ‘sound’, which, while having a 
range of actual realizations, is an abstract unit 
which maintains its identity across time, space, 
community and the individual. The range of 
variation only becomes comprehensible, and 
the continuity of the unit visible, when data in a 
community is aggregated, as illustrated in 
Figure 16.1. It is in this sense that Labov believes 
that systematicity is greater at the group level than 
within or between individuals. Even so, in a 
speech community, unique idiolects rarely contain 
random or inexplicable features. This is equally 
true of ‘anomalous’ speakers, or outliers, who 
despite being ‘native’ have unusual accent and 
dialect features, typically mixed or from some-
where else: these turn out to be perfectly under-
standable in the light of the speakers’ life histories 
(Newbrook, 1982; Britain, 2003). Other speakers 
are firmly embedded in the ‘community grammar’ 
both with respect to their phonology and grammar 
and in their social evaluation of features (see  
Kristiansen, this volume, for an extended discus-
sion of social evaluation and language change). 
Everyone’s linguistic behaviour is socially mean-
ingful in relation to it (see Labov, 1989 and cri-
tique in Downes, 1998: 121–6). Second- and 
third-wave variationist studies both recognize and, 
crucially, depend on this insight. 
The Dressler and Wodak dialect-switching 
model is at odds with Labov, being closer to the 
‘alternating systems’ model. In speech communi-
ties where there is a large linguistic distance 
between vernacular and standard, code-switching 
behaviour can be observed (Berruto, 2005). While 
acknowledging such differences, we should note 
there is still usually a linguistic continuum 
between the two alternating codes.
16.4  NEOGRAMMARIAN CHANGE 
AND LEXICAL DIFFUSION
Not all phonological change is exceptionless, as 
we saw in the case of the French k→S shift. A 
contemporary example concerns the tensing/rais-
ing of /æ/ in the northern United States, typically 
to [e:@] or [I:@]. This change is exceptionless (i.e. 
Neogrammarian) in varieties affected by the 
Northern Cities Shift, for example Detroit and 
Chicago (see Figure 16.3). However, in New York 
and Philadelphia, raising only takes place before 
particular, and different, consonants, as shown in 
Figure 16.4.
In both cities, the pattern could also be seen as 
the result of a Neogrammarian change, were it not 
for the several lexical exceptions to the tensing/
raising process.1 Thus, in New York City, avenue 
is normally tense, while (in conformity with the 
general pattern) average, savage and gavel are 
lax, i.e. pronounced [æ] (Labov, 2007: 355). In 
Philadelphia, /æ/ before /d/ is generally lax, as in 
sad and dad, while in just three words, mad, 
bad and glad (indicated by the dotted line in 
Figure 16.4), /æ/ is tense (Payne, 1980; Labov, 
1994: 341). In both cities, there is a clear phonetic 
Figure 16.3 The Northern Cities Shift 
(Labov, 1994: 177–201; diagram from Eckert, 
1989: 260).
(e)
ε
(uh)
∧
(oh)
c
(a)
a
(ae)
æ

PHONOLOGY
227
gap between the tense and lax variants of the vari-
able, while the tense variant itself exists on a 
continuous scale of raising akin to that of the 
Northern Cities Shift. Labov concludes from this 
that ‘It is clear that the NYC short-a system is 
very far from whatever beginnings it had as a 
simple, phonetically determined sound change. 
It has developed the lexical and morphological 
irregularities characteristic of many late stages of 
change (Janda and Joseph, 2001)’ (Labov, 2007: 
356). Thus, its present state is the outcome of 
lexical diffusion, characterized thus: ‘Words 
change their pronunciations by discrete, percepti-
ble increments (i.e. phonetically abrupt), but sev-
erally at a time (i.e. lexically gradual)’ (Wang and 
Cheng, 1977: 150, cited in Labov, 1981: 270). 
Labov (2007) is concerned with the later trans-
mission of both the Neogrammarian Northern 
Cities Shift and the New York City lexical diffu-
sion pattern to other regions of the USA. It is 
possible, however, to get a window on the transi-
tion from Neogrammarian change to lexical diffu-
sion by looking at the historical and geographical 
record of a known change. Labov (1992; 1994) 
discusses the diphthongization of Middle English 
/u:/ as in mouth, town, house, mouse in England as 
part of the Great Vowel Shift. Labov (1992; 1994: 
486) maps the diphthongization of this vowel 
in mouse and house in the material collected 
by the Survey of English Dialects (Orton 
et al., 1962–71). 
Labov’s map (Figure 16.5) shows that the 
monophthong is best preserved in the north. 
At least along the east coast, the transition appears 
to be quite gradual, starting with a shift to [Uu], 
then via [aU] and [æU] to [EU] in the south-east. 
Given that the transcribers did not use a particu-
larly narrow phonetic transcription, it is reasonable 
to suppose that, across much of the country, this 
represents a phonetic continuum. In order to adju-
dicate between a diffusionist or a Neogra mmarian 
interpretation of the change, Labov considers 
whether mouse and house have the same distribu-
tion: in almost all cases, they do. He concludes 
that almost all the data support a Neogrammarian 
interpretation. This is evidence that the change 
was gradual, both phonetically and geographically 
– though, of course, our evidence for this claim 
is indirect. What we see represented is the result 
of a vigorous sound change which proceeded 
incrementally (each generation slightly exaggerat-
ing the previous generation’s production – we 
return to this mechanism in Section 16.6), and 
the change being slowly diffused and picked up 
by new speakers further from the point of origin. 
This happened centuries ago; Figure 16.5 repre-
sents the residue of a long-since ‘spent’ sound 
change, which has left its imprint on the speech of 
twentieth-century conservative, non-mobile rural 
speakers.
The Great Vowel Shift was a series of vowel 
changes, originating in southern England, affect-
ing all the long vowels and stretching over a 
period of some 300 years up to some time in the 
early eighteenth century (McMahon, 2006). There 
is some debate as to where in the vowel system the 
shift started, but it is clear that the high vowels of 
Middle English, /i:/ (as in ice) and /u:/ (as in 
house) shifted together except in the far north of 
England and in Scotland (McMahon, 2006: 166). 
Here, /u:/ failed to diphthongize altogether 
until the twentieth century; Figure 16.5 shows the 
pre-shifted state in the North. Table 16.2 shows 
twentieth-century real-time incidence of the 
vowels /u:/, /aU/ and /O:/ in County Durham in the 
north-east of England. In lexical set 2, there has 
Figure 16.4 Consonants following /æ/ that condition tensing and raising in Philadelphia 
(inner line) and New York City (outer line) (from Labov, 1994: 430).
p
b
m
f
T
D
v
z
l
r
Z
s
n
t
d
dZ
k
g
N
tS
S

Figure 16.5 Development of Middle English /u:/ in house and mouse in 311 localities in 
England (Labov, 1994: 486, based on the Survey of English Dialects).
been an almost total change, over two generations, 
from the use of a near-monophthong [Uu] to 
[aU]. This has happened not by a phonetically 
gradual shift, but by the substitution of /aU/ for 
/u:/. Older people today alternate between [hUus] 
and [haUs], etc., while the youngsters on the 
whole do not, with the result that out now contains 
/aU/ and has become homophonous with owt 
(‘anything’).
This pattern is characteristic of lexical diffu-
sion, with an alternation between phones which 
are phonologically distinct in the dialect. The data 
is not sufficient to tell us anything about the 
lexical diffusion of the diphthong in lexical set 2, 
however. A study of working-class teenagers by 
Clark (2008) in Fife, Scotland, gives an indication 
of how such diffusion might take place. A similar 
variable, (au), shows that high-frequency items 
such as about, down, round and our are pro-
nounced with the original monophthong some 
90–100 per cent of the time, while less frequent 
items, including sound, our, house and allowed, 
are pronounced with the incoming diphthong 
around 50 per cent of the time (Clark 2008: 262). 

PHONOLOGY
229
She argues for a cognitive linguistic model to 
explain this difference. 
Similar frequency effects doubtless partly 
account for the lexically gradual nature of the 
French k→S shift, too, where low-frequency items 
(often belonging to a formal register) shift first. 
However, the reverse pattern is also found. It is the 
‘natural’ reductions of connected speech which 
shift first in high-frequency words. This is thought 
to be because such words are more automated in 
production, and because of their predictability in 
discourse they allow for greater redundancy in the 
speech signal. (See Bybee, 2002: 268–71 for dis-
cussion.) There is, thus, a difference between 
conditioned sound change representing reductions 
and assimilations and lexical diffusion in this 
respect. As for unconditioned sound change, the 
picture is, again, different. Labov (2006b) finds no 
frequency effects, only phonetic effects, while 
Dinkin (2008) finds small frequency effects but 
only when a regular sound change represents a 
potential lenition, or reduction in articulatory 
effort. 
16.5  GENERALIZATIONS 
AND EXPLANATIONS
The changes seen in Table 16.2 are the result of 
two sociolinguistic processes affecting British 
English dialects, ‘regional dialect levelling’ (or 
‘supralocalization’: L. Milroy, 2002; Kerswill, 
2003; Hickey, 2009) and ‘dedialectalization’ 
(Trudgill and Foxcroft, 1978; Trudgill, 1999). 
Regional dialect levelling/supralocalization leads 
to a reduction in the amount of regional variation 
across a given area; it is characterized by the 
adoption of new forms, or an increase in existing 
forms, which thereby gain currency across a wider 
area than before. Seen from the perspective of 
neighbouring dialects, convergence is observed. 
It is usually the consequence of intensive face-
to-face contacts within a relatively mobile area. 
These contacts also facilitate the geographical 
diffusion of new features, replacing existing 
ones and leading to further homogenization. 
(See Britain, 2002, pp 142–163; Hinskens, Auer and 
Kerswill, 2005; Kerswill, 2006.) Dedialectalization 
is not principally a contact phenomenon, however. 
More often than not, it is coextensive with stand-
ardization, by which forms are adopted which 
correspond closely to the standard variety (the 
‘roof’ – Kloss, 1967) in their lexical incidence of 
phonemes (Kerswill, 2007b). This process has 
all but gone to completion, at least in England. 
Table 16.2 clearly shows its effects, though in many 
cases the adoption of the more standard variants is 
also the adoption of supralocal forms.
Variationists have generally not attempted to 
explain dedialectalization and standardization, 
though the ‘linguistic market’ is doubtless highly 
relevant (Sankoff and Laberge, 1978; cf. Bourdieu, 
1991). Regional dialect levelling, on the other 
hand, has been associated with the loosening of 
network ties (L. Milroy, 2002; Stuart-Smith, 
Timmins and Tweedie, 2007), greater mobility 
(Williams and Kerswill, 1999; Kerswill, 2006) 
and a desire to gain a regional, rather than local 
identity (Watt, 2002).
16.6 TIME AND TRANSMISSION
One of the major challenges is to find optimal 
ways of mapping language change in a commu-
nity onto the time dimension. First, we need to 
consider what constitutes change, and this brings 
us again to a consideration of individual vs group 
behaviour. Change in language structure implies a 
permanent, categorical modification. As we have 
seen, both speakers and speech communities are 
variable. In some cases, what we observe is a 
change in the frequency of some feature, such as 
the glottal stop for intervocalic /t/ in British 
Table 16.2 /u:/ and /aU/ in central County Durham
Lexical set
Examples
Village/year of birth
Byers Green 1880 
(Orton, 1933)
Ushaw Moor 1940 
(Kerswill, 1987)
Ushaw Moor 1987 (record-
ings by Kreswill, 2002)
1
food, choose, move, 
prove ...
 /u:/
 /u:/
 /u:/
2
out, house, mouse, town, 
cow, down ...
 /u:/~/aU/
 /aU/
3
owt (‘anything’), nowt 
(‘nothing’)
 /aU/
 /aU/
4
four, daughter, thought, 
bought ...
 /aU/~/O:/
 /O:/

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
230
English; children increase their use of it as they 
reach adolescence, only to reduce it again by 
adulthood (Kerswill and Williams, 2000: 105; cf. 
Sankoff, 2006 on change across the life span). 
This does not amount to a change in the phonol-
ogy of the individual speaker: ‘change’, in this 
case, implies the learning, or loss, of a phonologi-
cal contrast, or in the case of a (gradual) 
Neogrammarian change, a quasi-permanent modi-
fication of the sound, such as the fronting of a 
vowel. 
Yet frequency changes and gradual phonetic 
changes are part and parcel of long-term commu-
nal linguistic change – language change ‘proper’. 
Tagliamonte and D’Arcy (2009) deal not with 
phonology, but with morphosyntax. They show 
that frequency changes can be mapped onto the 
so-called S-curve of change: from the point of 
view of the community, changes start by small 
steps, then in the middle stage the increase in fre-
quency is rapid, and finally the last few speakers 
adopt the change before it becomes categorical. 
The authors show that late adolescent cohorts use 
the incoming feature with the highest frequency, 
more than either children or adults. This implies, 
of course, that children actually change their 
speech as they grow older, peaking in late adoles-
cence, after which, for reasons of both social 
and cognitive maturation, there is little or no 
change. Not only do they increase their use of 
the feature during these years but also the feature 
is exaggerated in relation to the immediately 
preceding generation’s use – a process referred 
to as ‘incrementation’ (Labov, 2007: 346). For 
phonological features, Tagliamonte and D’Arcy 
point out that females are almost always in the 
lead, while they find that this is not the case for 
morphosyntax. 
This model only works if it can be shown that 
children do indeed change their speech, and that 
the change is in the direction of communal 
change. There is ample evidence that both are 
true. Figures 16.6 and 16.7 show the fronting in 
real time of the vowel of GOOSE in the speech of a 
girl and boy from Milton Keynes in the south-east 
of England. These informants were interviewed 
twice, first aged 12 and then 18 months later aged 
13 or 14. As can be seen, their GOOSE vowels were 
considerably fronter in the second recording than 
in the first. This can be seen in relation to three 
reference vowels, which proved stable across this 
period. These are two of eight young people in the 
study, and all eight showed significant fronting 
between the first and second recordings, with 
average fronting being in the region of 10 per cent 
in relation to the distance between GHOUL and 
FLEECE. In other studies, adults have also been 
shown to change frequencies and to participate in 
vowels shifts, at least to some extent (Sankoff, 
2006; Sankoff and Blondeau, 2007).
As mentioned earlier, apparent-time studies 
compare older and younger speakers. If it is the 
case that children, and adults, modify their 
speech in the direction of the change, then an 
apparent-time study will significantly underesti-
mate the amount of change in real time. It may 
also be the case that age-grading is present, 
i.e. changes which occur across the life span in 
the same way in every generation, but without 
leading to language change. To get round this, a 
combination of a trend study and a panel study 
is valuable. Trend studies sample the community 
at different times, but using the same age and 
social groups. Panel studies record the same 
people at least twice. This provides evidence of 
how speakers change, but without an accompany-
ing trend study little can be said about communal 
change. 
The LANCHART project has set out to repli-
cate a number of sociolinguistic studies originally 
carried out in the 1970s and 1980s in Denmark 
(Gregersen, 2009; Gregersen et al., 2009). Working 
on LANCHART data, Schøning (2008) investi-
gated a number of variables in the Jutland town of 
Odder. She analysed two cohorts, the first born in 
1971/2 and recorded in 1986/7 and again in 
2005/6, the second born in 1989/90 and recorded 
in 2006. This allowed a direct comparison of the 
apparent-time method (cohorts 1 and 2 recorded 
in 2005/6), a trend study (cohort 1 recorded in 
1989/90 and cohort 2 recorded in 2005/6) and 
a panel study (the two recordings of cohort 1). 
For the most part, the results showed that the 
apparent-time method indeed underestimated 
change. An example is the variable HUSET, 
which refers to the pronunciation of the neuter 
suffixed definite article –et. The standard form is 
[@ð], the local dialect form [@t]. Tables 16.3–16.5 
show the distributions.
Table 16.3 shows an apparent-time change 
from 19 per cent to 63 per cent standard, suggest-
ing rapid change. The panel study (Table 16.4) 
shows that cohort 1 have to a small, but significant 
extent, participated in this change. The communal 
change is shown in Table 16.5, and, as expected, 
this shows a greater change than the apparent-time 
method.
Individual and group change are linked in spe-
cific, statable ways. The study of dialect transmis-
sion holds the key to the mechanism of change: it 
is adolescents, who do the ‘work’ (Eckert, 2000), 
not, as historical linguists have supposed, young 
children who fail to learn their parents’ language 
properly (Aitchison, 1981: 180).

Figure 16.7 The fronting of /u:/ as in GOOSE, boy born 1979, Milton Keynes, recorded in 1991 
and in 1993 (from Kassab 2008).
7.5
8
8.5
9
9.5
10
10.5
11
11.5
12
12.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Z3-Z2
Z3-Z1
FU
MS
FLEECE
GHOUL
START
Figure 16.6 The fronting of /u:/ as in GOOSE, girl born 1979, Milton Keynes, recorded in 1991 
and in 1993 (from Kassab, 2008).
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Z3-Z2
Z3-Z1
FU
MS
FLEECE
GHOUL
START
Key to Figures 16.6 and 16.7:
MS = average formant 1/formant 2 of GOOSE, first recording (‘main study’).
FU = average formant 1/formant 2 of GOOSE, second recording 18 months later (‘follow-up’).
FLEECE, GHOUL, START: average formants for /i:/, /u:/ before /l/, and /A:/, acting as stable reference 
vowels. 
Note Formants 1 and 2 are here shown as normalized scores, Z1 and Z2, and are subtracted from Z3, 
the normalized formant 3.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
232
Table 16.3 Apparent time 2005–6, adult and young speakers
Speakers
Standard observed 
frequency
Per cent
Local observed 
frequency
Per cent
Total
Adult
26
19
111
81
137
Young
46
63
 27
37
 73
Total
72
138
210
chi-square
39.05702636
p
<0.01
Table 16.4 Real-time, panel study, cohort 1 1986–87 and 2005–6
Speakers
Standard observed 
frequency
Per cent
Local observed 
frequency
Per cent
Total
1986–7
 8
 8
 91
92
 99
2005–6
26
19
111
81
137
Total
34
202
236
chi-square
4.686016047
p
0.030409078
Table 16.5 Real-time, trend study, cohort 1 (1986–7) and cohort 2 (2006)
Speakers
Standard observed 
frequency
Per cent
Local observed 
frequency
Per cent
Total
Cohort 1
 8
 8
 91
92
 99
Cohort 2
46
63
 27
37
 73
Total
54
118
172
chi-square
56.34469956
p
<0.01
NOTE
1 Tensing and raising are conceived of by Labov 
as different processes; here, the best measure is 
vowel height.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Labov 2001 quote: This article was published in 
Principles of Linguistics Change, Vol. 2: External 
Factors, p. 34, Copyright Elseiver.
Tables 16.3, 16.4 and 16.5 Reprinted with 
permission.
Gregersen, Frans. 2009. The data and design of 
the LANCHART study, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 41, 
3−29, Routledge.
Gregersen, Frans, Maegaard, Marie and Pharao, 
Nicolai. 2009. The long and short of (ae)-variation in 
Danish −a panel study of short (ae)-variation in 
Danish real time, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia 41, 
64−82, Routledge.
REFERENCES
Aitchison, J. (1981) Language Change: Progress or Decay? 
London: Fontana.
Baranowski, M. (2007) Phonological Variation and Change in 
the Dialect of Charleston, South Carolina. Publication of 
the American Dialect Society, No. 92. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press.
Berruto, G. (2005) ‘Dialect/standard convergence, mixing, and 
models of language contact: the case of Italy’, in P. Auer, 

PHONOLOGY
233
F. Hinskens and P. Kerswill (eds), Dialect Change: 
Convergence and Divergence in European Languages. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 81–95.
Bloomfield, L. (1933) Language. New York: Holt, Rinehart and 
Winston. 
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Britain, D. (2002) ‘Space and spatial diffusion’, in 
J. K. Chambers P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds) The 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 603–37.
Britain, D. (2003) ‘Exploring the importance of the outlier in 
sociolinguistic dialectology’, in D. Britain and J. Cheshire 
(eds), Social Dialectology: in Honour of Peter Trudgill. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 191–208.
Britain, D. (2004) ‘Geolinguistics – diffusion of language’, in 
U. Ammon, N. Dittmar, K. Mattheier and P. Trudgill (eds), 
Sociolinguistics: International Handbook of the Science 
of Language and Society. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter. 
pp. 34–48.
Britain, D. (in press) ‘Language and space: the variationist 
approach’, in P. Auer and J. E. Schmidt (eds), Language 
and Space: An International Handbook of Linguistic 
Variation. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Bybee, J. (2000) ‘Lexicalization of sound change and alternat-
ing environments’, in M. B. Broe and J. Pierrehumbert 
(eds), Papers in Laboratory Phonology V. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 20–68.
Bybee, J. (2002) ‘Word frequency and context of use in the 
lexical diffusion of phonetically conditioned sound change’, 
Language Variation and Change, 14: 261–90. 
Bynon, T. (1977) Historical Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Cedergren, 
H. 
(1987) 
‘The 
spread 
of 
language 
change. Verifying inferences of linguistic diffusion’, in
P. H. Lowenberg (ed.), Language Spread and Language 
Policy. Issues, Implications and Case Studies. Washington, 
DC: Georgetown University Press. pp. 45–60.
Chambers, J. K. and Trudgill, P. (1998) Dialectology. 2nd edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cheshire, J. (2007) ‘Discourse variation, grammaticalisation 
and stuff like that’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11(2): 
155–93.
Cheshire, J., Fox, S., Kerswill, P. and Eivind, T. (2008) 
Linguistic Innovators: the English of Adolescents in London. 
Final report submitted to the Economic and Social Research 
Council of Great Britain, ref. RES 000 23 0680.
Clark, L. (2008) ‘Re-examining vocalic variation in Scottish 
English: a cognitive grammar approach’, Language 
Variation and Change, 20(2): 255–73.
Crystal, D. (2004) The Stories of English. London: Penguin.
Dinkin, A. J. (2008) ‘The real effect of word frequency on 
phonetic variation’, University of Pennsylvania Working 
Papers in Linguistics, 14: 97–106.
Docherty, G. (2008) ‘An evaluation of usage-based approaches 
to the modelling of sociophonetic variability’. Paper given 
at Sociolinguistics Symposium 17, Amsterdam, April.
Downes, W. (1998) Language in Society. 2nd edn. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Dressler, W. U. and Wodak, R. (1982) ‘Sociophonological 
methods in the study of sociolinguistic variation in Viennese 
German’. Language in Society, 11: 339–70. 
Eckert, P. (1989) ‘The whole woman: sex and gender differ-
ences in variation’, Language Variation and Change, 
1: 245–67. 
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. (2005) ‘Variation, convention, and social meaning’. 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Linguistic 
Society of America, Oakland, California. Accessed 22 April 
2009 at: http://www.stanford.edu/~eckert/EckertLSA2005.
pdf.
Farrar, K. and Jones, M. C. (2002) ‘Introduction’, in K. Farrar 
and M. C. Jones (eds), Language Change: the Interplay of 
Internal, External and Extra-Linguistic Factors. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 1–16.
Fasold, R. W. and Preston, D. R. (2007) ‘The psycholinguistics 
unity of inherent variability: old Occam whips out his razor’, 
in R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds), Sociolinguistic Variation: 
Theories, Methods, and Applications. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 45–69.
Gauchat, L. (1905) ‘L’unité phonétique dans le patois d’une 
commune’, in Romanische Sprachen und Literaturen: 
Festschrift Heinrich Mort. pp. 175–232.
Gordon, E., Campbell, L., Hay, J., et al. (2004) New Zealand 
English: Its Origins and Evolution. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Gregersen, F. (2009). ‘The data and design of the LANCHART 
study’, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 41, 3–29.
Gregersen, F., Maegaard, M. and Pharao, N. (2009). ‘The long 
and short of (æ)-variation in Danish – a panel study of 
short (æ)-variation in Danish in real time’, Acta Linguistica 
Hafniensia, 41, 64–82.
Guy, G. (2003) ‘Variationist approaches to phonological 
change’, in B. Joseph and R. Janda (eds), The Handbook of 
Historical Linguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 369–400.
Hay, J. (2008) ‘Coronal stop deletion revisited’. Paper given to 
the Language Variation and Change Research Group, 
Department of Linguistics and English Language, Lancaster 
University, 12 December 2008.
Hickey, R. (2009) ‘Supraregionalisation’, in L. Brinton and 
A. Bergs (eds), Historical linguistics of English. HSK series. 
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Hinskens, F., Auer, P. and Kerswill, P. (2005) ‘The study of 
dialect convergence and divergence: conceptual and meth-
odological considerations’, in P. Auer, F. Hinskens and 
P. Kerswill (eds), Dialect Change: Convergence and 
Divergence in European Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 1–48.
Hock, H. H. (1991) Principles of Historical Linguistics. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hollmann, W. and Siewierska, A. (2008) ‘Definite article 
reduction in Lancashire dialect: constructions in a sociolin-
guistic context’. First Triennial Conference of the 
International Society for the Linguistics of English, University 
of Freiburg.
Janda, R. D. and Joseph, B. D. (2001) ‘Reconsidering the 
canons of sound-change: towards a ‘Big Bang’ theory’, in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
234
B. J. Blake, J. Barry and K. Burridge (eds.), Selected Papers 
from the 15th International Conference on Historical 
Linguistics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 205–19.
Johnson, W. and Britain, D. (2007) ‘L-vocalisation as a natural 
phenomenon: explorations in sociophonology’, Language 
Sciences, 29: 294–315.
Johnstone, B. and Kiesling, S. F. (2008) ‘Indexicality and 
experience: variation and identity in Pittsburgh’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 12(1): 5–33.
Kassab, W. (2008) ‘A linguistic change in a newly-formed 
town’. Unpublished MA dissertation, Department of 
Linguistics and English Language, Lancaster University.
Kerswill, P. (1987) ‘Levels of linguistic variation in Durham’, 
Journal of Linguistics, 23: 25–49.
Kerswill, P. (2002) ‘Koineization and accommodation’, in 
J. K. Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), The 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 669–702.
Kerswill, P. (2003) 'Dialect levelling and geographical diffu-
sion in British English'. In D. Britain and J. Cheshire (eds.) 
Social dialectology. In honour of Peter Trudgill. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. 223–43.
Kerswill, P. (2004) ‘Social dialectology/Sozialdialektologie’, 
in K. Mattheier, U. Ammon and P. Trudgill (eds), 
Sociolinguistics/Soziolinguistik. An International Handbook 
of the Science of Language and Society. 2nd edn. Vol. 1. 
Berlin: De Gruyter. pp. 22–33.
Kerswill, P. (2006) ‘Migration and language’, in K. Mattheier, 
U. Ammon and P. Trudgill (eds), Sociolinguistics/
Soziolinguistik. An International Handbook of the Science 
of language and society. 2nd edn. Vol. 3. Berlin: De 
Gruyter. pp. 2271–85.
Kerswill, P. (2007a) ‘Social class’, in C. Llamas and 
P. Stockwell (eds), The Routledge Companion to 
Sociolinguistics. London: Routledge. pp. 51–61.
Kerswill, P. (2007b) ‘Standard and non-standard English’, in 
D. Britain (ed.), Language in the British Isles. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 34–51.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2000) 'Creating a new town 
koine: children and language change in Milton Keynes', 
Language in Society, 29: 65–115.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2002) ‘“Salience” as an explan-
atory factor in language change: evidence from dialect 
levelling in urban England’, in M. C. Jones and E. Esch 
(eds), Language change. The Interplay of Internal, External 
and Extra-Linguistic Factors. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 
81–110.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2005) ‘New towns and 
koineisation: linguistic and social correlates’, Linguistics, 
43(5): 1023–48.
Kerswill, P. and Wright, S. (1990) ‘The validity of phonetic 
transcription: limitations of a sociolinguistic research tool’, 
Language Variation and Change, 2: 255–75. 
Kerswill, P., Torgersen, E. and Fox, S. (2008) ‘Reversing ‘drift’: 
innovation and diffusion in the London diphthong system’, 
Language Variation and Change, 20: 451–91.
Kloss, H. (1967) ‘“Abstand languages” and “Ausbau 
languages”’, Anthropological Linguistics, 9(7): 29–41.
Labov, W. (1963) 'The Social motivation of language change', 
Word, 19: 273–309.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1969) ‘Contraction, deletion, and inherent variabil-
ity of the English copula’, Language, 45(4): 715–62.
Labov, W. (1980) ‘The social origin of sound change’, in 
Labov, W. (ed.), Locating language in Time and Space. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 251–66.
Labov, W. (1981) ‘Resolving the Neogrammarian controversy’, 
Language, 57: 267–309.
Labov, W. (1989) ‘Exact description of the speech community: 
short a in Philadelphia’, in: R. W. Fasold and D. Schiffrin 
(eds), Language Change and Variation. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. pp. 1–57.
Labov, W. (1992) ‘Evidence for regular sound change in English 
dialect geography’, in M. Rissanen, O. Ihalainen, 
T. Nevalainen and I. Taavitsainen (eds), History of Englishes: 
New Methods and Interpretations in Historical Linguistics. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 42–71.
Labov, W. (1994) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 1: 
Internal factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 2: 
External factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2006a) The Social Stratification of English in 
New York City. 2nd edn. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
Labov, W. (2006b) ‘A sociolinguistic perspective on sociopho-
netic research’, Journal of Phonetics, 34: 500–15.
Labov, W. (2007) ‘Transmission and diffusion’, Language, 
83(2): 344–87.
Labov, W., Ash, S. and Boberg, C. (2006) The atlas of North 
American English: Phonetics, Phonology, and Sound 
Change. New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Labov, W., Yaeger, M. and Steiner, R. (1972) A Quantitative 
Study of Sound Change in Progress. Philadelphia: US 
Regional Survey.
Larsen, A. B. and Stoltz, G. (1911–12) Bergens bymål. 
Kristiania/Oslo: Aschehoug.
Louden, M. (2006) ‘Pennsylvania German in the 21st century’, 
in N. Berend and E. Knipf-Komlosi (eds), Sprachinselwelten 
– The World of Language Islands. Entwicklung und 
Beschreibung der deutschen Sprachinseln am Anfang des 
21. Jahrhunderts. [The developmental Stages and the 
Description of German Language Islands at the Beginning 
of the 21st Century.] Frankfurt/Main: Peter Lang. 
pp. 89–107.
McMahon, A. (2006) ‘Restructuring Renaissance English’, in 
L. Mugglestone (ed.), The Oxford History of English. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 148–77.
Milroy, J. (1992) Linguistic Variation and Change: on the 
Historical Sociolinguistics of English. Oxford: Blackwell.
Milroy, J. (2000) ‘The ideology of the standard language’, in 
L. Wright (ed.), The Development of Standard English, 
1300–1800. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 11–128.
Milroy, L. (1980) Language and Social Networks. Oxford: 
Blackwell. (2nd edn, 1987).

PHONOLOGY
235
Milroy, L. (2002) ‘Introduction: mobility, contact and language 
change – working with contemporary speech communi-
ties’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 6(1): 3–15.
Milroy, L. and Gordon, M. (2003) Sociolinguistics: Method and 
Interpretation. Oxford: Blackwell.
Moore, E. (2003) ‘Learning Style and Identity: A Sociolinguistic 
analysis of a Bolton High School. Unpublished PhD 
dissertation, University of Manchester.
Moore, E. (2006) ‘“You tell all the stories”: using narrative to 
understand hierarchy in a Community of Practice’, Journal 
of Sociolinguistics, 10: 611–40.
Newbrook, M. (1982) ‘Scot or scouser? An anomalous 
informant in outer Merseyside’, English World-Wide, 
3: 77–86.
Nolan, F. and Kerswill, P. (1990) ‘The description of connected 
speech processes’, in S. Ramsaran (ed.), Essays in Honour 
of A. C. Gimson. London: Routledge. pp. 295–316.
Orton, H. (1933) The Phonology of a South Durham 
dialect. London: Kegan Paul, Trench and Co.
Orton, H. et al. (1962–71) Survey of English Dialects: Basic 
Material. Four volumes in 12 parts. Leeds: E. J. Arnold.
Payne, A. (1980) ‘Factors controlling the acquisition of the 
Philadelphia dialect by out-of-state children’, in W. Labov 
(ed.), Locating Language in Time and Space. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 143–78.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2003) ‘Phonetic diversity, statistical learn-
ing, and acquisition of phonology’, Language and Speech, 
46(2, 3): 115–54.
Robins, R. H. (1990) A Short History of Linguistics. 3rd edn. 
London: Longman.
Romaine, S. (1982) Socio-Historical Linguistics: Its Status and 
Methodology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Romaine, S. (1988) ‘The role of Children in linguistic change’, 
in L. E. Breivik and E. H. Jahr (eds), Language Change: 
Contributions to the Study of its Causes. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. pp. 195–225.
Rosenberg, P. (2005) ‘Dialect convergence in the German 
language islands (Sprachinseln)’, in P. Auer, F. Hinskens 
and P. Kerswill (eds), Dialect Change: Convergence and 
Divergence in European Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 221–35.
Sankoff, G. (2006) ‘Age: apparent time and real time’, in 
K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 
2nd edn. Oxford: Elsevier. pp. 110–16.
Sankoff, G. and Blondeau, H. (2007) ‘Language change 
across the lifespan: /r/ in Montreal French’, Language, 
83(3): 560–88. 
Sankoff, D. and Laberge, S. (1978) ‘The linguistic market and 
the statistical explanation of variability’, in D. Sankoff (ed.), 
Linguistic Variation: Models and Methods. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 239–50.
Schøning, S. (2009) ‘Investigating the apparent time method: 
the example of Odder’. Unpublished MA dissertation, 
Department of Linguistics and English Language, Lancaster 
University.
Schwarz, C. and Streck, T. (2009) ‘New approaches to describ-
ing phonological change: the realisation of Middle High 
German î in the Alemannic dialects of Southwest Germany’, 
in S. Tsiplakou, M. Karyolemou and P. Pavlou (eds), 
Language Variation –– European Perspectives II. Selected 
Papers from the 4th International Conference on Language 
Variation in Europe (ICLaVE 4), Nicosia, June 2007. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 205–214.
Skautrup, P. (1921) ‘Om Folke- og Sprogblanding i et vestjysk 
Sogn’, reprinted in P. Skautrup (1976) Dansk sprog og 
kultur. Udvalgte afhandlinger og artikler 1921–1971. 
Copenhagen: Gyldendal. pp. 9–21.
Stuart-Smith, J., Timmins, C. and Tweedie, F. (2007) ‘‘Talkin’ 
jockney’? Variation and change in Glaswegian accent’, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11: 221–60.
Sundgren, E. (2009) ‘The varying influence of social and linguistic 
factors on language stability and change: the case of 
Eskilstuna’, Language Variation and Change, 21: 97–113.
Tagliamonte, S. and D’Arcy, A. (2009) ‘Peaks beyond phonol-
ogy: adolescence, incrementation and language change’, 
Language, 85(1): 58–108.
Trudgill, P. (1986) Dialects in Contact. Oxford: Blackwell.
Trudgill, P. (1992) ‘Dialect contact, dialectology and sociolin-
guistics’, in K. Bolton and H. Kwok (eds), Sociolinguistics 
Today: International Perspectives. London: Routledge. 
pp. 71–9.
Trudgill, P. (1999) ‘Norwich: endogenous and exogenous lin-
guistic changes’, in P. Foulkes and G. Docherty (eds), Urban 
Voices: Accent Studies in the British Isles. London: Arnold. 
pp. 124–40.
Trudgill, P. (2004) New-Dialect Formation: the Inevitability of 
Colonial Englishes. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Trudgill, P. and Foxcroft, T. (1978) ‘On the sociolinguistics of 
vocalic mergers: transfer and approximation in East Anglia’, 
in P. Trudgill (ed.), Sociolinguistic Patterns in British 
English. London: Edward Arnold. pp. 69–79.
Wells, J. (1982) Accents of English. 3 vols. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Wang, W. S.-Y. and Cheng, C.-C. (1977) ‘Implementation of 
phonological change: the Shuang-Feng Chinese case’, in 
W. S.-Y. Wang (ed.), The Lexicon in Phonological Change. 
The Hague: Mouton. pp. 148–58.
Watt, D. J. L. (2002) ‘‘I don’t speak with a Geordie accent, 
I speak, like, the Northern accent’: contact induced level-
ling in the Tyneside vowel system’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
6: 44–63.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. (1968) ‘Empirical 
foundations for a theory of language change’, in 
W. Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for Historical 
Linguistics. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. pp. 97–195.
Williams, A. and Kerswill, P. (1999) ‘Dialect levelling: change 
and continuity in Milton Keynes, Reading and Hull’, in 
P. Foulkes and G. Docherty (eds), Urban Voices: Accent 
Studies in the British Isles. London: Arnold. pp. 141–62.
Wright, S. (1989) ‘The effects of style and speaking rate on 
/l/-vocalization in local Cambridge English’, York Papers in 
Linguistics, 13: 355–65. York: Department of Language 
and Linguistic Science, University of York.
Wyld, H. C. (1927) A Short History of English. 3rd edn. 
London: John Murray.

17
17.1 INTRODUCTION
This chapter explores aspects of the hypothesis 
that the distribution of linguistic structures and 
features over languages is sociolinguistically not 
entirely random.1 The suggestion is that there may 
be a tendency for different types of social environ-
ment and social structure to give rise to, or at least 
be accompanied by, different types of linguistic 
structure (Trudgill, forthcoming). In this chapter, 
I will outline facets of this sociolinguistic take on 
linguistic typology with respect to linguistic 
change, with a particular focus on changes that 
might be labelled ‘simplification’ and ‘complexi-
fication’. I suggest that linguistic simplification is 
most likely to occur in social environments of 
certain types, and that linguistic complexification 
is most likely to occur against social backgrounds 
of other, different types.
The relevant key parameters which go into the 
composition of these different types of society 
would appear to include the following:
(a) Contact vs isolation: the degree of contact that a 
linguistic community has with other communities 
speaking other language varieties.
(b) Dense vs loose social networks: the key factor 
here as adumbrated, on the basis of sociologi-
cal research, by James Milroy and Lesley Milroy 
(1985; and see also Milroy, 1992), is a distinc-
tion between communities with relatively dense, 
multiplex social networks, which is to say com-
munities where it is common for everybody to 
know everybody else, and where, for example, 
your neighbour and your second cousin and your 
workmate may be one and the same person, and 
on the other hand communities with relatively 
loose networks, where the reverse is the case.
(c) Social stability vs instability (cf. Dixon, 1997): 
the degree to which communities have relatively 
well-established, long-term, continuing social 
structures and patterns.
(d) Relatively small vs relatively large community 
size (cf. Haudricourt, 1961).
While these parameters are in principle independ-
ent of one another, they are in practice of course 
by no means totally so: small, stable communities 
with relatively few outside contacts are more 
likely to demonstrate relatively dense social net-
works. In the rest of this paper, I will focus on 
communities with this particular cluster of fea-
tures, which I will for convenience refer to as 
‘high-contact societies’, as well as on communi-
ties of the polar opposite type: large, fluid, high-
contact societies characterized by relatively loose 
networks, which I will term ‘low-contact’ societies.
To begin our discussion with high-contact soci-
eties, there is considerable agreement in the litera-
ture about the relationship between high contact 
and one type of language change: language con-
tact, it is widely believed, leads to simplification. 
This is the view which is quite naturally taken by 
linguists in pidgin and creole studies: koines, pid-
gins, creoles and creoloids (Trudgill, 1996) are all 
widely and uncontroversially agreed to owe their 
relative structural simplicity to language contact. 
But agreement about the role of contact in produc-
ing simplification generally, in languages other 
than pidgins, creoles and creoloids, is also 
widespread in sociolinguistics and dialectology. 
For example, Milroy (1992: 203) suggests that the 
Social Structure, Language 
Contact and Language Change
P e t e r  T r u d g i l l

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
237
trend towards simplification in late Old English/
early Middle English is clearly ‘at least to some 
extent associated with language contact’. Vogt 
(1948: 39) says that ‘on observe souvent qu’une 
langue ... perd des distinctions formelles, dans des 
circonstances qui rendent l’hypothese d’influence 
étrangère assez naturelle’.2 Sankoff (2002: 657) 
notes that, according to Bokamba (1993), multi-
lingual language contact situations ‘may result in 
morphological simplification’ where a language is 
used as a lingua franca. And Kusters (2003) has 
demonstrated the link between contact and simpli-
fication quantitatively in connection with inflec-
tional morphology. Jahr (2001) has argued for the 
role of language contact with Low German in 
producing the relative simplification of Danish, 
Swedish and Norwegian (as compared to Icelandic 
and Faroese), a view which has been shared 
by others, including Pedersen (1999) and Askedal 
(2005). And many more examples could be 
given.
On the other hand, the linguistic-typological 
literature is notable for the widespread acceptance 
of the diametrically opposed point of view. For 
example, Nichols (1992: 192) says that ‘contact 
among languages fosters complexity, or, put dif-
ferently, diversity among neighbouring languages 
fosters complexity in each of the languages’. 
Aikhenvald (2002) cites numerous examples of 
contact-induced complexification in Amazonia, 
and Aikenvald (2008) describes contact-induced 
elaboration of an unusually complex 11-imperative 
system in Tariana. Vanhove (2001) discusses lan-
guage contact, with its resultant complexification, 
in the history of Maltese. And once again many 
other examples could be cited.
It is a nice illustration of these two different 
perspectives that in a paper where he asks ‘What 
happens to inflectional morphology in cases of 
language contact?’, Comrie (2008) does not even 
mention a development which sociolinguists have 
routinely pointed to as being particularly likely to 
occur in such situations, namely a reduction in or 
total loss of inflectional morphology. 
The conflict between these two opposing posi-
tions has been noted by historical linguists, who 
have contented themselves with observations such 
as ‘all the examples that support the claim that 
interference leads to simplification are of course 
counterexamples to the opposite claim’ (Thomason, 
2001: 65). Harris and Campbell, too, mention the 
claim that contact leads to ‘structural simplifica-
tion’, but they also point out that ‘there are clear 
counterexamples’ (1995: 133).
In Trudgill (2009), I have suggested that a socio-
linguistic typological approach can help to shed 
light on this apparent contradiction. Language con-
tact can indeed have two totally opposed types 
of outcome, but a sociolinguistically-informed 
perspective suggests that this is likely to be due to 
the fact that the different outcomes involve two 
typologically different forms of contact, in terms of 
the sociolinguistic matrices in which they occur.
In Trudgill (2009), I make the not very startling 
suggestion that in fact simplification is most likely 
to occur in situations involving language learning 
by adults, who are typically poor second-language 
learners as compared to small children, particu-
larly insofar as informal acquisition in short-term 
contact situations is concerned. In such situations, 
features which are ‘outsider difficult? (Kusters, 
2003: 6) or ‘L2 difficult’ (Dahl, 2004: 294), are 
likely to disappear. The most extreme of these 
situations are of course those which lead to the 
emergence of pidgins. 
Correspondingly, complexification is most 
likely to occur in long-term co-territorial contact 
situations involving children and therefore profi-
cient bilingualism. The most extreme of these situ-
ations are probably those involving Sprachbünde/
linguistic areas. For example, Dixon and Aikhenvald 
(1999) discuss the linguistic area formed by the 
languages of Amazonia, specifically the Amazon 
and Orinoco basins, which has at least 10 major 
language families and many more smaller ones. 
Here, the vast majority of the languages, regard-
less of language family membership, have come 
over the centuries to share a large number of fea-
tures. Dixon and Aikhenvald (1999: 8–9) give a 
non-exhaustive list of 15 features which are 
common to most or all of the languages of this 
vast region, including the expression of verbal 
categories through optional suffixes, and the 
formation of subordinate clauses through verb 
nominalization. 
The contrast between the two different types of 
contact becomes particularly clear if we compare 
Comrie (2008) with Kusters (2003); it is clear that 
they are looking at two very different types of 
social situation. Comrie discusses the way in 
which contact led to the growth of mixed lan-
guages such as Michif, which is a French–Cree 
mixed or intertwined language with considerable 
morphological complexity (Bakker, 1997), and 
says that it is clear that the generation which devel-
oped this language must have had a high degree of 
fluency in both French and Cree or some other 
form of Algonquian. Kusters, on the other hand, 
relates simplification in, e.g., Arabic, to the acqui-
sition of Arabic, by adult non-native speakers.
17.2  SIMPLIFICATION AND 
COMPLEXIFICATION
Further light can be shed on this issue if we now 
further explore what is meant in the context of this 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
238
chapter by the terms ‘simplification’ and ‘com-
plexification’. I readily acknowledge that there are 
other, perhaps many other, facets of linguistic 
simplicity and complexity which I am not address-
ing here. And I intend to illustrate my usage of the 
terms in this chapter rather than define them in 
any detail.
Following Mühlhäusler (1977), I suggest that 
consideration of the growth of pidgins leads to the 
understanding that simplification, as discussed by 
Milroy, Vogt and Kusters, consists of the follow-
ing subprocesses:
• the regularization of irregularities
• an increase in lexical/ morphological transparency
• a reduction in syntagmatic redundancy, e.g. 
grammatical agreement
• the loss of morphological categories.
It therefore follows that complexification, as 
discussed by Nichols, consists of the reverse 
processes:
• irregularization
• increase in opacity
• increase in syntagmatic redundancy
• acquisition of morphological categories.
We can now note, however, that the complexi-
fication discussed by Nichols consists of only one 
of these processes. In her data, there are no irregu-
larizations, no increases in opacity, and no 
increases in syntagmatic redundancy. The com-
plexification described by typologists such as 
Nichols consists solely of the addition of mor-
phological categories – indeed, Nichols com-
putes complexity in terms of numbers of 
morphological markers – and, moreover, it is a 
very particular type of addition. The cases studied 
by Aikhenvald (2002), which are quite typical, are 
all instances of morphological categories being 
acquired by one language from another language 
with which it is in contact – and, crucially, being 
acquired in addition to categories which it already 
has. That is, we are dealing with additive bor-
rowing as opposed to replacive borrowing.
The interesting question therefore arises as to 
the origins of the other forms of complexity – of 
complexification, which is the precise antithesis to 
the simplification which leads to pidgins. If sim-
plification occurs in short-term, adult contact situ-
ations, and additive complexification in long-term 
child contact situations, then what exactly are the 
sociolinguistic conditions which give rise to 
irregularization, increase in opacity and increase 
in syntagmatic redundancy, and to the spontane-
ous addition of morphological categories, i.e. 
categories which are not borrowed from other 
languages? As Thurston (1994: 603) says, what 
we need to do be able to do is ‘to explain how 
complexity arose in languages in the first place’. 
In the rest of this chapter I attempt a preliminary 
investigation of this issue.
17.3 LANGUAGE IN ISOLATION
It is clear that we cannot look for the development 
of this type of complexification in any type of 
contact situation. If short-term adult (post-critical 
threshold) contact tends to favour simplification, 
and if long-term co-territorial pre-threshold con-
tact tends to favour additive complexification 
only, as illustrated in Trudgill (2009), then we 
must surely seek the locus of non-additive com-
plexification in languages which experience low 
levels of language contact.
It does seem to be very clearly the case that, in 
general, languages spoken in low-contact societies 
tend to demonstrate the preservation of existing 
complexity. This is one of the major points made 
by the authors quoted above who have dealt with 
simplification in the Nordic languages: not only is 
it the case that the continental languages have 
undergone simplification, it is also true that the 
insular languages Icelandic and Faroese have pre-
served a very great deal of the complexity that was 
present in Old Norse.
In the rest of this chapter, I hypothesize that it 
is in low-contact communities that we are most 
likely to find not only the preservation of com-
plexity but also an increase in irregularity, opac-
ity, syntagmatic redundancy and non-borrowed 
morphological categories. In other words, we 
should look for the growth of complexity in situa-
tions which are the opposite in every respect, 
including degree of contact, to those in which 
pidgins develop.
In this chapter, I look for this phenomenon in 
the Germanic languages. All the major standard 
language varieties in Europe today are now rela-
tively high-contact koinés and creoloids which 
are the result in part of simplification resulting 
from dialect contact. The precursor to modern 
Standard English referred to by Hope (2000: 50) 
as ‘a Londonish–East Midlandish–Northernish–
Southernish’ mixture is very typical. The hypoth-
esis therefore suggests that cases of spontaneous, 
non-additive complexification should be looked 
for in relatively isolated low-contact non-
standardized varieties of modern European lan-
guages in comparison with their respective 
standards. We can also look at those languages 
which are spoken by small groups of speakers 
in tightly-knit communities and compare them 
to related languages. For English, we can look at 
the traditional dialects (Wells, 1982), and for 

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
239
German at the Mundarten, for instance. And we 
can also look at ‘small’ languages like Frisian and 
Faroese.
It is important that this work be carried out 
comparatively, by ranging English Traditional-
Dialects against General English (Wells, 1982), 
Mundart against Umgangssprache, Faroese 
against Swedish, and so on. And we must neces-
sarily be concerned with diachronically demon-
strable complexification, because different levels 
of complexity between high-contact and low-
contact varieties will be due just as often to sim-
plification in the high-contact varieties as to 
complexification in low-contact varieties. By 
doing this work comparatively, and feature-by-
feature, we will also be able to avoid the pitfalls 
associated with attempting to develop some kind 
of measure for the calculation of complexity.
There is no claim here, of course, that com-
plexification occurs only in low-contact varieties, 
merely that there is a tendency for this to be more 
common – perhaps a good deal more common – in 
low-contact than in high-contact varieties. I simply 
suggest that if the most common pattern is one of 
complexification events in traditional dialects and 
‘small languages’ which are not paralleled by 
similar developments in high-contact urban, colo-
nial or standard varieties, then the thesis that the 
growth of complexity does tend to depend for its 
genesis largely on low-contact linguistic environ-
ments will be strengthened.
I now go on to produce evidence in favour of 
the hypothesis by describing linguistic changes 
which are of the complexification type and which 
have occurred in varieties of the Germanic lan-
guages spoken in communities that most closely 
meet the category of low contact – and changes 
which, crucially, have no counterpart in related 
high-contact urban dialects or standard varieties. I 
will do so by examining, in turn, apparent cases of 
the four different subtypes of complexification as 
listed above (although close examination of the 
actual examples will show that the distinction 
between the four categories is not a clear-cut one).
Complexification 1: growth 
of morphological categories
Under this heading are examples of the historical 
development of new morphological categories 
which are not paralleled in other related varieties, 
and where there is no evidence of the new cate-
gory having been acquired as a result of additive 
borrowing.
1. A few Traditional-Dialects in a small area of 
the southwest of England developed a new and 
fascinating marking of the difference between 
transitive and intransitive infinitives. Intransitive 
infinitives in these dialects are (or at least were – 
the distinction appears no longer to be current) 
marked by the word-final morpheme -y, while 
transitive infinitives were unmarked. So in Dorset 
we find (Trudgill 1999: 103):
Can you zew up thease zeam? ‘Can you sew up 
this seam?’
vs
The cat vell zick an’ woulden mousy. ‘The cat fell 
sick and wouldn’t catch mice’.
The important point is that this is unparalleled 
anywhere else in the English-speaking world, and 
is quite possibly unparalleled anywhere else at all. 
My inquiry on the Linguistic Typology List asking 
for examples of other languages which have mor-
phological marking for intransitive but not transi-
tive infinitives received three answers, none of 
them producing a precise parallel. 
2. A number of traditional dialects in the southwest 
of England developed an interesting phenom-
enon described by Ihalainen (1976), in which 
there is a category distinction between habitual 
and punctual verb forms such as (note that the 
forms do, did are unemphatic):
I do go there every day.
I did go there every day. 
vs
I goes tomorrow.
I went last week. 
This of course is a distinction between two cate-
gories which is common enough in the languages 
of the world. In English, however, it represents an 
innovation, and one which is unknown in any of 
the General English varieties. 
3. Certain North Frisian dialects have developed a 
distinction between two different definite articles 
(Ebert, 1971; Ebert and Keenan, 1973; Walker, 
1990: 14–15). In the Mooring dialect of the 
Bökingharde area the two sets of forms are:
 
Masc. di 
e
 
Fem. 
jü 
e
 
Neut. dåt 
et
 
Pl. 
da 
et
The usage of the two forms is grammatically and 
semantically complex (see Markey, 1981: 228), 
but typically the -e/-et forms are proximal and/or 
refer to a unique referent, as in e moune ‘the 
moon’, e wjaard ‘the truth’, whereas the di/jü/dåt/

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
240
da forms are distal and/or are context-bound and 
apply to definite but non-unique referents. For 
example, ‘I have spoken to the village-mayor’ can 
be rendered in two ways:
a) ik hääw ma e bürgermäister snaaked
b) ik hääw ma di bürgermäister snaaked
‘I have with the mayor spoken’
In (a) the reference is to the mayor of one’s own 
village, whereas in (b) it is to the mayor of some 
other village. Equally, in the Fering dialect, as 
Ebert (1984) points out, a question posed by some 
non-native-speaking outsider in a particular vil-
lage along the lines of:
Huar wenet di bürgermäister  ‘Where does
the mayor live?’
Would solicit the answer:
Hün bürgermäister manst du?  ‘Which mayor do
you mean?’
This distinction is clearly an innovation and, to 
say the least, has no parallel in any of the standard 
forms of other Germanic languages.
4. In the Toten dialect of Norwegian (Faarlund, 
2000), complexification has occurred in the 
demonstrative system. A system of demonstra-
tive pronouns and adjectives has developed 
which is not found in either of the standard forms 
of Norwegian, nor in most other Norwegian 
dialects. A three-way distinction has evolved, as 
follows:
(a) There is, first, a group of proximal demon-
stratives corresponding to this in English and 
to denne/dette/desse (masc.-fem. sing./neut. 
sing./plur.) in Nynorsk and denne/dette/disse 
in Bokmål. In Toten these are:
denni/detti/dessi.
(b) Then we find the second Toten group:
danna/datta/dassa.
These distal demonstratives refer ‘to some-
thing which is visible in the conversational 
situation, and which the speaker … can point 
to’ (Faarlund, 2000: 54, my translation):
Danna boka (somm ligg dær) har je itte lesi
‘That book (which is-lying there) have I not 
read’
Veit du åkke somm bor i datta husi dær?
‘Know you who that lives in that house 
there?’
Dassa såkka (somm ligg bortpå stola) er reine
‘Those socks (which are-lying over-there-on) 
the chair are clean’
(c) The third series ‘is used for something which 
is not visible to the interlocutors, but has 
recently been mentioned in the conversation’ 
(Faarlund, 2000: 54, my translation):
Denn boka (somm du næmnde) har je itte lesi
‘That book (which you mentioned) have I not 
read’
Veit du åkke somm bor i dæ huse (somm vi 
nettopp tala om)?
‘Know you who lives in that house (which we 
just were-speaking about)?’
Dei såkka (somm du spør ætter) ær møkkete
‘Those socks (which you are-asking about) 
are dirty’
5. The rural English dialect of Norfolk has devel-
oped a new verbal category which is not found 
in Standard English. The non-negative present 
tense of the verb to be is identical to the 
Standard English paradigm: I am, he/she/it is, 
we/you/they are. However, there is also a distinct 
presentative form of the verb which has be for all 
persons (Trudgill, 2003):
Here I be!
Ah, here you be!
Where’s Bill – ah, there he be.
Complexification 2: increase in 
syntagmatic redundancy
It is interesting to note that the examples I have 
located under this heading are of two different 
types. Example 6 is a case of a particular dis-
course strategy whereby speakers choose option-
ally to repeat information more frequently in some 
dialects than others. Examples 8 to 11, on the 
other hand, represent examples of grammatical 
agreement. It is possible that the latter type derive 
diachronically from earlier stages which resem-
bled the former type – and this may in fact be what 
we are seeing in Example 7.
6. The empirical and theoretical work of Berthele 
(2006), which is based on field recordings of 
discourse in dialects of Swiss German (as well 
as French and Romansch), is especially helpful 
on this topic because it provides some quantita-
tive data. One of the phenomena which Berthele 
has focused on is the use of complex, redundant 
pleonastic constructions involving prepositions 

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
241
and adverbials with motion and posture verbs, 
in which information appears to be given twice. 
Swiss German examples from his recordings 
(Berthele, 2006) include:
und iez tuet er ufe baumstamm uufchläddere 
(p. 183)
and now does he up-a tree-trunk up-climb
‘and now he climbs up a tree trunk’
de hirsch hed ne da übernes bord abbegrüärt ine 
täich ine (p. 184)
the stag has him then over-a bank down-thrown 
into-a pond into
‘the stag then threw him over a bank down into 
a pond’
ischer dri usse gsprunge übernes nesseli usse 
(p. 184)
is-he in-there out jumped over-a nettle out
‘he jumped out into there over a nettle’
Of particular value is Berthele’s discussion of 
the data from the Swiss German dialect of 
Muotathal. The Muotathal ‘is a place with a high 
degree of linguistic and cultural idiosyncrasy. The 
population is characterized by relatively dense, 
close-knit and multiplex social networks, which 
can easily be inferred from the small set of last 
names borne by a large portion of the native popu-
lation’ (Berthele, 2006: 101). And it has ‘relatively 
traditional language-ecology conditions’ with 
‘low levels of migration, higher education, and 
valley-external ties’ (ibid.: 102).
According to Berthele, Swiss German dialects 
as a whole tend to show greater syntagmatic 
redundancy in both stative and dynamic spatial 
expressions than Standard German, which is of 
course interesting for our thesis. But it is clear 
from Berthele’s data that this is much truer of 
Muotathal than of the other dialects he investi-
gated: the rural dialect of the Wallis/Valais, 
the rural Sensler dialect of Canton Freiburg, the 
urban dialect of Berne, and Standard German. The 
percentage of verb phrases with redundant direc-
tion marking in the different Swiss dialects is as 
follows:
 
Wallis 
12%
 
Berne 
15%
 
Sensler 
17%
 
Muotathal 23%
Speakers of the high-contact Standard German in 
Berthele’s sample, on the other hand, use less than 
half the number of redundant expressions as those 
used by Muotathal speakers: 11% (Berthele, 
2006: 188). This is consistent with the suggestion 
that it is in small, dense, close-knit societies that 
redundancy is most likely to increase.
7. In the English traditional dialect of Norfolk, a 
form of double tense marking or ‘past-tense 
infinitives’ can be found which is absent from 
Standard English. For example:
Have the fox left?
No that ain’t, do Bailey would’ve let them went.
‘No it hasn’t, or Bailey would’ve let them [the 
hounds] go.’ (Trudgill, 1995)
8. According to Van der Auwera and Neuckermans 
(2004: 455), some dialects of East Flemish have 
developed considerable redundancy of the rep-
etition-of-information type in the form of triple 
negation, as in: 
’k en ben niemand ni tegengekomen
I not am nobody not met
‘I haven’t met anybody’
Crucially, triple negation in this dialect is clearly 
an innovation out of earlier double negation: as 
Van der Auwera and Neuckermans say, while en is 
an ‘old negative marker’, ni is a ‘relatively new 
marker’ (idem. 455).
Even more remarkably the peripheral West 
Flemish dialects, as described by Haegeman 
(1995: 132), have gone even further down this 
path of growth of syntagmatic redundancy, with 
the development of no less than quadruple nega-
tion, as in:
da Valère nooit an geen mens niets gezeid 
en-oat
that Valère never to no person nothing said not-
had
‘that Valère had never told anyone anything’
Standardized Dutch, in contrast, has single nega-
tion only:
dat Valeer aan niemand ooit iets gezegd had
that Valère to nobody ever anything said had
9. De Vogelaer (2004: 190) notes that subject 
doubling occurs in a number of Belgian Dutch 
dialects. For example,
Ze hebbe-en zieder drie kinderen
they have they three kids
‘They have three kids’
contains three person markers: the -en third-per-
son plural marker on the verb, the clitic pronomi-
nal form ze, and the pronoun zieder. 
More remarkably, in East Flemish dialects (de 
Vogelaer, 2004: 191), subject tripling actually 
occurs, in the first-person plural. A verb can take 
a preverbal pronoun and two postverbal pronouns. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
242
The three pronominal forms are wij ‘we’, we ‘we’ 
[weak form], and me ‘we’ [clitic form]. De 
Vogelaer cites as an example:
We zulle-me wij dat doen
we shall-we we that do
‘We shall do that’
10. According to De Vogelaer (2005: 35), certain 
Flemish dialects have developed a system of 
obligatory person agreement on the words cor-
responding to English yes and no, referred to by 
him as ‘answer particles’.
Zullen we gaan? Jom. ‘Shall we go? Yes [1pl]’.
Heb je dat gedaan? Jok. ‘Have you done it? 
Yes [1sg]’
Is het warm vandaag? Jot. Is it warm today? Yes 
[3sg]’
11. Dialects of Bavarian German (Bayer, 1984) have 
developed person agreement marking on com-
plementizers. For example, second-person singu-
lar marking occurs on ob ‘whether’ in agreement 
together with the pronoun du ‘you-sg.’ and 
kumm-st ‘come-2nd sg.’ in:
… obst du noch Minga kummst 
whether you (sg) to Munich come 
‘… whether you are coming to Munich’
Second-person plural marking occurs on ob, with 
the suffix -ts being repeated, in:
… obts ihr noch Minga kummts 
… whether you (pl) to Munich come 
‘… whether you are coming to Munich’
The same phenomenon occurs in certain dialects 
of Dutch/Flemish (Van Haeringen, 1939).
Complexification 3: increase 
in morphological opacity
The most relevant aspect of opacity for the current 
discussion is one which has been treated by a 
number of authors and is referred to by Kusters 
(2003: 21) in his ‘transparency principle’ as a 
demand ‘that the relation between form and mean-
ing is as transparent as possible’. The highest level 
of transparency or analyticity is when ‘every 
single meaning is expressed in a separate form’. 
Kusters cites the loss of allomorphy in Arabic as 
an obvious simplification under this heading. 
Growth in allomorphy, obviously, correspond-
ingly represents a clear case of loss of morpho-
logical transparency, and thus an increase in 
complexity. The examples in this section are all 
cases of increases in allomorphy.
12. The first example of increase in allomorphy 
comes from an English dialect and, crucially, has 
not been paralleled in high-contact varieties of 
English. This concerns the third-person singular 
neuter pronoun. In nearly all English dialects, 
including Standard English, it is both the sub-
jective and the objective form. In the dialect of 
Norfolk, however, a complication has developed. 
In preverbal position, the neuter singular pro-
noun is not it but that. This is particularly clear 
in the case of the ‘weather pronoun’ where no 
possibility exists that we are dealing with the 
homophonous demonstrative:
That’s raining.
That’s cold in here.
But there is no doubt that it also operates in genu-
ine pronominalization:
I see the cat – that was on the wall.
However, in postverbal position the pronoun takes 
the form it:
Oh, that’s raining, is it?
That’s cold in here, in’t it?
The cat? – I just see it on the wall
13. In the traditional dialect of East Somerset 
(Ihalainen, 1991), a pronominal allomorphy more 
complex than that found in other dialects has 
developed, notably in the third-person singular 
masculine. The subject form of the pronoun is the 
expected he: 
He’s older than what I be.
The object form is ’n /@n ~ n n
˙    /: 
I looked up to un and said ‘What’s say?’
However, there is an additional form of the subject 
pronoun which Ihalainen refers to as a question 
clitic, and which occurs obligatorily in tag ques-
tions. This Ihalainen writes as her or er, but it is 
phonologically phonologically / @ó ~ ó/:
He do live in Latcham, don’ er? 
14. Most varieties of Frisian have two forms of the 
infinitive, but the Bökingharde dialect of North 
Frisian (Walker and Wilts, 2001: 295–6) has 
developed an even richer allomorphy, with three 
different infinitival forms. 
(a) Forms with the suffix -e occur after modal 
and auxiliary verbs: hi wal bål kaame ‘he 

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
243
will soon come’. In some cases, this form of 
the infinitive shows even greater opacity by 
being irregular and having palatalization in 
place of the -e suffix: düünj cf. douen ‘to do, 
give’, schiinj cf. schaien ‘to happen’.
(b) Forms ending in -en occur when the infinitive 
stands alone, after the preposition tu ‘to’, 
and after certain verbs such as bliwe ‘to stay’, 
hiire ‘to hear’: douen än fouen hiire tuhuupe 
‘giving and receiving belong together’. 
(c) Forms with a zero ending occur after the 
conjunction än ‘and’: dåt as ai lacht än snååk 
tjüsch ‘it is not easy to speak German’. The 
corresponding form of the verb ‘to do’ is dou.
Complexification 4: irregularization
Here I discuss two cases of irregularization. The 
first is quite clearly due to sound changes which, 
as is usually the case, were themselves quite regu-
lar. The second is rather different. Some of the 
irregularizations are examples of regular verbs fit-
ting into established strong verb patterns, but 
others are somewhat mysterious. 
15. Older Faroese had a complex system of noun 
declension, including numerous irregular para-
digms such as that for dagur ‘day’:
 
               singular  plural
 
nom. 
[dagur] 
[dagar]
 
acc. 
[dag] 
[dagar]
 
gen. 
[dags] 
[daga]
 
dat. 
[degi] 
[døgum]
This was a system which was relatively complex 
in post-threshold learnability terms. There were 
seven different forms to learn, and there was a low 
level of morphological transparency. 
However, crucially for our hypothesis, the com-
plexity of the nominal system of modern Faroese 
is now even greater than that of the earlier lan-
guage. The contemporary declension for this same 
noun is (Braunmüller, 2001: 73):
 
               singular 
plural
 
nom. 
[dEavUr] 
[dE:ar]
 
acc. 
[dEa] 
[dE:ar]
 
gen. 
[daě° s] 
[dE:a]
 
dat. 
[de:ji] 
[dø:vUn]
The complexity – the irregularity – of this para-
digm is colossal. As Braunmüller says, only the 
consonantal onset remains constant throughout 
the paradigm. Braunmüller cites similar cases in a 
number of other modern noun subclasses also.
High-contact continental Scandinavian, on the 
other hand, has lost complexity rather than adding 
it. The corresponding noun dag in Standard 
Norwegian Bokmål, for instance, has only two 
forms: dag (sing.), dager (pl.).
16. In the English traditional dialect of Norfolk, for 
example, we find a number of irregular preterites 
which occur in cases where Standard English 
has regular forms. These include (Forby, 1830; 
Trudgill, 2003):
 
hoe 
hew
 
mow 
mew
 
owe 
ewe
 
row  
rew
 
save 
seft
 
sew /sou/ 
sew /s0:/ (as of stitches)
 
show 
shew
 
snow 
snew
 
sow  
sew /s0:/ (as of seed)
 
thow (thaw) thew
 
shriek 
shruck
 
wave 
weft
 
wrap 
wrop
In fact, a few of these verbs did have strong or 
irregular preterites on their first attested appear-
ance in Old English or Middle English. This is 
true of mow and row, while sew had both strong 
and weak forms in Old English. In these cases, 
then, regularization has taken place in Standard 
English and in the General English nonstandard 
dialects, while the traditional Norfolk dialect has 
preserved the original irregularity. The other 
irregular forms, however, are not historical. Show, 
for example, was a weak verb in Old English, with 
the preterite sceawed, as was thaw; and the other 
verbs were also regular from their earliest appear-
ance. The only exception is owe, which goes back 
to Old English agan, with the early Old English 
preterite ahte, which later of course gave rise to 
ought, and was superseded as preterite by regular 
awede > owed. So the Norfolk forms ewe, hew, 
sew (of sew), shew, snew, thew, shruck, seft, weft, 
wrop are all innovations which involved irregu-
larization. The changes to ewe, hew, sew, shew, 
sew, thew are obviously the result of analogy with 
the blow class, but the origins of shruck, seft, weft 
and wrop are less clear.
17.4 SPECULATIVE CONCLUSION
I have attempted to demonstrate that there is a 
good case to be made for the role of societal type 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
244
in language change by examining briefly the 
social contexts in which simplification occurs, and 
then by producing comparative evidence in favour 
of the argument that complexification, in the sense 
in which the term has been used in this chapter, is 
most likely to develop in low-contact communi-
ties. I have argued for the legitimacy of this socio-
linguistic typological insight with examples from 
morphological data, but there is some indication 
that it may well be valid for phonology as well 
(see Trudgill, 2004). The argumentation, moreo-
ver, has relied on material from Germanic lan-
guages only. These languages do lend themselves 
particularly well to this discussion, because in the 
Germanic languages we can find striking con-
trasts, within a limited geographical area, between 
communities speaking related dialects and lan-
guages in which we can deduce with some accu-
racy which complex features are retentions, 
corresponding to simplification in other varieties, 
and which are the result of actual complexifica-
tion. But comparisons within other language 
families would obviously be desirable.
Of course, it is one thing to demonstrate that 
there may be a link between community type and 
simplification/complexification, but it is another 
matter to explain why there should be such a link. 
What exactly can the connection be between 
social structure and linguistic features of this 
type? I now attempt some elucidation of this point 
by discussing further the relevance of the sociolin-
guistic parameters outlined at the beginning of 
this chapter: networks, size and stability.
As far as social network structure is concerned, 
we can follow the lead of the Milroys who argue, 
on the basis especially of their work in Belfast, 
that dense networks lead to strong social ties, and 
that strong social ties lead to closer maintenance of 
community norms, in language as in other forms 
of behaviour. On the other hand, loose networks 
lead to weaker social ties and so to a relative lack 
of maintenance of community norms. The Milroys 
argue that the consequence is that ‘linguistic 
change is slow to the extent that the relevant popu-
lations are well established and bound by strong 
ties whereas it is rapid to the extent that weak ties 
exist in populations’ (see also L. Milroy, 2000). 
Dense social networks, as we noted earlier, are 
most likely to be found in small, stable communi-
ties with few external contacts and a high degree 
of social cohesion. Loose social networks are 
more liable to develop in larger, unstable commu-
nities which have relatively many external con-
tacts and a relative lack of social cohesion. 
Linguistic change is therefore liable, other things 
being equal, to be faster in larger than in smaller 
communities (see Trudgill, in preparation). 
This insight about speed of change can also be 
extended to differences of the sort we have been 
discussing here, between types of change. Given 
that there is a strong tendency for relative density 
of social networks to correlate with community 
size, we can note the comment made by Grace 
(1990: 126), who writes:
A language exists in the people who speak it, but 
people do not live very long, and the language 
goes on much longer. This continuity is achieved 
by the recruitment of new speakers, but it is not 
a perfect continuity. Children (or adults) learning 
a language learn it from people who already 
speak it, but these teachers exercise considerably 
less than total control over the learning process.
We must accept that no teachers exercise total 
control, but this perspective does also suggest that, 
because of network structure, there is a possibility 
that in smaller, more stable communities the 
‘teachers’ have more control than in larger socie-
ties. Because of this, small tightly-knit communi-
ties are better able to encourage the preservation 
of norms and the continued adherence to norms 
from one generation to another, however com-
plex they may be, and the absence of external 
contacts and social instability will also strengthen 
a community’s ability to maintain linguistic com-
plexity. 
If this is so, then it is not unreasonable to sup-
pose that these same societal factors may also 
assist in the production of complexification. In 
small isolated communities, linguistic change will 
be slower. But when it does occur, there is a greater 
chance that it will be of the complexification type 
– the other side of the coin from high contact and 
loose networks, leading to rapid change and sim-
plification. Small isolated communities are more 
able, because of their network structures, to push 
through, enforce and sustain linguistic innovations 
which would have a much smaller chance of suc-
cess in larger, more fluid communities – namely, 
changes of a relatively complex type. So not only 
is there less simplification in low-contact situa-
tions, there is indeed also more complexification, 
because innovations which complexify the system 
have a greater chance of succeeding than they 
would in other types of community. That is, it may 
well be that innovations of a complexification type 
occur with roughly equal frequency in all types of 
community, but that it is simply the case that these 
innovations are likely, perhaps much more likely, 
to succeed and become established linguistic 
changes in small isolated communities. If we can 
agree that irregularity is more complex than regu-
larity, then we can see why it is in larger language 
communities that irregular verbs are more likely to 
become regular, while the reverse may occur in 
smaller communities – irregularization is just less 
likely to succeed in larger societies. 

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
245
The same point can be made from the point of 
view of opacity. In an important paper, Braunmüller 
(1985) has argued that Undurchsichtigkeit (itself a 
more transparent form than English opacity) is a 
typical characteristic of small languages. We can 
now see why this would be. Innovations which 
render forms less transparent – these are typically 
phonological innovations – may well develop in 
all types of community, but they are much more 
likely to be successful ultimately in communities 
with tight social networks.
On the other hand, the tendency we have seen 
for syntagmatic redundancy – repetition of infor-
mation – to become more common in smaller 
communities is less obviously explicable. Indeed, 
it would have seemed more logical if it were the 
other way round. In small tightly-knit communi-
ties where there is a higher degree of shared 
knowledge and information, one would have 
thought that less repetition would be necessary, 
not more. The clue, however, may lie in the word 
‘necessary’. Linguistic change is not teleological 
(Lass, 1990, 1997: 340ff): changes are never ‘nec-
essary’; they just happen. And the development of 
agreement does seem to be an extraordinarily 
common process in linguistic change, since agree-
ment is a very common phenomenon in the 
world’s languages; it is ‘a widespread and varied 
phenomenon’ (Corbett, 2006: 1). That is, if lin-
guistic change proceeds without the involvement 
of non-native speakers, agreement is rather likely 
to develop even in constructions where there was 
none before. We can suppose that this type of 
development is less common in large fluid high-
contact communities because, as we said above, 
repetition of information means that there is more 
for non-native speakers to learn – it makes for L2 
difficulty/outsider complexity. Moreover, as 
Corbett says, the functions of agreement are by no 
means totally clear, and ‘agreement often appears 
to involve a lot of effort for a questionable payoff’ 
(2006: 274). It is therefore hardly surprising that 
pidgins, creoles and other high-contact varieties 
tend to manage without it. As to why it is typical 
for linguistic changes to occur in which agreement 
develops out of situations in which there was 
originally none – this seems not yet to be fully 
understood: Corbett’s book (2006) on Agreement 
consists of 284 pages of text, only five of which 
are actually devoted to origins. As Corbett says, 
‘agreement remains deeply puzzling’ (2006: 1). 
Perhaps we can content ourselves for the time 
being with noting that human languages are ‘like 
that’ in situations where no significant interven-
tion of non-native speakers occurs. It is the type of 
change, in other words, that is referred to be 
Bailey (1982) as ‘connatural’ – the sort of change 
which naturally takes place when a language is 
not in contact with other languages.
Finally, the greater likelihood of the develop-
ment of morphological categories in smaller com-
munities is also a puzzling phenomenon. Here the 
social factor of community size may be relevant, 
however. Linguists are naturally sceptical about 
relating linguistic and cultural complexity. As 
Bickerton (1996) says, ‘if there were any link 
between cultural complexity and linguistic com-
plexity, we would expect to find that the most 
complex societies had the most complex lan-
guages while simpler societies had simpler lan-
guages ... . We do not find any such thing’. 
Interestingly, though, I would like to point out 
that, in this chapter, we have presented some data 
which could be interpreted as suggesting that 
there is a relationship but that it is the other way 
round: some aspects of linguistic complexity may 
be more evident in simpler societies than in more 
complex societies.
Some suggestive work which bears on this 
point has been carried out by Perkins (1980, 
1995). He investigates certain aspects of linguistic 
complexity, concentrating on morphological cate-
gories in deixis. He takes as the starting point for 
his research a suggestion by Keenan (1976) that 
deictic systems are better developed in non-liter-
ate communities with fewer than 4000 speakers. 
Kay (1976: 18), for instance, says that 
in small, homogeneous speech communities there 
is a maximum of shared background between 
speakers, which is the stuff on which deixis 
depends. As society evolves toward complexity 
and the speech community becomes less homo-
geneous, speakers share less background infor-
mation, and so one would need to build more of 
the message into what was actually said.
Givón (1979), too, observes that people in more 
complex cultures are more frequently required to 
interact with other people who they do not know.
Perkins’ argument is that deictics identify refer-
ents by connecting them to the spatial–temporal 
axis of speech events. Deictics in his terms include 
persons, tenses, demonstratives, directionals (here, 
there), inclusive vs exclusive etc. The point about 
deictics, he argues, is that they involve the require-
ment that the spatio-temporal context of their use 
be available for the interpretation of the intended 
referents. Sacha Aikhenvald (pers.comm,) also 
points out that large complex systems of evidenti-
ality – with four, five or six specifications – are 
found only in small communities. She suggests 
that this may be because in such communities 
there is much pressure for everyone to be fully 
explicit about their source of information.
Perkins thus conjectures that deictics will 
be more salient in less complex than in more 
complex cultures, and are therefore more likely to 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
246
appear in the central inflectional systems of the 
languages concerned than more peripherally in the 
lexis or periphrastically. This is, in turn, because 
the more frequently free deictic morphemes occur, 
the more likely they are to be subject to gram-
maticalization processes, which turn them into 
bound morphemes through coalescence and mor-
phologization.
Perkins investigated 50 languages and their 
usage of seven deictic affixes: tense; person on 
verb; person on nouns; spatial demonstratives on 
verbs; spatial demonstratives on nouns; inclusive 
vs exclusive on person markers; and dual in 
person markers. Communities are ranged for cul-
tural complexity from 1 (e.g. Andamanese) to 5 
(e.g. Vietnamese). The measurement of cultural 
complexity that Perkins uses is based on the work 
of anthropologists such as Carneiro (1973) and 
computed in terms of factors such as type of agri-
culture, settlement size in terms of population, 
craft specialization, and numbers of levels in 
political and social hierarchies.
Perkins shows statistically that there is a cor-
relation between complexity and the presence of 
deictic affixes. For example, languages associated 
with the most complex cultures – those scoring 5 
– have on average 1.22 deictic affixes, while those 
scoring 1, the lowest, have on average 3.28. 
Perkins concludes that deictic affixes are lost as 
cultures become complex.
Most linguists are likely to feel a little uncom-
fortable about the notion of cultural complexity. I 
am therefore happy, at least for the time being, to 
leave this issue to the anthropologists, and to point 
out that we probably do not need to look any fur-
ther, for our own linguistic purposes, than actual 
community size. What is probably crucial here is 
simply how many individuals are involved in a 
particular speech community, and how much 
shared information is available. It is possible that 
the same or similar factors are associated with the 
development of other morphological factors; and 
in any case we can note that a number of the 
developments outlined above under 1–5 do indeed 
involve some kind of deixis.
We may speculate, then, that the crucial factors 
stemming from social structure which help to 
determine aspects of language structure, of the 
type discussed in this chapter, are social network 
structure and degree of shared information, both 
of which of course also relate to community size 
and degree of contact and social stability.
NOTES
1 I am very grateful for information, discussions, 
help and advice in connection with the subject 
matter of this paper to: Raphael Berthele, Kurt 
Braunmüller, Gunther De Vogelaer, Jan Terje 
Faarlund, Liliane Haegeman, Jean Hannah, Lukas 
Pietsch, Jacques Van Keymeulen, Wim Vandenbussche, 
Alastair Walker, and especially Peter Siemund, as 
well as to members of audiences in different parts of 
the world who have heard presentations of this 
material, and responded with helpful questions and 
vital information.
2 ‘It can often be observed that a language loses 
formal distinctions in circumstances in which the 
hypothesis of a foreign influence is very natural’.
REFERENCES
Aikhenvald, A. (2002) Language Contact in Amazonia. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Aikhenvald, A. (2008) ‘Multilingual imperatives: the elabora-
tion of a category in northwest Amazonia’, International 
Journal of American Linguistics, 74: 189–225.
Askedal, J. O. (2005) ‘The typological development of the 
Nordic languages I: morphology and syntax’, in O. Bandle 
(ed.), The Nordic Languages: an International Handbook of 
the History of the North Germanic Languages II. Berlin: de 
Gruyter. pp. 1872–86.
Bailey, C.-J. (1982) On the Yin and yang Nature of Language. 
Ann Arbor, MI: Karoma.
Bakker, P. (1997) A Language of our Own: the Genesis of 
Michif, the Mixed Cree–French Language of the Canadian 
Métis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bayer, J. (1984) ‘COMP in Bavarian syntax’, Linguistic Review, 
3: 209–74.
Berthele, R. (2006) Ort und Weg: die sprachliche Raumreferenz 
in Varietäten des Deutschen, Rätoromanischen und 
Französischen. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Bickerton, D. (1996) Language and Human Behaviour. London: 
UCL Press.
Bokamba, E. (1993) ‘Language variation and change in perva-
sively multilingual societies: Bantu languages’, in S. Mufwene 
and L. Moshi (eds), Topics in African Linguistics. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. pp. 207–52.
Braunmüller, K. (1985) ‘Morphologische Undurchsichtigkeit – 
ein Charakteristikum kleiner Sprachen’, Kopenhagener 
Beiträge zur germanistischen Linguistik, 22: 48–68.
Braunmüller, K. (2001) ’Morfologisk typologi og færøsk’, in 
K. Braunmüller and J. L. Jacobsen (eds), Moderne lingvis-
tiske teorier og færøsk. Oslo: Novus. pp. 67–88.
Carneiro, R. (1973) ‘Scale analysis, evolutionary sequences, 
and the range of cultures’, in: R. Naroll and R. Cohen (eds), 
A Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology. New 
York: Columbia University Press. pp. 834–71.
Comrie, B. (2008) ‘Inflectional morphology and language 
contact, with special reference to mixed languages’, in 
P. Siemund, and N. Kintana (eds), Language Contact and 
Contact Languages. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Corbett, G. (2006) Agreement. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

SOCIAL STRUCTURE, LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CHANGE
247
Dahl, Ö. (2004) The Growth and Maintenance of Linguistic 
Complexity. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
De Vogelaer, G. (2004) ‘Person marking in Dutch dialects’, in 
B. Kortmann (ed.), Dialectology Meets Typology: Dialect 
Grammar from a Cross-Linguistic Perspective. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 181–10.
De Vogelaer, G. (2005) Persoonsmarkering in de dialecten in 
het nederlandse taalgebied. Ghent: Universiteit Gent.
Dixon, R. M. W. (1997) The Rise and Fall of Languages, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dixon, R. M. W. and Aikhenvald, A. (eds) (1999) The 
Amazonian Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Ebert, K. H. (1971) Referenz, Sprechsituation und die bestim-
mten Artikel in einem nordfriesischen Dialekt (Fering). 
Bredstedt: Nordfriisk Instituut.
Ebert, K. H. (1984) ‘Zur grammatischen Differenziertheit des 
Dialektes (am Beispiel Fering)’, Nordfriesisches Jahrbuch, 
20: 227–38.
Ebert, K. and Keenan, E. (1973) ‘A note on marking transpar-
ency and opacity’, Linguistic Inquiry, 4: 421–4
Faarlund, J. T. (2000) Totenmålet. Lena: Østre Toten 
Kommune.
Forby, R. [1830] (1970) The Vocabulary of East Anglia. New 
York: Augustus Kelley. 
Givón, T. (1979) On Understanding Grammar. New York: 
Academic Press.
Grace, G. (1990) ‘The ‘aberrant’ (vs. ‘exemplary’) Melanesian 
languages’, in: P. Baldi (ed.), Linguistic Change and 
Reconstruction Methodology. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
pp. 155–73.
Haegeman, L. (1995) The Syntax of Negation. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Harnard, S. R., Steklis, H. D. and Lancaster, J. (eds) 1976 
Origins and Evolution of Language and Speech. New York: 
New York Academy of Sciences.
Harris, A. and Campbell, L. (1995) Historical Syntax in Cross-
Linguistic Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Haudricourt, A. (1961) ‘Richesse en phonèmes et richesse en 
locateurs’, L’Homme, 1: 5–10.
Hope, J. (2000) ‘Rats, bats, sparrows and dogs: biology, 
linguistics and the nature of Standard English’, in L. Wright 
(ed.) The Development of Standard English 1300–1800, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ihalainen, O. (1976) ‘Periphrastic do in affirmative sentences 
in the dialect of East Somerset’, Neuphilologische 
Mitteilungen, 77: 608–22. 
Ihalainen, Ossi (1991) ‘On grammatical diffusion in Somerset 
folk speech’, in P. Trudgill and J. K. Chambers (eds), 
Dialects of English: Studies in Grammatical Variation. 
London: Longman. pp. 148–60.
Jahr, E. H. (2001) ‘Historical sociolinguistics: the role of Low 
German language contact in the Scandinavian typological 
split of the late Middle Ages’, Lingua Posnaniensis, 43: 
95–104.
Kay, P. (1976) ‘Discussion of papers by Kiparsky and 
Wescott’, in S. R. Harnard, Steklis, H. D. and Lancaster, J. 
(eds), Origin and Evolution of Language and Speech. 
New York Academy of Sciences. pp. 17–19.
Keenan, E. (1976) ‘Discussion’, in S. R. Harnard, Steklis, H. D. 
and Lancaster, (eds). Origins and Evolution of Language 
and Speech. New York: New York, Academy of Sciences. 
pp. 92–6.
Kusters, W. (2003) Linguistic Complexity: The Influence of 
Social Change on Verbal Inflection. Leiden: Leiden 
University.
Lass, R. (1990) ‘How to do things with junk: exaptation 
in language evolution’, Journal of Linguistics, 26: 
79–102.
Lass, R. (1997) Historical Linguistics and Language Change. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Markey, T. (1981) Frisian. The Hague: Mouton.
Milroy, J. (1992) ‘Middle English dialectology’, in N. Blake 
(ed.), The History of the English Language II: 1066–1476. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 156–206.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1985) ‘Linguistic change, social net-
work and speaker innovation’, Journal of Linguistics, 21: 
339–84.
Milroy, L. (2000) ‘Social network analysis and language 
change’, European Journal of English Studies, 4: 
217–24.
Mühlhäusler, P. (1977) Pidginisation and Simplification of 
Language. Canberra: Pacific Linguistics.
Nichols, J. (1992) Linguistic Diversity in Space and Time. 
Chicago: Chicago University Press. 
Pedersen, K. M. (1999) ’Genusforenkling i Københavnsk’, 
Danske Folkemål, 41: 79–106.
Perkins, R. (1980) ‘The covariation of culture and grammar’. 
PhD thesis, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Perkins, R. (1995) Deixis, Grammar, and Culture. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins.
Sankoff, G. (2002) ‘Linguistic outcomes of language contact’, 
in J. K. Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), 
The Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Thomason, S. G. (2001) Language Contact: an Introduction. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Thurston, W. (1994) ‘Renovation and innovation in the 
languages of north-western New Britain’, in T. Dutton and 
D. Tryon (eds), Language Contact and Change in 
the Austronesian World. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 
573–609.
Trudgill, P. (1995) ‘Grammaticalisation and social structure: 
nonstandard conjunction-formation in East Anglian 
English’, in F. R. Palmer (ed.), Grammar and Semantics: 
Papers in Honour of John Lyons. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 136–47.
Trudgill, P. (1996) ‘Dual-source pidgins and reverse creoloids: 
northern perspectives on language contact’, in E. H. Jahr 
and I. Broch (eds), Language Contact in the Arctic: 
Northern Pidgins and Contact Languages. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter. pp. 5–14.
Trudgill, P. (1999) The Dialects of England. 2nd edition. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Trudgill, P. (2003) The Norfolk Dialect. Cromer: Poppyland. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
248
Trudgill, P. (2004) ‘Linguistic and social typology: the 
Austronesian migrations and phoneme inventories’, 
Linguistic Typology, 8: 305–20.
Trudgill, P. (2009) ‘Contact and sociolinguistic typology’, in 
R. Hickey (ed.), Handbook of Language Contact. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Trudgill, P. (forthcoming) Language in Contact and Isolation: 
Social Determinants of Linguistic Structure.
Van der Auwera, J. and Neuckermans, A. (2004) ‘On the 
interaction of predicate and quantifier negation in Flemish’, 
in B. Kortmann (ed.), Dialectology Meets Typology: Dialect 
Grammar from a Cross-Linguistic Perspective. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 453–78.
Van Haeringen, C. B. (1939) ’Congruerende voegwoorden’, 
Tijdschrift voor Nederlandse Taal- en Letterkunde, 
60: 126–7.
Vanhove, M. (2001) ‘Contacts de langues et complexification des 
systèmes: le cas du maltais’, Faits de Langues, 18: 65–74.
Vogt, H. (1948) ‘Dans quelles conditions et dans quelles lim-
ites peut s’exercer sur le système morphologique d’une 
langue l’action du système morphologique d’une autre 
langue?’, in M. Lejeune (ed.), Actes du Sixième Congrès 
International des Linguistes. Paris: Klincksieck. pp. 31–45.
Walker, A. (1990) ‘Frisian’, in C. Russ (ed.), The Dialects of 
Modern German: A Linguistic Survey. London: Routledge. 
pp. 1–30.
Walker, A. and Wilts, O. (2001) ‘Die nordfriesichen 
Mundarten’, in H.H. Munske et al. (eds), Handbuch des 
friesischen/Handbook of Frisian Studies. Tübingen: 
Niemeyer. pp. 284–305.
Wells, J. C. (1982) Accents of English. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

18
18.1 INTRODUCTION
Sociolinguistics is often seen as having little rele-
vance to formal linguistic theory. Indeed, a formal 
linguist once told the present author that sociolin-
guistics ‘is not linguistics’. While such a comment 
reveals a narrow and sectarian view of linguistics, 
it also shows that the relationship between social 
aspects of language and formal models of lan-
guage structure is not self-evident – at least, given 
prevailing theoretical frameworks in the field. So 
why does this volume have a chapter addressing 
this relationship?
The most obvious connection lies in the funda-
mental scientific concern with theoretical ade-
quacy. Chomsky (1964: 29) identifies the lowest 
level of adequacy as ‘observational’ – providing a 
faithful representation of the data. Formal linguis-
tic theories that ignore social diversity – a demon-
strable characteristic of all languages – do not 
meet this most elementary criterion, let alone the 
highly valued descriptive or explanatory adequacy 
they aspire to. Formalists have glossed over this 
glaring lacuna by addressing their models to ever-
narrower social universes, ultimately the ‘idiolect’ 
– the grammar of a hypothetical monostylistic 
invariant individual. But observation denies even 
this refuge, demonstrating that such an object 
does not exist in the world. And even if it did, a 
formal model that accounted for only this would 
be limited to production, leaving the other two 
pillars of the language tripod – perception and 
acquisition – unaddressed, since human beings 
encounter sociolinguistic diversity in the speech 
of others, and must be able to learn language and 
understand others even when they speak differ-
ently. Hence the obvious conclusion is that the 
human language faculty acquires, generates, rec-
ognizes and interprets variability, and that formal 
theories of this faculty are inadequate unless they 
account for this.
One contribution of sociolinguistics to 
formal lin   guistics is therefore observational and 
descriptive – it turns up facts that theory must 
account for. Formal models sometimes flee from 
the seemingly disorganized multitude of such 
facts and declare themselves not responsible for 
the mess. This is an appropriate initial scientific 
response to complexity – focusing on a subset of 
facts, idealizing them and ignoring interactions 
with other facts. But when disciplines mature to 
the point of achieving some mastery over their 
subject matter, the gains from idealization are 
outweighed by the concomitant limits on the the-
ory’s capacity to achieve a more accurate account 
of reality. At this point a serious science is obliged 
to engage with what was previously ignored. 
Linguistics has now reached this phase, and 
formal linguistics has begun to recognize the need 
for a sounder empirical basis, and to seek broader 
empirical testing of theory, which can only be 
achieved in the messy world of language use. 
Sociolinguistic studies thus provide a proving 
ground for theory that is unavailable in the intro-
spective, intuitive paradigm of theoretical 
research.
Sociolinguistic research also points towards 
what is needed in linguistic theory to achieve 
higher levels of adequacy. Adequate formal models 
must eventually account for variability – an indi-
vidual’s capacity for stylistic variation, for accom-
modation, for performing acts of identity by 
linguistic means – But what are the limits and the 
landscape of that variability? An adequate formal 
theory must incorporate social information – 
social interpretations of variables and ways of 
speaking; But what kinds of social information are 
linguistically relevant? Sociolinguistic work is 
Sociolinguistics and 
Formal Linguistics
G r e g o r y  R .  G u y

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
250
developing the outlines of the necessary elements 
of an adequate theory of language – one that 
accounts not only for narrow Chomskyan compe-
tence but also, following Hymes (1972; see 
Johnstone and Marcellino, this volume), for speak-
ers’ sociolinguistic or communicative compe-
tence, their capacity to speak and understand in a 
diverse and varying linguistic world. Encouragingly, 
this work is meeting complementary develop-
ments from the formal side, in theoretical frame-
works such as Optimality Theory (OT) and 
usage-based phonology.
The other side of this relationship is the impor-
tance of formal linguistics to sociolinguistics. 
Sociolinguists have, unfortunately, sometimes 
adopted a reciprocally sceptical view of the rele-
vance of formal theory to their subdiscipline. 
Ironically, their reasons for doing so are similar to 
formalists’ reasons for neglecting sociolinguistic 
results: the models of formalists are diverse, 
messy and constantly in flux. The impression that 
outsiders sometimes have of formal linguistics is 
reminiscent of T. S. Eliot’s famous poem, Prufrock: 
‘In the field, the theories come and go, talking of 
Michelangelo; there is time for a hundred visions 
and revisions before the taking of the toast and 
tea’. If theories are ephemeral, focus on irrelevan-
cies, and change a hundred times before tea, an 
empirical researcher might be wise to avoid 
making them a central concern of a study that 
might take years to complete.
Despite sometimes holding such attitudes, soci-
olinguists cannot avoid theory when they analyse 
data. Whenever they formulate a hypothesis, or 
even identify a variable, they are relying on some 
model of events, some ‘theory’ (perhaps implicit) 
of the structure of language. When Labov famously 
studied coda /r/ in New York City (1966), he made 
a formal claim to the effect that /r/-less and /r/-ful 
pronunciations of words like source, car, beer 
alternated in the speech of New Yorkers, and that 
the alternants counted as lexically equivalent even 
though they were phonologically and socially dif-
ferentiated. This analysis rested on theoretical 
constructs such as phoneme, word, equivalence, 
difference and phonological alternation. In gen-
eral, theoretical models suggest to the sociolin-
guist what things might be interesting to 
investigate. A great deal of sociolinguistic research 
has been devoted to investigating and testing 
hypotheses derived from theoretical models.
And much sociolinguistic work seriously 
engages with the construction of formal models. 
Bailey (1973) proposed a contextually-driven 
theory of variation and change, in which change is 
hypothesized to begin earliest and proceed fastest 
in maximally favourable contexts. Kroch (1989b) 
tested this model against data on syntactic change 
and disproved it, proposing instead an alternative 
theory – the Constant Rate Hypothesis – that 
states that changes move at the same rate in all 
contexts, and are therefore not driven by contex-
tual effects. Guy (1991, 1992) applied the Lexical 
Phonology model of Kiparsky (1982a) to variable 
coronal stop deletion (CSD) in English, deriving 
predictions of an exponential relationship among 
retention and deletion rates in three different mor-
phological categories, which has been confirmed 
in studies of several English dialects (cf. Santa 
Ana, 1992; Bayley, 1994).
Some of the formal models in sociolinguistic 
work have pioneered in areas where other formal 
theories have feared to tread. Sociolinguists have 
been at the forefront of work on interlingual 
issues, notably the formal models of code-switch-
ing proposed by scholars such as Poplack (1980), 
Myers-Scotton (1993) and Nishimura (1997). 
Formalists have done little work on linguistic 
structure above the level of the sentence, but 
sociolinguists have proposed formal models of 
discourse level phenomena such as narrative 
structure (Labov and Waletzky, 1967), conversa-
tional turn-taking (Sacks et al., 1974) and thera-
peutic discourse (Labov and Fanshel, 1977). Thus 
the relationship of sociolinguistics to formal 
theory comes full circle, with sociolinguists not 
only following up the analyses suggested by 
formal models but also testing and revising them, 
and proposing new ones. 
Of course, as this volume makes clear, sociolin-
guistics has become a very broad discipline that 
encompasses a considerable variety of interests 
and approaches, and not all of these will have the 
same level of engagement with formal linguistics. 
Studies of language policy and planning, or lan-
guage endangerment, are marginal to the con-
struction of formal models of language, whereas 
sociolinguistic research that examines detailed 
contextual constraints on phonological or syntac-
tic variation is intimately involved with analysing 
linguistic structure. But subdividing sociolinguis-
tic interests into those that engage with formal 
theory and those that do not is not necessarily 
simple or clear. Consider work on language con-
tact. The Franco-Norman conquest of England in 
1066 is a sociohistorical fact with no direct con-
nection to linguistic theory. But the massive bor-
rowing of French and Latinate words into English 
that ensued has complicated English phonology in 
ways of considerable interest to formal linguists. 
Much theoretical work in phonology addresses 
problems of this sort, such as how to associate 
certain phonological patterns with specific subsets 
of the lexicon. Similarly, code-switching was first 
studied by sociolinguists interested in the social 
phenomenon of alternating languages in bilingual 
communities. But it has attracted much formal 
theoretical attention, due to the insights it offers 

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
251
into questions of syntactic structure and linguistic 
cognition.
Therefore we cannot, a priori, partition socio-
linguistics into theoretically relevant and theoreti-
cally uninteresting components. All its subdivisions 
have the two connections to linguistic theory we 
have identified: all have the descriptive connec-
tion, revealing facts that theories may eventually 
seek to explain, and all rely on hypotheses about 
language structure that are ultimately derived 
from theoretical models. Since we assume, in 
principle, that language cannot be adequately 
understood in isolation from its social embedding, 
we assume a general relevance of sociolinguistics 
to formal theory.
In what follows, this chapter considers the fol-
lowing topics: how theory informs sociolinguis-
tics, how sociolinguistic studies address formal 
issues, and current developments in formal theory 
that constitute progress towards an adequate 
model of language – one that has some possibility 
of accounting for the sociolinguistic facts. But 
before addressing these topics, we begin with a 
brief survey of the history of linguistic theory 
insofar as it has spoken to, or ignored, sociolin-
guistic questions.
18.2  PAROLE, PERFORMANCE, 
PERIPHERY: THE 
MARGINALIZATION OF 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS IN 
FORMAL THEORY
Ever since the Neogrammarian movement revolu-
tionized linguistic theory in the late nineteenth 
century, the mainstream of formal thinking about 
language has pushed sociolinguistic questions 
either to the margins of the discipline, or beyond 
the pale. The Neogrammarians provided a key 
idealizing assumption that justified this marginali-
zation: the concept of invariance in linguistic proc-
esses. The dominant focus of linguistics in the 
nineteenth century was historical and comparative, 
leading to the discovery of numerous phonological 
correspondences between related languages, such 
as the ‘Grimm’s Law’ relationship between 
Germanic and Proto-Indo-European (roughly 
speaking, Germanic underwent a chain shift of the 
form: /bh, dh, gh/ > /b, d, g/ > /p, t, k/ > /f, θ, h/). 
Many exceptions to such correspondences were 
well known, and an emergent dialectological tradi-
tion was documenting extensive variability in lexi-
cal development. But despite the empirical evidence 
of variability, the Neogrammarians argued that 
correspondences arose from EXCEPTIONLESS sound 
change. The hypothesis of ‘exceptionlessness’ was 
justified by a formal model in which words were 
composed of phoneme-like units on which sound 
change operated (Paul, 1978 [1886]). When such a 
unit changed, all words containing it changed 
simultaneously. Apparent ‘exceptions’ to these cor-
respondences were postulated to result from proc-
esses like borrowing and analogical change that 
operated after the categorical change occurred. 
Sociolinguistic and dialectological observations of 
variability were relegated to the periphery of this 
research paradigm, by definition; they were noise 
obscuring the systematic big picture. (See also 
discussion in Kerswill, this volume.)
The Neogrammarian worldview was motivated 
in part by the discovery of phonological condi-
tioning. For example, Verner (1978 [1877]) 
famously discovered a prosodic constraint on 
Grimm’s Law: voiceless stops following an 
unstressed vowel in Proto-Indo-European are 
voiced in Germanic, instead of becoming voice-
less fricatives. Such discoveries provided a para-
digm for formal analysis in linguistics that persists 
in some measure to the present day: search for 
invariant generalizations, ignoring variability 
present in usage; where persistent exceptions to 
those generalizations are encountered, search for 
other invariant sub-generalizations delimited by 
formally definable contexts. This has been a 
productive heuristic for linguists, but it has 
also provided formal linguistics with an oubliette 
for disposing of inconvenient facts: one postulates 
that any exceptions will be accounted for in the 
future by some more refined statement of the 
context. At worst, this is unfalsifiable: all formal 
processes are exceptionless, and any observable 
exceptions will be explained by future Verners. 
For linguists who take a Popperian view of 
their science, such a hypothesis need not be taken 
seriously.
The invariant view of linguistic process was 
adapted to synchronic theory by Saussure, the 
founder of modern formal linguistics. Saussure 
(1916) elevated the separation of social and 
formal elements of language to a theoretical prin-
ciple via his dichotomy between langue and 
parole. For Saussure, langue is the abstract, sys-
tematic aspect of language, while the social diver-
sity of language use is assigned to parole. These 
have unequal status in linguistic science: Saussure 
privileges langue as the object of study of serious 
linguistics. Sociolinguistic concerns are consigned 
to the periphery of Saussurean thought, as the 
study of parole.
Saussure’s dichotomy is recast by Chomsky 
as competence and performance, and later, 
I-language (internalized) and E-language (exter-
nalized). Competence/I-language is the mental 
linguistic system governing production – the 
mental grammar. It is assumed to follow invariant 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
252
principles in the Neogrammarian ‘exceptionless’ 
tradition. Performance is the product of the system 
– actual speech, or any other externalized linguis-
tic output (hence E-language). Mediating between 
the mental grammar and its products are psycho-
logical and physiological factors that do not share 
the property of invariance; hence, they introduce 
variability into performance. Chomsky cites fac-
tors such as slips of the tongue, memory lapses 
and performance errors as common flaws in eve-
ryday language use, and argues that such flaws are 
not the product of the mental grammar and do not 
provide useful evidence about its nature (1965).
The competence/performance distinction has 
logical elegance, opposing a mental machine to its 
products. But in the give-and-take of linguistic 
argumentation, it becomes the neutron bomb of 
generative theory, removing humans from the bat-
tlefield, leaving only naked linguistic structures 
behind. Sociolinguistics is collateral damage in 
this battle; it provides no data relevant to the con-
struction of formal theory, because it looks only at 
performance. Chomsky specifically argues that 
‘observed use of language … surely cannot con-
stitute the actual subject matter of linguistics, if 
this is to be a serious discipline’ (1965: 4). 
Performance is thus an even deeper oubliette for 
the disposal of empirical counter-examples: data 
from usage bears unknown deviances from the 
mental grammar, and therefore cannot contradict 
theories about that grammar.  
Chomskyan thought and its theoretical succes-
sors thus continue the century-old tradition of 
consigning sociolinguistic concerns to the periphery. 
Linguists interested in the topics addressed in this 
volume therefore find themselves with just two 
options for relating to linguistic theory. They can 
accept that their work addresses ‘mere’ perform-
ance, and is consequently irrelevant to formal 
theory, or they can problematize the assumptions 
that lead to this conclusion, most importantly the 
assumption of invariance and the postulated oppo-
sition between competence and performance. One 
encounters, in sociolinguistics, work that follows 
both of these paths. One trend eschews attention 
to theoretical issues – a position consistent with 
the Chomskyan view that evidence from language 
use is not, in principle, relevant to formal theory.
Another, perhaps dominant, trend in sociolin-
guistic research has been to reject the sectarian 
definition that excludes sociolinguistic concerns 
and denies their relevance to formal models of 
competence, and instead proposes alternatives that 
embrace variability and social diversity. This 
approach found an influential formulation in the 
work of Weinreich, Labov and Herzog (1968, 
henceforth WLH), which enunciates two princi-
ples that contradict the assumption of invariance. 
First is ‘inherent variability’: since language use is 
full of variety, it is reasonable to postulate that 
linguistic systems – mental grammars – generate, 
perceive and interpret variability. Since no 
Chomskyan invariant ‘ideal speaker-listener’ 
exists, why postulate such a person as the object 
that our theories seek to explain? Indeed, WLH go 
further; they argue that if such invariant speakers 
did exist, they would be social monsters, unable to 
adapt to changing circumstances, or accommodate 
to different interlocutors, or to use language to 
communicate all the social messages performed 
by variant means.
The second WLH principle is ‘orderly hetero-
geneity’: linguistic variability is not random and 
unstructured, the product of errors. Rather, it is 
deeply structured by social and linguistic contexts. 
Essentially, this counterposes a probabilistic inter-
pretation of orderliness to the categorical interpre-
tation prevailing in formal theory. If system and 
order are equated to exceptionlessness, all valid 
generalizations must be categorically true; in 
quantitative terms, they must apply to 100% of 
cases. But a probabilistic model allows valid gen-
eralizations about values below 100%. Social 
groups are rarely distinguished by the categorical 
presence or absence of a particular form, but they 
are often characterized by particular rates of use; 
thus, in New York City, middle-class speakers use 
more coda [r] than working-class speakers. And 
orderly heterogeneity is also evident in linguistic 
structure: many sociolinguistic variables show 
strong probabilistic – but not categorical – condi-
tioning by linguistic contexts. Thus, English final 
CSD is much more likely preconsonantally (eas’ 
side) than in prevocalic position (eas’ end). Nobody 
does this categorically, with 100% deletion before 
consonants and 0% before vowels, but every 
speaker’s usage shows probabilistic favouring of 
preconsonantal contexts. This process always has 
‘exceptions’, but it is still systematic and orderly. 
The challenge to formal linguistics that WLH 
present, therefore, is to design theoretical models 
that accommodate variability and probabilistic 
orderliness. Formal models that continue to adhere 
to the assumption of invariance and the marginali-
zation of parole/performance cannot account for 
the results emerging from sociolinguistic research, 
and run the risk of ultimate irrelevance. But many 
models are emerging that take up this challenge; 
some of these are discussed in subsequent sections.
18.3  FORMAL THEORY INFORMS 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
The fundamental finding of sociolinguistic 
research is that variation and diversity permeate 
language. Individual speakers vary their usage 

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
253
constantly and adaptively, to construct social iden-
tities, demonstrate attitudes and manage social 
relationships. Collectively, speakers are differenti-
ated by geography and time, and by social dimen-
sions of class, sex, ethnicity, age and linguistic 
experience. Therefore, the fundamental questions 
in sociolinguistic research are: What is it about 
language that varies, and why?
Because of the nature of the field, some answers 
to the ‘Why?’ questions will be linguistic, and 
some social and historical. Formal linguistics has 
great relevance to the former, providing potential 
explanations of constraints on variation. It will not 
necessarily contribute to understanding the latter: 
nothing about the structure of language accounts 
for the social dominance of Spanish over Mayan 
in Guatemala, or for the spread of Northern Cities 
dialect features in American English from larger 
to smaller urban areas (Callary, 1975). But it is 
often difficult to distinguish one line of explana-
tion from another, and they may interact (if, for 
example, the linguistic markedness of forms limits 
borrowability). Therefore, sociolinguistics must 
allow the possibility of formal linguistic accounts 
of any patterns of variation it encounters.
The most important contribution of formal 
theory may lie in answering the ‘What?’ ques-
tions. To make progress in appreciating the work-
ings of sociolinguistic diversity, we require 
concepts and hypotheses about the structure of 
language – a ‘theory’ that suggests what things are 
worth studying and where to look for them. 
Clearly, our investigations are best served by 
bringing the best theories available to bear on the 
issues. If we want to know how speakers differ, or 
what linguistic items they respond to in formulat-
ing social evaluations, we would do well to turn to 
formal theories to delineate the elements and 
processes that may be relevant.
As an example of the theoretical contributions 
to sociolinguistic research, consider the variable 
process of final coronal stop deletion (CSD) in 
English, a coda-simplification process with paral-
lels in many other languages. It shows classic 
traits of a linguistic variable: it is conditioned by 
linguistic contexts, stylistically constrained 
(speakers delete less in more careful styles) and 
socially stratified (higher-status speakers delete 
less). But the linguistic constraints affecting it 
have a curious interaction with the social con-
straints: some constraints are constant for all 
speakers of English, while others vary from dia-
lect to dialect. Why is this so?
Let us consider two constraints affecting this 
process. First, as noted above, CSD is markedly 
affected by following phonological context, with 
significantly more deletion in preconsonantal than 
prevocalic position. Also, the process is sensitive 
to morphology: stops representing the -ed suffix in 
regular verbs are deleted less often than those that 
are part of the root morpheme. Relevant values 
from several studies are found in Table 18.1.
The effect of following vowel (V) and conso-
nant (C) is, as the table indicates, systematic 
across all dialects. But, strikingly, the effect of 
following pause (P) varies considerably from 
group to group. For some speech communities, 
pause is the most conservative environment, disfa-
vouring deletion even more than vowels, while for 
others it is associated with high deletion rates. The 
first discovery of this dialect-specific effect of 
pause was made by Guy (1980), who found that 
New Yorkers favoured deletion before pause, 
while Philadelphians disfavoured it. The effect 
was systematic within each speech community, as 
Table 18.2 illustrates. Everybody in both commu-
nities (except two Philadelphians with small ns) 
has more deletion before C than V, but 18 of 19 
Philadelphians show pause as the least favourable 
environment for deletion (P deletion rates 
below V), while no New Yorkers have this ranking 
of vowel and pause.
A similar issue arises with respect to morphol-
ogy. Most speakers in most dialects systematically 
show higher deletion rates in monomorphemic 
(M) words like mist, pact, bold, vs reduced rates 
in regular past tense verbs (R) like missed, packed, 
bowled. But speakers vary considerably in their 
Table 18.1 Effects of morphological class and following segment on English coronal stop 
deletion
Morphological
Following segment
M
I
R
C
V
P
Bayley
.53
<
.62
.36
.73
.27
<
.46
Santa Ana
.55
>
.43
.28
.62
.33
>
.32
Lim and Guy 
.60
<
.65
.26
.61
.37
<
.48
Guy
.64
>
.55
.32
.66
.19
<
.37
M, monomorphemic words; I, irregular past tense verbs; R, regular past tense verbs; V, vowel; C, consonant; 
P, pause.
Source: (from Bayley (1994), Guy (1991) Lim and Guy (2003) and Santa Ana (1992))

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
254
treatment of the irregular past tense verbs (I) that 
take both a root vowel change and a coronal stop 
affix in the past, such as lost, kept, told. Guy and 
Boyd (1990) found that the treatment of this mor-
phological class varied with age: older speakers 
treat irregular verbs conservatively, with lower 
deletion rates, while younger speakers are more 
likely to delete them (Figure 18.1).
Such findings provoke an obvious question: 
Why are some constraints constant across speak-
ers and dialects, while others are inconstant, either 
dialect-specific or age-graded? Since sociolin-
guistics is simultaneously concerned with linguis-
tic structure and social context, we might entertain 
both social and linguistic explanations of these 
facts. On the social side, a possible hypothesis is 
that speakers arbitrarily select linguistic items for 
social-indexical purposes. This is akin to the arbi-
trariness of the linguistic sign: just as a book does 
not intrinsically demand the label book, since it is 
labelled hon in Japanese and kitab in Arabic, so 
there is no intrinsic reason that pronouncing coda 
/r/ is socially favoured in New York. Therefore, we 
might suppose that the prepausal deletion rate for 
coronal stops is arbitrarily selected as a dialect 
marker, and the deletion rate in irregular verbs has 
been arbitrarily associated with particular age 
cohorts.
Pending a more comprehensive analysis of 
what variables and constraints have what social 
interpretations and associations, we cannot rule 
out this account on purely social grounds. But the 
fact that numerous studies of CSD show the same 
effects for many other constraints, leaving just 
these two contexts to vary greatly across speakers, 
should give us pause. Perhaps some linguistic 
property makes these constraints more amenable 
to social differentiation.
This is where formal theory comes to our aid. 
Many strands of phonological theory agree that 
there is a universal hierarchy of syllable types, 
with CV being the most basic, found in all lan-
guages, while other structures, including complex 
codas, complex onsets and zero onsets, are 
more marked and typologically less common. 
These principles are explicitly incorporated in CV 
phonology (Clements and Keyser, 1983), and in 
postulated OT constraints such as NoCoda, 
*CxCoda, Onset, etc. Hence, these theories sug-
gest a prediction, to the effect that … VCCCV… 
sequences, in phrases like east side, are univer-
sally more marked than … VCCV … sequences, 
like east end. This being the case, a process that 
simplified the coda sequence should always be 
more strongly motivated in the former than the 
latter. If these are linguistic universals, we should 
not expect to find any dialect or speaker that con-
tradicts them, which, essentially, is what the data 
show – everybody deletes more before consonants 
than before vowels. 
But what do formal models say about following 
pause? Eligible words for English CSD have the 
form …VCC, so when no other subsequent 
segments are considered, they will violate NoCoda 
and *CxCoda constraints just like eligible words 
occurring in other contexts, but are they more or 
less marked than prevocalic or preconsonantal 
contexts? Formal theories are largely silent on 
this point; an answer would depend on a formal 
analysis of non-speech (What are the distinctive 
features of silence?), or on an additional set 
of hypotheses about syllabification, stop release, 
etc., which would not be universal in nature. 
Therefore, it is a fair conclusion from phonologi-
cal theory that the effects of prevocalic and 
preconsonantal contexts are determined by lin-
guistic universals, but the effect of following 
pause is not universally defined, and hence is 
available for dialect-specific, dialectally arbitrary 
treatments. 
Formal theory suggests a similarly ambiguous 
status for the treatment of CSD in irregular verbs. 
The difference between monomorphemic and 
regular past tense forms is modelled in several 
ways in different theories: by functional con-
straints against loss of information; by a historical 
constraint against loss of morphological distinc-
tions (Kiparsky, 1982b, the ‘distinctness condi-
tion’); and by the different derivational histories 
of the two classes (underived vs derived, cf. Guy, 
1991). But all models assign a distinct status to 
the morphological marker in missed, bowled 
Table 18.2 Comparing constraint effects in two speech communities: 
following context constraint orderings for coronal stop deletion in New York 
and Philadelphia
Following context
Number of speakers showing the order:
C>V
V>C
V>Pause
Pause>V
Philadelphians
16
2
18
1
New Yorkers
 4
0
 0
4
C, consonant; V, vowel.

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
255
that is absent in mist, bold, with a consistent 
prediction that deletion of the past tense forms 
is disfavoured.
But what about irregular past forms? There is 
no obvious universal explanation for how they 
should be treated by a deletion process. The final 
stops in left, told mark tense redundantly, so they 
have no greater functional load than those in 
monomorphemes. Their derivational histories 
depend on specific hypotheses about what form 
classes exist and how they are stored and gener-
ated, on which there is little theoretical consensus. 
Therefore, we can again entertain a reasonable 
hypothesis that while the difference between 
monomorphemes and regular past tense forms is 
subject to universal conditions, the status of the 
irregular forms is precisely irregular, subject to 
different analyses and different treatments by the 
deletion process.
This is what Guy and Boyd (1990) argue. They 
see the age-grading in Figure 18.1 as a product of 
successive reanalyses of these words by English 
speakers as they develop linguistically. The young-
est (pre-teen) speakers classify them as strong 
verbs, lacking a suffix (thus keep~kep, analogous 
with feed~fed); hence, final stops are almost com-
pletely absent. By adolescence, most speakers 
construct a special morphological class for such 
words, combining traits of the strong and weak 
classes, but without any internal morphological 
analysis (thus keep~kept). Hence, they show the 
same deletion rates as monomorphemes, which 
also lack internal morphology. Finally, in adult 
life, many speakers proceed to a complex analysis 
in which the final coronal stop acquires a separate 
morphemic analysis, no doubt by analogy with the 
regular affix in missed, bowled (thus keep~kep#t); 
hence they begin to partake of the morphological 
resistance to deletion that regular past forms 
exhibit.
In both of these examples we find that theoreti-
cal analysis supplies a principled basis for distin-
guishing the constant constraints from those that 
vary dialectally or generationally; some elements 
of linguistic structure are universal, and cannot 
vary between speakers, dialects or languages, 
while others are not universally specified, and 
hence are available for social differentiation.
This conclusion is supported by other studies of 
sociolinguistic variation, beyond phonology and 
beyond English. A case in point is Cameron’s 
(1993) study of subject pronoun expression in 
Spanish. Spanish is a PRO-drop language – 
subject pronouns are optional. In the meaning 
‘I want’, a Spanish speaker can say either Yo 
quiero or Quiero with the pronoun Yo ‘I’ expressed 
or omitted. Cameron reports a major dialect dif-
ference between Puerto Rico and Spain: Puerto 
Ricans use many more overt pronouns than their 
Spanish counterparts. He also identifies linguistic 
constraints on this process, including switch refer-
ence: speakers are more likely to use an overt 
Figure 18.1 Probability of –t,d absence in irregular past-tense verbs, by age (from Guy and 
Boyd, 1990: 8.)
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Prob. of –t,d absence
.30
.40
.50
.60
.70
.80
.90
Age

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
256
pronoun to mark a change in subject between the 
previous clause and the current clause. Most lin-
guistic constraints are common across the two 
dialects, but one is treated differently: specificity 
of reference (the difference between references to 
specific individuals and generic references mean-
ing ‘somebody, one, people in general’). For the 
second-person singular (2sg) pronoun tú, this con-
straint is significant in both countries, but with 
opposite effect. Puerto Ricans use overt tú more 
often when making a generic reference, while 
Madrileños favour overt tú for specific reference 
(Table 18.3). 
What does linguistic theory say about these 
constraints? The switch-reference effect has a 
clear functional motivation: the low information 
alternative (with no overt pronoun) serves as a gap 
onto which earlier references are projected. But 
the higher information form, with an overt pro-
noun, is used to signal a new subject. English uses 
contrastive stress in much the same way. In a sen-
tence like ‘Billy talked to Paul about it, and HE 
said … ’ the stressed ‘HE’ refers to Paul, as a new 
subject, whereas an unstressed alternative ‘… and 
he said … ’, would ordinarily indicate a continua-
tion of the same subject, i.e., Billy. In each case, 
greater emphasis on the subject (via an overt pro-
noun or contrastive stress) signals a switched ref-
erence. This is a possible universal. But the 
specificity constraint has no such universal asso-
ciation with overt or zero pronouns. English, 
which only allows overt pronouns, uses the 2sg 
pronoun for both meanings. A sentence like ‘You 
know what it means’ can mean either specifically 
‘you (the hearer) know … ’, or generically ‘one 
knows … ’. This suggests no intrinsic association 
of overt pronouns with either meaning; rather, 
such an association is arbitrary, and two Spanish 
dialects have made different selections for indicat-
ing genericity and specificity.
18.4  SOCIOLINGUISTIC CONTRIBUTIONS 
TO FORMAL THEORY
In formal linguistics one encounters many exam-
ples of principles that are originally proposed as 
categorical – unsurprising, given the categorical 
bias of linguistic theory. A case in point is the 
Obligatory Contour Principle (OCP), a generali-
zation in phonology to the effect that languages 
prefer alternations (or ‘contours’) over repetition 
of identical elements. Thus the preferred structure 
for syllables and words involves alternating con-
sonants and vowels, not strings of one or the 
other: CVCV over CCC or VVV. Similarly, tone 
languages prefer alternating tones, not strings of 
identical tones: HLHL, not HHH or LLL. Indeed, 
the OCP was first proposed by Leben (1973) to 
account for categorical tonal alternations in 
African tone languages. 
A common finding of sociolinguistic research, 
and of other quantitative studies of language, 
however, is that essentially the same principles are 
observed in linguistic variation, but in a probabil-
istic, rather than categorical form. This discovery 
has been termed the ‘stochastic generalization’ 
(Bresnan et al., 2001; Clark, 2005): generaliza-
tions that may be categorically true in one lan-
guage exist as quantitative constraints on variation 
in another language or social variety. 
This is the result Guy and Boberg (1997) find 
for the OCP in their research on English CSD. The 
segment preceding a deletable final stop has a 
proven constraining effect on the likelihood of 
deletion; roughly speaking, obstruents promote 
deletion more than sonorants. Guy and Boberg 
accounted for this effect in terms of the similarity 
between the preceding context and the deletion 
target (the final coronal stop): greater similarity 
(measured in terms of shared distinctive features) 
favours deletion. The values appear in Table 18.4. 
The results show that segments that share two 
of the defining features with [t, d] all promote 
deletion more than those that share only one fea-
ture, while preceding vowels, which are com-
pletely dissimilar, almost never trigger deletion. 
Note further that adjacent identical stops are cat-
egorically prohibited in English (*tt, *dd) – itself 
an OCP effect. Thus the results demonstrate a 
continuum: the phonology of English disfavours 
sequences of segments to the extent that those seg-
ments are similar; sequences of partially similar 
segments are partially suppressed by means 
of CSD, and sequences of completely similar 
Table 18.3 Subject pronoun expression in Spanish: dialect differences in the effect of 
specificity of reference with second-person singular pronoun tú
San Juan, Puerto Rico
Madrid, Spain
Per cent overt 
pronouns
Factor weight
n
Per cent overt 
pronouns
Factor weight
  n
[+specific]
48%
.51
145
40%
.72
58
[−specific]
69%
.72
188
19%
.50
150
Source: Cameron (1993: 325)

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
257
(i.e. identical) segments are completely sup-
pressed, banned in underlying forms, and avoided 
in derived forms by epenthesis (thus, bisyllabic 
raided vs monosyllabic rained ). 
Results of this sort have two-fold implications. 
First, they confirm the theory; here they show that 
OCP is an active principle in English. But, sec-
ondly, they show the principle to have graded, 
probabilistic effects, not only categorical ones. In 
the Guy and Boberg data we see not an ‘obliga-
tory’ principle, but rather a contour preference 
whose force is inversely proportionate to the slope 
of the contour: flat contours are prohibited, gentle 
slopes are disfavoured and steep slopes are pro-
moted. This preference operates gradiently in 
sociolinguistic variation, not as a ‘knockout’ 
effect. Words with disfavoured consonant 
sequences like act are not categorically deleted in 
some social dialects or styles and retained in 
others; rather, they are variable in all dialects, but 
always show higher rates of deletion than those 
with more favourable contours, like old. The 
sociolinguistic findings thus test the formal model 
– the OCP – and in this case confirm it, but recast 
it as a stochastic generalization.
The OCP example shows a formal principle, 
conceived in the Neogrammarian tradition as dis-
crete and invariant, being reformulated in the light 
of sociolinguistic evidence as a probabilistic gen-
eralization. What might the impact of sociolin-
guistic evidence be on larger elements of formal 
theory, such as an entire grammar? Formal lin-
guistics since Chomsky attributes a speaker’s 
capacity to use language to a mental grammar that 
codifies and encompasses linguistic knowledge. 
This is constructed by speakers in the course of 
language acquisition, based on input from the 
language they hear spoken around them (along 
with, presumably, some universal elements).
This model presupposes that the speaker is 
embedded in a social universe, with other speak-
ers from whom the individual hears evidence 
needed for language acquisition, and with whom 
the individual communicates using his or her 
mental grammar. So an obvious question is, how 
similar or different are the mental grammars of 
individuals who speak what we informally call 
‘the same language’? Given the diversity that 
sociolinguistic research documents, even among 
members of the same speech community, what 
elements of their mental grammars are diverse, 
allowing differentiation, and what are the same, 
allowing them to communicate in a language that 
they believe they share? 
In the mainstream tradition the mental gram-
mar is an apparatus with categorical, invariant 
properties. Hence even a small alteration to its 
internal structure, if it produces any difference in 
output, would count as a discretely different gram-
mar. Linguistic diversity, therefore, would imply 
that speakers have grammars that differ in some 
component or set of components (features, rules, 
constraints, constraint rankings, etc.). Different 
speech styles would be handled the same way: to 
shift among different speech styles or registers, 
speakers would have to switch between discretely 
different grammars. By implication, styles and 
speakers would exhibit categorical differences: 
speaker A would use some form in some context 
that speaker B did not or could not use. 
In the social world, it is clear that diversity is 
orderly: socially proximal individuals are linguis-
tically proximal as well; family members speak 
more alike than those who are unrelated; people in 
the same community or dialect region are more 
alike than those who live farther away; and people 
of the same ethnicity, class or age group also tend 
to be more similar than those of other groups. 
What does this scale of sociolinguistic similarity 
correlate with in the mental grammar? Is the scale 
a gradient continuum, or is it composed of dis-
crete steps, so speakers who are more dissimilar 
simply have a larger number of quantum differ-
ences in their grammars?
Sociolinguistic research suggests nuanced 
answers to such questions. We encounter both 
discrete and continuous differences between 
varieties, and we encounter different orders of 
Table 18.4 Preceding segment effect: an OCP analysis
Preceding segment
Deletion
N
Per cent
Factor weight
/t,d/     [+cor, −son, −cont]
   –
(categorical absence, i.e. 1.00)
/s,z,S,z ˇ/     [+cor, −son]
276
49
.69
/p,b,k,g/  [−son, −cont]
136
37
.69
/n/     [+cor, −cont]
337
46
.73
/f,v/     [−son]
45
29
.55
/l/       [+cor]
182
32
.45
/m,N/   [−cont]
9
11
.33
vowels  –
   –
(nearly categorical retention, i.e. 0.00)
Source: Guy and Boberg (1997: 3 Philadelphians)

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
258
quantitative diversity. First, much sociolinguistic 
variability is indeed continuous. One finding, by 
now classic, is that speech communities are 
replete with variables showing social stratifica-
tion: higher-status speakers use more and lower-
status speakers use less of a given variant and, 
simultaneously, all speakers use more of that vari-
ant in more careful styles. Labov’s (1966) findings 
on the use of coda /r/ in New York City cogently 
illustrate this pattern. 
The data in Figure 18.2 clearly suggest a con-
tinuum of usage; New Yorkers make finely graded 
quantitative adjustments in their individual pro-
duction, and are collectively finely graded in /r/ 
usage by socioeconomic status. It is implausible 
to perceive in these data a series of discretely dif-
ferent grammars, each associated with a particular 
speaker in a particular speech style, each display-
ing some quantum difference from socially or 
stylistically adjacent grammars. Instead, it sug-
gests a quantitative component of the mental lin-
guistic capacity that controls the frequency of 
coda /r/ – in other words, a probability. Each 
speaker has a characteristic value for this proba-
bility, but they can adjust it continuously for sty-
listic purposes, to accommodate the social 
demands of a situation, or for expressive value. 
Social proximity between individuals is reflected 
in their settings of this probability: one’s experi-
ences in language acquisition, daily interaction 
and accommodation, and attitudinal factors such 
as solidarity, all combine to make it likely that 
speakers who belong to common networks and 
who share social characteristics such as class, 
ethnicity, etc., will have common values for these 
probabilities. And what the speech community as 
a whole shares, including New Yorkers of differ-
ent social classes and ethnicities, is a common 
social evaluation of the use of the /r/ variant: they 
all understand it is associated with higher-status 
speakers and more formal styles, and reflect this 
shared evaluation in their own usage. 
However, beyond these scalar patterns of varia-
tion associated with style, class, age, etc., we also 
encounter discrete differences. The data presented 
above in Tables 18.2 and 18.3 demonstrate this, 
showing discrete differences between speech com-
munities. Notice, however, that those examples 
involved the effects of context on linguistic varia-
tion: the effect of a following pause on English 
CSD, and the effect of specificity of reference on 
pronoun expression in Spanish. Notice further that 
Figure 18.2 Class stratification of coda /r/ in New York City. (from Labov, 1972: 114).
Socioeconomic class (SEC) scale: 0–1, lower class; 2–5, working class; 6–8, lower middle class; 9, upper 
middle class. Style scale: A, casual speech: B, careful speech: C, reading style: D, word lists: D’, minimal pairs. 
Reprinted with permission.
A
B
C
D
SEC
6–8
4–5
2–3
9
1
0
D′
/r/ index
0
20
40
60
80
Style

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
259
these discrete differences lay between different 
speech communities – Philadelphia vs New York, 
San Juan vs Madrid – whereas the continuously 
varying data of Figure 18.2 come from speakers in 
the same community, in fact the same neighbour-
hood (the Lower East Side of New York).
This suggests a basic distinction between two 
dimensions of quantitative variability. We distin-
guish overall rates of use of a variant (a context-
free statement of the alternation) from differential 
rates of use by linguistic context (context-
sensitivity). Quantitative variation in the overall 
rate of use of social variables, differentiating 
classes, speech styles, etc., is in principle continu-
ous, and speakers within a given community are 
accustomed to, and accomplished at, varying 
freely in this dimension. But the contextual effects, 
although they may also be probabilistic, do not 
vary freely within the grammar of an individual, 
or within a community. Thus there is no social 
class of speakers in Philadelphia, for example, for 
whom pause is a more favourable context for dele-
tion, and no speech style in which Philadelphians 
use pause as a favourable context. Hence we 
advance a hypothesis: the rankings, and quite pos-
sibly the specific probabilities, associated with 
constraints on linguistic processes are a fixed fea-
ture of the grammar of a speaker, and are one of 
the shared linguistic characteristics common to all 
members of a speech community. 
This distinction is given formal representation 
in the ‘variable rule’ model (Labov, 1969; 
Cedergren and Sankoff, 1974; Sankoff, 1978). 
This model associates an ‘input’ probability (p0) 
with every option or rule in the grammar; in addi-
tion, context-sensitive processes may have proba-
bilistic weights associated with relevant contexts 
(contexts i, j, k, etc., are associated with weights 
pi, pj, pk). In this model, the value of p0 is what 
varies within a community, whether stylistically 
or socially, while the values of specific constraints 
pi, pj, pk are fixed. This is an original contribution 
of sociolinguistic research to the theory of gram-
mars, specifically to the question of grammatical 
similarity and difference. 
18.5  TOWARDS AN ADEQUATE 
FORMAL LINGUISTICS
What does an adequate theory of language need 
– one that accounts for speakers’ capacity to pro-
duce and deal with diversity? The first require-
ment is that it must accommodate variation. The 
Neogrammarian-inspired model of exceptionless 
linguistic processes has been mistaken in much of 
formal linguistics for a design principle of lan-
guage; in fact it is a hypothesis, which has been 
tested against reality and found wanting. Language 
is neither Platonic nor digital; it is a neurological, 
physiological and social system, an analog device 
that doesn’t always do the same thing in exactly 
the same way. An adequate formal theory must 
recognize inherent variability, and generate it. 
Secondly, the sociolinguistic evidence suggests 
that an adequate model must incorporate quantifi-
cation. This point is still the subject of some 
debate, as some scholars propose to leave the 
grammar unquantified and derive quantitative reg-
ularities observed in language use by other means, 
as an epiphenomenal consequence of the range of 
possibilities (cf. Anttila’s OT analyses of variation 
– see below), or by some mechanism external to 
the grammar proper that selects among different 
grammars. We shall argue, however, that these 
alternatives are not adequate to account for the full 
range of quantitatively orderly heterogeneity. 
Thirdly, an adequate model must accommodate 
social information. Linguistic representations 
must be capable of modeling the capacity of 
speakers to speak in socially adaptive ways, and to 
perceive the social significance of the usage of 
others. Since individuals smoothly vary their 
usage both expressively and responsively, thereby 
communicating social meanings and adapting to 
social expectations, an adequate formal model of 
this capacity must incorporate a social semantics 
not only of words but also of linguistic forms and 
processes. The formal account must also be capa-
ble of representing diversity at the community 
level, differences in the usage of others that 
speech community members can passively recog-
nize the social significance of, even if their own 
grammars do not productively generate them. 
The sociolinguistic adequacy of a formal model 
can therefore be evaluated on the basis of these 
three criteria: accounting for variation, quantifica-
tion and social information. Let us consider some 
formal models that have been proposed to address 
sociolinguistic issues, and how they fare by these 
criteria.
The first issue, of modelling variation, has 
been widely addressed, by a variety of formal 
approaches. The variable rule (VR) model, men-
tioned above, uses a generative framework in 
which probabilities are attached to operations; 
conventional obligatory processes have a proba-
bility of 1, but probabilities of less than 1 indicate 
variable outcomes. This is the model most widely 
used in sociolinguistic research on variation. In 
OT, several proposals have been made to generate 
variability using variable or underspecified con-
straint rankings (Anttila, 1997, 2002; Nagy and 
Reynolds, 1997): instead of a fixed constraint 
hierarchy that always gives the same outcome, 
speakers are hypothesized to vary among several 
rankings of the relevant constraints which select 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
260
different variants. In treatments of historical 
change, diachronic variability has been modelled 
by means of alternation between grammars that 
generate old and new variants (Kroch, 1989b, 
2000; Yang, 2000). All of these models are ade-
quate for generating variable outcomes.
Greater differences between approaches are 
found when we consider the second criterion, 
quantification: How should a formal model 
account for the probabilistic patterns of natural 
language? Do they result from one grammar or 
from alternation between grammars? Should they 
be generated directly, by quantification within the 
linguistic system, or derivatively, as a secondary 
consequence of the way a grammar operates to 
generate a range of options, or the diversity of 
representations or inputs?  
The quantificational strategy that involves the 
smallest departure from the theoretical tradition of 
invariance is grammar competition. In this 
approach, traditional invariant grammar is pre-
served, and variation and change are taken as 
evidence that speakers command multiple gram-
mars, each one discretely generating one observed 
variant. These alternative grammars are selected 
with different probabilities to produce the quanti-
tative patterns that are found in language use. This 
approach is exemplified in work on diachronic 
change by Kroch (1989b), Yang (2000) and others. 
Kroch (1989a), for example, takes this approach 
to model the development of periphrastic do in 
English. In early Middle English (ME), before AD 
1300, negative constructions inserted not after a 
verb or auxiliary (e.g., They know not what they 
do), and questions were formed by inverting sub-
ject and verb (e.g. Slept you well?). In late ME and 
early Modern English, modern equivalents with 
auxiliary do began to appear (They don’t know 
what they’re doing; Did you sleep well?); for the 
next 400 years, usage varied between the two 
forms, with the modern constructions steadily 
increasing in frequency. 
Kroch accounts for these facts in terms of 
a parametric shift. The grammar of early ME 
permitted the main verb to raise to an auxiliary 
position (or an INFL, a functional head containing 
auxiliaries and/or tense or agreement features), so 
that it could do whatever auxiliary verbs do (in 
Modern English other auxiliaries also occur before 
not and invert with subjects to form questions: e.g. 
They must not know; Have you slept well?). But in 
late ME an alternative grammar emerged that did 
not permit verb-to-INFL raising, so that when the 
auxiliary position was separated from the verb by 
another element, such as an inverted subject or a 
negative, do was inserted as an empty auxiliary to 
carry tense and agreement. In Kroch’s analysis, 
during the four or five centuries when this varia-
tion was evident, speakers entertained two mental 
grammars, one with and one without V-to-INFL 
raising, and their variation consisted of choosing 
one grammar or the other for each relevant sen-
tence they uttered. What changed across time was 
the probability of speakers selecting one or the 
other grammar, while within each grammar, there 
was no variation. 
While providing an elegant treatment of his-
torical change, this strategy does not offer a gen-
eral quantitative model for sociolinguistic 
variation. First, it does not, strictly speaking, solve 
the problem of variation; rather, it relocates it 
from inside the grammar to outside. To account 
for the quantitative facts of orderly heterogeneity 
– all the subtle probabilistic variation evident in 
sociolinguistic usage – this approach requires an 
additional theory of grammar selection. Secondly, 
it runs afoul of Occam’s razor – the elementary 
scientific principle of economy, that proliferation 
of explanatory elements should be avoided. For 
the English do case, Kroch requires two grammars 
that are identical in every respect except for the 
V-to-INFL parameter setting. But at any given 
moment, languages typically have not one but 
many variables – thus ME also has variable dele-
tion of that complementizers (I thought THAT he 
knew vs I thought he knew), among other varia-
bles. If each alternant of each variable requires a 
separate grammar, and these variables intersect, so 
that a speaker may in one utterance use periphras-
tic do and complementizer deletion and, in the 
next, periphrastic do but complementizer reten-
tion, and so on, then a language with n binary 
variables would require speakers to maintain 2n 
mental grammars, each trivially different from the 
next. Besides constituting a massive violation of 
Occam’s razor, this would rapidly exhaust the 
storage capacity of the brain, if the language had 
as few as a score of variables. 
The alternative to grammar competition is to 
step off the Neogrammarian path and locate vari-
ation inside the grammar. But there are still com-
peting strategies on how to formalize this so as to 
achieve quantitative adequacy. The VR model 
uses explicit quantification; in principle, it per-
mits the probabilistic quantification of all gram-
matical operations and contextual conditions. 
This allows it to achieve excellent accuracy in 
accounting for the quantitative patterns observed 
in sociolinguistic variation. However, some schol-
ars have argued that incorporating a probabilistic 
component in the grammar gives an overly power-
ful formal model, capable of generating patterns 
that do not occur. A notable alternative is found in 
versions of OT using variably ordered constraints 
(VOC), which treat quantitative patterns as, in 
a sense, epiphenomena – statistical reflections 
of the range of possibilities permitted by gram-
matical options, rather than the product of 

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
261
a specific probabilistic element. This approach is 
exemplified by Anttila’s treatment of phonological 
variables in several languages (Anttila, 1997; 
Anttila et al., 2008). 
As a simplified example, consider a VOC treat-
ment of English CSD. Suppose there were only 
three relevant constraints: one disfavouring syl-
labic codas (NoCoda), one disfavouring complex 
codas (*CxCoda), and one favouring the faithful 
articulation of underlying consonants (FAITH). If 
the ranking of these constraints was unspecified in 
the grammar, and randomly varied whenever 
speakers articulated a relevant word, they could 
occur in any of six possible orders (NoCoda high-
est, followed by the other two in either order; 
*CxCoda highest, followed by either order of the 
other two, and FAITH highest, with either order of 
the other two). Following standard OT conven-
tions, we assume the grammar selects outputs 
consistent with (i.e. incurring the fewest viola-
tions of) the highest ranked constraints. Therefore, 
when FAITH is highest-ranked, words like act, 
mist are pronounced with final /t/, but when either 
of the other constraints outrank FAITH, a pronun-
ciation with a deleted /t/ results, because NoCoda 
and *CxCoda are both violated by candidates 
preserving the final stop. Since two of the six pos-
sible orders generate retention of /t/, and the other 
four generate deletion, this model predicts dele-
tion should occur in two-thirds of occurrences.  
Using the VOC strategy, Anttila has achieved 
impressively accurate quantitative models of several 
cases of linguistic variation. He also argues that 
VOC explains dialect patterning – why certain com-
binations of variants are dialectally attested, while 
other patterns we might imagine, but which are not 
generated by any possible order of constraints, do 
not occur. These results present a serious challenge 
to other formal models addressing these questions. 
However, the approach is inadequate as a general 
model of sociolinguistic variation. As we have 
noted, quantitative variation has two aspects: differ-
ences in overall rates, which vary between speakers 
and across speech styles, and differences in con-
straint rankings and contextual effects. VOC can 
model the latter, but lacks any formal treatment of 
the former. The only way predicted probabilities can 
differ in VOC, among styles, speakers or dialects, is 
by varying the number of constraints that are varia-
bly ranked. In the simplified example above, three 
constraints have 3! = 6 possible rankings; if four 
constraints were involved, they would have 4!, or 24 
possible rankings. So adding more constraints to the 
set that are variably ranked gives more possible 
rankings, and therefore different possible propor-
tions among the selected variants, but it also means 
the variation will now occur or fail to occur at dif-
ferent rates in whatever contexts are affected by the 
constraints that have been added to the mix. 
To illustrate this point, we can extend the previ-
ous example. Suppose, in another speech style, or 
a different group of speakers, a fourth constraint is 
added to the variably ranked group, an OCP con-
straint prohibiting sequences of overly-similar 
consonants, ruling out cases like act, mist, but 
permitting left, old. When this constraint outranks 
FAITH, deletion is selected in words like act. 
Hence when OCP is variably ranked with respect 
to the other three, undeleted forms of act are 
selected only one-quarter of the time (the possible 
orders in which FAITH is highest ranked), rather 
than one-third, raising the expected deletion rate 
from 67 per cent to 75 per cent. But this constraint 
has no effect on deletion of words like old, which 
will continue to show deletion in 67 per cent of all 
cases. Hence the consequence of involving an 
additional variably-ranked constraint is to intro-
duce a new difference between contexts, not to 
change deletion rates across the board. As we have 
noted, this is not how sociolinguistic variation 
actually works; styles and social groups in the 
same speech community differ in overall rates of 
use of variables, not in contextual constraints.
Finally, consider the third criterion, the formal 
modelling of social information. The above exam-
ple shows the difficulties OT encounters in this 
respect; it could incorporate social information by 
associating styles or social indexicality with cer-
tain constraint rankings, but this incorrectly pre-
dicts regular differences between speakers or 
styles in contextual constraints on variables. VR 
models treat social information as probabilistic 
constraints on production; thus stylistic con-
straints fit into the model in the same way as lin-
guistic constraints. In speech community studies 
using VR, it is routine practice to treat social 
groups in the same way; so age or gender groups, 
for example, are treated as if they were contexts 
for usage associated with probabilities that 
increase or decrease the use of a variable. However, 
this practice has a hazy theoretical status. It may 
more or less accurately model the collective 
behaviour of a community, but it is not clear what 
it means for the grammar or usage of an individual. 
An important lacuna in all of these theoretical 
approaches to sociolinguistic variation is that, 
since they focus on variable production, they have 
little to say about the perception and mental repre-
sentation of diversity, so that speakers’ passive 
knowledge of the social significance of the usage 
of others is not explicitly accounted for. It is a 
central argument of sociolinguistics that speakers 
understand the social significance of the linguistic 
behaviour of other members of their speech com-
munities, even when these others are doing things 
with their language that the speaker does not 
personally do. This understanding is reflected in 
shared evaluations of variables, and it influences 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
262
production in such ways as the shared directions 
of style shifting. But how is this knowledge repre-
sented in the mind? Should it have formal repre-
sentation in the mental grammar? To conclude our 
consideration of formal models, we turn now to a 
theory that puts such representations at the centre 
of linguistic structure. 
18.6  NEW DIRECTIONS: USAGE-BASED 
GRAMMAR
An important theoretical development that explic-
itly seeks to offer a formal account of usage, vari-
ation and change, and to provide a model of 
speakers’ knowledge that incorporates social and 
stylistic information, is the emergence of usage-
based approaches to grammar, notably Exemplar 
Theory (Bybee, 2001; Pierrehumbert, 2001). This 
theory is a radical departure from mainstream 
formal linguistics; it embraces variability and 
rejects categorical, exceptionless processes. 
Indeed, it denies the existence of general abstract 
processes, along with abstract representations of 
words and segments. Instead, Exemplar Theory 
(ET) begins by postulating that speakers remem-
ber, in rich phonetic detail, the tokens of words 
they hear pronounced, or produce themselves. 
Therefore, speakers have stored in memory the 
full range of variation they have encountered, and 
use these memories (the ‘exemplar cloud’) as tar-
gets for their own productions, which necessarily 
also vary. Words are not decomposed into strings 
of phonemes, but remembered holistically; hence 
each word can behave distinctly, showing idiosyn-
cratic patterns of variation and change that diverge 
from other words containing the same phonemes. 
The substance of other approaches to phonology, 
such as segments, morphemes and phonological 
processes, are, in ET, all secondary generaliza-
tions and analogic operations, rather than primary 
components of representation and grammar. 
Exemplar theory thus incorporates a compre-
hensive rejection of Neogrammarian exception-
lessness, phonemic representation, categorical and 
invariant grammar, and the langue/parole and 
competence/performance distinctions. It puts vari-
ation and diversity at the centre of the theory. It is 
inherently quantified: frequencies, proportions 
and contextual effects can be deduced from the 
distribution of variants in the exemplar cloud. But 
perhaps its clearest advantage for sociolinguistics 
is that, with modest elaboration, it can be extended 
to incorporate a formal representation of speakers’ 
knowledge of the social significance of linguistic 
variables, including their passive knowledge of 
the use of others. Thus Foulkes and Docherty 
(2006) suggest that the memories of exemplars 
also incorporate memories of who uttered them 
and what the social circumstances of usage were. 
In this way, a speaker can deduce from memory 
what variants are more often associated with what 
social context or identity. This allows them to 
interpret the usage of others, and to adapt their 
own usage accordingly. An indexical association 
between linguistic characteristic and social char-
acteristic emerges statistically from the distribu-
tion of exemplars in the cloud. 
Such a model addresses all the shortcomings of 
conventional formalisms, providing a framework 
for explicitly modelling inherent variability, 
orderly heterogeneity and social embedding. This 
is an attractive framework for sociolinguistics. 
But there are open questions about the theory 
concerning its capacity to explain the things that 
the theoretical mainstream was designed for and 
does well, such as categorical processes and 
abstract operations. Many linguistic generaliza-
tions are indeed categorical: articles precede 
nouns in English, without exception; many sound 
changes 
show 
Neogrammarian 
regularity: 
Germanic languages have no residual voiced aspi-
rates (/bh, dh, gh/) left over from Proto-Indo-
European in lexically-diffused defiance of 
Grimm’s Law. Speakers use language in ways that 
go beyond the evidence, for which they have no 
exemplars. 
For example, how does a child language learner 
do something new, which he or she has not 
encountered in the input? Consider the case of 
Jesse, an American-English (AmEng)-speaking 
child, observed by the author, who was moved to 
Australia at the age of 1year, 11 months. After two 
months of exposure to Australian English, he 
abruptly reformulated his pronunciation of post-
tonic intervocalic obstruents: he made them all 
voiceless. The only exemplars in his Australian 
English (AusEng) input relevant to this change 
were AusEng pronunciations of [t] in words like 
water, little, which contrasted with the voiced flap 
in his native AmEng phonology. But rather than 
changing just the words for which he had such 
exemplars, Jesse repronounced his entire vocabu-
lary, affecting other medial flaps, other voiced 
stops and even voiced fricatives: thus daddy>datty, 
table>tapu, doggy>dockie, fuzzy>fussy. During 
this period he acquired, from his AmEng-speaking 
parents, the words driver and driving, and duly 
pronounced them drifer and drifing. Aside from 
the intervocalic /t/ cases, he had no exemplars 
whatsoever for any of these new pronunciations; 
in fact, the input from American parents, Australian 
peers and childcare workers offered massive 
counter-examples. Jesse’s behaviour suggests not 
a probabilistic exemplar-driven adjustment to his 
lexicon, but rather, an abstract reanalysis, a gener-
alization of the form [+obs] → [-voice]/´ V___V.  

SOCIOLINGUISTICS AND FORMAL LINGUISTICS
263
ET addresses such issues by recognizing proc-
esses of generalization and analogy, but these are 
vaguely defined and formalized. It is not clear 
how the generalizations across exemplars and 
experience that ET permits are substantively dis-
tinct from the abstract grammar it rejects. Notably, 
recent work in this framework takes steps to 
address such issues by formally recognizing 
abstract operations (cf. Pierrehumbert, 2006).
There are also empirical challenges to certain 
predictions of ET. For example, it is a central 
claim of the model that production is strongly 
influenced by such statistical properties of the 
input as lexical frequency. This hypothesis is in 
the process of being empirically tested, with 
mixed results to date – some studies confirm sig-
nificant frequency effects on variation, while 
others are more equivocal. Guy et al. (2008), for 
example, found a frequency effect on CSD in 
early New Zealand English – final coronal stops in 
words that are more common in everyday usage 
were more likely to be deleted, but this result 
depended on using frequency counts from the 
corpus under study. Standard frequency counts 
from a large corpus of contemporary English (the 
CELEX corpus) did not have a significant effect. 
18.7 CONCLUSION 
For over a century the dominant formal theories in 
linguistics have paid little attention to the findings 
or concerns of sociolinguistics, because they treated 
the USE of language as fundamentally different 
from, and not particularly relevant to, the mental 
linguistic capacity of human speakers, which was 
the declared concern of theoretical linguistics. In 
place of natural language, they studied an idealiza-
tion. But the limits of this strategy are now becom-
ing clear: the idealization cannot explain the real 
world. If anything unifies the field of sociolinguis-
tics, it is a shared concern with the real world, in the 
form of language in use. By conjoining the findings 
and interests of sociolinguistics with the best prod-
ucts of formal linguistic thinking, we can illumi-
nate a path towards a genuine science of language. 
REFERENCES
Anttila, A. (1997) ‘Deriving variation from grammar’, in 
F. Hinskens, R. van Hout and L. Wetzels (eds), Variation, 
Change and Phonological Theory. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. pp. 35–68.
Anttila, A. (2002) ‘Morphologically conditioned phonological 
alternations’, Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 20: 
1–42.
Anttila, A., Fong, V., Benus, S. and Nycz, J. (2008) ‘Variation 
and opacity in Singapore English consonant clusters’, 
Phonology, 25: 81–216. 
Bailey, C.-J. N. (1973) Variation and Linguistic Theory. 
Arlington, VA: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Bayley, R. (1994) ‘Consonant cluster reduction in Tejano 
English’, Language Variation and Change, 6(3): 303–26.
Bresnan, J., Dingare, S. and Manning, C. (2001) ‘Soft 
Constraints Mirror Hard Constraints: voice and person in 
English and Lummi’, in M. Butt and T. H. King (eds), 
Proceedings of the LFG 01 Conference, University of Hong 
Kong, online proceedings. Stanford, CSLI Publications: 
http://csli-publications. stanford.edu.
Bybee, J. (2001) Phonology and Language Use. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Callary, R. E. (1975) ‘Phonological change and the develop-
ment of an urban dialect in Illinois’, Language in Society, 
4(2): 155–69.
Cameron, R. (1993) ‘Agreement, functional compensation, 
and nonspecific tu in the Spanish of San Juan, Puerto Rico, 
and Madrid, Spain’, Language Variation and Change, 5(3): 
305–34.
Cedergren, H. J. and Sankoff, D. (1974) ‘Variable rules: per-
formance as a statistical reflection of competence’, 
Language, 50(2): 333–55.
Chomsky, N. (1964) Current Issues in Linguistic Theory. The 
Hague: Mouton.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Clark, B. (2005) ‘On stochastic grammar’, Language, 81(1): 
207–17.
Clements, G. N. and Keyser, S. J. (1983) CV Phonology: a 
Generative Theory of the Syllable. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press.
Foulkes, P. and Docherty, G. (2006) ‘The social life of phonet-
ics and phonology’, Journal of Phonetics, 34: 409–38. 
Guy, G. R. (1980) ‘Variation in the group and the individual: 
the case of final stop deletion’, in W. Labov (ed.), Locating 
Language in Time and Space. New York: Academic Press. 
pp. 251–65.
Guy, G. R. (1991) ‘Explanation in variable phonology: an 
exponential model of morphological constraints’, Language 
Variation and Change, 3(1): 1–22.
Guy, G. R. (1992) ‘Contextual conditioning in variable lexical 
phonology’, Language Variation and Change, 3(2): 
223–39.
Guy, G. R. and Boberg, C. (1997) ‘Inherent variability and the 
obligatory contour principle’, Language Variation and 
Change, 9(2): 149–64.
Guy, G. R. and Boyd, Sally (1990) ‘The development of a 
morphological class’, Language Variation and Change, 
2(1): 1–18.
Guy, G. R., Hay, J. and Walker, A. (2008) ‘Phonological, lexical 
and frequency factors in coronal stop deletion in early New 
Zealand English’, poster presented at Laboratory Phonology 
11, Wellington, New Zealand.
Hymes, D. H. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in J. B. 
Pride and J. Holmes (eds), Sociolinguistics. Harmondsworth: 
Penguin.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
264
Kiparsky, P. (1982a) Explanation in Phonology. Dordrecht: 
Foris.
Kiparsky, P. (1982b) ‘Lexical phonology and morphology’, in 
S. Yang (ed.), Linguistics in the Morning Calm. Seoul: 
Hanshin. pp. 3–91.
Kroch, A. (1989a) ‘Function and grammar in the history of 
English: periphrastic “do’’, in R. Fasold and D. Schiffrin 
(eds), Language Change and Variation. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. pp. 133–72.
Kroch, A. (1989b) ‘Reflexes of grammar in patterns of lan-
guage change’, Language Variation and Change, 1(3): 
199–244.
Kroch, A. (2000) ‘Syntactic change’, in M. Baltin and C. Collins 
(eds), The Handbook of Contemporary Syntactic Theory. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell. pp. 629–739.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1969) ‘Contraction, deletion, and inherent variabil-
ity of the English copula’, Language, 4: 715–62.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. and Fanshel, D. (1977) Therapeutic Discourse: 
Psychotherapy as Conversation. New York: Academic Press.
Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis’, in 
J. Helm (ed.), Essays on the Verbal and Visual Arts. Seattle: 
University of Washington Press. pp. 12–44. 
Leben, W. (1973) ‘Suprasegmental phonology’. PhD 
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lim, L. T. and Guy, G. R. (2003) ‘The limits of linguistic com-
munity: speech styles and variable constraint effects’, Penn 
Working Papers in Linguistics: Selected Papers from 
NWAVE 32, 10(2): 157–70.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993) Social Motivation for Codeswitching: 
Evidence from Africa. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Nagy, N. and Reynolds, B. (1997) ‘Optimality Theory and 
variable word-final deletion in Faetar’, Language Variation 
and Change, 9(1): 37–55.
Nishimura, M. (1997) Japanese–English Code-Switching: 
Syntax and Pragmatics. New York: Peter Lang.
Paul, H. (1978 [1886]) ‘On sound change’, in P. Baldi and 
R. N. Werth (eds), Readings in Historical Phonology: 
Chapters in the Theory of Sound Change. Tr. by H. A. 
Strong from Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte. University 
Park: the Pennsylvania State University Press. pp. 3–22. 
Pierrehumbert, J. (2001) ‘Exemplar dynamics: word frequency, 
lenition and contrast’, in J. Bybee and P. Hopper (eds), 
Frequency and the Emergence of Linguistic Structure. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 137–58.
Pierrehumbert, J. (2006) ‘The next toolkit’, Journal of 
Phonetics, 34(6): 516–30. 
Poplack, S. (1980) ‘Sometimes I’ll start a sentence in Spanish 
y termino en español: toward a typology of code-
switching’, Linguistics, 18(7, 8): 581–618.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conver-
sation’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Sankoff, D. (1978) ‘Probability and linguistic variation’, 
Synthese, 37: 217–38.
Santa Ana, O. (1992) ‘Chicano evidence for the exponential 
hypothesis: a variable rule pervades lexical phonology’, 
Language Variation and Change, 4(3): 275–88.
Saussure, F. de (1916) Cours de linguistique générale. 
Published by C. Bally, E. Sechehaye, and A. Reidlinger. 
Paris, Geneva: Payot.
Verner, K. (1978 [1877]) ‘An exception to Grimm’s law’, in 
P. Baldi and R. N. Werth (eds), Readings in Historical 
Phonology: Chapters in the Theory of Sound Change. Tr. 
by R. Stanley, from Eine Aushnahme der ersten 
Lautverschiebung. University Park: the Pennsylvania State 
University Press. pp. 3–22. 
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. (1968) ‘Empirical 
foundations for a theory of language change’, in W. P. 
Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for Historical 
Linguistics. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
pp. 95–195.
Yang, C. (2000) ‘Internal and external forces in 
language change’, Language Variation and Change, 12(3), 
231–50.

19
19.1  SOCIAL EVALUATION OF 
VARIATION IN A CHANGE 
PERSPECTIVE
Text genres that introduce or provide overviews of 
sociolinguistics as a discipline (historical accounts, 
introductory books, handbooks), normally group 
attitudes and ideology with the applications (lan-
guage planning, politics, education, etc.), or with 
the types of topics (language contact, choice, mul-
tilingualism, etc.) that characterize the sociology 
of language. Against this backdrop, the present 
handbook’s inclusion of a language attitudes 
chapter in its Part III (Language Variation and 
Change) is noteworthy.
Theories that aim to explain language change 
processes operate with a number of ‘factors’ that 
make up these processes. There is little disagree-
ment about what to put in the total pool of factors, 
but views differ as to how the different factors 
interrelate and function. The fundamental ques-
tion is which factor(s) we should conceive of as 
the driving force, and which ones we should con-
sider as conditions. The factors may be differ-
ently grouped in theoretical frameworks but, in 
general, such different groupings do not reflect the 
theory’s answer to the driving-force versus condi-
tions question. If a theory operates with the 
common distinction between internal and external 
factors, internal factors will typically refer to 
possibilities and constraints in terms of fundamen-
tal speaker-/hearer-based processing capacities 
(articulation and perception) interacting with a 
concrete language system, while external factors 
will cover possibilities and constraints in terms of 
the material and ideological aspects of social 
structure. The distinction itself does not imply any 
commitment as to where the driving force is to be 
found. The same can be said of William Labov’s 
division of his monumental work on Principles of 
Linguistic Change into three volumes, subtitled 
Internal Factors (1994), Social Factors (2001), 
and Cognitive Factors (forthcoming).
However if, in this chapter, I operate with a 
distinction between subjective factors (social 
values and evaluations) and objective factors (all 
the others), then this is not only because it gives 
me a cover term for ‘attitudes, ideology and 
awareness’ but also mainly because it reflects the 
theoretical position I want to advocate – namely, 
that language change is driven by what I prefer to 
call ‘subconscious attitudes’. This position is 
derived from our research in Denmark, which I 
shall return to at the end (Section 19.3). But the 
bulk of the chapter is a presentation and discus-
sion of Labov’s work – simply because this is 
where we find the most explicit attempt within 
variationism to theorize the role of subjective fac-
tors on the basis of independent empirical data 
(i.e. data other than language-use data).
19.2  THE THEORETICAL AND EMPIRICAL 
STATUS OF SUBJECTIVE FACTORS 
IN LABOVIAN VARIATIONISM
From the beginning of variationist sociolinguistics, 
as developed in the work of Labov, the social unit of 
research was the speech community. This entity 
Attitudes, Ideology and 
Awareness
T o r e  K r i s t i a n s e n

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
266
was defined at the level of subjective, not objec-
tive, facts about language use (see also Mendoza-
Denton, this volume).
(1)
The speech community is not defined by any 
marked agreement in the use of language ele-
ments, so much as by participation in a set of 
shared norms. … In fact, it seems plausible to 
define a speech community as a group of speakers 
who share a set of social attitudes towards 
language (1972: 120ff., 248).
In their agenda-setting paper, ‘Empirical founda-
tions for a theory of language change’, Weinreich, 
Labov and Herzog (1968) listed evaluation among 
the five problems that had to be solved by the 
theory: namely, the problems of transmission, 
embedding (linguistic and social), evaluation, 
actuation and constraints. The first three of these 
problems in particular had been addressed empiri-
cally in Labov’s research during the first half of 
the 1960s on Martha’s Vineyard (1963) and in 
New York City (1966), and were thoroughly dis-
cussed in his seminal book Sociolinguistic Patterns 
(1972). The evaluation problem was defined as 
follows:
(2)
The evaluation problem is to find the subjective (or 
latent) correlates of the objective (or manifest) 
changes which have been observed. The indirect 
approach to this problem correlates the general 
attitudes and aspirations of the informants with 
their linguistic behaviour. The more direct approach 
is to measure the unconscious subjective reactions 
of the informants to values of the linguistic varia-
ble itself (1972: 162).
This definition allows for three observations that 
relate to the issues we need to address: the inde-
pendent-evidence issue (Section 19.2.1), the con-
sciousness issue (Section 19.2.2) and the 
driving-force issue (Section 19.2.3).
19.2.1 The ‘independent-evidence’ issue
Labov’s solution to the problem of defining the 
speech community was derived from the discov-
ery that people differ far more in their use of lan-
guage than in their evaluations of different uses. It 
goes without saying that the collection and analy-
sis of independent subjective data were a prereq-
uisite for that discovery. Also, though not explicitly 
formulated, it is clearly an implicit statement 
of Labov’s definition of the evaluation problem 
that it cannot be solved on the basis of facts 
about language use (‘the objective (or manifest) 
changes’); its solution requires a search for inde-
pendent evidence (‘the subjective (or latent) 
correlates’). Such evidence has been obtained 
and analysed in all of Labov’s projects. The data 
are obtained in sociolinguistic interviews or 
group conversations and may be of two types: 
discursive (Section 19.2.1.1), and experimental 
(Section 19.2.1.2).
The insistence on the need for independent 
evidence is important, in order to avoid circular 
argumentation on the driving-force issue. To the 
extent that the subjectivities involved in language 
variation and change are not studied using inde-
pendent data, it is hard to see how, in a principled 
way, we can constrain our ingenuity in pointing 
out ideologies that would appear as ‘good fits’ and 
explanations for established patterns of use. An 
example would be the different explanations that 
have been offered for the well-documented find-
ing that women generally speak more ‘correctly’ 
than men.
19.2.1.1 Discursive data
The discursive data consist of responses to, or 
comments about, questions that in one way or 
another relate to language. Such questions and 
responses may address the issue of language-
related values and evaluations either directly (i), 
or indirectly (ii).
(i) Evaluative responses with direct language-
related relevance 
When language-related ques-
tions are posed directly, informants’ answers or 
comments will typically draw on well-known 
public discourses and appear very much the same, 
in one and the same speech community. Labov 
repeatedly refers to ‘the fundamental sociolin-
guistic question posed to me in 1967 by a woman 
from New York: ‘ “Why do I say [wAi] when I 
don’t want to?” ’ (2001: 215 (italics in original); 
see also 1972: 308). He found that ‘New Yorkers 
show a general hostility towards New York City 
speech which emerges in countless ways. The 
term “linguistic self-hatred” is not too extreme to 
apply to the situation which emerges from the 
interviews’ (1966: 344). Thus, analyses of ‘what 
they say’ may shed light on the significance of 
social values and evaluation for language use.
(ii) Evaluative responses with indirect language-
related relevance 
Answers to questions about 
something other than language may allow 
researchers to characterize and group informants 
according to attitudes and values that can be 
assumed to be language-related in an indirect way. 
For instance, freely expressed statements about 
life on Martha’s Vineyard were used by Labov to 

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
267
group the informants into three categories accord-
ing to whether their expressed feelings were posi-
tive, neutral or negative towards the island. 
Patterns emerging from such data and analyses 
may be of relevance for the study of language-
related values and their role in language variation 
and change.
19.2.1.2 Experimental data
A second type of evaluative interview data results 
from elicitations that are more or less experimen-
tal in character. These evaluations may be divided 
according to whether they concern the informants’ 
own language (i), or the language of others (ii). In 
both respects, a further distinction is possible 
according to whether the evaluations concern spe-
cific variants (most often variant pronunciations 
of words), or whole varieties (languages or dia-
lects). As it is the specific-variant approach that 
characterizes Labov’s work, I focus on that 
approach here (and return to the ‘holistic’ approach 
in Section 19.3).
(i) Evaluations of own language 
As developed 
in the classic variationist projects in New York 
(Labov, 1966) and Norwich (Trudgill, 1974), self-
evaluation tests (also referred to as self-report 
tests) aim to tap into informants’ representations 
(perceptions and evaluations) of their own speech 
and are designed to ‘measure’ these representa-
tions in terms of some sort of comparison, with 
the possibility of detecting interesting ‘discrepan-
cies’ in the way informants relate to variant 
pronunciations of words.
In one design, the task of the informants is to 
select which one of two variant pronunciations of 
a word they think is correct, and then indicate 
which variant they usually use themselves (e.g. 
‘aunt’ pronounced as either [A:nt] or [æ:nt]; see 
Labov, 1966: Appendix A, 1972: 117). If what an 
informant claims to be ‘correct’ and their self-re-
ported forms are not the same, the discrepancy can 
be made the object of interpretation; it might for 
instance be thought to signal a lack of confidence 
that one’s own language is ‘good enough’. Data 
from a series of such choices (18 in all) allowed 
Labov to assign scores to his New York inform-
ants on an index of linguistic insecurity, and thus 
to characterize and compare individuals and social 
groups in terms of linguistic insecurity. One might 
argue that the discrepancy indicates a lack of con-
fidence in one’s own language, resulting from the 
general ideological ‘climate’ which monitors the 
uses of language in the community.
(ii) Evaluations of language spoken by others 
Around 1960, the Canadian social psychologist 
Wallace Lambert and his colleagues developed an 
experimental technique, known as the matched 
guise technique, which was designed to elicit lan-
guage attitudes at the level of varieties, e.g. 
English and French in Quebec (Lambert et al., 
1960; Lambert, 1967). The idea of the approach 
was to collect evaluations controlling for the 
effects of voice quality and linguistic content. The 
basic procedure is to tape-record one and the same 
bilingual, or bidialectal, person reading the same 
text in the two (or more) varieties under study, and 
then have listeners assess the readings (the 
‘matched guises’). In order to prevent listener-
judges from realizing that the same person appears 
twice (or several times), the guises are separated 
on the tape by filler voices. Assessments are made 
on some kind of evaluative scale(s).
In Labov’s projects (1966: Ch.11, 2001: 
Section 6.3), the so-called subjective reaction test 
uses the matched guise technique in an adaptation 
which aims to elicit evaluations at the level of 
linguistic variants. The stimulus speakers appear 
several times on the tape, in random order, each 
time reading a sentence which concentrates exam-
ples of one of the variables investigated. In addi-
tion, each speaker reads a ‘zero sentence’ with no 
variables of interest. The judges’ evaluations of 
readings with a high concentration of examples of 
the variables investigated may then be analysed as 
either upgrading or downgrading the speaker in 
comparison with evaluation of the zero sentence. 
Evaluations have been made on scales of ‘job suit-
ability’ and ‘friendliness’ – which may be said to 
represent a more fundamental value distinction, 
treated by social psychologists in terms of compe-
tence versus sociability, or status versus solidar-
ity (Ryan, Giles and Sebastian, 1982: 8). The 
possible relevance of such value distinctions for 
the theory of language change – and the role of 
subjective factors in change processes – seems 
quite obvious. Labov estimates that ‘[t]he most 
fruitful experimental measures of subjective reac-
tions to linguistic variation have been through 
matched guise tests … ’ (2001: 194 (italics in 
original)).
19.2.2 The consciousness issue
Why does the matched guise technique 
produce the more fruitful data? The quote above 
continues by qualifying the matched guise tests 
as tests ‘…which tap subjects’ unconscious atti-
tudes towards languages and dialects’. The impor-
tant word here appears to be the word 
unconscious.
We recall that Labov’s definition of the evalua-
tion problem operates with two methodological 
approaches to its solution (see quote (2), above). 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
268
The ‘indirect approach’ involves gathering data 
that shed light on ‘general attitudes and aspira-
tions’. The reference here, to judge from Labov’s 
empirical research as outlined above, is to data 
from discourse and self-reporting. The more 
‘direct approach’ involves gathering of ‘uncon-
scious subjective reactions’, and is instantiated by 
matched guise testing.
In brief, the ‘subjective correlates’ may be 
either conscious or unconscious. And so we may 
reformulate our question: Why is it that uncon-
scious attitudes are the more useful data? We 
cannot answer that question without considering 
the place and role of consciousness within Labov’s 
theoretical framework in general (19.2.2.1). 
Having done that, we shall return to considering in 
what sense Labov’s use of the matched guise tech-
nique taps into unconscious attitudes (19.2.2.2).
19.2.2.1  The ubiquity of un-/consciousness 
in Labov’s framework
In fact, the notion of consciousness is of crucial 
importance not only when the search is on for 
‘subjective correlates’. This holds true for Labov’s 
entire approach to the study of language variation 
and change. To start with, the consciousness 
dimension is (described and understood as) cru-
cial to the phenomenon of linguistic change as 
such – changes are classified according to whether 
they come from above or below consciousness (i). 
Furthermore, reference to the consciousness 
dimension constitutes the fundamental basis for 
the classification of linguistic variables into stere-
otypes, markers, and indicators (ii), for the style 
analyses in terms of careful versus casual speech 
(iii), and, more implicitly, for the discussion of 
language ideology in terms of overt versus covert 
norms and values (iv).
(i) Change from above and change from 
below 
It is commonplace in sociolinguistics to 
link the distinction between change from above 
and change from below to the dimension of con-
sciousness. For instance, A Dictionary of 
Sociolinguistics (Swann, Deumert, Lillis and 
Mesthrie, 2004: 35ff.) explicates the notions as 
follows:
(3)
change from above … linguistic changes of which 
speakers are consciously aware (the linguistic 
forms involved in the change are said to be ‘above’ 
the level of social awareness)
change from below Linguistic changes of which 
speakers are not consciously aware (the linguistic 
forms involved are said to be ‘below’ the level of 
social awareness).
The focus on consciousness reflects similar expli-
cations in Labov’s own writings, e.g. ‘change 
from below, that is, below the level of social 
awareness’ (1972: 178; 2001: 279). Recently, 
Labov again noted, regarding the above/below 
distinction, that ‘[t]his terminology does not imply 
higher or lower on the socioeconomic scale’ 
(2007: 346 (footnote 2)), even though elsewhere 
we can also read that ‘ “Above” and “below” refer 
here simultaneously to levels of social awareness 
and positions in the socioeconomic hierarchy’ 
(Labov, 1994: 78).
One-half of the claimed parallelism between 
social awareness and the socioeconomic hierarchy 
is easy to grasp and accept, in so far as ‘Changes 
from above are introduced by the dominant social 
class, often with full public awareness. Normally, 
they represent borrowings from other speech com-
munities that have higher prestige in the view of 
the dominant class’ (ibid.: 78 (italics in original)). 
The other half of the claimed parallelism is harder 
to follow, partly because ‘[c]hanges from below 
may be introduced by any social class’ (1994: 78), 
but mainly because the claims about (the absence 
of) consciousness in changes from below seem 
more problematic. I shall return to this problem 
in connection with the driving-force issue 
(Section 19.2.3), but first we need to touch on the 
importance of un-/consciousness to other funda-
mental distinctions in the Labovian framework.
(ii) Stereotypes, markers and indicators 
Three 
types of linguistic variables are differentiated, 
essentially in terms of social awareness, addition-
ally in terms of patterns of use.
(4)
Some variables are the overt topics of social com-
ment and show both correction and hypercorrec-
tion (stereotypes); others are not at the same high 
level of social awareness, but show consistent sty-
listic and social stratification (markers); still others 
are never commented on or even recognized by 
native speakers, but are differentiated only in their 
relative degrees of advancement among the initi-
ating social groups (indicators) (Labov, 1994: 78 
(italics in original)).
A change from below appears in the vernacular. 
At first, there is no social awareness of the varia-
tion, and the use of the variable by community 
members produces a systematic pattern only in 
terms of social group membership; the variants 
used are indicators of social affiliation. As the 
social awareness surrounding the variable rises, 
the variants become markers of social affiliation, 
and the pattern of use no longer shows only sys-
tematic social-group-related variation but also 

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
269
systematic stylistic (i.e. social-context-related) 
variation. Whether the change comes from above 
or below, the variation may become the object of 
high-level social awareness and strong evalua-
tions, mostly in terms of negative comments con-
cerning one of the variants; the variable has 
become a stereotype, and its use shows correc-
tional behaviour of a more irregular kind (see e.g. 
Labov, 2001: 196).
(iii) Careful and casual speech 
As raised social 
awareness is accompanied by style shifting, we 
are not surprised to learn that Labov’s analysis of 
stylistic variation is founded on the notion of 
attention, i.e. a notion with clear links to con-
sciousness and awareness. 
(5)
There are a great many styles and stylistic dimen-
sions that can be isolated by an analyst. But we 
find that styles can be ranged along a single 
dimension, measured by the amount of attention 
paid to speech (1972: 208 (italics in original)).
 [Subjective reaction tests] must be considered as 
sensitive measures of the place of a given variable 
on a scale of social awareness. As a rule, social 
awareness of a given variable corresponds to the 
slope of style shifting (2001: 196).
In terms of social embedding, stylistic variation is 
analysed along a single contextual dimension. The 
speech situation is manipulated in the sociolin-
guistic interview and is characterized as more or 
less formal. The basic idea is that a more formal 
context triggers more attention to speech, which in 
turn triggers more careful speech. Inversely, a less 
formal context triggers less attention to speech, 
which in turn triggers less careful, more casual, 
speech. This conception of stylistic variation has 
been much criticized, but what we need to notice 
is again the decisive importance accorded to 
unconsciously produced (unmonitored) speech. 
‘[T]he vernacular [is] the style in which the mini-
mum attention is given to the monitoring of 
speech’ (Labov, 1972: 208). Monitoring yields 
irregular patterns of use (cf. stereotypes above), 
whereas the less monitored – casual, vernacular – 
styles yield ‘more systematic speech, where the 
fundamental relations which determine the course 
of linguistic evolution can be seen most clearly’ 
(1972: 208).
(iv) Overt and covert values 
Any study of ‘atti-
tudes’ and ‘ideology’ needs to start by somehow 
explicating these entities in terms of social mean-
ings, norms or values. Ever since the New York 
study, Labov’s basic distinction in the realm of 
language ideology has been between overt and 
covert social values. This distinction, however, 
has never been based, like the speech-related dis-
tinctions in (ii) and (iii) above, on explicit refer-
ence to awareness or attention.
The connection between the dimensions of 
social values (in terms of overt vs covert) and 
consciousness (in terms of above vs below, or 
conscious vs unconscious) is clear so far as the 
‘overt–conscious’ connection is concerned. ‘The 
process [of ‘overt social pressures applied from 
above’ (TK)] is out in the open for us to observe, 
in public performances, in the attitudes of teachers 
in the schools, and in the conscious reactions of 
some middle class persons’ (Labov, 1966: 224). In 
contrast, the ‘covert–unconscious’ connection is 
harder to establish with reference to explicit 
claims in Labov’s writings. Consider, however, 
the following statements:
(6)
For change from below, there is no important 
distinction between stigmatized and prestige 
forms: the speech form assumed by each group 
may be taken as an unconscious mark of self-
identification (1966: 225ff.).
(7)
There are surely other values [than the overt values 
(TK)], at a deeper level of consciousness, which 
reinforce the vernacular speech forms of New York 
City … recent studies of the black English vernacu-
lar in New York City have demonstrated the exist-
ence of such covert norms… (1972: 177).
By contrast with change from above, which we 
know to be accompanied by overt, conscious, 
social valuations (stigma or prestige), change 
from below is said, in (6), to be accompanied by 
social valuations to do with group- and self-
identification – which are unconscious. I take it 
that an alleged unconscious act of social identifi-
cation will have to be classified, in terms of the 
overt–covert distinction, as a manifestation of 
covert values. If so, establishment of a ‘covert–
unconscious’ connection appears the natural infer-
ence from quote (6). Quote (7), on the other hand, 
links covert norms or values, not to the uncon-
scious, but to a deeper level of consciousness.
To judge from Labov’s work in general, no 
important theoretical distinction is implied by 
glosses like ‘a deeper level of consciousness’ on 
the one hand, and ‘unconscious’ or ‘below con-
sciousness’ on the other. For me, this is an impor-
tant issue, which I shall return to. Here I just want 
to suggest that the parallelisms in the theoretical 
framework favour an understanding which con-
nects ‘covert’ with ‘unconscious’ – the point being 
that Labov’s claims about the absence of con-
sciousness in social valuations (no matter how 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
270
‘covert’ they might be) are akin to his claims 
about the absence of consciousness in changes 
from below, and just as problematic.
19.2.2.2  Consciousness, values and the 
matched guise technique
We set out in Section 19.2.2 to shed light on the 
claim that ‘unconscious attitudes’, obtained by 
using the matched guise technique, are more valu-
able as data for students of language change than 
are conscious attitudes. We have seen (in Section 
19.2.2.1) that the notion of consciousness (aware-
ness, attention) is of paramount importance to 
Labov’s understanding and analysis of how lan-
guage in use varies and changes and, furthermore, 
that the interesting (systematic) facts of change 
take place ‘below consciousness’, when minimal 
or no awareness is involved in the use of language. 
In brief, the priorities of the Labovian framework 
lie with unconscious linguistic variation and 
change. We can conclude that the conception of 
unconscious attitudes as the more valuable data 
type in the evaluative dimension appears natural, 
even mandatory, within the framework as a whole.
However, the notion of unconscious attitudes, 
as used by Labov, needs further clarification. We 
have argued above (in Section 19.2.2.1) that the 
parallelisms between the analytical dimensions 
(consciousness, class, context and values) invite 
us to infer that covert values are ‘below con-
sciousness’. It seems then that what Labov’s 
matched guise tests are said to be doing, as they 
tap into ‘unconscious attitudes’, is to uncover 
‘covert values’, the social motivations from below. 
Accordingly, sociolinguists tend to discuss the 
aim and potentiality of matched guise testing in 
terms of attitudes that are ‘covert’ (e.g. Fasold, 
1984: 164) or ‘private’ (e.g. Garrett, Coupland and 
Williams, 2003: 57). There is nothing surprising 
in this when seen against the parallelisms in 
Labov’s theoretical framework.
Nevertheless, there are good reasons to believe 
that we would be mistaken if we take unconscious 
attitudes, as obtained in Labov’s matched guise 
tests, to mean ‘covert values’. The main reason, of 
course, is that the test’s measuring instruments – 
the job suitability and friendship scales – are 
simply Labov’s operationalization of the distinc-
tion between overt and covert values. Hence, the 
‘unconscious attitudes’ obtained in the New York 
project, where only a job suitability scale was 
included in the test, were never meant (nor consid-
ered) to be reflections of covert values (1966: 284; 
1972: 177). In Philadelphia, the friendship scale 
was added in the hope of producing evidence for 
covert subjective reactions. But as the ‘uncon-
scious attitudes’ obtained on the friendship scale 
by and large replicated the results of the job suit-
ability scale, Labov concludes by pointing to a 
lack of success in establishing the existence of 
covert values (more about this in Section 19.2.3.2 
below).
In the perspective of our discussion here, it is 
interesting to note that Labov argues that the dif-
ficulties experienced in establishing independent 
evidence for covert values should be ascribed to 
the conditions of data collection. The argument 
goes something like this: in our attempts to elicit 
covert values, we have only come ‘as far as one 
can in a field experiment’ (2001: 216), which is 
not very far, because covert values ‘do not readily 
emerge in formal situations’ (2001: 24). Yes, but 
we have seen how the contextual-formality dimen-
sion is linked to, in fact based on, the dimen   -
sion of consciousness/awareness/attention; what 
emerges at a certain level of formality is a func-
tion of the level of consciousness involved. Thus, 
it seems to me that what the argument really says 
is something like: no evidence of covert values is 
found because the attitudes expressed in the 
matched guise experiment are ‘conscious’.
Indeed, ‘conscious attitudes’ make much more 
sense than ‘unconscious attitudes’. Consider the 
following conditions of data collection: the 
Philadelphia matched guise was carried out ‘in 
course of the second interviews … . The ‘second’ 
interview was in many cases a third, fourth, or 
even tenth recording made by the field workers’ 
(Labov, 2001: 207, 334). The job suitability ques-
tion was phrased: ‘What is the highest job this 
person could hold, speaking as she does?’ (2001: 
207). There can be little doubt that the Philadelphia 
informants evaluated the matched guise speakers 
in full awareness of giving away attitudes towards 
dialect differences.
In fact, there is no indication that Labov ever 
aimed at obtaining conditions which might pro-
duce ‘unconscious attitudes’ in the sense of atti-
tudes offered by respondents who are unaware 
of offering attitudes towards dialect differences 
(which is what we aim at in our Danish studies: 
Section 19.3 below). On the contrary, about the 
matched guise test in the New York project, he 
says that: ‘The respondents were told that this test 
was the most important part of the interview: since 
we had already learned how they themselves used 
the English language, we then wanted to know 
how they felt about the way other New Yorkers 
used it’ (Labov, 1966: 281ff.). Respondents were 
actually controlled for whether they could hear 
dialect differences between the speakers (or sen-
tences) on the test tape: three respondents were 
described as ‘dialect deaf’, whereas ‘the great 
majority heard clear-cut differences between the 
test sentences’ (ibid.: 284).

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
271
What does Labov mean then by labelling his 
matched guise data ‘unconscious’ (attitudes, eval-
uations, reactions)? As it turns out, Labov’s real 
reason for prioritizing the matched guise data is 
that these data are systematic:
(8)
The type of evaluative behavior that I would like to 
measure here is more systematic, more completely 
internalized than any reply to overt questions 
about speech. We are searching for the evaluative 
norms which reflect the complex and regular struc-
tures in [the social differentiation of language use] 
(1966: 280).
…attitudes do not emerge in a systematic form if 
the subject is questioned directly about dialects; 
but if he makes two sets of personality judgements 
about the same speaker using two different forms 
of language, and does not realize that it is the 
same speaker, his subjective evaluations of lan-
guage will emerge as the differences in the two 
ratings (1972: 146 (italics in original)).
It seems clear that Labov’s ‘unconscious attitudes’ 
refers more to an aspect of the data-collection 
technique than to the nature of the data. His 
respondents are not unconscious of offering atti-
tudes towards language; they are unconscious of 
offering attitudes towards the same speaker sev-
eral times or, in case they realize this, unable to let 
it influence their ratings. (‘As the listener reacted 
to a particular sentence, he would not be able to 
know exactly how he had rated the same speaker 
in a previous utterance’ (1966: 281).). Thus, what 
Labov’s matched guise experiments collect is not 
‘unconscious’ language attitudes, but evaluative 
reactions towards language of a more ‘systematic’ 
kind than obtained in interview answers.
19.2.3 The driving-force issue
Put simply, the driving-force issue (see Section 
19.1) boils down to the question of ‘What comes 
first’: does change in use result from change in 
attitudes, or does change in attitudes result from 
change in use? As correlation does not imply a 
cause–effect relationship, stating that ‘the evalua-
tion problem is to find the subjective (or latent) 
correlates of the objective (or manifest) changes 
which have been observed’ (see quote (2)) does 
not in itself commit Labov to a particular position 
on the driving-force issue. Actually, Labov’s posi-
tion on the issue has never appeared particularly 
clear-cut to me, but I think it is right to point 
out a repositioning on his part from before 
Philadelphia (19.2.3.1) to after Philadelphia 
(19.2.3.2).
19.2.3.1 Before Philadelphia
Independently of how we should understand the 
relationship between covert values and uncon-
scious attitudes (as obtained in the matched guise 
test; see Section 19.2.2.2 above), it may be firmly 
established that Labov, throughout all of his work, 
operates with social values, pressures and motiva-
tions that people are unaware of.
(9)
Social forces exerted upon linguistic forms are of 
two distinct types, which we may call pressures 
from above, and pressures from below. By below 
is meant “below the level of conscious aware-
ness”. Pressures from below operate upon entire 
linguistic systems, in response to social motivations 
which are relatively obscure and yet have the 
greatest signification for the general evolution of 
language … social pressures from above … repre-
sent the overt process of social correction applied 
to individual linguistic forms (1972: 123 (italics in 
original)).
My difficulties with understanding Labov’s 
position on the driving-force issue may largely be 
due to quite different conceptions of the relation-
ship between the notions of value and conscious-
ness. I have no problems with changes from 
above. These are driven by social evaluations that 
function as pressures by virtue of people’s aware-
ness of the social significance involved, often 
referred to in terms of correctness and prestige. 
The problem arises with changes from below. 
How are we to understand that social motivations 
and pressures with the greatest significance for 
language use in the speech community operate 
below conscious awareness (while also being rela-
tively obscure to Labov as a student of the speech 
community)?
In the mechanism-of-linguistic-change para-
graph that concludes Labov 1966 (398–400), it is 
stressed that ‘… linguistic behavior is highly nor-
mative, or goal-directed. The need for a target, a 
set of norms, is evident in the casual speech of our 
informants as well as in their formal styles’, and it 
is suggested that:
(10)
Hypercorrection can operate in a more general 
sense [i.e. can override not only upper middle class 
norms as in the New York study, but also target 
norms in general (TK)] as the mechanism of 
change in response to pressures from below.
 […]
Driven by the fear of not conforming, and the 
need to establish oneself as an authentic member 
of one’s immediate group, the members of the 
speech community can gradually push these labile 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
272
norms further and further in the direction that 
they first began to move.
 […]
the unconscious tendency of speakers to increase 
the measure of their identification with their 
immediate group may be stated as the probable 
mechanism of these changes.
We recall that the first stage of change from below 
is characterized by the absence of consciousness 
(see Section 19.2.2.1 above). At this stage, the 
established variation functions as an indicator, 
‘defined as a function of group membership’ 
(Labov, 1972: 178). That is, even though people 
are not aware of the change, it is thought of as 
driven by the kind of evaluations that delimit and 
define social groups. Such evaluations were also 
pointed out as the driving force as Labov (1972: 
178ff.) summarized his experiences with the 
subsequent stages of ‘the mechanism of sound 
change’:
(11)
[the sound change spread] to the extent that the 
values of the original subgroup were adopted by 
other groups in the speech community … . As the 
sound change with its associated values reached 
the limits of its expansion, the linguistic variable 
became one of the norms which defined the 
speech community, and all members of the speech 
community reacted in a uniform manner to its use 
(without necessarily being aware of it). The varia-
ble is now a marker, and begins to show stylistic 
variation.
As it develops and spreads, a linguistic variable 
first indicates social group membership, then 
marks both group and style categories. The devel-
opment and spread of the variable is driven by 
social evaluations (attitudes come first) – which 
the speakers themselves are unaware of (possibly 
so, even at the marker stage). As I have indicated, 
I am not sure how to understand this. I see two 
possible readings, which to my mind entail very 
different theoretical assumptions and methodo-
logical implications.
One possibility is that the notion of values 
(social pressures and motivations) operating from 
below the level of conscious awareness refers to a 
situation in which people pay no conscious atten-
tion to some of the linguistic variables which 
constitute their speech community, in the sense 
that they do not (seem able to) comment upon 
the use and social signification of the variants 
involved. Some of Labov’s formulations point in 
that direction, e.g.: ‘To sum up, incoming linguis-
tic changes rarely rise to the level of social com-
ment in their initial stages, and not all changes 
become the focus of conscious attention even in 
their advanced stages’ (1972: 309). ‘Though (aw) 
is not at a high level of conscious social aware-
ness, and is rarely a subject of social comment …’ 
(2001: 187). If the absence of conscious aware-
ness (or conscious attention) results from an 
absence of ‘social comment’, we may say that 
below conscious awareness means ‘no available 
discourse’, and such a reading may be taken – 
depending on the theoretical conceptions of ‘the 
self and its values’ – to allow for the existence of 
an unconscious awareness of uses and values. 
There is awareness, certainly, but it is implicit, 
linguistically inexpressible. If this is the situation, 
it might be better conceived of in terms of differ-
ent levels or layers of consciousness/awareness. 
The other possibility is that we would be mis-
taken in establishing and foregrounding such a 
distinction between conscious and unconscious 
awareness, or between layers of awareness. I 
know of no explicit attempt in Labov’s work to 
theorize levels of consciousness/awareness. It is 
true that the ‘either-or’ treatment of this dimension 
(above/below, conscious/unconscious, aware/una-
ware) is sometimes replaced by a ‘more-or-less’ 
treatment (see quote (5)). The important point to 
notice, however, is that values are talked about 
as decisive for variation and change, quite inde-
pendently of whether consciousness/awareness 
is said to be involved or not. Labov seems to 
operate with a driving-force role for social evalu-
ations that are conceived of as unconscious in the 
sense of being ‘beyond consciousness’.
Apparently, Labov sees no problem here. Or 
rather saw no problem. In a more recent state-
ment, which is remarkable for its explicit com-
ment on the issue that occupies us here, Labov 
argues that an explanation based on social sym-
bolism (the case in question concerns gender dif-
ferentiation in use) is problematic because ‘it 
assigns social sensitivity to early stages of change 
that are remote from levels of social awareness’ 
(2001: 291).
As we would expect in the work of a devoted 
empiricist, the continued failure to establish firm, 
independent evidence for the kind of social sensi-
tivity – covert values – that was assumed to drive 
the more general and interesting changes in use, 
had to become a problem. Our discussion above 
suggests two possible approaches to the lack-of-
evidence problem. On the one hand, if the distinc-
tion between conscious and unconscious, between 
overt and covert, is a question of layers of con-
sciousness and discursive availability, the natural 
implication for the student of language change 
would be to concentrate on developing methods 
for tapping into the deeper layers that people lack 
a language to express. On the other hand, if we 
operate with a binary ‘either-or’ conception and 
end up with no evidence for covert values in spite 

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
273
of supposedly valid and reliable endeavours to 
establish such evidence, the result might be an 
instigation to rethink the driving-force issue. As 
we shall see, it is probably right to say that Labov 
has opted for the latter approach.
19.2.3.2 After Philadelphia
The matched guise test of the Philadelphia project 
was designed to detect indications of covert values 
in terms of a reversed response pattern for friend-
liness in comparison with job suitability (see 
Section 19.2.1.2 (ii) above). The result was, how-
ever, that ‘[n]o such tendency emerged. In gen-
eral, the friendship question replicated the results 
of the job suitability question … evidence for 
covert norms failed to appear’ (Labov, 2001: 
216ff.). Arguably, as a consequence of the fact 
that ‘Philadelphians have shown a strong pattern 
of negative evaluation of changes in progress, and 
no clear evidence of covert, positive evaluation of 
their own behaviour’ (2001: 220), a growing ten-
dency to reduce or even refute the driving-force 
role attributed to subjective factors is clearly dis-
cernible in Labov’s more recent work.
(12)
…Changes from below are systematic changes 
that appear first in the vernacular, and represent 
the operation of internal, linguistic factors. At the 
outset, and through most of their development, 
they are completely below the level of social 
awareness. No one notices them or talks about 
them, and even phonetically trained observers may 
be unconscious of them for many years. It is only 
when the changes are nearing completion that 
members of the community become aware of 
them (1994: 78 (italics in original)).
This description recapitulates earlier formulations 
as far as the role of consciousness/awareness is 
concerned, but there is no mention of values. 
Changes from below are not assumed to be driven 
by social valuations (pressures and motivations) in 
the same way as before (as in quote (9)), but are 
instead said to ‘represent the operation of internal, 
linguistic factors’.
The importance of solving the evaluation prob-
lem by searching for the subjective correlates, 
including the covert values in particular, is now 
clearly downplayed in Labov’s approach and 
argumentation, while the pertinence of ‘interac-
tional frequency’ to the driving-force issue is 
upgraded in the discussion – with reference to 
Bloomfield’s principle of density, the implications 
of which, with regard to the evaluation problem, is 
spelled out: ‘The principle of density implicitly 
asserts that we do not have to search for a motivat-
ing force behind the diffusion of linguistic change. 
The effect is a mechanical and inevitable one; the 
implicit assumption is that social evaluation and 
attitudes play a minor role’ (Labov, 2001: 20).
In discussing other researchers’ claims about 
the role of attitudes in terms of ‘group member-
ship’ or ‘acts of identity’ (exemplified by Sturtevant 
(1947) and Le Page and Tabouret-Keller (1985)) 
– Labov argues that ‘[i]f such attitudes are to be 
used to account for linguistic diffusion, it is neces-
sary to posit a covert belief structure’, and goes on 
cautiously to admit that ‘such covert attitudes and 
beliefs may actually be involved in linguistic 
change’, but stresses that ‘they are not usually 
supported by material evidence’ (2001: 191). 
Even the few cases, where attitudinal evidence for 
an effect from ‘local-identification’ processes on 
sound change in progress have been considered 
fairly secure (as in the Martha’s Vineyard study), 
are reopened for a possible interpretation in line 
with the density principle: ‘The question remains 
as to whether the same conclusions could be 
drawn from frequencies of interaction with speak-
ers with different systems, following Bloomfield’s 
principle of density. In other words, language 
change may simply reflect changes in interlocutor 
frequencies which are in turn the result of changes 
in social preferences and attitudes’ (ibid.: 191). In 
another version of his argument with the acts-of-
identity position, Labov finds the group-distin-
guishing function of linguistic differences to be 
‘very likely’, but, because of the lack of independ-
ent evidence for covert values, ‘there is always the 
possibility that the effect is due to Bloomfield’s 
principle of density: that the more often people 
talk to each other, the more similar their speech 
will be’ (ibid.: 228). The consequences for the 
research strategy in general, and the possible con-
sequences for the status of the evaluation problem 
in particular, are radical:
(13)
The strategy of this inquiry [into whether language 
change is driven by changes in either ‘interactional 
frequency’ or ‘social identifications’] is to draw as 
much as possible on concrete evidence of actual 
behaviour as evidence for such questions. To the 
extent that social differences in language behav-
iour can be mapped onto the matrix of communi-
cative interaction, we must give priority to this 
pattern of interaction in accounting for the linguis-
tic facts … . The account based on covert attitudes 
is redundant to the extent that the network of 
daily interaction brings people into contact with 
the new form in proportion to their distance from 
the originating group (Labov, 2001: 191–2).
Thus, the Philadelphia study puts a focus on the 
communicative interaction of individual people 
in their social networks, and ‘transform[s] the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
274
traditional question “Why does language change?” 
into a different form: “Who are the leaders of 
linguistic change?” ’ (Labov, 2001: 29). The char-
acteristics of these leaders are determined 
by studying ‘their personal statements, their 
social histories, and their philosophies of life’ 
(2001: 33). The study concludes that ‘[t]he history 
of our leaders of linguistic change is a history 
of nonconformity, and their sociolinguistic 
position is a display of nonconformity’ (2001: 
410). Celeste S. is presented as the prototypical 
influential person: ‘She did not hesitate to use 
violence when it was called for. But her primary 
weapons were linguistic: negotiation, persuasion, 
and denunciation, all enlisted under a profound 
intolerance for cupidity, hypocrisy, and injustice. 
These are the qualities that make a great leader of 
linguistic change’ (2001: 410). The Nonconformity 
Principle, presented as the major conclusion of 
the 2001 volume, says that: ‘Ongoing linguistic 
changes are emblematic of nonconformity to 
established social norms of appropriate behavior, 
… are generated in the social milieu that 
most consistently defies these norms, [and] 
are generalized to the wider community by 
those who display the symbols of nonconformity 
in a larger pattern of upward mobility’ 
(2001: 516).
One might argue here that the qualities given as 
characteristic of the leaders of change might just 
as well be referred to as values and, furthermore, 
that the Nonconformity Principle might perfectly 
well be read as a statement to the effect that covert 
values are the driving force of change. Such a 
reading would be tantamount to saying that the 
neighbourhood-based Philadelphia study does 
indeed offer a partly-new methodological approach 
to the task of establishing independent evidence 
for covert values.
Labov, however, reasons otherwise. The leaders 
of change are ‘people taking deliberate and 
conscious actions that identify their social posi-
tion and define their relations with the commu-
nity’, but:
(14)
[t]heir linguistic choices cannot be described as 
actions in the same sense. The level or rate of use 
of a stochastic variable is at the level of conscious-
ness comparable to walking and breathing. There 
is no evidence that attitudes, ideologies, and opin-
ions that people express in so many words will 
bear directly upon linguistic changes from below. 
These attitudes may influence who a person talks 
to and how often they talk, and so affect the flow 
of linguistic influence and the diffusion of sound 
changes within and across local social networks. 
(2001: 409)
Labov does in fact say that the notion of noncon-
formity ‘deals with norms that are covert in some 
situations, but emerge more freely in others’ 
(2001: 512). However, his theoretical point is that 
there is no evidence of direct influence from such 
norms on linguistic changes from below. Whatever 
their mode of existence or appearance might be, 
attitudes, ideologies and opinions may influence 
patterns of interaction, but the change-producing 
forces at work in interaction are ‘internal, linguis-
tic factors’ – factors of a mechanical kind which 
should be compared to the forces behind walking 
and breathing rather than social identifications 
and evaluations.
Labov’s position now seems to be that a driving-
force role for social values becomes a pertinent 
issue only if changes cannot be accounted 
for in terms of ‘mechanical’ or ‘structural’ forces 
(see e.g. 2001: 463, 500). In discussing the acts-
of-identity type of explanation, Labov explicitly 
refutes a more constructivist view in stressing 
that he does not see the leaders of change (like 
Celeste S.) ‘as creating a system of verbal behav-
iour so much as responding to ambient pressures 
to shift their habitual range of values of 
Philadelphia variables’, and stresses that ‘[a]s 
always, it is good practice to consider first the 
simpler and more mechanical view that social 
structure affects linguistic output through changes 
in the frequency of interaction’ (2001: 505ff.).
The continued reduction of a role for social 
evaluation in language change reaches its end 
point in the recent article on ‘Transmission and 
diffusion’ (Labov, 2007), in which these two 
change processes are explained in terms of differ-
ent learning strategies in children and adults, 
without any reference to norms or values at all.
19.3  THE DRIVING-FORCE ROLE 
OF COVERT ATTITUDES: 
THE DANISH EVIDENCE
Are subjective factors to be seen as essential to 
language change processes – i.e. as their driving 
force – or as a contingent concomitant of usage 
differences that emerge in virtue of other, objective 
factors? This issue became central to Danish soci-
olinguistics from its very beginning in the 1970s, 
as it began where Labov seems to have ended.
When Brink and Lund argue and, to some 
extent, document that Copenhagen speech (includ-
ing its HIGH/LOW variation) is spreading to the rest 
of Denmark, they rely on the density principle as 
their main explanation, presented in a textbook 
for university students (Brink and Lund, 1974) as 
the ‘Napoleon principle’: always make sure you 

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
275
outnumber the enemy where you attack him. In 
other words, wherever variants compete, the vic-
tory will go to the most frequently heard variant. 
Brink and Lund admit that prestige may influence 
the battle and speed up the advance of the new 
variant but, in general, they treat, and condemn, 
attribution of social values to linguistic variants as 
a category mistake, in speakers and researchers 
alike.
The view that attitudes are alien to language 
use and change (and should be fought and elimi-
nated as mistakes) appeared to accord with the 
facts of the Danish speech community as it devel-
oped between 1960 and 1980. The traditional 
dialects stopped being transferred to, or acquired 
by, the younger generations, and were replaced by 
Copenhagen speech, which spread to the whole 
country, most vitally in its LOW variety among 
young people. In contrast, Danish élite discourse 
(as represented for instance in official teaching 
guidelines) began extolling the value of local dia-
lects, while increasingly complaining (e.g. through 
letters to the editor) about particular features of 
LOW Copenhagen speech as these became increas-
ingly salient on national television. So, what hap-
pened at the level of use was the opposite of what 
happened at the level of attitudes. Language ideol-
ogy did indeed seem to be of little relevance to 
attempts at explaining language change.
This picture has been strongly supported by the 
many empirical studies of language attitudes that 
have been conducted in Denmark from the begin-
ning of the 1980s onwards: outside Copenhagen, 
young people are always, on average, found to 
express more positive attitudes towards LOCAL 
varieties of language than towards LOW Copenhagen 
speech. This holds true whether the data are 
of a discursive or an experimental kind (see 
Section 19.2.1) – also subjective reaction tests 
confirm this picture – but with the proviso that 
the elicited attitudes are consciously offered.
The ideological climate surrounding Danish 
varieties appears quite different whenever the 
subjective reaction test is constructed and con-
ducted in such a way that subjects do not become 
aware of reacting to language varieties (see the 
discussion in Section 19.2.2.2). In this case, we 
talk of the obtained data as subconscious atti-
tudes. Rather, the point is that the attitudes are 
subconsciously offered in the test situation. 
Besides exploiting natural situations, which is dif-
ficult (for an example, see Kristiansen, 1997), we 
have succeeded in collecting subconscious atti-
tudes in experimental situations (classroom set-
tings) from around 1000 young Danes over a 
period of 20 years. The same basic design has 
been used in more than 10 Danish localities, 
including all parts of the country and a wide range 
of community types. As our claims to a decisive 
role for covert values in language change are 
based on the results from these experiments, 
I shall go into some detail with the design (as it 
materialized in the LANCHART project; for fur-
ther descriptions, see Kristiansen, 2009, a, b).
Having been based on the so-called verbal 
guise technique, the experiments in question have 
requested ninth-graders (15–16 years old, in their 
last year of compulsory schooling and represent-
ing the whole social gamut) to evaluate clips of 
about 30 seconds taken from different speakers 
talking about the same subject: ‘What is a good 
teacher?’. As this design represents a relaxation 
of the control for voice and content effects 
obtained in a matched guise design, we have used 
four speakers for each of the accents under study 
in each community, and have said that conclu-
sions, as to a decisive effect of accent differences 
on evaluations, are acceptable if, and only if, the 
assumed accents emerge as clear similarities and 
differences in how the speakers are evaluated. 
This has always turned out to be the case: the 
accents we have assumed to be relevant in proc-
esses of social identifications among today’s 
adolescents (two in Copenhagen, three in all 
other communities) have always emerged from 
the evaluative patterns. As the high/low social 
contrast seems to have lost much of its signifi-
cance at the levels of both use and attitudes in 
later decades, we label the three accents MODERN 
(characterized by previous ‘low’ features and 
recently developed ‘new’ features), CONSERVATIVE 
(with no or fewer ‘low’ and ‘new’ features) and 
LOCAL (i.e. Copenhagen speech with traces of 
local prosody). The stimulus speakers are adoles-
cents of the same age as the subjects. The same 
four MODERN and the same four CONSERVATIVE 
speakers have been used in all communities (all 
of them are Copenhageners), while the four 
LOCAL speakers, it goes without saying, have been 
recorded in each of the local communities under 
study.
Three methodological points have been essen-
tial to the successful elicitation of subconsciously-
offered attitudes. First, prior to their participation, 
no information was given to the informants about 
the purpose of the experiment, and data collection 
followed a strict procedure in order to avoid ques-
tions and comments that might arouse informants’ 
awareness of the purpose. Secondly, the accent 
variation represented in the stimulus tape was 
‘natural’ – i.e. a part of everyday speech in the 
local community under study and therefore not 
salient in any way that might make the informants 
reflect on the purpose of the evaluation as having 
to do with dialectal differences. Thus, the stimulus 
speakers represented the three accents that are 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
276
naturally present as young speech in any Danish 
locality today. Thirdly, the measurement instru-
ment – i.e. the scales used for evaluations – was 
constructed in such a way that informants’ atten-
tion was not directed to the idea that the evalua-
tions were towards dialect. Hence, evaluative 
items focusing on speech (correct? good? dia-
lect?) had to be left out, of course, in favour of 
items addressing speaker characteristics, e.g. in 
terms of personality traits (intelligent? trustwor-
thy? cool?).
After completion, informants were always 
asked what they thought the experiment was 
about. No one has ever suggested anything that 
could be taken to mean attitudes towards ‘dia-
lects’. When they are told, and listen to the speak-
ers again, informants are always amazed how easy 
it is to hear, now that they know, that the speakers 
have different accents – which is informative on 
the nature of our ‘subconscious attitudes’: if ‘nat-
urally occurring’ accent differences are so easily 
made recognizable, they are also likely to be 
included in listeners’ reactions when they are not 
salient in the evaluative situation. In this sense, I 
find it evident that people will always have to be 
aware of the value issues involved in the use of 
language, if values have a role to play in the battle 
between variants. These values are covert in the 
sense that they differ radically from the overt 
attitudes expressed in general (common as well as 
élite) public discourse.
Now, the point is that the covert evaluations – 
in sharp contrast with the overt ideology of 
Danish society – show a pattern which is not in 
contradiction to, but is in accordance with, what 
happens at the level of use. In comparison to 
‘pure’ Copenhagen speech (whether in CONSERVA-
TIVE or MODERN version), young Danes every-
where strongly downgrade the ‘locally coloured’ 
speech (LOCAL) – which in most cases is their own 
speech. As to the variation within Copenhagen 
speech, the evaluative pattern is again consistently 
the same all over the country, including the city of 
Copenhagen itself: MODERN is everywhere strongly 
upgraded on dynamism traits (such as self-as-
sured, fascinating, cool), whereas CONSERVATIVE 
does as well or better on superiority traits (such 
as intelligent, conscientious, trustworthy).
Thus, subconsciously-offered attitudes show no 
trace of positive values attached to locally col-
oured speech; there is no trace of the distinction 
often found between status values accorded 
to standard varieties and solidarity values 
accorded to non-standard varieties. In terms of 
covert values – i.e. at the subconscious level of 
social evaluation – the battle for the position as 
‘best language’ in late-modern Danish society 
includes only Copenhagen speech and is a matter 
of dynamism versus superiority.
This evaluative pattern is reproduced in a 
remarkably uniform and consistent fashion by 
young people across the whole of Denmark. At 
least as far as the younger people are concerned, 
Denmark is a speech community in the Labovian 
sense, not only by virtue of shared overt values 
but also, and in particular, by virtue of shared 
covert values.
One might accept, I think, that our studies have 
established firm evidence for covert values, yet at 
the same time refuse to accept that we have 
proven a driving-force role for these values in the 
changes of language use. We have established 
‘subjective correlates’ – subconsciously offered – 
that are in accordance with and not in contradic-
tion to the changes in use, but can we say for sure 
what comes first for today’s young speakers: the 
advance of Copenhagen speech, or its evaluative 
upgrading? Can we decide for sure whether the 
essential factor in change (the driving force) is to 
be found in the facts of use (the density of interac-
tion) or in the facts of ideology (the non-cognitive 
functions, i.e. the connotational meanings, of 
variation)? Maybe not.
It seems to me, however, that the spread of 
Copenhagen speech is far easier to understand as 
an effect of the covert values we have established 
than as an effect of the density principle. The lim-
ited size of Denmark notwithstanding, I find it 
hard to see how the ‘Napoleon strategy’ (always 
make sure you outnumber the enemy where you 
attack him) could possibly bring Copenhagen 
speech to all corners of the country. I find it more 
natural to reason like Labov did, on Martha’s 
Vineyard, when he found that the facts of use 
(centralization of the diphthongs /ay/ and /aw/) 
was more sharply stratified by the facts of ideol-
ogy (orientation towards the island) than by any 
other background factor: ‘[this] indicates that we 
have come reasonably close to a valid explana-
tion’ (Labov, 1972: 39), or stated even more 
strongly: ‘It seems plain that the noncognitive 
functions which are carried by these phonological 
elements are the essential factors in the mecha-
nism of the change. This conclusion can be gener-
alized to many other instances of more complex 
changes … ’ (1972: 170).
As to the development of the nationwide uni-
formity of covert representations (perceptions and 
evaluations), it can only be understood as an effect 
of identical experiences with language varieties in 
the national public sphere. The general upgrading 
of Copenhagen speech and the downgrading of 
local speech reflect how these two types of lan-
guage are treated by the most important institu-
tions in young people’s public lives: Copenhagen 
speech is the only ‘appropriate’ language in the 
schools and the spoken media; local speech is ‘not 
good enough’. Also, the split between MODERN 

ATTITUDES, IDEOLOGY AND AWARENESS
277
and CONSERVATIVE Copenhagen speech, and their 
battle for ‘best language’ position in terms of 
dynamism versus superiority, is likely to be a 
reflection of what young people experience as 
‘excellence’ in language in the modern media on 
the one hand, and the more traditional institutions 
of education and business on the other (Kristiansen, 
2001).1
19.4 CONCLUDING REMARKS
Most sociolinguists, I would imagine, will judge 
social values and evaluations to be of relevance to 
the study of language use in very many of its 
aspects, maybe even in all of its aspects. Quite a 
few feel that we learned this from Labov, and 
therefore find reasons to ponder when Labov 
(2001) begins the Social Factors volume by 
stressing the narrowness of the interface between 
language and society. Having pointed out that ‘[a]t 
one point in the development of sociolinguistics, it 
was not uncommon for scholars to suggest that the 
social and linguistic aspects of language were 
coextensive in the sense that each linguistic ele-
ment had a social aspect or evaluation’, Labov 
continues: ‘Yet the actual situation seems to be 
quite the reverse. For the most part, linguistic 
structure and social structure are isolated domains, 
which do not bear upon each other … . The force 
of social evaluation, positive or negative, is gener-
ally brought to bear only upon superficial aspects 
of language: the lexicon and phonetics’ (2001: 28).
On the face of it, this just reiterates what Labov 
has always said: namely, that ‘[i]n speaking of the 
role of social factors influencing linguistic evolu-
tion, it is important not to overestimate the amount 
of contact or overlap between social values and 
the structure of language’ (1972: 251). In reality, 
however, the significance of this claim about 
the relationship between social values and lan-
guage is different ‘after Philadelphia’ from what it 
was ‘before Philadelphia’, because of the general 
change in theoretical perspective. The claim now 
reads, and serves, as an argument for omitting the 
evaluation problem from the privileged position it 
once was accorded among the theoretical and 
methodological problems that had to be solved by 
the theory of language change.
In my reading, Labov’s own failure to establish 
firm independent evidence of covert values 
appears the decisive reason why he changes posi-
tion on the driving-force role of social values. 
However, one might suggest that this change has 
been radicalized as a reaction to how social-value 
explanations have proliferated, in terms of ‘iden-
tity’ and ‘prestige’, mostly without any other evi-
dence than the patterns of use themselves: ‘It is 
not uncommon to speak of linguistic changes as 
the result of speakers’ desires to assume a certain 
social identity. But, for most linguistic changes 
from below, operating well below the level of 
social awareness, the only evidence for such acts 
of identity is simply the fact that successive gen-
erations change their ways of speaking’ (Labov, 
2001: xv). ‘In recent years, a great deal of atten-
tion has been given to the association of linguistic 
variables with local identity … . As with the covert 
values … the evidence for the association of such 
values is largely the linguistic distributions them-
selves’ (Labov, 2001: 228).
It is interesting to note also that that other 
important scholar in Labovian sociolinguistics, 
Peter Trudgill, has, in recent years, addressed the 
driving-force issue by stressing the role of mecha-
nistic factors at the expense of social evaluations, 
while expressing similar reservations with regard 
to the omnipresence of identity as an explanatory 
notion (Trudgill, 2004; see the discussion in 
Language in Society 37(2), 2008).
The issue of whether and how different aspects 
of language may be differently available to aware-
ness and/or social evaluation is certainly of impor-
tance to our understanding of language variation 
and change, but a discussion of this issue has not 
been my aim in this chapter (for such discussions, 
see Labov, 2001: 25–8; Preston, 1996, forthcom-
ing; discussions of ‘salience’ as a central notion in 
this regard may be found in Auer et al., 1998; 
Kerswill and Williams, 2002). My aim has been of 
a more foundational kind: while wholly sharing 
the scepticism towards social-identity explana-
tions which are inferred solely from patterns of 
use, my intention has been to defend the driving-
force view of social values which Labov and 
Trudgill seem to have abandoned, and hence to 
defend a privileged position for the evaluation 
problem in the study of language change – in 
accordance with Labov’s first assumptions and 
guidelines, which I find fundamentally sound: 
(i) the role of ideology should be studied and 
established using independent evidence, i.e. in 
data other than the established patterns of use, and 
(ii) the study of ideological data should focus on 
social motivations ‘from below’, in particular, 
because (iii) these motivations, appearing in sub-
consciously-offered attitudes as covert values, are 
important to language change in a way that overt 
values are not. These fundamentals of the original 
Labovian framework are sustained by the Danish 
evidence. My moral goes as follows: the failure to 
establish independent evidence for covert values 
should stimulate us, as students of language 
change, to develop our methods (allowing for 
elicitations of subconsciously-offered attitudes) 
rather than lead us to abandon the driving-force 
view of social evaluation.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
278
NOTE
1 We hope to be able to shed further light on 
the driving-force issue in future studies within the 
LANCHART project (www.lanchart.dk); the design of 
such a study is outlined in Kristiansen and Jørgensen, 
2005; for fuller descriptions of the Danish speech 
community, see Kristiansen and Jørgensen (eds), 
2003; Gregersen (ed.), 2009.
REFERENCES
Auer, P., Barden, B. and Grosskopf, B. (1998) ‘Subjective and 
objective parameters determining “salience” in long-term 
dialect accommodation’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 2(2): 
163–87.
Brink, L. and Lund, J. (1974) Udtaleforskelle i Danmark. 
Aldersbestemte – geografiske – sociale. København: 
Gjellerup.
Fasold, R. (1984) The Sociolinguistics of Society. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Garrett, P., Coupland, N. and Williams, A. (2003) Investigating 
Language Attitudes. Social Meanings of Dialect, Ethnicity 
and Performance. Cardiff: University of Wales Press.
Gregersen, F. (ed.) (2009) Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 41.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2002) ‘“Salience” as an explan-
atory factor in language change: evidence from dialect 
levelling in urban England’, in M. C. Jones and E. Esch 
(eds), Contact-Induced Language Change. An Examination 
of Internal, External and Non-Linguistic Factors. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 81–110.
Kristiansen, T. (1997) ‘Language attitudes in a Danish 
cinema’, in N. Coupland and A. Jaworski (eds), 
Sociolinguistics. A Reader and Coursebook. London: 
Macmillan Press. pp. 291–305.
Kristiansen, T.  (2001) ‘Two standards: one for the media and 
one for the school’, Language Awareness, 10(1): 9–24.
Kristiansen, T.  (2009a) ‘Investigating language in space: 
experimental techniques’, in P. Auer and J. E. Schmidt 
(eds), Language and Space: Theories and Methods. HSK. 
An International Handbook of Linguistic Variation. Berlin, 
Walter de Gruyter. pp. 528–49.
Kristiansen, T. (2009b) ‘The macro-level social meanings of 
late-modern Danish accents’, Acta Linguistica Hafniensia, 
41: 167–192.
Kristiansen, T. and Jørgensen, J. N. (eds) (2003) ‘The socio-
linguistics of Danish’, International Journal of the Sociology 
of Language, 159.
Kristiansen, T. and Jørgensen, J. N. (2005) ‘Subjective factors 
in dialect convergence and divergence’, in P. Auer, 
F. Hinskens and P. Kerswill (eds), Dialect Change. 
Convergence and Divergence in European Languages. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 287–302.
Labov, W. (1963) ‘The social motivation of a sound change’, 
Word, 19: 273–309.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1994) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 1, 
Internal factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 2, 
Social factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2007) ‘Transmission and diffusion’, Language, 
83(2): 344–87.
Labov, W. (forthcoming) Principles of Linguistic Change. 
Vol. 3, Cognitive factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lambert, W., Hodgson, R., Gardner, R. and Fillenbaum, S. 
(1960) ‘Evaluational reactions to spoken languages’, 
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 60: 
44–51.
Lambert, W. E. (1967) ‘A social psychology of bilingualism’, 
Journal of Social Issues, 23: 91–108.
Le Page, R. B. and Tabouret-Keller, A. (1985) Acts of Identity: 
Creole-Based Approaches to Language and Ethnicity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Preston, D. (1996) ‘Whaddayaknow? The modes of folklin-
guistic awareness’, Language Awareness, 5(1): 40–74.
Preston, D. (forthcoming) ‘Variation in language regard’, in 
E. Ziegler, J. Scharloth and P. Gilles (eds), Empirische 
Evidenzen und theoretische Passungen sprachlicher 
Variation. P. Lang-Verlag. Variolingua. Nonstandard– 
Standard–Substandard Vol. 37.
Ryan, E. B., Giles, H. and Sebastian, R. (1982) ‘An integrative 
perspective for the study of attitudes towards language 
variation’, in E. B. Ryan and H. Giles (eds), Attitudes 
Towards Language Variation: Social and Applied Contexts. 
London: Edward Arnold. pp. 1–19.
Sturtevant, E. (1947) An Introduction to Linguistic Science. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Swann, J., Deumert, A., Lillis, T. and Mesthrie, R. (2004) A 
Dictionary of Sociolinguistics. Tuscaloosa, AL: The University 
of Alabama Press.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The Social Differentiation of English in 
Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Trudgill, P. (2004) New Dialect Formation: The Inevitability of 
Colonial Englishes. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Weinreich, U., Labov, W. and Herzog, M. (1968) ‘Empirical 
foundations for a theory of language change’, in W. P. 
Lehmann and Y. Malkiel (eds), Directions for Historical 
Linguistics. Austin, TX: University of Texas Press. 
pp. 95–189.

20
20.1 NEW SUBDISCIPLINE
Over the last three decades, historical sociolin-
guistics has emerged as a subdiscipline at the 
interface of sociolinguistics and historical 
linguistics. It appears in the titles of Romaine 
(1988), Milroy (1992), Machan and Scott (1992), 
Ammon, Mattheier and Nelde (1999), Jahr (1999), 
Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg (2003) and 
Bergs (2005), as well as in the forthcoming 
Handbook of Historical Sociolinguistics edited by 
Hernández-Campoy and Historical Sociolingui s-
tics and Sociohistorical Linguistics, an e-journal 
launched by Tieken-Boon van Ostade in 2000.1 To 
get an idea of the scope of historical sociolinguis-
tics, let us begin by considering how its two parent 
disciplines, sociolinguistics and historical linguis-
tics, perceive each other.
In contradistinction to their own field, sociolin-
guists working with present-day spoken language 
often regard historical linguistics as ‘the art of 
making the best use of bad data’ (Labov, 1994: 11). 
This characterization derives from what are seen 
as the historical linguists’ impoverished and 
incomplete data sources, lack of controlled exper-
iments and absence of native speakers. Taking a 
global view of the scope of historical linguistics, 
this is of course true: few of the world’s languages 
have a spoken record of their past of any consider-
able time depth, and the vast majority have no 
written records. Not all languages have a written 
form even today. This is also the case with many 
social and regional varieties of languages that 
have a standard written form. Even languages that 
have written documentation of the past lack 
a written record representative of the language 
community as a whole. Wide-ranging illiteracy 
lies at the root of this historical ‘bad-data prob-
lem’. This is not only the case of the distant past 
but would also apply to modern sociolinguistics if 
it were to rely on written material as its data 
source. According to the statistics published by 
UNESCO, 774 million people, about one-fifth of 
the world’s adult population, could not read or 
write in 2008.
Historical linguistics, in turn, has a long tradition 
of defining its objectives in rather abstract terms. 
This is justified, as noted above, because all the 
prehistory and most of the history of human lan-
guages even since the advent of writing have gone 
unrecorded. What can be reconstructed is based on 
comparisons of the information available on the 
sound systems, morpheme inventories and vocabu-
lary of genetically related languages. The compara-
tive method relies on the basic hypothesis that 
language change, and sound change in particular, is 
regular. The application of this method requires that 
the object of investigation is limited to one system 
at a time. A typical view of a historical linguist is 
expressed by André Martinet, who specifies the 
object of historical linguistics as the study of a 
perfectly homogeneous community. He writes:
To simplify our analysis, we shall assume that the 
language in process of evolution is that of a strictly 
monoglot community, perfectly homogeneous in 
the sense that observable differences represent 
successive stages of the same usage and not con-
current usages (Martinet, 1964: 164). 
However, aware of linguistic variation, Martinet 
refers to central concepts used by sociolinguists, 
Historical 
Sociolinguistics
T e r t t u  N e v a l a i n e n

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
280
such as the speech community. Twenty years on, 
in his Historical and Comparative Linguistics, 
Raimo Anttila (1989: 47–54) has an extended 
discussion of linguistic variation as the precondi-
tion for language change. By the latter half of the 
twentieth century, sociolinguistic thinking has 
impacted on historical linguistics to the extent that 
‘social variation must be included in the back-
ground as a necessary prerequisite for understand-
ing change’ (Anttila, 1989: 47; see also Janda and 
Joseph, 2003).
While discussing work that applies sociolin-
guistic insights to the study of the past, this chap-
ter stresses the commonalities between historical 
linguistics and sociolinguistics. I will begin by 
introducing some assumptions, shared by both 
disciplines, about the nature of human language 
and its use (Section 20.2). The sections that follow 
are devoted to discussions of language contact 
(Section 20.3), the diffusion of linguistic 
changes (Section 20.4), their connections with 
‘central places’ (Section 20.5) and processes of 
standardization in relation to vernaculars (Section 
20.6). In one form or another, these topic areas are 
addressed by sociolinguists and historical lin-
guists alike, and they occupy the centre stage in 
historical sociolinguistics. The prerequisites for 
doing historical sociolinguistics empirically are 
discussed in Section 20.7, where I illustrate the 
extent to which variation studies, a distinct growth 
area in the new subdiscipline, can make use of 
sociolinguistic models and methods.
20.2 THE UNIFORMITARIAN PRINCIPLE
One of the key topics of research shared by socio-
linguists and historical linguists is language change. 
Sociolinguists typically analyse language change 
in progress, whereas traditional historical linguists 
work with the results of these processes. However, 
it is a sign of the rapprochement of the two fields 
that the sociolinguist William Labov and his co-
workers have set out to find empirical evidence for 
the Neogrammarian hypothesis on the regularity of 
sound change. Similarly, aware of sociolinguistic 
thinking, those working with the historical com-
parative method have advanced alternative speaker-
based hypotheses concerning the diffusion of 
sound changes (Durie and Ross (eds), 1996).
The theoretical justification of this hypothesis 
testing, and of the historical sociolinguistic enter-
prise more generally, derives from the uniformi-
tarian hypothesis. Historical linguists should not 
expect that human languages in the past were in 
any prin cipled way different from those spoken 
today, or as Lass (1997: 25) puts it, ‘[w]hat we can 
say about any aspect of the past in any domain 
has to be constrained by the (known or hypothe-
sized) properties of its present-day analogues’. 
In his Sociolinguistic Patterns, Labov (1985 
[1972]: 275) views the uniformitarian principle in 
terms of extralinguistic conditioning of language 
variation:
If there are relatively constant, day-to-day effects 
of social interaction upon grammar and phonol-
ogy, the uniformitarian principle asserts that these 
influences continue to operate today the same 
way that they have in the past. 
Romaine (1988: 1454) similarly promotes uni-
formitarianism to an axiom of sociolinguistic 
reconstruction:
The linguistic forces which operate today and are 
observable around us are not unlike those which 
have operated in the past. This principle is of 
course basic to purely linguistic reconstruction as 
well, but socio linguistically speaking, it means that 
there is no reason for believing that language did 
not vary in the same patterned ways in the past as 
it has been observed to do today.
While Labov and Romaine stress the impact of 
social interaction on language use across time, it 
is clear that the uniformitarian notion should not 
be interpreted naively or anachronistically on the 
basis of present-day findings. Rather, it should be 
tested, wherever possible, with empirical data. 
This is of course only possible in the historical 
period, and to the extent that records of varied 
situated language use have been preserved from 
the language community.
Due to differences in data sources, sociolin-
guistic enquiries are bound to have different foci 
depending on whether they are dealing with the 
present or the past. Table 20.1 outlines some of 
these differences based on the empirical sociolin-
guistic work Helena Raumolin-Brunberg and 
I have carried out on Late Middle and Early 
Modern English (Nevalainen and Raumolin-
Brunberg, 1996, 2003). By the sixteenth and sev-
enteenth centuries, the regularization of English 
spelling had reached a stage when even texts such 
as personal letters had become difficult to localize 
on the basis of spelling. This state of affairs to a 
large extent rules out the study of phonological 
variation, which is the primary focus of present-
day research. However, as normative grammar 
does not have a role to play in the English language 
in this period, prescriptivism does not impact on 
syntactic and morphological variation and change. 
Grammatical variation therefore presents a good 
target for the study of English in this period.
Focusing on grammar does not mean that writ-
ten evidence could not be used to reconstruct 

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
281
Table 20.1 Dimensions of sociolinguistic research
Present
Past
Object of investigation
Phonological variation and change
Grammatical and lexical variation and change
Research material
Spoken language
Written language
All people
Only literate people
Authentic speech; observation, 
elicitation
Randomly preserved texts, commentary
Social context
Society familiar; rich context available
Society unfamiliar; amount of contextual 
information varies
Standardization
Significant element
Significance varies
Associated discipline
Sociology
Social history
Duration and outcome 
of a process of change
Unknown
Known
Source: Modified from Raumolin-Brunberg (1996: 18)
variation in speech in the past. In the Middle 
English period, for instance, a good deal of pho-
nological variation was recorded in writing, and 
verse form preserved information on rhyming 
sounds. Moreover, metalinguistic material of dif-
ferent kinds is plentiful from later periods, rang-
ing from the work of sixteenth-century spelling 
reformers to the publications of eighteenth-cen-
tury grammarians and elocutionists (Wyld, 1936; 
Nevalainen, 2006: 12–26, 118–120; Nevalainen 
and Tieken-Boon van Ostade, 2006). These 
sources provide information on the salient speech 
patterns of various social groups, discussed, for 
example, in Mugglestone (2003). The particularly 
rich tradition of literary parody offers a good 
source for the study of a number of stigmatized 
variants in French in the early modern period 
(Lodge, 2003).
However, looking for authentic material pro-
duced by individuals, the historical sociolinguist 
is faced with the fact that it is only available from 
the literate section of the population. This repre-
sents the tip of the iceberg at a time when the vast 
majority of the population was illiterate. As the 
social structures of an earlier era are not familiar 
to the researcher, they have to be reconstructed on 
the basis of social, demographic and economic 
history. Placing historical linguistic findings in 
their social contexts thus requires more back-
ground information than those present-day studies 
in which the researchers are familiar with the 
communities they investigate. Nevertheless, the 
outcome of linguistic processes of change will 
usually be known to the researcher working with 
real-time diachronic materials. This is where his-
torical sociolinguists come into their own and may 
have an advantage over their colleagues working 
with synchronic, present-day data. 
20.3 LANGUAGE AND DIALECT CONTACT
As noted above, the historical comparative method 
starts with the basic assumption that language 
change is regular and language-internal. If two 
languages share a common feature it need not, 
however, be a sign of their common genetic ori-
gins but it may reflect their geographic proximity 
and thus be the result of borrowing.2 Since lan-
guage and dialect contact is ubiquitous in the 
world, it is a prototypical source of language vari-
ation and linguistic change. Linguistic pluralism 
was also commoner than monolingualism in the 
past, before the close association of language and 
nation, and the standardization and codification of 
languages that we often take for granted today 
(Burke, 2004: 63–4; see also Section 20.6). 
At the macro-sociolinguistic level, the effects 
of language contact can vary a great deal, depend-
ing on the type and duration of the contact 
situation. These effects range from typical 
contact-induced changes, such as lexical and mor-
phological borrowing, to extreme language mix-
tures, which result in new languages, pidgins and 
creoles. The ultimate result of a contact situation 
is language death, which is being witnessed on a 
large scale in the languages of the world today.3 
Nevertheless, contact can give rise to linguistic 
areas where genetically unrelated languages come 
to share a varying number of linguistic features 
over time. As Thomason (2001: 101–2) points out, 
these areas typically have fuzzy boundaries:
… since the way a linguistic area arises is through 
contact-induced changes that occur over a long 
period of time and spread widely through the 
region – but always from language to language 
in a series of events, not in some single mystical 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
282
area-wide process that affects many languages 
at once.
In individual languages, contact can often pro-
vide an explanation for certain linguistic develop-
ments such as morphological simplification. 
McWhorter (2007) goes so far as to claim that in 
languages that appear to have been simplified 
beyond what can be expected on the basis of regu-
lar linguistic change, this simplification must be 
due to extensive contact with non-native learners. 
Simplification contrasts with complexity, which is 
described in terms of semantic overspecification, 
structural elaboration and irregularity. The lan-
guages McWhorter considers to be simplified 
compared with their cognate languages include, 
among others, English (contact with Scandinavian 
invaders and settlers in the Old English period 
before AD 1000), Mandarin Chinese (contact with 
Tibetan and Altaic populations during the Tang 
dynasty), Persian (possibly through the acquisi-
tion of Persian as a foreign language by large 
populations between the Old and Middle Persian 
periods), Colloquial Arabic (various historical 
language and dialect contacts) and Malay (various 
contacts). (See Trudgill, this volume.)
Contact may also alter the typological make-up 
of a linguistic area. Jahr (2001) suggests that the 
typological shift from a synthetic to an analytic 
language type, which occurred in the Mainland 
Scandinavian languages, Danish, Swedish and 
Norwegian, in the late Middle Ages, was due to 
their close contact with Low German. Low German 
was the language used by the Hanseatic League, 
an alliance of trading centres, which was a strong 
influence in Northern Europe from the thirteenth 
to the seventeenth centuries. Signifi cantly, a simi-
lar change failed to occur in Icelandic, whose 
contact with Low German was much less intense.
The historical circumstances in which radical 
linguistic changes have taken place have often 
gone unrecorded. However, in some well-
documented cases, basic contact models may be 
enriched by considering social networks. Networks 
can serve as a norm-enforcement mechanism, and 
their breakdown can accelerate language change 
through a decline in norm enforcement. James and 
Lesley Milroy (1985: 377–9) contrast the two 
Germanic languages, Icelandic and English, 
whose recorded histories display vastly different 
rates of language change. Icelandic has to a large 
extent retained its morphological and phonolog-
ical structures, while the much faster rate of 
change in English has resulted in a phonologically 
quite different, minimally-inflected language.
The Milroys suggest that, in Iceland, the slow 
rate of linguistic change could be correlated with 
strong social network ties based on kinship and 
friendship networks which were established over 
long distances and through many generations. 
These network links ensured practical support in 
time of need but also acted as a norm-enforcement 
mechanism in various domains of human activity, 
including language use. By contrast, a combination 
of external factors such as the Scandinavian inva-
sions and the Norman Conquest contributed to the 
breakdown of pre-existing strong ties in Anglo-
Saxon England. This process, the Milroys argue, 
created social distance between sectors of the 
population and paved the way for an institutional 
system of social stratification. The rise of London 
as the seat of government and the national centre 
of commerce further reinforced weak ties and 
accelerated language change in the late Middle 
Ages and the Renaissance.
20.4  MODELLING PROCESSES 
OF LINGUISTIC CHANGE
Another focus of interest for historical linguists 
and sociolinguists alike concerns the ways in 
which language changes spread over time. The 
traditional tree and wave models represent comple-
mentary aspects of the issue at different levels of 
abstraction. The tree model describes the outcome 
of the divergence of genetically related languages: 
the speakers of Proto-Indo-European, for example, 
are assumed to have spread out to distinctive com-
munities, and during this process become linguisti-
cally more dissimilar over time. The traditional 
wave model, by contrast, accounts for the diffusion 
of ongoing linguistic changes. As changes spread 
gradually outwards from a centre, neighbouring 
dialects become increasingly more similar linguis-
tically. Dialects constitute continua, ‘a series of 
systems where those nearest and most in contact 
show only slight differences’ (Samuels, 1972: 90). 
Could the tree model be used to account for 
more recent historical changes such as the diver-
gence of the Romance languages from Latin? This 
is a complex issue in that the spoken and written 
Latin varieties diverged to the extent of becoming 
mutually unintelligible in the course of the Middle 
Ages. The archaic written variety that was pro-
moted and standardized by the Carolingian 
Reforms around AD 800 became the language of 
education and the Church in Western Europe. This 
reform was politically motivated, to quote Pulgram 
(1950: 461), ‘to enforce the revival, at least for 
formal use, of “good” Roman speech (which was 
dead) in the new Roman Empire (which was the 
Frankish state) under the new Roman Emperor 
(who was a German)’. This archaic written 
variety was diffused not only in southern and 
south-western Europe, where Latin had been a 
spoken language during the Roman Empire 

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
283
(roughly, modern Italy, Spain, Portugal, France 
and Romania), but also in central and northern 
Europe. At the same time, the spoken forms of 
Latin continued to diverge and fragment. The two 
modes of communication, written and spoken, 
thus operated with different varieties.
The national languages that are today known as 
Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, French, Romanian 
and the other Romance varieties spoken in south-
ern Europe are direct continuations of spoken 
Latin – in the same way as historical linguists 
identify contemporary Greek and English as the 
descendents of Ancient Greek and Old English, 
respectively. Wright (2004: 5) points out that, 
while English and Greek have not changed their 
names in the course of time, for political reasons 
the spoken Latin varieties have, and are identified 
as separate languages. The processes that led to 
these national varieties were neither simultaneous 
nor straightforward. Just as in the case of Latin 
itself, the use of which had expanded with the 
Roman Empire, political power promoted certain 
regional forms of speech over others. In the thir-
teenth century, Parisian French started to gain 
prestige and with time surpassed Provençal, a 
widely recognized literary language. Castilian 
Spanish, associated with Madrid, similarly dis-
placed Catalan, spoken in the Barcelona region. 
However, as Italy’s political unification only took 
place in the nineteenth century, the Tuscan pres-
tige variety of Florence, the model for modern 
standard Italian, was not supplanted by the speech 
of Rome (McColl Millar, 2007: 220–3).
However, identifying the modern spoken varie-
ties of Latin as separate languages, Wright (1999: 
179) argues, also has to do with the comparative 
method, which stresses the evolution of separate 
languages from a common source. The family-tree 
model presents fragmentation as geographically 
discrete and historically linear. This abstract 
model is not applicable, he suggests, to language 
divergence with a relatively shallow time depth. 
Proto-Indo-European speakers spread out to dis-
tinctive communities with no unifying standards, 
but this did not happen with Romance speakers, 
who had access to written standard Latin. 
Moreover, the regional variation and fragmenta-
tion attested in Romance is not easily reducible to 
neatly separated languages. This divergence can 
best be understood with a knowledge of history 
combined with a knowledge of what is plausible 
sociolinguistically (Wright, 1999: 184).
It is obvious that historical developments can 
be described at various levels of delicacy. Consider 
the rise of Castilian Spanish referred to above. 
Penny (2000) and Tuten (2003) suggest that it 
was due to its recurrent contacts with other 
Hispano-Romance varieties in the Iberian Peninsula 
in the Middle Ages, reinforced by internal 
migration to Madrid after it had been made the 
capital in 1561, that Castilian Spanish became 
more levelled and structurally less irregular than 
the other varieties in the northern Hispano-
Romance dialect continuum, notably Catalan, 
Galician and Portuguese. Castilian was, for 
instance, the first Hispano-Romance variety to 
show a reduction of the Romance seven-vowel 
system to five vowels, but this reduced pattern 
also spread to the other varieties. It therefore 
becomes difficult, if not impossible, to determine 
clear-cut boundaries between the different regional 
varieties, especially as these processes continued 
in the New World.
Penny (2000) argues that the result of succes-
sive migrations was the formation of new speech 
communities where speakers from different 
regions came together but were connected by 
weak rather than strong ties, which speeded up 
language change. This is notably the case with the 
American varieties of Spanish, which arose as a 
consequence of the Spanish colonization of Latin 
America, beginning in the fifteenth century. They 
are largely based on western Andalusian varieties, 
and show, for example, the weakening of the 
syllable-final /s/ and the merger of /l/ and /r/. 
In some other respects they resemble varieties of 
central and northern Spain, and the coming 
together of the Sevillan and Madrilenian norms of 
Castilian (Penny, 2000: 145–6, Conde Silvestre, 
2007: 296–306).
However, moving from linguistic varieties to 
individual processes of change, the family-tree 
metaphor has been re-evoked in accounts of ongo-
ing changes under stable conditions. Labov (2007: 
346–7) makes a distinction between linguistic 
‘transmission’, by which he understands a regular 
unbroken sequence of native-language acquisition 
by children, and ‘diffusion’, which he defines as 
transfer across language communities, i.e. across 
the branches of the family tree. He bases this dis-
tinction on the notion of a well-defined speech 
community with clear boundaries. Although adults 
can participate in ongoing changes, they are 
expected to do it more sporadically and at a slower 
rate than children.4
Sociolinguists naturally recognize that the 
transfer of language change is by no means auto-
matic but subject to various psychological and 
social factors. These are related to the social 
evaluation of the features undergoing change and 
speakers’ perceptions of them, as well as the gen-
eral tendency of speakers to modify their language 
in the presence of others (Trudgill, 1986; Eckert, 
2000; Kerswill and Williams, 2000; Milroy and 
Gordon, 2003: 116–35; Sankoff, 2004; Raumolin-
Brunberg, 2005).
Labov’s empirical evidence for diffusion comes 
from studies on the geographical distribution of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
284
certain ongoing North American sound changes. 
His studies show, first, that structural constraints are 
lost in the diffusion of the New York City pattern of 
tensing short -a to other speech communities. 
Secondly, they show that the spread of a chain 
shift of six vowels, known as the Northern Cities 
Shift from the Chicago area across a dialect 
boundary to St. Louis, only represents the borrow-
ing of certain individual sound changes rather 
than the adoption of the whole system. Labov 
(2007: 383) argues that the results of dialect con-
tact can be expected to be slower, less regular and 
less governed by structural constraints than the 
internal developments based on parent-to-child 
transmission. 
Unlike the borrowing of individual sound 
changes across a major dialect boundary, the 
Northern Cities Shift progresses quite regularly in 
all the major cities within the Inland North dialect 
region. Although parts of the shift were first 
recorded only 50 years ago, Labov (2007: 373) 
assumes that the conditions for it go back 100 
years earlier, and were transmitted across the 
Inland North with the westward migration of 
entire communities.
20.5 THE GRAVITY OF CENTRAL PLACES
Migration holds the key to understanding many 
developments connected with the diffusion of lan-
guage change. In the case of Romance languages, 
for instance, demographic growth was propelled 
by internal migration, which led to dialect mixing 
and levelling in large cities, as happened, for 
example, in Madrid. Medieval Paris is another 
case in point. Lodge (2003, 2004) shows that by 
the thirteenth century, Paris had became the largest 
city in Western Europe. Due to internal migration 
and dialect contact, extensive dialect mixing and 
levelling took place in this pre-industrial city, 
which had become what dialectologists identify as 
a ‘central place’ for a large hinterland. Features of 
the Parisian urban dialect, Parisian spoken koiné, 
such as the fricative pronunciation of the initial 
consonant in words like chat (< Latin cattus), 
began to make their way to varieties of northern 
Gallo-Romance in the late Middle Ages. However, 
by the time of the Renaissance, social stratification 
had taken place in the capital to the extent that the 
é lites sought to distinguish their language from 
that of the lower ranks (Lodge, 2003).
Figure 20.1 Regional distribution of the data in The Corpus of Early English Correspondence 
(© Terttu Nevalainen and the CEEC Team).
CEEC Areas
1 North
2 East
 
Anglia
3 London
4 Court
5 Home
 
Counties
6 Other

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
285
Most morphological changes that diffused in 
England between the fifteenth and eighteenth cen-
turies, and that have been studied empirically, 
were promoted by the capital region or gathered 
momentum in the capital. It is obvious that 
London English reflects the various waves of 
migration to the capital and the dialect mixing that 
took place there. The features of northern origin, 
for instance, that diffused throughout the country 
include the third-person present-tense indicative 
ending -(e)s (sings) as opposed to the southern 
-(e)th (singeth) and the use of are instead of be in 
the present indicative plural of the verb be.
If these features had followed the wave model 
of diffusion in a regular manner, they would have 
spread southwards from the North of England 
covering all the intervening regions. Are followed 
the pattern (Nevalainen, 2000), but this did not 
happen with -(e)s. Nevalainen and Raumolin-
Brunberg (2003) studied its diffusion in The 
Corpus of Early English Correspondence 
(CEEC), which indicated that this suffix was, as 
expected, the preferred form in the North in the 
latter half of the fifteenth century. It was also used 
in about one-third of the cases in the City of 
London but not at all in East Anglia, which 
represents the East Midland region (for the areas 
studied, see Figure 20.1). 
This state of affairs was also observed by 
H. C. Wyld (1936), the eminent philologist, who 
analysed the diffusion of linguistic changes in this 
period. He writes:
We are placed in this dilemma, that the only 
apparent possible intermediary between the North 
and London and the South, by which a dialectal 
peculiarity could pass, is the E. Midland area, 
whereas this peculiar characteristic does not 
appear to be espe ci ally widespread in the 
E. Midland dialects, or among such writers as 
might be expected to show direct influence from 
these dialects in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries 
(Wyld 1936: 336).
A plausible answer to Wyld’s dilemma is supplied 
by the central places theory and London demo-
graphics: a steady flow of migrants, especially 
from the northern regions, to the capital in the 
fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. Throughout 
the early modern period the growth of the capital 
entirely depended on internal migration. East 
Anglia, by contrast, was quite self-contained and 
Norwich, its capital, was the largest provincial 
town in England at that time. It is therefore prob-
able that the northern suffix reached London by 
means of ‘dialect hopping’ rather than as a result 
of steady dialect diffusion (Nevalainen, 2000; 
Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 2000; see 
also Section 20.7).
Similar demographic and linguistic develop-
ments can be found in many other cities in Early 
Modern Europe. Howell (2006) argues that the 
rapid growth of urban centres in Holland, espe-
cially that of Amsterdam, is entirely attributable to 
immigration. The urban population more than tri-
pled in the northern Netherlands between 1550 
and 1650, and marriage records show that dialect 
contact must have been common, even within 
nuclear families. Linguistically, the situation led 
to dialect levelling and koinéization, i.e. favouring 
majority forms and disfavouring marked regional 
forms in the post-contact variety. Phonologically, 
grammatically and lexically simpler elements also 
came to be preferred to more complex ones 
(Howell, 2006: 216–17; cf. Kerswill and Williams, 
2000).
While acknowledging the roles of both adults 
and children in the rise of new urban koinés, 
Howell (2006) stresses the importance of second-
generation immigrants to the koinéization process 
in his material. He analyses the personal corre-
spondence of an immigrant family in The Hague, 
and demonstrates how the daughters’ usages 
closely reflect those of urban centres in the north-
ern Netherlands at large. These include the adop-
tion of the new reflexive pronouns sich and of the 
prefix ge- in past participles. The uninflected form 
sich represents a simplifying innovation that 
replaced the inflected object pronouns hem and 
haer of the native Holland dialects, while the 
prefix ge- replaced the reduced e-, which was a 
salient feature of the Holland dialects at the time 
(but is today only found in rural dialects). It is 
noteworthy that the various innovations that 
Howell (2006) studied do not all come from the 
same immigrant dialects; neither are they neces-
sarily present in the native Holland varieties, but 
represent new dialect formation taking place in 
the urban centres.
The history of Japanese demonstrates how the 
linguistic influence of the capital city can be trans-
ferred from one locality to another. When the 
dominant centre of political and cultural influence 
shifted from the Kyoto region in the west to Edo 
(present-day Tokyo) in the east in the seventeenth 
century, the focus of linguistic prestige shifted 
accordingly. However, Inoue (1983, 1986) finds 
that not only do new standard and dialect forms 
spread from modern Tokyo to the rest of country 
but also that new dialect lexis also spreads to 
Tokyo from other localities.
Although historical linguistics is, as Campbell 
(2007: 21) points out, by definition a retrospective 
science, the gravity model, coupled with knowl-
edge about past developments, may be used to 
make predictions about the future. Trudgill (1999) 
bases his future dialect map of England on urban 
dialects. Over the past couple of centuries, large 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
286
cities have been instrumental in the formation of 
modern dialects, which Trudgill contrasts with 
traditional dialects. He predicts the survival of 
areas such as those focused on Newcastle, 
Liverpool, Birmingham and Manchester, and the 
growth of a new region focused on Bristol. In this 
scenario, East Anglia is expected to contract, and 
the South Midlands to disappear in the face of the 
expansion of the Home Counties area based on 
London (Trudgill, 1999: 83–4; cf. Figure 20.1).
20.6 LINGUISTIC STANDARDIZATION
Selection of standards
The rise of standard languages is of interest to both 
modern sociologists of language and historical 
sociolinguists.5 One of the influential models ana-
lysing the process was proposed by Einar Haugen 
(1997 [1966]). He traces the phases of standardi-
zation, from the selection of a language variety as 
the basis of the standard and its acceptance by the 
language community via its elaboration (Ausbau), 
to its codification in grammars and dictionaries. 
More detailed models have also been proposed on 
the basis of Haugen’s, adding to the process the 
diffusion, maintenance and prescription of the 
standard (Milroy and Milroy, 1999: 22–3).
As suggested by Table 20.1, above, the role 
played by standardization on language variation 
and change does not remain constant over time. 
The standardization of European languages shows 
that even the selection processes that lead to the 
adoption of a vernacular norm can be expected to 
vary greatly from one language community to 
another (Deumert and Vandenbussche (eds), 
2003). Good candidates to be selected are those 
varieties that are spoken in the political, economic 
and cultural capitals of their respective areas. As 
shown above, they often represent levelled varie-
ties which are comprehensible outside the region, 
and ones to which a large number of people have 
been exposed. In the case of London, it has 
been argued that one English adult in eight in 
1550–1650 and one in six in 1650–1750 had some 
experience of life in London regardless of their 
social status (Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 
2003: 39).
One step further from urban dialects, but often 
including them, are deregionalized varieties used 
in supraregional communication. These koinés are 
good candidates for a standard in that they are 
characterized by levelling, the process which 
reduces those features that show the most regional 
variation among the dialects or languages involved 
(Trudgill, 1986). A case in point is the Hellenistic 
Koiné, which was the ‘common language’ of the 
Greece of Alexander the Great. It was based on the 
dialect of Athens, perhaps the most important city-
state in Greece in this and subsequent periods. It 
was ‘de-Atticized’ when the extensive trade, cul-
tural and political contacts that the inhabitants of 
Athens had with the other city-states exposed 
them to their local dialects. Other illustrations of 
more recent koiné-based standard languages are 
Swahili and Lingala (Hock, 1986: 485–91). 
The selection of a future standard language can 
also be the product of language planning. This 
was how, for example, the Norwegian and Finnish 
literary languages were created in the nineteenth 
century. In the case of Norwegian, the result was 
two standard written varieties, nynorsk and 
bokmål, which became native alternatives to writ-
ten Danish. Nynorsk was created by Ivar Aasen on 
the basis of different regional varieties in the 
mid-nineteenth century, while bokmål developed 
from an existing koiné, the Norwegianized spoken 
variety of Danish that was associated with the 
urban é lite, especially that of the capital. Although 
nynorsk and bokmål both continue to have the 
status of official written standards, the vast major-
ity of the Norwegian population use bokmål in 
their written communication today (Kerswill, 
1994: 32–7). 
The conscious planning of the Finnish literary 
language in the nineteenth century resulted in a 
single norm that combined elements from various 
regional dialects. The dialect to form the basis of 
the standard was subject to a prolonged debate 
among language professionals. The (south)west-
ern dialects had the prestige of a long literary 
history, which could be traced back to the first 
religious texts printed in Finnish in the 1540s. The 
eastern varieties were, in turn, associated with a 
rich folklore tradition, which was captured in the 
Kalevala, first published by Elias Lönnrot in 
1835, and soon hailed as the national epic of 
Finland. The written norm came to be based on 
western structures, with considerable lexical 
enrichment from eastern dialects (Huumo, Laitinen 
and Paloposki (eds), 2004).
Standards and vernaculars
Since standardization is a process, the relations 
between standard and vernacular varieties in a lan-
guage community are liable to change over time. In 
multilingual communities, standard norms can 
arise both from within the language community 
(‘endoglossic’ norms) and from outside it (‘exoglos-
sic’ norms). In Medieval Europe, endoglossic 
standards were typically preceded by exoglossic 
ones, such as Latin in western and central Europe, 
Arabic in Spain, and Old Church Slavonic in 
Russia and Romania (Auer, 2005: 9–12). 

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
287
However, it is worth bearing in mind that lin-
guistic pluralism was commonplace both in 
Medieval and Early Modern Europe, and different 
languages could be used for different functions at 
the same time. Even with Latin as an exoglossic 
standard, Burke (2004: 63) points out the ‘literary’ 
uses of varieties of French, Anglo-Saxon and Irish 
in the ninth century, of Spanish and Slovene in the 
tenth century, Italian at the turn of the millennium, 
Provençal around AD 1100, Dutch and Icelandic in 
the twelfth century, Hungarian and Danish in the 
thirteenth, and Catalan and Polish in the four-
teenth. In early fifteenth-century England, Latin 
continued as the language of learning and the 
Catholic Church, and the Anglo-Norman variety 
of French was used as the language of the law. The 
earlier widespread use of French as the language 
of the administration had considerably declined 
by this time and English had begun to be employed 
in government documents emanating from the 
King’s writing offices at Westminster. English 
also continued in literary use (Nevalainen and 
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, 2006).
Vernacularization, the shift from an exoglossic 
to an endoglossic standard, can be a prolonged 
process, with exoglossic and endoglossic norms 
coexisting side by side. It could take a vernacular 
variety a long time to become the standard, accord-
ing to the definition offered by Haugen (1997: 348), 
with ‘minimal variation in form’ and ‘maximal 
variation in function’. In this process, a distinction 
can be made between a mainly written endoglossic 
standard and spoken local dialects. As shown 
above, however, written endoglossic supraregional 
varieties can also be attested before the rise of a 
focused vernacular standard. In general, as Auer 
(2005: 10) points out, interdialectal levelling can 
serve as a useful step paving the way for a national 
standard variety. The previous sections have shown 
that levelling commonly takes place in dialect con-
tact situations as a result of speakers accommodat-
ing to each other in social interaction.
Such levelled varieties also arose in Late 
Medieval England, which was triglossic between 
Latin, French and English. They include some 
more distinct regiolects, such as the Central 
Midland variety, which is attested in a large 
number of texts, including religious and medical 
writings. Another local norm is found in mid-
fourteenth-century official documents in the 
London area, and a later type of London writing 
appears in texts copied in the late fourteenth cen-
tury, which contain, for instance, Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales. Late Middle English non-literary 
texts were in general characterized by ‘colourless’ 
mixtures of regional dialects. They were unstable 
and showed local register variation, but as they dis-
played the more widespread features of their respec-
tive varieties to the exclusion of those that were 
more distinctly local, these usages are often referred 
to as ‘colourless regional standard’ (Samuels, 1963; 
Benskin, 1992: 82–5; Smith, 1996: 73–7). 
The variety to undergo standardization is con-
nected with political and economic power, but its 
acceptance as a shared norm is a matter of focus-
ing and speakers’ awareness of a common norm. 
This awareness is raised by education and the 
mass media, such as the advent of printing in the 
late fifteenth and early sixteenth centuries. In 
some communities, the process of focusing on a 
given norm is more diffuse and unmonitored than 
in others. However, as many parallel processes of 
vernacularization took place in Europe in the six-
teenth century, the praise of the vernacular became 
something of a Renaissance genre. Burke (2004: 
65–70) provides a long list of such publications, 
apparently sparked off by Dante’s 1529 Latin 
treatise on the eloquence of the Italian vernacular. 
The list given below could be supplemented with 
a number of similar treatises on these and other 
European languages, among them Czech, 
Hungarian, Icelandic, Russian and Swedish. As 
Burke (2004: 66) points out, orations were also 
dedicated to languages that may now be consid-
ered dialects, including Bolognese, Milanese and 
Neapolitan.
Italian:  
 1529 Dante, De vulgari eloquentia
 
1542 S. Speroni, Dialogo delle lingue
Portuguese: 1540 J. de Barros, Louvor da nossa 
linguagem
French:  
1549 J. Du Bellai, Deffense et illustra-
tion de la langue françoise
 
1579 H. Estienne, Precellance du 
language françois
Spanish:  
1574 M. Viziana, Alabanças de las 
lenguas ... castellana y valenciana
Dutch: 
1586 S. Stevin, Weerdigheyt der 
duytsche tael
German: 
1617 M. Opitz, De contemptu linguae 
teutonicae
 
1642 J. Rist, Rettung der edlen 
teutschen Hauptsprache
Polish: 
1589 J. Rybinski, De lingua polonica 
praestantia
English: 
1615 R. Carew, On the Excellency of 
the English Tongue
One of the concerns typically raised by the func-
tional elaboration of vernaculars was their adequacy 
as a literary medium in comparison with Latin. 
English is here a case in point. To meet the needs of 
creating new vocabulary for new concepts and reg-
isters, a large number of words were borrowed into 
the vernacular from the classical languages directly 
or via French. As these words presented problems 
for those without a classical education, their 
use created linguistic insecurity among the less 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
288
educated – and a flourishing market for publishers. 
The first monolingual English dictionaries, which 
started to appear from the beginning of the seven-
teenth century onwards, focused on definitions of 
‘hard vsuall English wordes’. They were intended 
for the uneducated, women in particular, and con-
tributed to the codification of the borrowed lexical 
element in English (Nevalainen, 2003).
However, the processes of standardization need 
not stop with the fixing of an endoglossic norm, 
for de- and restandardization can also take place 
for demographic, political and ideological reasons 
(Auer, 2005: 24–6). Even spelling norms are not 
immutably fixed by the codification of an endo-
glossic norm in the print medium. A written stand-
ard can break up, yielding new codified regional 
norms, as to some extent happened with British 
and American English in the nineteenth century. 
This is not uncommon in postcolonial orthogra-
phy in general. Scripts and spelling conventions 
can be rejected if they are closely identified 
with the former dominant or colonial power. As 
Sebba (2007: 81–101) shows in detail, numerous 
orthographic upheavals have taken place after the 
break-up of former world powers such as the 
Ottoman and Tsarist Russian empires and the 
Soviet Union, and in newly-independent Third 
World countries. 
Even attempts at reforming established spelling 
norms can cause far-reaching debates, which 
reveal that spelling standardization is not simply a 
matter of common conventions but also of lan-
guage ideology. Linguistic standardization creates 
identities in that it forms what Anderson (1991) 
calls ‘imagined communities’, and a reform pro-
posal can hence be seen as an identity-threatening 
act. A case in point is the introduction of the 
reform of German orthography in the 1990s, 
which only concerned about 0.5 per cent of the 
lexicon but caused a huge public outcry and even 
escalated into a constitutional crisis (Johnson, 
2005; Sebba, 2007). 
20.7  VARIATIONIST HISTORICAL 
SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Register variation
The historical study of standard languages is inti-
mately connected with that of vernaculars. As 
modern sociolinguistics generally prioritizes 
speech, the concentration of historical sociolin-
guists on written materials may appear problem-
atic (cf. Section 20.2). However, historical linguists 
have long recognized the need not only to relate 
the two modes of communication to each other 
but also to treat, as emphasized by Romaine 
(1988), the written language in its own right. One 
common way to depict the relation between the 
two is by polarizing them into two contrasting 
modes of communication, which, rather than 
remaining equidistant, may either diverge or con-
verge over time.
Linguistic differences between the written and 
spoken medium may be discussed at various 
levels of delicacy. Sloping lines connecting the 
two media have been diagrammed for languages 
with considerable time depth, such as the six clas-
sical or written languages of Egyptian from 
c. 4000 BC down to AD 1000. While the spoken 
vernacular is assumed to continue to change 
throughout the history of Egyptian, the six classi-
cal languages are traditionally each assumed to 
represent steps that adhere to a standard without 
any major changes as long as the society that uses 
it remains stable (Pulgram, 1950). The written 
language is realigned with the vernacular only 
after the breakdown of a culture, as the new 
culture succeeding it creates its own literary 
language. As already noted, similar abstract 
models based on the written and spoken media 
have been proposed for Latin and the Romance 
languages.
At a more delicate level of description, written 
language can be found to move either away from 
informal speech or closer to it over time. However, 
no strict dichotomy between the two can be pro-
posed – at any one time, language variation 
remains situation-dependent. Research into this 
variability requires data sources that represent a 
range of genres or registers, i.e. situationally 
defined varieties (Biber, 1995: 7–10). The register 
comparisons that Biber and Finegan have carried 
out are based on well over 60 linguistic features. 
Their multivariate analysis produces textual 
dimensions that can be used to describe linguistic 
variation in different communicative situations 
today, as well as in the past. Three dimensions 
emerge as salient in present-day English: (D1) 
involved vs informational production, (D2) 
situation-dependent vs elaborated reference, and 
(D3) non-impersonal vs impersonal style (Biber, 
1995; Biber and Finegan, 1997). 
Face-to-face conversations and personal letters, 
for example, show high frequencies of features 
that express personal involvement, including first- 
and second-person pronouns, private verbs (e.g. 
think, know), that-deletion, present tense verbs, 
contractions (it’s, won’t), hedges (maybe, sort of  ) 
and emphatics and amplifiers (really, totally). By 
contrast, academic texts, such as scientific research 
articles, exhibit few such involvement markers. 
Focusing on information, they show high frequen-
cies of nouns, prepositions, attributive adjectives, 
long words and varied lexis, as well as both 
agentless and by-passives.

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
289
These dimensions can distinguish typically oral 
(conversational) genres or registers from typically 
literate (written expository) ones. The studies car-
ried out on historical corpora using the same meth-
odology also reveal trends of diachronic register 
evolution along these dimensions. Biber (1995: 
283–300) and Biber and Finegan (1997) analyse 
how such popular written registers, in essays and 
fiction for instance, develop in a more oral direction 
or ‘colloquialize’ along these dimensions between 
1650 and 1990 in British and American English 
alike, becoming more involved, situation-depend-
ent and less impersonal. However, they also detect 
simultaneous generic drifts towards more formal 
expression as such specialist expository registers as 
legal, medical and other scientific writings reveal a 
consistent trend towards the more literate end of 
these three dimensions, and show increasing ten-
dencies towards informational production, elabo-
rated reference and impersonal style.6
Reconstructing real-time 
processes of change
Having access to a systematic diachronic corpus 
makes it possible for a historical sociolinguist 
to study linguistic changes over extended periods 
of time. Significantly, however, reconstructing 
language use in its social context is a question of 
time depth: even late medieval sources may prove 
too scarce to provide a sufficient basis for socio-
linguistic investigations of many European ver-
naculars. For English, the situation improves from 
the fifteenth century onwards when full vernacu-
lar literacy – the ability not only to read but also 
to write – begins to spread outside professional 
circles, thus providing access to a wider section of 
the population.7 
According to David Cressy’s 1980 study based 
on people’s ability to sign their names (‘signature 
literacy’), an average of 10 per cent of men 
and 1 per cent of women could both read and write 
in England in 1500. By 1700, the corresponding 
figure had risen to 40 per cent for men and 25 per 
cent for women. Literacy studies give us an idea 
of the kind of people whose language has been 
recorded in writing. The social circumstances of 
the past are brought to life by research into social, 
economic, cultural and demographic history. 
Indeed, information provided by historians is vital 
for an adequate sociohistorical reconstruction of 
the social conditions, categories and hierarchies of 
the past.
Personal letters offer certain advantages as 
source material for historical variation studies: 
(1) work carried out by, among others, Biber 
and Finegan, indicates that letters share a number 
of genre characteristics with face-to-face 
conversations, and (2) they can provide authentic 
data produced by known individuals, similar to 
interview data used in present-day sociolinguistic 
research.8 The generic differences between per-
sonal letters and face-to-face conversations as data 
sources are also obvious, and need not be elabo-
rated upon here. However, as many processes of 
language change proceed below the level of con-
scious awareness, they may not be regulated by 
generic constraints to the same extent as more 
conscious processes. This becomes obvious when 
analysing linguistic changes in progress, an 
extended example of which is given below.
As shown by the case of ‘dialect hopping’ dis-
cussed in Section 20.6, correspondence can be 
used to trace real-time processes of language 
change in their social context. Much of the varia-
tionist sociolinguistic research that has been car-
ried out using The Corpus of Early English 
Correspondence has concentrated on morphosyn-
tactic processes between the fifteenth and seven-
teenth centuries. The 14 changes reported in 
Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg (2003) range 
from pronominal and verbal changes to abstract 
structural patterns, such as the disappearance of 
multiple negation. They are all instances of 
supralocalization (and all but two are successful) 
in that they spread from their region of origin to 
the rest of the country. They hence contribute to 
the rise of what Trudgill (1999: 6) refers to as 
Mainstream Modern Dialects of English.
The case of verbal -(e)s
In the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, English 
did not have a codified standard language, and the 
education system, centred on Latin, had little 
impact on linguistic changes in progress. The 
rivalry between the third-person singular indica-
tive suffixes -(e)s and -(e)th serves as an illustra-
tive case study on this issue. When it first appeared 
in the City of London in the fifteenth century, the 
verbal -(e)s probably counted as a northernism 
and failed to diffuse further to the south, while the 
southern -(e)th continued to spread across the 
country (Moore, 2002). However, the trend was 
reversed in the course of the sixteenth century. 
Figure 20.2 shows the S-shaped curve of the dif-
fusion of -(e)s in the aggregate data provided by 
the CEEC. It suggests that the southern -(e)th 
continued to dominate until the 1580s.9 Letter-
writers coming from different parts of the country 
used both forms from the latter half of the century 
onwards, as in excerpt (1), and some well into the 
seventeenth century, as in excerpt (2).
(1) … that a question may, upon allegeance, be 
demanded by yourselfe of the mastar Gray, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
290
whether he knoweth not the prise of my bloude, 
wiche shuld be spild by bloudy hande of a 
murtherar, wiche some of your nere-a-kin 
did graunt. A sore question, you may suppose, but 
no other act than suche as I am assured he 
knowes, and therfor I hope he wyl not dare deny 
you a truthe; (CEEC, Queen Elizabeth I, 1585; 
ROYAL 2, 11)
(2) ... thy father remembers his loue to the and 
take thy wrightinge to him very kindly: thy brother 
remember his louingest loue to the [...] I had 
thought to haue written to mr Roberts this time. 
but this sudene Iornye of this mesinger affordethe 
me not so much time, (CEEC, Lady Katherine 
Paston, 1626?; PASTONK, 90)
Excerpt (1) comes from a letter that Queen 
Elizabeth I wrote to King James VI of Scotland 
(and her successor on the throne of England) in 
1585. The letter excerpted in (2) was written by 
Lady Katherine Paston, a Norfolk gentlewoman, 
to her son, who was a student at Cambridge in the 
mid-1620s. Both show variation in the third-
person singular endings, Lady Paston also exhibit-
ing the suffixless alternative (take, remember). 
The situation is not atypical when a change has 
reached mid-range: many letter-writers use 
100
90
80
70
60
50
Percent
40
30
20
10
0
1500–
1539
1540–
1579
1580–
1619
1620–
1659
1660–
1681
Figure 20.2 Replacement of the third-person indicative singular suffix -(e)th by -(e)s. 
Relative frequencies of -(e)s in verbs other than have and do (based on Nevalainen and Raumolin-
Brunberg, 2003: 178).
100
90
London
Court
North
East Anglia
1500–1539 1540–1579 1580–1619 1620–1659 1660–1681
80
70
60
50
40
Percent
30
20
10
0
Figure 20.3 Replacement of -(e)th by -(e)s in verbs other than have and do. Regional distri-
bution of -(e)s (based on Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 2003: 178).

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
291
both the old and the new form. However, some 
more general tendencies can also be detected. 
Figure 20.3 presents the patterns that emerge 
when the data are broken down into four of the 
regions shown in Figure 20.1 in Section 20.5. 
Two things appear from Figure 20.3. First, 
although -(e)s was of northern origin and was 
common there in the early part of the sixteenth 
century, the southern -(e)th was the dominant 
form in all the four areas studied. However, once 
-(e)s begins to spread, the City of London leads 
the process. At this stage, the Royal Court at 
Westminster was much slower in adopting the 
incoming form, which suggests that the change 
spread from the lower social ranks to the higher. 
This impression is confirmed by a social rank 
analysis of the aggregate data, which divides the 
sixteenth-century social hierarchy into upper 
(gentry, clergy), middle (professionals, merchants) 
and lower ranks: the lower ranks are in the van-
guard of the process from the 1540s onwards 
(Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 2003: 
144–5). 
However, Figure 20.3 indicates that the process 
was slowest not at Court but in East Anglia, where 
the traditional southern form dominated well into 
the early decades of the seventeenth century. 
Besides the gravity model discussed in Section 
20.5, the reasons why this should have been the 
case range from the relative isolation and 
self-sufficiency of East Anglia at the time to a 
three-competing-forms hypothesis (the third being 
the suffixless form; Nevalainen, Raumolin-Brunberg 
and Trudgill, 2001). All three occur in Lady 
Katherine Paston’s letter excerpt in (2). Whatever 
the retarding factors, -(e)th was replaced by -(e)s in 
the East Anglian data in the seventeenth century. 
As a result of the successful supralocalization of 
Table 20.2 Three VARBRUL analyses of the verbal -(e)s variable: period means show the 
relative frequency of -(e)s
Period/mean (%)
Factor group
Weight
Range
Total N
1540–79
Region
0.478
741
North
0.788
 22
8%
London
0.451
217
Court
0.421
212
East Anglia
0.310
290
Gender
0.232
741
Women
0.616
 39
Men
0.384
702
Register
0.054
741
Intimate
0.473
316
Distant
0.527
425
1580–1619
Region
0.612
952
North
0.616
 83
42%
London
0.767
303
Court
0.509
375
East Anglia
0.155
191
Gender
0.216
952
Women
0.608
170
Men
0.392
782
Register
0.068
952
Intimate
0.534
490
Distant
0.466
462
1620–59
Region
0.314
904
North
0.405
288
74%
London
0.576
218
Court
0.688
102
East Anglia
0.329
296
Gender
0.062
904
Women
0.531
157
Men
0.469
747
Register
0.094
904
Intimate
0.547
693
Distant
0.453
211

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
292
the originally northern ending, a reallocation of the 
regional and stylistic features of the suffixes took 
place: -(e)s became the regionally unmarked form, 
whereas the southern variant -(e)th came to be rel-
egated to literary and religious registers.10
Multivariate analysis
As to the use of quantitative methods, historical 
sociolinguistic work need not differ from that 
carried out on present-day sociolinguistic data. 
Let us finish by considering the situational factors 
that correlate with the diffusion of -(e)s in Early 
Modern English. The tool I have used is the 
VARBRUL application GoldVarb2 (Rand and 
Sankoff, 1990).
The results of this multivariate analysis, shown 
in Table 20.2, confirm the fact that region has a 
key role to play throughout the diffusion of the 
third-person suffix -(e)s. Compared to gender and 
register, the top factor weights for region are 
higher (closer to 1) and their variation range is 
consistently wider. In the incipient phase of the 
process, from 1540 to 1579, -(e)s is favoured by 
northern writers (0.788), which is suggestive of its 
origins. In mid-range (42%), the process contin-
ues to be promoted by the North (0.616), but 
especially by the City of London (0.767). When it 
is nearing completion, at 74%, the Royal Court 
catches up and takes the lead. The multivariate 
analysis confirms the information in Figure 20.3 
that, in comparison with the other areas, East 
Anglia disfavours the incoming form until the 
mid-seventeenth century.
As with most of the changes studied, women 
favour the incoming form. This gender difference 
is statistically significant in the first two periods, 
but neutralizes when the process approaches com-
pletion in the third. Finally, the narrow range of 
the factor weights suggests that register differ-
ences, accounted for in terms of the writer–recip-
ient relationship (intimate or distant), play only a 
minor role compared with region and gender.11
Concluding remarks
Going back to the uniformitarian principle dis-
cussed in Section 20.2, the broadest historical 
generalization that can be made, based on modern 
sociolinguistic research, is that links between lin-
guistic variables and other variables correlating 
with them are probabilistic (more or less) rather 
than categorical. Being probabilistic, a linguistic 
variable may be sensitive to a whole range of 
other variables, linguistic and social, each exerting 
a different degree of influence on how it is 
realized. The gender of the speaker or writer may 
account for linguistic variation better than social 
status. In the CEEC studies, women proved to 
be the leaders of 11 out of the 14 changes investi-
gated. The historical role of cities as centres 
of linguistic innovation and dialect levelling was 
also well documented. The majority of the 
changes studied, which diffused throughout 
England between the fifteenth and eighteenth cen-
turies, were promoted either by the City of 
London, the Royal Court, or by both, or were 
given new impetus for their supralocalization by 
the capital.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The research for this article was supported by the 
funding awarded by the Academy of Finland and 
the University of Helsinki to the Research Unit for 
Variation, Contacts and Change in English 
(2006–11). I would like to thank Paul Kerswill, 
Mark Shackleton and Ruth Wodak for their 
comments on the prefinal version of this chapter, 
Tanja Säily for help with the references and Simo 
Ahava and Tanja Säily for the print version of 
Figure 20.1.
NOTES
1 See: 
http://www.let.leidenuniv.nl/hsl_shl/. 
Ammon et al. (1999) list the German and French 
equivalents of the term, Historische Soziolinguistik 
and la sociolinguistique historique. Similarly, the 
Spanish term used in Conde Silvestre (2007) is soci-
olingüística histórica. Romaine’s earlier term (1982), 
socio-historical linguistics, occurs in the titles of 
Tieken-Boon van Ostade (1987) and Kielkiewicz-
Janowiak (1992). Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg 
(1996) refer to both.
2 Language change is characterized by both 
regularity and contact-induced variability. Language 
contact and borrowing were of course also recog-
nized by nineteenth-century Neogrammarians and 
have preoccupied linguists ever since (cf. Haugen, 
1950). James and Lesley Milroy (1985: 339) strive for 
‘a theory which is sensible both to the constrained 
and regular nature of change and to its relationship 
with social structure’. Campbell (2007: 19) similarly 
points out that we need both models, those based 
on common ancestors and those considering contact 
and borrowing, to account for the ‘whole history’ 
of a language or a group of languages. A third 
source of shared features between languages, which 
does not go back to a historical relationship, 
is related to language universals (Thomason, 
2001: 100).

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
293
3 Language attrition has been an active concern 
of sociolinguists since the 1970s. A special issue 
edited by Dressler and Wodak-Leodolter was devoted 
to this topic by the International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language (IJSL) in 1977, and Dorian’s 
1981 seminal work on Scottish Gaelic was followed 
by global discussions such as Crystal (2000) and 
Nettle and Romaine (2000). A special issue on 
regional dialect attrition appeared in the 2009 
volume of IJSL edited by Vandekerckhove and Britain 
with the title ‘Dialects in western Europe: a balanced 
picture of language death, innovation, and change’.
4 A similar account of the regularity of linguistic 
change was given by Hockett (1950), who contrasted 
the roles of children and adults in the transmission of 
language change (I owe this classic reference to Peter 
Mühlhäusler).
5 I use the term ‘rise’ for want of a better one, 
although, as Burke (2004: 64) rightly points out, it is 
ambiguous in that it may refer to an increase in pres-
tige, in the number of speakers, or the number of 
functions. Moreover, the trend is not irresistible, 
although the term may imply that.
6 For reasons of space, a number of issues to do 
with sociohistorical pragmatics have to be omitted 
here. One of them is forms of address, which have 
been extensively studied in a number of periods, 
languages and language communities. Another area 
is historical dialogue analysis: for English, see e.g. 
Kytö and Culpeper 2010.
7 For a range of English historical corpora, see 
Beal, Corrigan and Moisl (eds) (2007). Personal let-
ters as data sources are discussed by Fitzmaurice, 
Meurman-Solin, Raumolin-Brunberg and Nevalainen, 
and van Bergen and Denison.
8 Access to authentic materials can provide strik-
ing new information about the linguistic system of 
social groups. Van Herk (2008) found wide-ranging 
use of the present perfect in nineteenth-century letters 
written by semi-literate African-American settlers in 
Liberia. His data provide new light on the core gram-
mar of these writers, and suggest that the verb form 
was far from marginal, as previously suggested on the 
basis of narratives elicited in sociolinguistic interviews.
9 The ‘second coming’ of -(e)s may also have 
involved reduction of the unstressed vowel in the 
suffix (Nevalainen and Raumolin-Brunberg, 2003: 
67). Have and do are excluded from the analysis, 
because they both retained their southern forms 
(hath, doeth) much longer than other verbs, in some 
traditional dialects until the twentieth century, which 
suggests a degree of lexical diffusion in this process. 
The extent to which -(e)s was adopted in regional 
and social varieties of English is witnessed, for exam-
ple, by its use in early African-American English, 
where it was most common in the third-person sin-
gular, but also found in the third-person plural and 
first-person singular (Poplack, 2006).
10 Echoing the King James Bible, the archaic 
suffix continues to be used by the press for humorous 
effect, as in ‘But what the tabloids giveth they may 
also taketh away, and Charles must watch his step’ 
(Time, June 19, 2000; 33), where the suffix appears 
in the plural, and ‘Cometh the hour, cometh the man 
with the cheeky grin’ (The Times, Oct. 29, 2007; 4).
11 The much lower overall number of instances 
produced by women than men is a direct reflection 
of women’s much lower rate of full literacy at the 
time. However, the significance of the gender differ-
ence persists with other statistical measures as 
well – for instance, in randomization tests.
REFERENCES
Ammon, U., Mattheier, K. J. and Nelde, P. H. (eds) (1999) 
Historische Soziolinguistik = Historical Sociolinguistics = La 
sociolinguistique historique (Sociolinguistica 13). Tübingen: 
Niemeyer.
Anderson, B. (1991) Imagined Communities: Reflections on 
the Origin and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Anttila, R. (1989) Historical and Comparative Linguistics 
(Current Issues in Linguistic Theory 6). 2nd rev. edn. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. (1st edn, 1972.)
Auer, P. (2005) ‘Europe’s sociolinguistic unity, or: A typology 
of 
European 
dialect/standard 
constellations’, 
in 
N. Delbecque, J. van der Auwera and D. Geeraerts (eds), 
Perspectives on Variation: Sociolinguistic, Historical, 
Comparative (Trends in Linguistics 163). Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. pp. 7–42.
Beal, J. C., Corrigan, K. P. and Moisl, H. L. (eds) (2007) 
Creating and Digitizing Language Corpora. Vol. 2, 
Diachronic Databases. Houndsmills: Palgrave-Macmillan.
Benskin, M. (1992) ‘Some new perspectives on the origins of 
standard written English’, in J. A. van Leuvensteijn and 
J. B. Berns (eds), Dialect and Standard Language in the 
English, Dutch, German and Norwegian Language Areas. 
Amsterdam: North Holland. pp. 71–105.
Bergs, A. (2005) Social Networks and Historical Sociolinguistics: 
Studies in Morphosyntactic Variation in the Paston Letters 
(1421–1503) (Topics in English Linguistics 51). Berlin and 
New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Biber, D. (1995) Dimensions of Register Variation: a Cross-
Linguistic Comparison. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Biber, D. and Finegan, E. (1997) ‘Diachronic relations among 
speech-based and written registers in English’, in 
T. Nevalainen and L. Kahlas-Tarkka (eds), To Explain the 
Present: Studies in the Changing English Language in 
Honour of Matti Rissanen. Helsinki: Société Néophilologique. 
pp. 253–75.
Burke, P. (2004) Languages and Communities in Early Modern 
Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Campbell, L. (2007) ‘Areal linguistics: a closer scrutiny’, in 
Y. Matras, A. McMahon and N. Vincent (eds), Linguistic 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
294
Areas: Convergence in Historical and Typological 
Perspective. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 1–31.
CEEC = Nevalainen, T., Raumolin-Brunberg, H., Keränen, J., 
Nevala, M., Nurmi, A. and Palander-Collin, M. (eds) (1998) 
The Corpus of Early English Correspondence. Helsinki: 
University of Helsinki.
Conde Silvestre, J.C. (2007) Sociolingüística histórica. Madrid: 
Gredos.
Cressy, D. (1980) Literacy and Social Order: Reading and 
Writing in Tudor and Stuart England. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Crystal, D. (2000) Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Deumert, A. and Vandenbussche, W. (eds) (2003) Germanic 
Standardizations: Past to Present (Impact: Studies in 
Language and Society 18). Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Dorian, N. C. (1981) Language Death: the Life Cycle of a 
Scottish Gaelic dialect. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Durie, M. and Ross, M. (eds) (1996) The Comparative Method 
Reviewed: Regularity and Irregularity in Language Change. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Haugen, E. (1950) ‘The analysis of linguistic borrowing’, 
Language, 26 (2): 210–31.
Haugen, E. (1997) ‘Language standardization’, in N. Coupland 
and A. Jaworski (eds), Sociolinguistics. London: Macmillan. 
(1st published 1966). pp. 341–52.
Hernández-Campoy, J. M. (ed.) (forthcoming) The Handbook 
of Historical Sociolinguistics. Malden, MA: Wiley-
Blackwell.
Hock, H. H. (1986) Principles of Historical Linguistics. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hockett, C. (1950) ‘Age-grading and linguistic continuity’, 
Language, 26(4): 449–57.
Howell, R. B. (2006) ‘Immigration and koineisation: 
the 
formation 
of 
early 
modern 
Dutch 
urban 
vernaculars’, Transactions of the Philological Society, 
104(2): 207–27.
Huumo, K., Laitinen, L. and Paloposki, O. (eds) (2004) Yhteistä 
kieltä tekemässä. Näkökulmia suomen kirjakielen kehi-
tykseen 1800-luvulla. Helsinki: Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden 
Seura.
Inoue, F. (1983) ‘A note on recent changes of dialect near 
Tokyo’, Area and Culture Studies, 33: 363–7.
Inoue, F. (1986) ‘Sociolinguistic aspects of new dialect forms: 
language change in progress in Tokyo’, International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language, 58: 73–89. 
Jahr, E. H. (ed.) (1999) Language Change: Advances in 
Historical Sociolinguistics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Jahr, E. H. (2001) ‘Historical sociolinguistics: the role of Low 
German language contact in the Scandinavian typological 
shift of the Late Middle Ages’, Lingua Posnaniensis, 43: 
95–104.
Janda, R. D. and Joseph, B. D. (2003) ‘On language, change, 
and language change – or of history, linguistics, and 
historical linguistics’, in B. D. Joseph and R. D. Janda (eds), 
The Handbook of Historical Linguistics. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell. pp. 3–180.
Johnson, S. A. (2005) Spelling Trouble: Language, Ideology 
and the Reform of German Orthography. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.
Kerswill, P. (1994) Dialects Converging: Rural Speech in Urban 
Norway. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kerswill, P. and Williams, A. (2000) ‘Creating a new town 
koiné: children and language change in Milton Keynes’, 
Language in Society, 29: 65–115.
Kielkiewicz-Janowiak, A. (1992) A Socio-Historical Study in 
Address: Polish and English (Bamberger Beiträge zur 
englischen Sprachwissenschaft 30). Frankfurt am Main: 
Peter Lang.
Kytö, M. and Culpeper, J. (2010) Speech in Writing: 
Explorations in Early Modern English Dialogues. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Labov, W. (1985) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Oxford: Blackwell. 
(1st edn, 1972.)
Labov, W. (1994) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 1, 
Internal Factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (2007) ‘Transmission and diffusion’, Language, 
83(2): 344–87.
Lass, R. (1997) Historical Linguistics and Language Change. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lodge, R. A. (2003) ‘Reallocation between standard and ver-
nacular in early modern Paris’, Sociolinguistica, 17: 88–107.
Lodge, R. A. (2004) A Sociolinguistic History of Parisian 
French. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Machan, T. W. and Scott, C. T. (eds) (1992) English in Its 
Social Contexts: Essays in Historical Sociolinguistics. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
McColl Millar, R. (rev.) (2007) Trask’s Historical Linguistics. 
2nd edn. London: Hodder Arnold.
McWhorter, J. (2007) Language Interrupted: Signs of Non-
Native Acquisition in Standard Language Grammars. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Martinet, A. (1964) Elements of General Linguistics. London: 
Faber.
Milroy, J. (1992) Linguistic Variation and Change: on the 
Historical Sociolinguistics of English. Oxford: Blackwell.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1985) ‘Linguistic change, social net-
work and speaker innovation’, Journal of Linguistics, 21: 
339–84.
Milroy, J. and Milroy, L. (1999) Authority in Language: 
Investigating Standard English. 3rd edn. New York: 
Routledge.
Milroy, L. and Gordon, M. (2003) Sociolinguistics: Method and 
Interpretation. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Moore, C. (2002) ‘Writing good Southerne: local and supralo-
cal norms in the Plumpton letter collection’, Language 
Variation and Change, 14 (1): 1–17.
Mugglestone, L. (2003) Talking Proper: The Rise and Fall of 
the English Accent as a Social Symbol. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. (1st edn, 1995.)
Nettle, D. and Romaine, S. (2000) Vanishing Voices: the 
Extinction of the World’s Languages. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

HISTORICAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
295
Nevalainen, T. (2000) ‘Processes of supralocalisation and the 
rise of Standard English in the Early Modern period’, in 
R. Bermúdez-Otero, D. Denison, R. M. Hogg, and 
C. B. McCully (eds), Generative Theory and Corpus 
Studies: a Dialogue from 10 ICEHL. Berlin: Mouton de 
Gruyter. pp. 329–71.
Nevalainen, T. (2003) ‘English’, in A. Deumert and 
W. Vandenbussche (eds), Germanic Standardizations: Past 
to Present (Impact: Studies in Language and Society 18). 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 127–56.
Nevalainen, T. (2006) An Introduction to Early Modern 
English. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Nevalainen, T. and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (eds) (1996) 
Sociolinguistics and Language History: Studies Based on 
the Corpus of Early English Correspondence. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi.
Nevalainen, T. and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (2000) ‘The chang-
ing role of London on the linguistic map of Tudor and 
Stuart England’, in D. Kastovsky and A. Mettinger (eds), 
The History of English in a Social Context: a Contribution 
to Historical Socio-Linguistics. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
pp. 279–337.
Nevalainen, T. and Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (2003) Historical 
Sociolinguistics: Linguistic Change in Tudor and Stuart 
England. London: Pearson Education.
Nevalainen, T. and Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I. (2006) 
‘Standardisation’, in R. Hogg and D. Denison (eds), 
A History of the English Language. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 271–311.
Nevalainen, T., Raumolin-Brunberg, H. and Trudgill, P. (2001) 
‘Chapters in the social history of East Anglian English: the 
case of third person singular’, in J. Fisiak and P. Trudgill 
(eds), East Anglian English. Cambridge: D. S. Brewer. 
pp. 187–204.
Penny, R. (2000) Variation and Change in Spanish. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Poplack, S. (2006) ‘How English became African American 
English’, in A. van Kemenade and B. Los (eds), The 
Handbook of the History of English. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. 452–76.
Pulgram, E. (1950) ‘Spoken and written Latin’, Language, 
26(4): 458–66.
Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (1996) ’Historical sociolinguistics’, in 
T. Nevalainen and H. Raumolin-Brunberg (eds), 
Sociolinguistics and Language History: Studies Based on 
the Corpus of Early English Correspondence. Amsterdam: 
Rodopi. pp. 11–37.
Raumolin-Brunberg, H. (2005) ‘Language change in adult-
hood: historical letters as evidence’, European Journal of 
English Studies, 9(1): 37–51.
Rand, D. and Sankoff, D. (1990) GoldVarb Version 2: A Variable 
Rule Application for the Macintosh. Montréal: Centre de 
recherches mathématiques, Université de Montréal.
Romaine, S. (1982) Socio-Historical Linguistics: Its Status and 
Methodology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Romaine, S. (1988) ‘Historical sociolinguistics: problems and 
methodology’, in U. Ammon, N. Dittmar and K. J. Mattheier 
(eds), Sociolinguistics: an International handbook of the 
Science of Language and Society. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. 
pp. 1452–69.
Samuels, M. L. (1963) ‘Some applications of Middle English 
dialectology’, English Studies, 44: 81–94. 
Samuels, M. L. (1972) Linguistic Evolution, with Special 
Reference to English. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Sankoff, G. (2004) ‘Adolescents, young adults and the critical 
period: two case studies from ‘Seven Up’’, in C. Fought 
(ed.), Sociolinguistic Variation: Critical Reflections. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 121–39.
Sebba, M. (2007) Spelling and Society: the Culture and Politics 
of Orthography Around the World. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Smith, J. (1996) An Historical Study of English. London: 
Routledge.
Thomason, S. G. (2001) Language Contact: an Introduction. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I. (1987) The Auxiliary Do in 
Eighteenth-Century English: A Sociohistorical-Linguistic 
Approach. Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
Tieken-Boon van Ostade, I. (ed.) (2000–) Historical 
Sociolinguistics and Sociohistorical Linguistics. http://www.
let.leidenuniv.nl/hsl_shl/ Accessed 4 November 2008.
Trudgill, P. (1986) Dialects in Contact. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell.
Trudgill, P. (1999) The Dialects of England. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Tuten, D. N. (2003) Koineization in Medieval Spanish 
(Contributions to the Sociology of Language 88). Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
UNESCO-UIS (2008) International Literacy Statistics: A Review 
of Concepts, Methodology and Current Data. Montreal: 
UNESCO Institute for Statistics. http://www.uis.unesco.org/
template/pdf/Literacy/ LiteracyReport2008.pdf. Accessed 2 
November 2008.
Van Herk, G. (2008) ‘Letter perfect: the present perfect in early 
African American correspondence’, English World-Wide, 
29(1): 45–69.
Wright, R. (1999) ‘Comparative, structural and sociolinguistic 
analyses of the history of the Romance languages’, in S. 
Embleton, J. E. Joseph and H.-J. Niederehe (eds), The 
Emergence of the Modern Language Sciences. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. pp. 175–88.
Wright, R. (2004) ‘Latin and English as world languages’, 
English Today, 20(4): 3–13.
Wyld, H. C. (1936) A History of Modern Colloquial English. 
3rd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.

21
21.1  DEFINING SOCIOLINGUISTIC 
FIELDWORK
The label ‘sociolinguistic fieldwork’ has been 
assigned to cover a wide variety of activities and 
procedures for collecting speech data, extending 
from the incidental observation of language use in 
the course of everyday interaction to the systematic 
elicitation of structural responses conducted within 
an experimental study. In this context, the role of 
the fieldworker can be as diverse as the types of 
studies conducted on the social life of language. 
The relatively loose, operational definition of field-
work that prevails in sociolinguistics is, of course, 
a far cry from the model of participant observation 
set forth by Bronislaw Malinowski (1915, 1922) 
when he argued that cultural anthropologists 
needed to have daily contact with their subjects for 
an extended period of time if they were to record 
the ‘imponderabilia of everyday life’. 
In the cultural anthropological tradition, we 
think of social scientists who enter a completely 
different, preferably non-Western culture, for 
extended periods of time in order to observe and 
understand behaviours quite different from their 
own from the standpoint of the indigenous culture. 
Such is hardly the case in sociolinguistic field-
work, although there are many instances in which 
researchers travel to distant community sites for 
extended periods of time in order to profile socio-
linguistic variation in a culture different from their 
own (e.g. Nagy, 2000; Meyerhoff, 2001; Schreier, 
2003). More frequently, however, sociolinguistic 
researchers are likely to work with communities 
in their country of residency, and may even focus 
on communities of which they are a part. 
The range of community involvement may 
further extend from one-time interaction with 
subjects through a rapid, anonymous interview in 
the context of a department store (Labov, 1966) to 
the video recording of a politician on the political 
trail to examine variation that includes linguistic 
and paralinguistic behaviour (Mendoza-Denton 
and Mjahed, 2002). Or, it may involve a profes-
sional community (Holmes and Stubbe, 2003; 
Holmes, 2006), a prescribed professional interac-
tion (e.g. Hagstrom, 2004), a subcultural commu-
nity (e.g. Alim, 2004), or any other specialized 
setting or interaction. It may even involve living in 
a community context for years without relying on 
audio- or video-recording in order to observe lan-
guage use in its natural context (Dayton, 1996). 
Sociolinguistic fieldwork is much more fluid and 
open in its definition than in some other fields of 
social science inquiry. At the same time, it is often 
a neglected dimension of discussion within the 
sociolinguistic enterprise, and most sociolinguis-
tic studies simply offer a limited description of 
their fieldwork, in some cases consigning it to a 
footnote. But a footnote of sociolinguistic study 
may alter the narrative text of the sociolinguistic 
description in ways that greatly affect our descrip-
tion and interpretation of data – and it can never 
be marginalized. 
In this survey, we consider a variety of topics 
that have fallen under the rubric of fieldwork 
methods, from the selection of a community of 
study to the discussion of specific methods for 
collecting data from the community. On one level, 
sociolinguistic fieldwork may be viewed in terms 
of a set of questions about choosing a community 
of study, working with the community and 
Fieldwork Methods in 
Language Variation
W a l t  W o l f r a m

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
297
gathering appropriate data to answer research 
questions posed in a study of sociolinguistic 
differences. Schilling-Estes (2008: 165) identifies 
the challenges of fieldwork as:
1 How do I decide who to get data from?
2 How do I get people to talk to me?
3 How do I explain to people why I’m recording 
them?
4 How do I make good quality recordings in the 
field?
5 How should I be involved with my research 
participants?
We address some of these questions as well as 
some additional considerations as we examine 
some of the traditions that have developed 
during the last half-century of sociolinguistic field 
methods.
21.2 IDENTIFYING THE COMMUNITY
It is hard to imagine any social group or commu-
nity from which an attendant set of research issues 
related to the life of language does not emerge, 
thus making just about any community eligible for 
sociolinguistic study. By the same token, the type 
of community selected for study depends, to a 
large extent, on the researcher’s interests and 
questions. While sociolinguists conveniently refer 
to ‘speech community’ as a primitive sociolinguis-
tic notion, defining the speech community can be 
theoretically elusive and communities can be 
quite fluid. William Labov, a pioneer in the devel-
opment of fieldwork methods as well as other 
areas in sociolinguistics, defined the speech com-
munity as a group of people with shared norms, or 
common evaluations of linguistic variables (1966, 
1972b). Though this may seem like a reasonable 
working definition, it is important to understand 
the difficulties involved with such a seemingly 
straightforward definition of a speech community 
(Patrick, 2002). ‘Shared language norms’ does not 
mean that everyone in a speech community speaks 
exactly the same way, or even similarly, only that 
they orient toward the same language norms. But 
language norms can also be elusive and negotiated 
rather than proscribed. 
A number of issues arise when attempting to 
delimit a community in order to conduct a socio-
linguistic study. For example, should researchers 
apply external, predetermined ‘objective’ criteria 
in delimiting a community, or allow the definition 
of the community to emerge as particular popula-
tions are studied so that researchers realize 
how participants themselves demarcate their 
communities? Should the researcher start by 
identifying a particular social unit and seeing how 
people within the group use language, or start 
with the particular language variety, an ideal con-
struct in its own right, and then see who uses it 
and how they are tied together socially? Further, 
there are questions of size and uniformity. Can we 
really talk about a very large social aggregate like 
the Lower East Side of New York City (Labov, 
1966) or perhaps a region like the Fens of Eastern 
England (Britain, 2001) as a single unified com-
munity with a shared set of norms, or is it more 
likely that different subpopulations have different 
norms for language use and other social behav-
iours? It may, in fact, be best to view the ‘speech 
community’ as more of a multilayered construct, 
since people have affiliations at different levels, 
ranging from various communities of practice, 
neighbourhood communities, migrant communi-
ties (Kerswill, 1993), larger politically-defined 
groups (e.g. a city or state) and broadly-based 
regional groups (e.g. US Southerners). A resident 
of Charleston, South Carolina, for example, may 
be affiliated with an individualized set of com-
munities of practice, some of which extend 
beyond Charleston or South Carolina, at the 
same time that he or she is affiliated with a 
particular neighbourhood group that may be based 
on ethnic and family ties as well as geographic 
proximity and the broader-based notion of the 
American South.
In considering the various intersecting com-
munities of which all speakers are necessarily a 
part, we need to consider whether we should take 
a ‘top-down’ approach, in which we begin by 
focusing on large social aggregates such as cities 
or regions, or a ‘bottom-up’ approach, in which 
we begin by studying individuals and their various 
interconnections. Better yet, it may be best to 
work ‘back and forth’ between the individual and 
the community, and between the social and the 
linguistic, as we study the interrelation of lan-
guage and community. For example, Labov began 
his study of New York City by first applying social 
criteria to the identification of a particular group 
as a ‘community’. He then narrowed this group 
down through linguistic criteria, selecting only 
native speakers of the New York City English 
varieties he was particularly interested in study-
ing. Though his focus was on community patterns 
of language variation and change, he did not 
neglect individuals and included in his studies 
investigations of individual speech patterns in dif-
ferent stylistic contexts, as well as individual 
speakers’ comments about stigmatized vs prestig-
ious language features. In more recent work 
(Labov, 2001), Labov relies even more heavily on 
detailed studies of individuals, including individ-
ual personality traits and social networks, in 
seeking to understand the large-scale patterns of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
298
variation and change that reflect their multilay-
ered and overlapping interactions, affiliations and 
orientations, and in addition use features with a 
variety of social associations to help shape social 
groups and social meanings in their daily conver-
sational interactions. 
Early fieldwork techniques in sociolinguistics 
tended to start with predetermined populations, 
defined by language, political or social bounda-
ries. Pioneering studies in the USA, for example, 
focused on politically-based metropolitan areas 
such as New York City (Labov, 1966) and Detroit 
(Shuy, Wolfram and Riley, 1967), whereas 
Trudgill’s (1974) early sociolinguistic analysis in 
England focused on Norwich. As studies of 
speech communities progressed, however, enquiry 
turned towards social groups within large-scale 
communities – in particular, interaction within 
social groups. In the 1970s, following Leslie 
Milroy’s (1987) innovative studies of Belfast 
English, focus shifted to social networks and the 
kinds of people the residents of a given commu-
nity tended to interact with most often on a daily 
basis. In examining social networks, the concern 
is on the DENSITY, the extent to which members of 
a social network all interact with one another, and 
MULTIPLEXITY, the extent to which people interact 
with the same people in different spheres of activ-
ity, for example, in work, in leisure activities and 
in the neighbourhood. Researchers have shown 
that social network density and multiplexity can 
have a significant impact on dialect maintenance 
and change. In particular, speakers in high-den-
sity, multiplex networks tend to maintain local-
ized, vernacular language varieties far more 
tenaciously than speakers in uniplex, low-density 
networks, who are quicker to adopt language 
features from outside their local communities. 
In more recent work, Dodsworth (2005) extends 
network analysis to a model related to social 
perceptions in attributes.
In addition to looking at people’s patterns of 
interaction, focus has extended to the investiga-
tion of why people come together as they do – i.e. 
what sorts of activities people join together to 
participate in, and what these social practices 
reveal about people’s values, as well as the role of 
language in shaping and projecting these values. 
Accordingly, the COMMUNITY OF PRACTICE (Eckert 
and McConnell-Ginet, 1992) approach has become 
a central community-based social group for socio-
linguistic inquiry. Community of practice is 
defined as ‘an aggregate of people who come 
together around some enterprise’ and which is 
‘simultaneously defined by its membership and 
the shared practices in which that membership 
engages’ (Eckert, 2000: 35). In other words, when 
considering people’s communities of practice, 
the focus shifts from pre-established structures, 
whether the small-scale structures of localized 
social networks or large-scale structures like 
social class groups, to the ongoing social practices 
through which social structures are sustained and 
changed. In addition, communities of practice are 
defined in terms of people’s subjective experi-
ences and sense of belonging rather than the 
external criteria often used to delimit social group 
memberships (e.g. type of residence, income 
level) or determine the strength of an individual’s 
social network ties (e.g. number of workmates 
who live in one’s neighbourhood). Communities 
of practice are also viewed as dynamic and fluid 
rather than as static entities, and individuals are 
seen as active agents in the construction of indi-
vidual and group identity, rather than simply as 
passive respondents to the social situations in 
which they find themselves (e.g. the social class 
group to which they belong).
In examining individualized, localized prac-
tices rather than social structures, we begin to 
understand not only what sorts of language pat-
terns correlate with which groups but also why 
people use the language features they do. For 
example, in conducting a study of a small African-
American community in the Smoky Mountain 
region of Appalachia, Christine Mallinson and 
Becky Childs (Childs and Mallinson, 2004; 
Mallinson, 2006) found that the linguistic prac-
tices of some adult women in the community 
could only be explained in terms of the different 
communities of practice in which the women par-
ticipated. One group, the ‘church ladies’ engaged 
in practices such as church-going and other activ-
ities associated with cultural conservatism and 
propriety. The other primary group, the ‘porch sit-
ters’ engaged in regular socializing on one group 
member’s porch, where they would listen to music 
and engage in other activities indicative of affilia-
tion with more widespread African-American 
culture, especially youth culture. Such patterns of 
practice help explain why the ‘porch sitters’ 
showed high usage levels for features of African-
American English, while the ‘church ladies’ 
showed low usage levels for these features and 
instead used features associated with the local 
European-American variety, as well as more fea-
tures of standard American English. 
To carry the permeable, fluid definition of a 
community to its logical extension, sociolinguistic 
analysis may even focus on a single speaker as a 
representative of a community type. Thus, focus 
on the speech of a political figure (Mendoza 
Denton, 1995; Mendoza-Denton and Mjahed, 
2002; Podesva et al., 2008) or a linguistic isolate 
might provide critical sociolinguistic insight into a 
community. One instructive study on the ethnolin-
guistic development of African-American English 
is limited to the last surviving member of the only 

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
299
African-American family to have lived on the 
island of Ocracoke since the 1860s (Wolfram et al. 
1999). This study of a single African-American 
speaker born in 1904, who was part of an ethnically-
isolated family on a geographically-isolated island, 
demonstrated how one family and one speaker 
could indeed constitute a type of community. 
In the final analysis, communities come in 
many sizes and shapes, and they are usually quite 
dynamic. They range from predetermined, bound-
aried political populations to shared-experience 
communities of different types. On a practical 
level, they are operationally limited to our sample 
of participants, though inferences about their rep-
resentativeness of population beyond the sample 
are inevitable and appropriate. 
21.3 SELECTING PARTICIPANTS
Like other aspects of fieldwork, the selection of 
participants in a sociolinguistic study is con-
strained by the goals of the study. Validity, the 
extent to which a procedure measures what it is 
supposed to measure, and reliability, the degree to 
which an item is consistently measured by the 
same or another analyst, are the cornerstones of 
sociolinguistic research, as they are in any type of 
social science research. However, the assumptions 
of and the operationalization of these constructs in 
sociolinguistics may differ somewhat from other 
fields of social science inquiry. Early in the 
regional survey game, Pickford (1956) criticized 
linguistic atlas surveys in terms of sociological 
sampling theory, noting that they suffered from 
significant deficiencies of validity and reliability. 
Though some of these criticisms are indeed 
valid – for example, to this day, sociolinguists do 
not seem sufficiently concerned about issues of 
intra- and inter-judge reliability in data extraction 
and measurement (e.g. Kerswill and Wright, 
1990; Thomas, 2002; Kendall, 2009) – it also 
needs to be recognized that the assumptions and 
goals of sociolinguistics are also quite different 
from those in other social science disciplines. 
Accordingly, a survey focusing on the historical 
linguistic development of a region might legiti-
mately be restricted to older, lifetime local resi-
dents rather than a random sample of the entire 
population. Furthermore, there are assumptions of 
representativeness and homogeneity that set lin-
guistic behaviour apart from some other types of 
social behaviour. Thus, it is not uncommon in 
linguistic description to use a single speaker as a 
representative for an entire language, and millions 
of speakers of the language due to the shared fea-
tures among its speakers. Given the breadth of 
diversity in American English or British English, 
we can still safely assume that the vast majority of 
structures are shared by all varieties. This kind of 
homogeneity reduces the need for extensive sam-
pling to make generalizations from the perspective 
of social science sampling (Neuman, 2002). For 
sociolinguistics, of course, the relevant question is 
how much and what type of sampling is needed in 
order to investigate the differences and generalize 
about them. Ultimately, it is not how many sub-
jects are included in a sample, but how many 
speakers are needed to adequately represent a cell 
in a study, i.e. a particular demographic or social 
attribute category that is being examined as a 
variable in the analysis (e.g. older, Latino, male, 
length of residency 10–15 years). The number of 
cells is the number of factors in each variable 
multiplied by each other. Thus, a study that con-
siders three age categories, two ethnicities, and 
two gender groups (3 x 2 x 2) would involve 12 
cells. With just five speakers in each cell, we 
would then have a sample of 60 speakers. 
Logistically, large-scale sampling of in-person 
interviews in sociolinguistics is simply not practi-
cal given the microscopic attention to linguistic 
detail characteristic of most sociolinguistic analy-
ses. In one of the largest urban sociolinguistic 
surveys ever conducted, the Detroit Dialect Study 
(Shuy, Wolfram and Riley, 1967, 1968), more than 
700 speakers were interviewed in the Detroit met-
ropolitan area based on a quasi-random sampling 
of school children, but less than 100 of the inter-
views were ever subjected to detailed sociolin-
guistic analysis of any type (e.g. Shuy, Wolfram 
and Riley, 1968; Wolfram, 1969). In Labov, Ash, 
and Boberg (2006), arguably the most influential 
survey in the history of North American dialect 
geography, only two native speakers were selected 
for phone interviews from each US city with a 
population of more than 50,000; 772 speakers in 
all were included. On the basis of this sample, 
major vowel patterns and shifts in North American 
English were plotted, based on the assumption 
that a couple of native speakers is adequate to 
make generalizations about major dialect pattern-
ing. Other studies have operated with a threshold 
of five speakers per cell for quantitative analysis 
(Guy, 1980), but of course this is sensitive to the 
type of linguistic phenomenon being investigated 
and the assumptions of representativeness of the 
speakers in the cell. It should be noted that small 
cell sizes may work fine for variationist studies 
but not for opinion polls, because linguistic varia-
tion is often much more constrained and less 
amenable to conscious reflection.
As might be predicted, one of the emerging 
trends in the examination of sociolinguistic sur-
veys is the use of online surveys, with all of the 
advantages and limitations of self-selected partici-
pants and self-reported data. The personal and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
300
social attributes of such participants are worthy of 
careful study since the respondents from such 
studies typically show a distinctive set of social, 
educational and ethnic attributes, in addition to the 
personal traits that make them respond. Surveys 
such as the Cambridge Online Survey of World 
Englishes (http://www.ling.cam.ac.uk/survey/) 
and the Harvard Survey of English dialects (http://
www4.uwm.edu/FLL/linguistics/dialect/index.
html) provide important data that appear to match 
some of the data elicited by fieldworkers conduct-
ing linguistic field surveys. For example, general 
surveys of particular lexical items (pop vs soda 
http://popvssoda.com:2998), and regionalized 
online surveys for lexical items in Canada by 
Boberg (2005), tend to confirm data from linguis-
tic atlas surveys, at least for lexical data. 
Another type of sociolinguistic participant to 
emerge from online communication comes from 
those who participate in computed-mediated com-
munication, including instant messaging, blogs 
and other types of online postings (Johnstone and 
Baumgardt, 2004; Tagliamonte and Denis, 2008). 
Such studies are clearly expanding the profile of 
the participant and community in sociolinguistic 
studies, and virtual communities can no longer be 
dismissed as extraneous to the collection of data 
in sociolinguistics.
21.4  THE SOCIOLINGUISTIC 
FIELDWORKER
In Labov’s (1972: 99) pioneering article on lin-
guistic methodology, he notes that the methods 
used in linguistics can be captured by looking at 
where linguists might be found, noting that ‘In 
this search, we would find linguists working in the 
library, the bush, the closet, the laboratory, and 
the street’. In sociolinguistics, the bush and the 
street are prime locations for sociolinguists in the 
traditional focus of sociolinguistic inquiry, and 
online would certainly be added now to the list of 
places linguists might be found. As the field of 
sociolinguistics has developed, the role of the 
sociolinguistic fieldworker has become more 
closely scrutinized, with growing sensitivity to the 
affect of the fieldworker in the collection of data 
(Cameron et al., 1992; Hazen, 2000; Nagy, 2000; 
Schilling-Estes, 2000, 2008). Though some 
researchers study communities of which they are 
already a part, the majority of sociolinguists ven-
ture into new communities as strangers. 
Accordingly, they are assigned a social role within 
the community that may range from a proscribed 
role as an external social science researcher to a 
negotiated status as participant observer in the life 
of the community. In between, there is a range of 
roles and relationships that fieldworkers may 
assume, and the process is a dynamic, evolving 
one. Over the past 15 years and more than 50 trips 
to the island, our fieldwork team (Wolfram, Hazen 
and Schilling-Estes, 1999) has gone from our ini-
tial role in Ocracoke as academic sociolinguists to 
partners in a variety of community activities that 
extend from collaborative projects documenting 
and celebrating local language history and other 
cultural traditions within the community, to friends 
who celebrate special occasions with families, 
including birthdays, graduations and funerals 
(Wolfram, Reaser and Vaughn, 2008).
In earlier (and current) sociolinguistic surveys 
such as Labov (1966) and Shuy, Wolfram and 
Riley (1967), which relied on stratified and quasi-
random sampling, the sociolinguistic fieldworker 
assumed the status of an outside social scientist 
who had a single encounter with subjects during 
the interview. As sociolinguists migrated away 
from the sociologically-based survey model for 
selecting a sample (Wolfram and Fasold, 1974) 
towards convenience or judgment samples (Milroy, 
1987; Milroy and Gordon, 2003), they have typi-
cally spent more time getting to know the com-
munity and people within the community, resorting 
to the so-called ‘friend of a friend’ method 
(Milroy, 1987) for establishing a common 
acquaintance within the community. Such a 
method often has a ‘snowballing’ effect (Milroy 
and Gordon, 2003: 23) in that it can lead to a 
natural network of friends and a role that some-
what mitigates the status of the social science 
researcher. Though there are obvious advantages 
in securing participants through this method, there 
are also disadvantages associated with the friend-
of-a-friend technique (Schilling-Estes, 2008). It 
limits representativeness in terms of the broader 
population and applying parametric statistical 
testing. Furthermore, the fieldworker’s association 
with one group may inhibit access to other groups. 
By the same token, the advantages of working 
with a group over time may help ease some of the 
awkwardness and social obstacles associated with 
an outside fieldworker and lead to more natural 
interaction. 
While audio-recording is standard procedure 
for the collection of sociolinguistic data, there are 
some occasions where data may be collected and 
even quantified from unrecorded natural conversa-
tion. Hazen (2002), for example, shows how the 
use of a generalized form of the past tense form of 
be, wont (e.g. I/you/(s)he/we/you/they wont there) 
showed significant differentiation when family 
members were and were not being recorded, and 
Wolfram and Smith (2008) showed how meaning-
ful stylistic variation took place in the use of 
the generalized negative past tense form of be 
(e.g. She weren’t nice) when three friends were 

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
301
not being recorded. There are only a few instances, 
however, where sociolinguistic data have been 
collected completely from participant observation 
without the aid of any audio or video recording. 
Dayton (1996) is an exceptional case; she spent 
almost a decade in an African-American commu-
nity in Philadelphia as a participant observer, col-
lecting examples of different uses of verb structures 
in African-American English exclusively on note 
cards. In part, her motivation was to escape the 
limitations of the sociolinguistic interview as a 
specialized speech event (Wolfson, 1976) and to 
observe the use of grammatical forms only in their 
natural setting of conversation through the course 
of everyday life. Dayton’s study is an admirable 
but painstaking exception to the usual method for 
gathering data.
In working with communities, there are a 
number of relationships and roles that sociolin-
guists can assume. Cameron, Frazer, Harvey, 
Rampton and Richardson (1992) define several 
different kinds of research based on relationships 
between researchers and those they are research-
ing, including ETHICAL RESEARCH, ADVOCACY 
RESEARCH and EMPOWERING RESEARCH. Ethical 
research assumes that there is minimal inconven-
ience to participants and that the subjects are 
adequately acknowledged for their contributions. 
Advocacy-based research is characterized by a 
‘commitment on the part of the researcher not just 
to do research on subjects but research on and for 
subjects’ (Cameron et al., 1992: 14), whereas 
empowering research is research on, for, and with 
the community in light of the fact that ‘subjects 
have their own agendas and research should try to 
address them’. As Cameron et al. noted (1992: 
24), ‘if knowledge is worth having, it is worth 
sharing’. In the current sociolinguistic context, a 
number of sociolinguists have proactively sought 
to share their insights with community members 
and to ‘give back’ to the community, with the goal 
of empowering the community in some way. As 
John Rickford (1999: 315) puts it:
The fundamental rationale for getting involved in 
application, advocacy, and empowerment is that 
we owe it to the people whose data fuel our theo-
ries and descriptions; but these are good things to 
do even if we don’t deal directly with native speak-
ers and communities, and enacting them may help 
us to respond to the interests of our students and 
to the needs of our field. 
Sociolinguists can work with community mem-
bers to ensure that language variation is docu-
mented and described to raise the level of 
consciousness within and outside the community 
about the past, current and future state of the lan-
guage variation, and to engage representative 
community agents and agencies in an effort to 
understand and explicate the role of language in 
community life. 
There are a variety of stances, positions and 
roles that sociolinguistic researchers might assume 
in the field, but one of the most essential aspects 
of current fieldwork is the increasing self-aware-
ness of the role of the fieldworker in the fieldwork 
process. As Schilling-Estes (2000: 84) observes:
More and more, we are coming to realize that 
genuine detachment is impossible and that there 
indeed exists a reality outside our individual and 
societal interpretations of it, it is virtually impossi-
ble to access it (Cameron et al., 1992). This inabil-
ity to separate ourselves and our biases from that 
which we are studying is especially acute for those 
of us whose object of study is our fellow humans 
… .Thus, it is imperative that we consider exactly 
how what we as researchers bring to the field 
with us impacts on the observations and analysis 
we take home.
If nothing else, fieldworkers are becoming increas-
ingly reflexive about their role in the gathering, 
shaping and interpreting of data in the field 
(Hazen, 2000; Mendoza-Denton, 2008; Wolfram 
et al., 2008).
Many surveys of vernacular dialects now 
employ fieldworkers from the community itself, 
and some of the richest sources of data we have 
collected over the years come from interviews 
conducted by indigenous fieldworkers, but this 
condition in itself is also no guarantee of a more 
useful interview for analysis. Outsiders also pos-
sess the personal characteristics that make for an 
effective fieldworker, and sometimes the ‘intimate 
stranger’ who has outsider status (Briggs, 1986) 
will be offered information not shared with com-
munity members. People with empathetic, non-
threatening conversational styles often end up 
getting more useful interviews than fieldworkers 
who are carefully selected to match the status, age 
and gender characteristics of the interviewee 
(Cukor-Avila and Bailey, 2001). In the final analy-
sis, the role of rapport and empathy in promoting 
an effective conversational interview may be dis-
cussed at length, but ultimately those qualities are 
difficult to programme. 
21.5 COLLECTING DATA
As noted previously, the collection of data in 
sociolinguistics is related to the research questions 
that underlie the study (Milroy and Gordon, 
2003). At the same time, the articulation of 
research questions is not a predetermined, static 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
302
process; instead, there is a synergy that binds 
together methods, description and theory. I per-
sonally cannot identify one project in which the 
predetermined research questions remained 
unaltered throughout the course of the research 
project – in more than four decades of field-
initiated research that has included dozens of dif-
ferent projects. Notwithstanding our best attempts 
to identify our primary research issues before 
beginning a study, research questions continue to 
be formulated and reformulated during the course 
of the study, invariably linking methods, descrip-
tion and theory. In such a context, complementary 
methods of data collection are often included in 
sociolinguistic fieldwork. In the following sec-
tions, we consider some of the traditional and 
developing trends for collecting data in field-initi-
ated sociolinguistic research.
21.6 THE SOCIOLINGUISTIC INTERVIEW
The methodological heart of the sociolinguistic 
movement over the past half-century, particularly 
in the variationist paradigm pioneered by William 
Labov (1963, 1966, 1972a, 1984; Wolfram and 
Fasold, 1974), is the so-called ‘sociolinguistic 
interview’, a conversational interview intended to 
elicit conversation comparable to everyday, ordi-
nary speech. The underlying goal of most conver-
sational interviews is quite straightforward: to get 
as much natural conversational speech as possible 
from the interviewee, i.e. speech that represents 
how the interviewee speaks in everyday conversa-
tion when language is not directly under examina-
tion. Even in a conversational interview focused 
on relatively neutral topics of discussion, the fact 
that a person is being interviewed and tape-re-
corded is a formidable obstacle to obtaining ordi-
nary speech – the kind of speech that is so central 
to most studies of dialect variation. This problem 
has become known in sociolinguistics as the 
OBSERVER’S PARADOX, which Labov formulated 
thus: ‘To obtain the data most important for lin-
guistic theory, we have to observe how people 
speak when they are not being observed’ (Labov, 
1972b: 113). A lot of attention has been given to 
developing strategies for overcoming the inherent 
constraints of a tape-recorded interview with a 
relative stranger, ranging from concern with the 
personal characteristics of interviewers (Edwards, 
1986; Rickford and McNair-Knox, 1994; Cukor 
Avila and Bailey, 1995, 2001) to the best physical 
locations for conducting these interviews and the 
kinds of questions to be asked in the interview 
(Cukor-Avila and Bailey, 2001; Kendall, 2009).
Topics of conversation in the sociolinguistic 
interview are centred on themes of common 
interest, eliciting discussions that might be of 
most natural interest to community participants 
and which minimize the attention paid to speech. 
Open-ended questions are grouped into common 
areas or ‘modules’ and most are open-ended to 
maximize conversation by the participants. One 
set of questions might, for example, focus on 
childhood games, another on friends, another on 
community concerns, and so forth. The key ele-
ment of these questionnaires is the elicitation of 
spontaneous conversation that taps into personal 
and community interests and is non-threatening to 
the participant. 
There are important theoretical reasons for tar-
geting the most casual and ordinary conversations 
as the basis for analysing sociolinguistic data. It 
was originally based on the assumption of Labov’s 
vernacular principle (1972a: 112, 113), which 
maintained that most important speech for linguis-
tic theory came from relatively unmonitored, nat-
ural conversation. The more participants focused 
on the topic of conversation vis-à-vis the speech 
per se, the better the data would be for analysing 
authentic linguistic patterning. Operationally, the 
sociolinguistic interview was also considered 
essential in order to examine the orderly nature of 
language variation, since it was the basis for 
examining the fluctuating patterns of socially-di-
agnostic variants. The careful examination of 
dialect forms (Fischer, 1958; Labov, 1966; 
Wolfram, 1969) showed that dialects sometimes 
were differentiated on the basis of how frequently 
particular forms are used rather than whether or 
not a given variant is used. Individual speakers 
may fluctuate in their use of variants, sometimes 
using one form and sometimes using an alternate 
form, and the relative frequencies of usage helped 
differentiate varieties of a language and correlated 
with various linguistic and social traits. For exam-
ple, the production of unstressed -ing as -in’ in 
words like swimming or taking might fluctuate 
within the speech of a single speaker during a 
single speech event, referred to as INHERENT VARI-
ABILITY. At the same time, the relative frequency 
of different variants correlates significantly with 
various linguistic factors, for example, – ing is 
more likely to become – in’ when it functions as a 
verb vs a noun (e.g. She was swimmin’ > He likes 
swimmin’), and by various social attributes: for 
example, as a group, lower working-class speak-
ers use more – in’ than middle-class speakers, 
men more than women, and so forth. But in order 
to tap into such systematic variability, sociolin-
guists need sufficient amounts of natural conver-
sation to produce enough cases for meaningful 
quantitative 
study 
of 
orderly 
variation 
(Tagliamonte, 2006).
Although a fieldworker cannot control the 
elicitation of particular diagnostic forms when the 

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
303
focus of the interview is simply upon obtaining 
reasonable amounts of conversation, it is possible 
to include certain kinds of questions that raise the 
likelihood for targeted structures to occur. Thus, 
interview questions may be designed to yield 
narratives of past experiences or of movie plots 
in order to obtain significant numbers of past 
tense verb forms. Similarly, descriptions of 
different attributes (e.g. ‘What does he look 
like?’) may raise the potential for predicate adjec-
tive constructions to occur (e.g. He’s tall and he’s 
kinda thin ... ).
The kinds of questions that promote the poten-
tial for certain structures are, of course, deter-
mined only after pilot trials with various formats 
and, in some cases, after some of the analysis has 
already begun. In our early studies of Detroit 
speech (Wolfram, 1969), we found that many of 
the occurrences of habitual be (e.g. They be tag-
ging somebody when they catch them) among 
children occurred during their descriptions of tra-
ditional game activities, since such speech events 
call for the description of regularly-occurring, or 
habitual activities. Such information not only 
aided in the analysis of the invariant form of be 
(Fasold, 1969) but also helped researchers study-
ing this form to devise questions that might bring 
out the use of be (Bailey and Maynor, 1987). Care 
may therefore be given in a conversational inter-
view to the kinds of questions that might elicit 
sufficient data for analysis, the kinds of linguistic 
structures that certain questions are likely to call 
forth and the cultural topics that are relevant to the 
community. When these considerations are taken 
into account, the demands of the conversational 
interview may present a significant challenge. 
These concerns also point to the need for exten-
sive pilot testing before large-scale series of socio-
linguistic interviews are undertaken. The success 
of particular topics in eliciting conversation varies 
considerably from community to community 
and from subject to subject, and the actual inter-
view sometimes strays far from the structured 
topics as the fieldworker follows the interviewee’s 
interests.
Notwithstanding the important data that can be 
obtained from the sociolinguistic interview, there 
are a number of concerns about the focus on data 
derived from this primary method (Schilling-
Estes, 2008). Wolfson (1976), for example, has 
criticized the sociolinguistic interview as being a 
specialized speech event and less, rather than 
more, like typical kinds of interviews; further-
more, she notes that it excludes certain types of 
narrative styles that are important for the analysis 
of conversational speech. It has also been noted 
that some of the questions are not typical of 
everyday speech and could be considered impolite 
or inappropriate for different cultural groups 
(Schilling-Estes, 2008). Another concern with the 
sociolinguistic interview emerges from the focus 
on the most vernacular, unconscious speech style. 
For non-mainstream varieties of speech, this 
obsession has led to a focus on vernacular struc-
tures and basilectal versions of speech, resulting 
in a kind of sociolinguistic nostalgia for the 
authentic vernacular speaker and reification of 
non-mainstream vernacular speech and speakers 
(Bucholtz, 2003).
Schilling-Estes observes that the focus in the 
Labovian interview on vernacular, unselfcon-
scious speech lapses into unjustified assumptions 
about a monolithic vernacular. Schilling-Estes 
notes (2008: 173):
… it is by no means certain that each speaker can 
be said to have a single, “genuine” vernacular 
style unaffected by situational and speaker-internal 
factors such as who they’re talking to and how 
much attention they’re paying to their speech. 
Instead, people may have a range of quite casual, 
unselfconscious styles they use with various people 
in different circumstances.
The focus on unselfconscious styles ignores the 
sociolinguistic insights provided by examining 
more self-conscious styles of speech. Studies of 
performative styles within and outside of inter-
views (Preston, 1992, 1996; Schilling-Estes, 1998) 
provide insight into the significant distribution of 
socially diagnostic forms. For example, these 
forms may be prone to linguistic overproduction 
when speakers are conscious about their speech so 
that it signifies ironic roles in the symbolic repre-
sentation and language change. Notwithstanding 
some major and minor concerns about the role of 
the sociolinguistic interview in fieldwork, the data 
provided by such interviews have been indispen-
sable in the growth of sociolinguistic methodol-
ogy, description and theory.
21.7  BEYOND THE SOCIOLINGUISTIC 
INTERVIEW
While the sociolinguistic interview has been a 
staple method for gathering data in sociolinguis-
tics for a half-century now, it has often been aug-
mented by other techniques to gather a full range 
of sociolinguistic information and behaviour. 
Even within the sociolinguistic interview, there is 
a tradition of supplementing conversational speech 
with other types of tasks such as reading passages, 
word lists and minimal word pair lists to collect 
complementary data or simulate different levels of 
formality (Labov, 1966; Shuy, Wolfram and Riley, 
1968). And, of course, there is a tradition of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
304
collecting data from groups of participants in 
naturally occurring speech events that character-
ized the earliest sociolinguistic studies. Labov’s 
early study of African-American English in the 
mid-1960s relied on interviews with peer groups 
of African-American teenagers (Labov et al., 
1968) to access the more vernacular style of 
speech as well as to compare group speech with 
the speech style used during individual interviews. 
Controlling for different permutations of inter-
view participants, interviewers and speech events 
is fairly common in sociolinguistic fieldwork now 
(e.g. Edwards, 1986; Renn, 2007; Van Hofwegen 
and Wolfram, forthcoming) in order to examine 
systematically the effects of various participant 
attributes and speech conditions on language vari-
ation. Thus, in one current study of the longitudi-
nal development of African-American English 
over a 17-year span (Burchinal, Roberts, Zeisel 
and Rowley, 2008), participants are examined 
speaking with their mothers, with peers at differ-
ent age levels and with adults. Furthermore, there 
are different conditions for each of these partici-
pant sets, including formal speech (such as con-
structing a formal speech for parents with a peer), 
and informal speech events (such as eating a snack 
or planning a MySpace page with a peer) for each 
combination of participants. Such proscribed 
designs for data collection allow researchers 
to maintain experimental control in their examina-
tion of systematic language variation while 
maintaining relatively spontaneous speech as the 
basis for the systematic investigation of language 
variation. 
As creative and innovative as sociolinguistic 
interviews have become over the past decades, 
there are still inherent limitations to the types of 
data collected from these interviews for both lin-
guistic and sociolinguistic analysis. Theoretically, 
sociolinguistic data are not conducive to tapping 
linguistic intuitions of speakers, one of the main-
stays of ‘descriptive adequacy’ in formulating a 
linguistic description. The goal of a grammar of a 
socially subordinate language variety is no differ-
ent from that of a standard variety in this respect. 
The basic problem is simple: we want to obtain 
the most complete data possible in order to arrive 
at an adequate, representative, descriptive account. 
The fieldwork situation for the collection of data 
is, at best, not conducive to the probing of linguis-
tic intuitions, and, at worst, actively resistant to 
such probing. In reality, there are some occasions 
in linguistic description when particular hypothe-
ses about vernacular structures need to go beyond 
the simple observation of language in a naturalis-
tic context. 
On one occasion, for example, preliminary 
observations about a-prefixing in constructions 
such as She was a-huntin’ and They came 
a-runnin’ led to hypotheses about its linguistic 
boundaries as well as a set of hypotheses about 
cross-dialectal knowledge of this form (Wolfram, 
1982, 1988). Direct intuition questions about the 
grammaticality of vernacular structures, however, 
are confounded by prevailing attitudes about 
social acceptability, so it is impossible to obtain 
reliable data from straightforward questions about 
intuitions (Labov, 1972a; Wolfram, 1986). To 
counter this tendency, we devised a forced-choice 
test of sentence pairs in which we simply asked 
speakers to choose which sentence sounded better; 
for example, does the speaker prefer adding the 
prefix a- to He likes working vs He was working. 
We found that speakers given a forced choice task 
would, in fact, resort to their native speaker intui-
tions (viz., He was a-workin’ vs *He likes a-wor-
kin’) and overcome the social acceptability 
judgments that lead them to reject as ‘ungram-
matical’ any structure that was not associated with 
the mainstream standard variety. In a similar 
forced choice test with habitual be (They always 
be going to school vs *They be going to school 
today) administered to native speakers of African-
American English and middle-class speakers of 
Standard American English, we found important 
contrasts between these two groups that led to 
significant hypotheses about cross-dialectal gram-
maticality (Wolfram 1982, 1988) and the gram-
maticalization of habitual be in African-American 
English (Fasold, 1969; Green, 2002). 
The indirect probing of linguistic intuitions is 
not the only method that can be used to confirm or 
reject various hypotheses about the structures of 
non-mainstream language varieties. There is a 
tradition of structural elicitation tasks in sociolin-
guistic studies that ranges from simple repetition 
tasks to the elicitation of sentence fragments or 
cloze techniques of various types that expose 
underlying forms and patterns. In one early task to 
test out a hypothesis about different underlying 
forms for invariant be in African-American 
English, Fasold (1969, 1972) devised a task to 
elicit an elliptical form that would force the choice 
of an underlying modal. Fasold hypothesized that 
there were three underlying forms from which 
invariant be in an African-American sentence 
might be derived, which were indicated by the co-
occurring auxiliary with the verb. The habitual 
derivation of He be there, occurs with do support 
(e.g. He don’t be there all the time), the future co-
occurs with will (e.g. He won’t be there tomor-
row), and past requires would (e.g. He wouldn’t be 
there if he had a choice). To examine his hypoth-
esis, Fasold devised sentence-stimulus frames 
that would require the subject to respond with 
an elliptical form that required a full auxiliary. 

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
305
After training the subject to a response pattern on 
non-diagnostic sentences, the subject would then 
provide responses such as the following:
Tape stimulus: He be in in a few minutes
Subject response: I know he will
Fieldworker response: Will what?
Subject response: Be in in a few minutes 
The elicitation frame offered strong support for 
Fasold’s (1969, 1972) claim that invariant be in 
African-American English is derived from at 
least several different sources, a couple of which 
parallel its uses in the standard variety and 
one (habitual be) that was unique to this variety.1 
A variety of structural elicitation frames have 
been used to supplement the data from natural 
conversation in testing hypotheses for formulating 
grammars of vernacular varieties (e.g. Schilling-
Estes and Wolfram, 1994; Wolfram, 1996; 
Rickford, 1999).
It is also possible to extend elicitations in 
sociolinguistic fieldwork to pragmatics and lan-
guage use, though this type of elicitation is con-
siderably less frequent than the elicitation of 
structural linguistic forms. In one sociolinguistic 
study of assumed information and felicitous ques-
tioning, my son, who was seven years old at the 
time, and I collaborated to ask a series of ‘How 
come?’ questions to people of different ages 
(Wolfram and Wolfram, 1977). We approached 
acquaintances of different ages and asked them 
how old they were, then followed it up with a 
‘How come?’ question, as in the following 
sample: 
Fieldworker: How old are you?
Subject: Twenty-four.
Fieldworker: How come?
Subject: How come [laughter] How come, what do 
 you mean how come?
Fieldworker: How come?
Subject: Because 24 years ago my parents worked 
something out.
Responses were not recorded, but each was writ-
ten down on a file card after the interaction was 
observed by the senior fieldworker. The responses 
of subjects showed important differences based on 
the age of the subject and the age of the field-
worker. For the adult fieldworker with an adult 
subject, the subject typically assumed that it was a 
behaviour that plays on the known-information 
joking genre (e.g. Why did the chicken cross the 
road? To get to the other side). However, when 
asked by the seven-year-old fieldworker, adults 
assumed it was a sincere question and responded 
accordingly (e.g. ‘The years have been hard on 
me’, ‘The years just fly by’). By the same token, 
younger children assumed it was a sincere 
question that required a criterion-based response, 
as in the following example:
Fieldworker: How old are you?
Subject: Six.
Fieldworker: How come?
Subject: Because I’m in kindergarten.
Slightly older adolescents (9–13) interpreted it as 
a literal question related to a simple mathematical 
calculation (e.g. I’m 8 years old because I was 
born in 1966). Most importantly, the data indi-
cated the developmental trajectory of assumed 
information in questions and the developmental 
acquisition of productive and receptive pragmatic 
competence. While such deliberate conversational 
manipulation admittedly extends the boundaries 
of data collection, it demonstrates that the collec-
tion of data is only limited by the willingness of 
fieldworkers to take conversational risks and think 
creatively about eliciting relevant data to address 
issues of linguistic form and use. 
21.8 PERCEPTUAL STUDIES
The consideration of speakers’ subjective view-
points on language differences adds an important 
dimension to understanding and interpreting soci-
olinguistic differences (Preston, 1989, 1992, 
1993). In recent years, fuelled by advances in 
technology and the accessibility of software pro-
grams, a proliferation of perceptual studies have 
taken place in the field, led by a variety of socio-
phonetic experiments (Thomas, 2002). Many cur-
rent perceptual studies show the influence of 
experimental psychology in terms of their design, 
their controlled manipulation of variables and 
their associated statistical analyses. At the same 
time, some of these perceptual research studies 
have shifted research samples from the indigenous 
research community to convenient, generic popu-
lations of middle-class university students. Indeed, 
there is a trade-off in terms of rigorous experimen-
tal design and field-initiated, community-based 
research that typifies current perceptual studies. 
Thomas (2002) has identified a number of dif-
ferent issues that frame the tradition of socio-per-
ceptual approaches to sociolinguistics. One is the 
ability of listeners to identify regional varieties, 
ethnicity or socioeconomic levels of speakers. 
There is a well-established tradition of compiling 
a stimulus tape of different speakers representing 
dissimilar groups and then having listeners iden-
tify the language variety, socioeconomic status or 
ethnicity of the speaker. Earlier studies, for exam-
ple, had listeners identify whether speakers on a 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
306
tape recording were using American, British or 
Indian English (Bush, 1967), or identify the 
social-class and ethnicity of speakers from Detroit 
or Michigan based on tape recordings extracted 
from natural conversation (Shuy, Baratz and 
Wolfram, 1969). In the latter study, different 
social-class groups and ethnicities from Detroit 
were included as listener groups to match the 
social attributes of speakers in the stimulus record-
ing, leading to important conclusions about social 
class and ethnic identification. For example, mid-
dle-class speakers and working-class speakers 
were not significantly differentiated in identifying 
speakers from different social classes; at the same 
time, Black listeners of different social classes 
were better able to identify middle-class Black 
speakers than their cohort white groups. Such 
results are not only significant for sociolinguistic 
description but also they underscore the value of 
including different social groups of listeners from 
the study population as a methodological proce-
dure. In a recent study, Wolfram, Dannenberg, 
Knick and Oxendine (2002) examined listener 
accuracy in identifying Native-American Lumbees, 
African Americans, and European Americans in a 
tri-ethnic community in North Carolina (NC). By 
comparing reactions of listeners from within the 
community with listeners from Raleigh, NC, a 
metropolitan area located about 100 miles away, it 
was shown that tri-ethnic identity in Robeson 
County was a highly localized phenomenon, 
endemic to the community where the Lumbee 
reside. While listeners from both communities 
reliably identified African Americans and 
European Americans at the same level of accu-
racy, only local community members could relia-
bly identify Lumbee Indians. The enlistment of 
the local community in the experiment thus 
proved to be critical for understanding dimensions 
of local and broad-based notions of ethnic identity 
in the American South. 
Analyses of listeners’ reactions to different 
productions can become quite sophisticated, 
thanks to computer software that allows for vari-
ous kinds of experimental manipulations of 
speech, including speech synthesis. For example, 
it is possible to alter just the production of a par-
ticular vowel or consonant while keeping the rest 
of the utterance constant so that the specific con-
tribution of the manipulated production to listen-
ers’ reaction can be teased out (Graff, Labov and 
Harris, 1986; Grimes, 2005; Campbell-Kibler, 
2007). Experimentation of this type has advanced 
our understanding of the role of vowel and conso-
nant production in listeners’ judgments of region-
ality as well as the interaction of regionality with 
social factors such as ethnicity, social status and 
gender. For example, perception tests indicate that 
the fronting of the vowel in boat so that it sounds 
more like bewt is strongly associated with 
European-American speech in the American South 
and that African Americans who use this feature 
are regularly identified as being European 
American rather than African American (Torbert, 
2004). In contrast, the fronting of the vowel in 
boot, so that it sounds more like biwt is not as 
strongly associated with European-American 
ethnicity, and African Americans with this feature 
tend to be identified correctly as African 
Americans. This indicates that the fronted produc-
tions of these two vowels, both common in many 
Southern-based speech varieties, have quite differ-
ent ethnic associations. Careful perceptual studies 
of this type help sort out the effects of subtle 
nuances of vowel production on listeners, and 
may help determine the relative perceptual sali-
ency of different phonetic factors in marking 
regional and ethnic identity.
Another area of study relates to the relationship 
of stereotypes and speech perception, ranging 
from the association of personal and social 
attributes ascribed to different voices (e.g. Labov, 
1966; Shuy et al., 1969) to the effect of social 
stereotypes on speech perception (Niedzielski, 
1999; Strand, 1999). Studies now abound in 
which researchers manipulate the stimulus to 
determine the effect of various phonetic traits on 
personal and social attribution (see Thomas, 2002 
for a review). For example, van Bezooiyen (1988) 
investigated how listeners judge speakers’ person-
alities in the Netherlands based on speech samples 
from speakers of various socioeconomic statuses 
in the city of Nijmegen. The speech was presented 
in four ways: (1) as excerpts of the unaltered 
recording; (2) lowpass filtered at 300 Hz in order 
to focus listeners’ attention on prosody; (3) with 
the recordings cut and respliced digitally to focus 
listeners’ attention on voice quality; and (4) as 
written text. The listeners rated the speech in the 
different conditions on various personality scales 
(e.g. ‘educated’, ‘strong-willed’, ‘fair’), resulting 
in an analysis that concluded that strong personal-
ity was inferred from prosody but intellectual and 
socioeconomic status were inferred from the 
segmental aspects of speech. 
One of the long-standing methods used in 
sociolinguistic research to elicit subjective reac-
tions to speech is the MATCHED GUISE TECHNIQUE, 
developed by Wallace Lambert and colleagues in 
the 1960s to evaluate the reactions of Montreal 
residents towards both French speakers and 
English speakers. In this technique a bilingual or 
bidialectal speaker renders the same passage in 
the two varieties, thus controlling for individual 
speaker traits. The results of the initial investiga-
tion by Lambert and his colleagues (Lambert, 
1967) showed that the Canadian English speakers 
evaluated the Canadian French guises less 

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
307
favourably, as predicted, but that the Canadian 
French speakers also attributed the Canadian 
French guises with less positive characteristics, a 
surprising conclusion.
A more recent use of the matched guise tech-
nique by Baugh (2003) applied it to linguistic 
profiling and housing discrimination. In response 
to advertisements for vacant apartments in the 
newspaper, Baugh telephoned using three differ-
ent guises – African American, Chicano American 
and European American – and found that the pro-
portion of vacant apartments reported was signifi-
cantly differentiated based on the three guises and 
the location of the apartments. To a large extent, 
the use of speech synthesis has now replaced the 
matched guise technique in sociolinguistic experi-
mentation type since it is easier to manipulate 
variables in a speech sample more precisely while 
strictly controlling other speaker variables. 
The previous studies relate to the social evalu-
ations and stereotypes evoked from speech. A 
different tack is taken by Strand (1999), who 
examined how stereotypes may alter a subject’s 
perception of speech. Strand’s study, based on part 
of the ‘McGurk effect’ (McGurk and MacDonald, 
1976), showed an interaction between hearing and 
vision in speech perception as speakers hearing 
one sound, while watching a video with another 
sound, tended to perceive the sound they lip-read 
from the video. Her study showed that subjects 
altered their perception of the sound based on the 
sex of the speaker, concluding that perception was 
influenced by gender stereotypes.
The development of experimental methods in 
perceptual studies is one of the fastest growing 
areas of sociolinguistics, and there are many 
experiments related to vowel mergers, vowel 
splits and comprehension across different dialects 
(see Labov, 1994; Thomas, 2002) that have 
advanced our understanding of the role between 
perception and production in sociolinguistic 
description. However, these studies take us beyond 
our focus on field methods here and are best 
treated as a burgeoning subfield of sociolinguis-
tics in its own right (Thomas, 2002). 
Not all studies of subjective viewpoints of 
speakers are dependent on tape-recorded stimuli 
of various types. The research of Dennis Preston 
and his colleagues (Preston, 1986, 1989, 1991, 
1999) focuses on people’s ‘commonsense’ beliefs 
and subjective mental categories rather than 
spoken language data. Such beliefs and mental 
representations are important to sociolinguists, 
since they may play an important role in shaping 
language variation and change across regional and 
social space. In the most straightforward proce-
dure for determining people’s ‘mental dialect 
maps’, study participants are simply asked to 
draw, on a blank or minimally detailed map, lines 
around regional speech zones. Instructions that 
guide such drawings involve eliciting people’s 
perceptions of the boundaries of Southern and 
Northern speech areas. These lines can then be 
traced onto digitized pads and software can then 
be used to generate composite maps of various 
types based on drawings from a large number of 
respondents. Differences in mental maps may cor-
relate with a range of respondent attributes such as 
region, age, social class, ethnicity and gender – 
the same kinds of social factors shown to be 
relevant in the patterning of variable dialect 
productions. For example, respondents from 
Southeastern Michigan and Southern Indiana in the 
USA draw very similar Southern dialect regions. 
However, there seems to be a ‘home region effect’ 
that influences how each group draws their 
Northern and Southern Midland boundaries, with 
each group drawing a larger dialect area around 
their home region.
These maps are supplemented by people’s 
evaluative judgments of different regional dialects, 
elicited through instructions such as ‘Rank the 
states on a scale of 1 to 10 showing where the most 
correct and the most incorrect English are spoken’ 
‘Rank the states showing where the most pleasant 
and unpleasant English are spoken’ and ‘Rank the 
states showing where English is most and least 
like your own variety’. For example, New York 
City and the South tend to be ranked as ‘most dif-
ferent’ by respondents from Michigan and Indiana. 
New York City and the South were also ranked as 
‘most incorrect’ by these same respondents. At the 
same time, Southern dialect is rated high on a 
scale of pleasantness, showing people’s compli-
cated and sometimes somewhat contradictory 
reactions to regional speech varieties. 
21.9 ETHNOGRAPHIC DESCRIPTION
Over the past couple of decades, the role of ethno-
graphic description has taken on increased signifi-
cance in sociolinguistic field methods. Most 
ethnographic description is based on some level of 
participant observation and long-term involve-
ment in a community, whether it be through 
extended residency in the community or regular 
visits and participation in the life of the commu-
nity. The benefits of an ethnographic approach 
include the quality and amount of data and 
the familiarity with community practices that 
allow researchers to uncover the essential social 
and cultural factors that may affect language vari-
ation and change from the standpoint of the com-
munity itself (Johnstone, 2000; Milroy and 
Gordon, 2003). Most sociolinguistic analyses that 
use social network or community-of-practice 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
308
approaches to sociolinguistic description rely on 
ethnographic approaches to some extent, and 
there are several paradigm examples of the bene-
fits of long-term involvement in an observation of 
a community. Eckert (2000), in her study of high-
school students in a Detroit suburb, spent two 
years at the school, regularly attending the school 
in the first year and occasionally attending it in the 
second year. Her years at the school helped her 
make sense of the linguistic and behavioural pat-
terns of the school, particularly as they related to 
different social groups of students (viz. ‘jocks’ 
and ‘burnouts’). In a similar vein, Mendoza-
Denton’s (2008) description of language and cul-
tural practices among Latina youth gangs was 
based on several years of participation in the lives 
of high school girls in California. In the process, 
she recorded them on different occasions, she 
copied their drawings, and she took notes and 
video-taped them when they went on trips to the 
beauty salon or to the amusement park. This regu-
lar engagement over time led Mendoza-Denton 
not only to a description of their speech but also to 
a description of their bodily practices and sym-
bolic exchanges that signal gang affiliations, cul-
tural practices and ideologies.
The richness of accounts based on extensive 
ethnographic involvement speak for themselves, 
but they also suggest that greater explanatory 
power in sociolinguistic description is dependent 
on understanding the local social categories and 
ideologies that emerge from long-term participa-
tion. Ethnographic approaches are by their very 
nature more interdisciplinary and involve the 
observation and description of a wide range of 
behaviours. For example, Mallinson’s (2008) 
description of two communities of practice in a 
small African-American community in the Smoky 
Mountains in western North Carolina, the ‘church 
ladies’ and ‘the porch ladies’, includes a descrip-
tion of physical details such as the layout and 
decoration of their homes, their style of dress and 
their physical complexion, as well as their atti-
tudes about religion, family, race and social 
mores. The ethnographic description thus frames 
the social groups that constitute the communities 
of practice and the language differences that dis-
tinguish them. As Milroy and Gordon (2003: 70) 
note, participant observation tends to work well in 
small, well-delineated communities if the com-
munity is responsive to the fieldworkers on a 
personal basis. 
The model of participant observation used by 
fieldworkers from the North Carolina Language 
and Life Project in Ocracoke (Wolfram, Hazen 
and Schilling-Estes, 1999; Wolfram, 2008) has 
lasted more than 15 years with numerous trips to 
the island for up to a week at a time. Furthermore, 
it has involved multiple teams of student 
fieldworkers over the years with one of two con-
stant faculty members of the team involved in 
each trip. Without our extended participation, we 
would not have been able to identify some of the 
social groups and personal attributes critical to our 
description of language change. For example, the 
so-called ‘Poker Game Network’ is a male-exclu-
sive group that values traditional island themes, 
which in turn correlates with their maintenance of 
several iconic dialect features (Wolfram and 
Schilling-Estes, 1995). Our long-term participa-
tion in the life of the community has now led to 
real-time studies that combine panel studies with 
trend studies at different periods, including a com-
parison of a current analogue of the ‘Poker Game 
Network’ (Wolfram and Smith, 2008). While this 
extended participation has resulted in some unique 
insights into the relation between real-time and 
apparent-time studies, it has also uncovered some 
methodological cautions for real-life studies of 
language change. Keeping data points in time 
equal in terms of social conditions, interaction and 
even acoustic conditions for recording also need 
to be considered in order to conduct systematic 
comparative studies of the same community and 
speakers at different points in time. And, of 
course, in the current vein of sociolinguistic stud-
ies, both groups and individuals need to be consid-
ered in real-time language change – just as they 
are in apparent-time studies. Indeed, qualitatively-
based fieldwork is necessary to complement and 
inform our quantitative analyses in sociolinguis-
tics. The balance between the qualitative perspec-
tive provided through ethnographic study and the 
quantitative analysis of variable speech data is one 
of the challenges for sociolinguistics in the future 
development of field methods that are rooted in 
both humanities and social science traditions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Support from NSF grants BCS-0542139 and 
BCS-0542139 for research and writing is grate-
fully acknowledged.
NOTE
1 Dayton (1996) and Labov (1998) have since 
rejected Fasold’s hypotheses about the different 
underlying structures for invariant be in African-
American English based solely on naturalistically-
acquired data, but it remains an issue in dispute 
(Green, 2002).

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
309
REFERENCES
Alim, H. S. (2004) You Know My Steez: An Ethnographic and 
Sociolinguistic Study of Style Shifting in a Black American 
speech community. Publication of the American Dialect 
Society 89. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Bailey, G. and Maynor, N. (1987) ‘Decreolization’, Language 
in Society, 16: 449–74.
Baugh, J. (2003) ‘Linguistic profiling’, in M. Cinfree, 
G. Smitherman, A. F. Ball and A. K. Spears (eds), Black 
Linguistics: Language, Society, and Politics in Africa and the 
Americas. New York: Routledge. pp. 155–68.
Boberg, C. (2005) ‘The North American Regional Vocabulary 
Survey: renewing the study of lexical variation in North 
American English’, American Speech, 80: 22–60.
Briggs, C. (1986) Learning How to Ask: A Sociolinguistic 
Appraisal of the Role of the Interview in Social Science 
Research. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Britain, D. (2001) ‘Welcome to East Anglia!: two major dialect 
‘boundaries’ in the Fens’, in P. Trudgill and J. Fisiak (eds), 
East Anglian English. Woodbridge: Boydell and Brewer. 
pp. 217–42.
Bucholtz, M. (2003) ‘Sociolinguistic nostalgia and the 
authentication of identity’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
7: 398–416.
Burchinal, M., Roberts, J. E., Zeisel, S. A. and Rowley, S. 
(2008) ‘Social risk and protective factors for African 
American children’s academic achievement and adjustment 
during the transition to middle school’, Developmental 
Psychology, 44: 286–92.
Bush, C. N. (1967) ‘Some acoustic parameters of speech and 
their relationships to the perception of dialect differences’, 
TESOL Quarterly, 1(3): 20-30.
Cameron, D., Fraser, E., Harvey, P., Rampton, M. B. H. and 
Richardson, K. (1992) Researching Language: Issues of 
Power and Method. New York: Routledge.
Campbell-Kibler, K. (2007) ‘Accent, (ING) and the social logic 
of listener perceptions’, American Speech, 82: 32–64.
Childs, B. and Mallinson C. (2004) 'African American English 
in Appalachia: Dialect accommodation and substrate 
influence'. English World-Wide, 25: 25–50.
Cukor-Avila, P. and Bailey, G. (1995) ‘An approach to socio-
linguistic fieldwork: A site study of rural AAVE in a Texas 
community’, English World-Wide, 16: 21–59.
Cukor-Avila, P. and Bailey, G. (2001) ‘The effects of the race 
of the interviewer on sociolinguistic fieldwork’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 5: 254–70.
Dayton, E. (1996) ‘Grammatical categories of the verb in 
African American Vernacular English’. University of 
Pennsylvania dissertation.
Dodsworth, R. (2005) ‘Attribute networking: a technique for 
modeling social perceptions’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
9: 225–53.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992) ‘Think practically 
and look locally: language and gender as community-based 
practice’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 21: 461–90.
Edwards, V. (1986) Language in a Black Community. Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters.
Fasold, R. W. (1969) ‘Tense and the form be in Black English’, 
Language, 45: 763–76.
Fasold, R. W. (1972) Tense Marking in Black English: A 
Linguistic and Social Analysis. Arlington: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Fischer, J. N. L. (1958) ‘Social influences on the choice of a 
linguistic variant’, Word, 14: 47–56.
Graff, D., Labov, W. and Harris, W. A. (1986) ‘Testing listen-
ers’s reactions to phonological markers of ethnic identity: a 
new method for sociolinguistic research’, in D. Sankoff 
(ed.), Diversity and Diachrony. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 45–58.
Green, L. J. (2002) African American English: A Linguistic 
Introduction. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Grimes, A. (2005) ‘In search of ethnic cues: the status of /æ/ 
and // and their implications for linguistic profiling’. MA 
thesis, North Carolina State University.
Guy, G. (1980) ‘Variation in the group and the individual: the 
case of final stop deletion’, in W. Labov (ed.), Locating 
Language in Time and Space. New York: Academic Press. 
pp. 1–36.
Hagstrom, C. (2004) ‘The language of doctors and patients’, 
in E. Finegan and J. R. Rickford (eds), Language in the USA: 
Themes for the Twenty-First Century. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 445–62.
Hazen, K. (2000) ‘The role of researcher identity in conducting 
sociolinguistic research: a reflective case study’, Southern 
Journal of Linguistics, 24: 103–20.
Hazen, K. (2002) ‘Identity and language variation in a rural 
community’, Language, 78: 240–57.
Holmes, J. (2006) Gendered Talk at Work: Constructing 
Gender Identity Through Workplace Discourse. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell. 
Holmes, J. and Stubbe, M. (2003) Power and Politeness in the 
Workplace: A Sociolinguistic Analysis of Talk at Work. 
London: Pearson. 
Johnstone, B. (2000) Qualitative Methods in Sociolinguistics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnstone, B. and Baumgardt, D. (2004) ‘Pittsburghese 
online: vernacular norming in conversation’, American 
Speech, 79: 115–45.
Kendall, T. (2009) ‘Speech rate, pause, and linguistic varia-
tion: an examination through the sociolinguistic archive 
and analysis project’. Duke University dissertation.
Kerswill, P. (1993) ‘Rural dialect speakers in an urban speech 
community: the role of dialect contact in defining a socio-
linguistic concept’, International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics, 3: 33–56.
Kerswill, P. and Wright, S. (1990) ‘The validity of phonetic 
transcription: limitations of a sociolinguistic research tool’, 
Language Variation and Change, 2: 255–75.
Labov, W. (1963) ‘The social motivation of a sound change’, 
Word, 19: 273–307.
Labov, W. (1966) The Social Stratification of English in New 
York City. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics.
Labov, W. (1972a) ‘Some principles of linguistic methodo-
logy’, Language in Society, 1: 97–120.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
310
Labov, W. (1972b) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1984) ‘Field methods of the project on language 
change and variation’, in J. Baugh and J. Sherzer (eds), 
Language in Use: Readings in Sociolinguistics. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall. pp. 28–53.
Labov, W. (1994) Principles of Language Change. Vol. 1, 
Internal Factors. Oxford: Blackwell.
Labov, W. (1998) ‘Coexistent systems in African-American 
vernacular English’, in S. Mufwene, J. R. Rickford, G. Bailey 
and J. Baugh (eds), African American Vernacular English. 
New York: Routledge. pp. 110–53.
 Labov, W. (2001) Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 2, 
Social Factors. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Labov, W., Cohen, P., Robins, C. and Lewis, J. (1968) A Study 
of the Non-Standard English of Negro and Puerto Rican 
Speakers in New York City. United States Office of 
Education Final Report, Research Project 3288.
Labov, W., Ash, S. and Boberg, C. (2006) The atlas of North 
American English: Phonetics, Phonology, and Sound 
Change. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Lambert, W. E. (1967) ‘A social psychology of bilingualism’, 
Journal of Social Issues, 23: 91–108. 
McGurk, H. and MacDonald, J. (1976) ‘Hearing lips and seeing 
voices’, Nature, 264: 385–403.
Malinowski, B. (1915) ‘The natives of Mailu: preliminary 
results of the Robert Mond research work in British New 
Guinea’, Transactions and Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of South Australia, 39: 494–706.
Malinowski, B. (1922) Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An 
Account of the Native Enterprise and Adventure in the 
Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. Studies in 
Economics and Political Science, No. 65. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul. 
Mallinson, C. (2006) ‘The dynamic construction of race, class, 
and gender through linguistic practice among women in a 
Black Appalachian community’. Raleigh, NC: North Carolina 
State University dissertation,
Mendoza-Denton, N. (1995) ‘Pregnant pauses: silence and 
authority in the Hill-Thomas hearings’, in M. Bucholtz and K. 
Hall (eds), Gender Articulated: Language and the Culturally 
Constructed Self. Routledge: New York. pp. 51–66.
Mendoza-Denton, N. (2008) Homegirls: Language and 
Cultural Practice among Latina Youth Gangs. London: 
Wiley/Blackwell.
Mendoza-Denton, N. and Mjahed, M. (2002) A Congressman’s 
Response to Face-Threatening Acts in Town Hall Meetings: 
Implications for Habermas’ Public Sphere. American 
Anthropological Association, New Orleans, LA.
Meyerhoff, M. (2001) ‘Formal and cultural constraints on 
optional objects in Bislama’, Language Variation and 
Change, 13: 323–46.
Milory, L. (1987) 'Language and Social Networks', 2nd ed. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Milroy, L. and Gordon, M. (2003) Sociolinguistics: Method and 
Interpretation. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Nagy, N. (2000) ‘Fieldwork in the new century: working, in 
facto, an endangered language community’, Southern 
Journal of Linguistics, 24: 121–36.
Neuman, W. L. (2002) Social Research Methods: Qualitative 
and Quantitative Approaches. 5th edn. Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon. 
Niedzielski, N. (1999) ‘The effect of social information on the 
perception of sociolinguistic variables’, Journal of Language 
and Social Psychology, 18: 62–85.
Patrick, P. L. (2002) ‘The speech community’, in J. K. 
Chambers, P. Trudgill and N. Schilling-Estes (eds), 
Handbook of Language Variation and Change. Malden, 
MA: Blackwell. pp. 573–97.
Pickford, G. R. (1956) ‘American linguistic geography: a socio-
logical appraisal’, Word, 11: 211–33.
Podesva, R. J., Jamsu, J., Calllier, P. and Heitman, J. (2008) 
‘The social meaning of released /t/ among US polititicians: 
insights from production and perceptions’. Paper given at 
New Ways of Analyzing Variation, Houston, TX, November 
2008.
Preston, D. (1986) ‘Five visions of America’, Language in 
Society, 15: 221–40.
Preston, D. R. (1989) Perceptual Dialectology: Nonlinguists’ 
Views of Areal Linguistics. Dordrecht: Foris.
Preston, D. R. (1991) ‘Sorting out the variables in sociolinguis-
tic theory’, American Speech. 66: 33–56.
Preston, D. R. (1992) ‘Talking black and talking white: a study 
in variety imitation’, in J. J. Hall, N. Doanne and D. Ringler 
(eds), Old English and New: Studies in Language and 
Linguistics in Honor of Frederic G. Cassidy. New York: 
Garland. pp. 327–55.
Preston, D. R. (1993) ‘Folk dialectology’, in D. R. Preston (ed.), 
American Dialect Research. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 333–77.
Preston, D. R. (1996) ‘Whaddayaknow? The modes of folk 
linguistic awareness’, Language Awareness, 5: 40–77.
Renn, J. (2007) ‘Measuring style shift: a quantitative analysis 
of African American English’. University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill thesis.
Rickford, J. R. (1999) African American English: Features, 
Evolution, and Educational Implications. Malden, MA: 
Blackwell.
Rickford, J. R. and McNair-Knox, F. (1994) ‘Addressee- and 
topic-influenced style shift’, in D. Biber and E. Finegan 
(eds), Sociolinguistic Perspectives on Register. New York: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 235–76.
Schilling-Estes, N. (1998) ‘Investigating “self-conscious” 
speech: the performance register in Ocracoke English’, 
Language in Society, 27: 53–83.
Schilling-Estes, N. (2000) ‘Fieldwork for the new century’, 
Southern Journal of Linguistics, 24: 83–90.
Schilling-Estes, N. (2008) ‘Sociolinguistic fieldwork’, in 
R. Bayley and C. Lucas (eds), Sociolinguistic Variation: 
Theories, Methods, and Applications. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp.165–89.
Schilling-Estes, N. and Wolfram, W. (1994) ‘Convergent expla-
nation and alternative regularization patterns: were/
weren’t leveling in a vernacular English variety’, Language 
Variation and Change, 6: 273–302.
Schreier, D. (2003) Isolation and Language Change: 
Contemporary and Sociohistorical Evidence from Tristan da 
Cunha English. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

FIELDWORK METHODS IN LANGUAGE VARIATION
311
Shuy, R., Wolfram, W. and Riley, W. K. (1967) Linguistic 
Correlates of Social Stratification in Detroit Speech. USOE 
Final Report No. 6-1347. Washington, DC: Center for 
Applied Linguistics.
Shuy, R. W., Wolfram, W. and Riley, W. K (1968) Field 
Techniques in an Urban Language Study. Washington, DC: 
Center for Applied Linguistics.
Shuy, R., Baratz, J. C. and Wolfram, W. (1969) Sociolinguistic 
Factors in Speech Identification. NIMH Research Project 
No. MH 15048-01. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Strand, E. (1999) ‘Understanding the role of gender stereo-
types in speech perception’, Journal of Language and Social 
Psychology, 18: 86–100.
Tagliamonte, S. (2006) Analyzing Sociolinguistic Variation. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tagliamonte, S. and Denis, D. (2008) ‘Linguistic ruin? LOL! 
Instant messaging and teen language’, American Speech, 
83: 3–34
Thomas, E. R. (2002) ‘Sociophonetic applications of 
speech perception experiments’, American Speech, 77: 
115–47.
Torbert, B. (2004) ‘Southern vowels and the social construc-
tion of salience’. Duke University dissertation.
Trudgill, P. (1974) The Social Differentiation of English in 
Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Van Bezooijen, R. (1988) ‘The relative importance of pronun-
ciation, prosody, and voice quality for the attribution of 
social status and personality characteristics’, in R. van Hout 
and U. Knops (eds), Language Attitudes in the Dutch 
Language Area. Dordrecht: Foris. pp. 85–103.
Van Hofwegen, J. and Wolfram, W. (forthcoming) Coming of 
Age in African American English: A Longitudinal Study, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics.
Wolfram, W. (1969) A Sociolinguistic Description of Detroit 
Negro Speech. Washington, DC: Center for Applied 
Linguistics.
Wolfram, W. (1982) ‘Language knowledge and other 
dialects’, American Speech, 57: 3–18.
Wolfram, W. (1986) ‘Good data in a bad situation: eliciting 
vernacular structures’, in J. Fishman, A. Tabouret-Keller, 
M. Cline, B. Khrishnamurti and M. Abdulziz (eds), 
The Fergusonian Impact. Vol. 2. The Hague: Mouton. 
pp. 3–33.
Wolfram, W. (1988) ‘Reconsidering the semantics of a-prefix-
ing’, American Speech, 63: 247–54.
Wolfram, W. (1996) ‘Delineation and description in dialectol-
ogy: the case of perfective I’m in Lumbee English’, 
American Speech, 71: 5–26.
Wolfram, W. (2008) ‘When islands lose dialects: the case of 
the Ocracoke Brogue’, Shima: The International Journal for 
Research on Island Cultures, 2: 1–13.
Wolfram, W. and Fasold, R. (1974) The Study of Social Dialects 
in the United States. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Wolfram, W. and Schilling-Estes, N. (1995) ‘Moribund dialects 
and the endangerment canon: the case of the Ocracoke 
brogue’, Language, 71: 696–71.
Wolfram, W. and Smith, A. (2008) Re-examining dialect 
recession: integrating real and apparent time. Houston, TX. 
NWAV 37. November 2008.
Wolfram, W. and Wolfram, T. D. (1977) ‘How come you asked 
how come?’, in R. W. Fasold and R. W. Shuy (eds), Studies 
in Language Variation. Washington, DC: Georgetown 
University Press. pp. 33–41.
Wolfram, W., Hazen, K., and Schilling-Estes, N. (1999) Dialect 
Maintenance and Change on the Outer Banks. Publications 
of the American Dialect Society 81. Tuscaloosa, AL: 
University of Alabama Press.
Wolfram, W., Dannenberg, C., Knick, S. and Oxendine, L. 
(2002) Fine in the World: Lumbee Language in Time and 
Place. Raleigh: NC State Humanity Extension Program/
Publications.
Wolfram, W., Reaser, J. and Vaughn, C. (2008). 
‘Operationalizing linguistic gratuity: from principle to prac-
tice’, Linguistic and Language Compass, 2(6): 1109–34.
Wolfson, N. (1976) ‘Speech events and natural speech: some 
implications for sociolinguistic methodology’, Language in 
Society, 5: 168–82.


PART 4
Interaction


22
22.1 INTRODUCTION
Class, race and gender divisions continue to be 
among the central forces shaping how we live. 
Social theorists, particularly sociologists, try to 
understand how societies are structured and how 
‘power’, ‘class’ or ‘gender’ are distributed, organized 
and indexed. It is a major concern of sociolinguis-
tics to examine the possible relationships between 
language, on the one hand, and concepts such as 
those mentioned above, on the other (Wardhaugh, 
2002: 9). Through the introduction of a systematic 
methodology for investigating social dialects, 
Labov (1972) was able to show that variations in 
features such as the postvocalic (r) in words such 
as car were not a matter of free choice, but rather 
were conditioned in predictable ways by social 
factors such as social class, age, sex and style 
(Romaine, 1995: 494). Since then, this approach 
has been refined and broadened by linguists from 
various different traditions, many of whom believe 
that the relationship between language and the 
social structure is complex and multifaceted. The 
analysis of face-to-face interaction contributes to 
this enterprise in important ways.
In this chapter, I aim to summarize and discuss 
sociolinguistic dimensions of interactional features. 
Most sociologists regard structural categories 
such as ‘class’ or ‘gender’ as macro issues. The 
micro/macro distinction is a great source of confu-
sion in thinking about the causes of inequality. 
Social scientists sometimes blur the distinction 
between the individual and societal causes of 
certain phenomena. What causes a single person 
to be poor is not always what causes high societal 
rates of poverty. Sociolinguists distinguish a 
macro level of society and a micro level of dis-
course phenomena. There are different ways to 
connect these levels and different views as to what 
kinds of evidence are appropriate for what kinds 
of question. Boxer (2002: 19ff.) points out that 
many researchers who combine sociolinguistics 
and the study of face-to-face interaction success-
fully triangulate their methods (see also Wodak 
and Krzyzanowski, 2008):
The manner in which research is carried out con-
strains findings. This fact has long been known to 
researchers of social sciences. Sociolinguistics is par-
ticularly vulnerable to differential interpretation of 
research results that have used different methods of 
data collection and analysis. How one studies a par-
ticular issue both determines and is determined by 
the research question(s). Thus, if we want to study 
the realization of a particular speech act in a particu-
lar speech community, we will choose to collect the 
data in face-to-face interaction. If the speech behav-
iour is rare, employing a method other than that 
which relies on naturally occurring data may be in 
order. Having said this, one must understand the 
limitations of any approach and proceed with cau-
tion, hedging on claims that may be beyond the 
possibility of analysis when using any one particular 
method. A combination of approaches is always 
recommended, and triangulating data sheds light 
on how and why people said what they did.
Sociolinguistic Potentials of 
Face-to-Face Interaction
H e l g a  K o t t h o f f

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
316
Interaction studies can shed light on the complex-
ity of social life beyond reifying static stratified 
groups, and they are particularly concerned with 
the intersection between class, gender and other 
kinds of identity.
Various schools have contributed to the emer-
gence of interaction analysis as a discipline bridg-
ing anthropology, linguistics, communication 
science and sociology. In this chapter, I deal with 
the following:
• ethnography of communication and interactional 
sociolinguistics
• ethnomethodology and conversation analysis
• (critical) discourse analysis
• gender studies.
The focus will be on the findings and approaches 
these schools have contributed to the sociolinguis-
tics of face-to-face interaction. In the last 30 years 
a lot of research has been done on gender in com-
munication (see, e.g., the handbook by Holmes 
and Meyerhoff, 2003) and also on ethnic discrimi-
nation (see, e.g., Kotthoff and Spencer-Oatey, 
2007). But to write about stratification according 
to class was seen as ‘proof you belonged to the 
past age – an age where old-fashioned macho and 
egotistical union leaders endangered the national 
good’ (Machin and Richardson, 2008: 282; see 
Hellinger in this volume).
Not only is there a gap as far as class and class 
experience are concerned but also a theoretical gap 
in our understanding of both individual experience 
and structurally stratified inequalities because, as 
well, in discourse studies idealistic philosophical 
approaches dominated, according to which dis-
course ‘creates’ social positions and social realities 
(Machin and Richardson, 2008: 283).
22.2  ETHNOGRAPHY OF 
COMMUNICATION AND 
INTERACTIONAL SOCIOLINGUISTICS
The American linguists and anthropologists Dell 
H. Hymes and John Gumperz were among the 
first to study ‘ways of speaking’ as they differ 
from culture to culture, from speech community 
to speech community (Hymes, 1972, reprinted 
2001; Gumperz, 1968, reprinted 2001).
The studies concentrated on rigidly stratified com-
munities where roles were strictly compartmental-
ized and associated varieties of language clearly 
differentiated (Saville-Troike, 1982: 87). In many 
societies roles are marked by different pronouns 
or terms of address and may require different 
levels of formality, corresponding to the different 
levels of prestige or deference assigned to them. 
Speakers possess ‘communicative competence’, 
i.e. knowledge of appropriate ways of speaking 
within their culture. An important unit of analysis 
is the communicative event, a single verbal inter-
action (e.g. ‘nagging’ in a family context; Boxer, 
2002) within a specific communicative situation 
as recognized by the culture (e.g. an evening meal 
or an examination). The object of study in this 
tradition is situated discourse. ‘Ethnography’ 
refers to fieldwork, supplemented by techniques 
developed in other areas of study such as pragmat-
ics, anthropology and conversation analysis (Fitch 
and Philipsen, 1995). Since the appearance of a 
special issue of American Anthropologist com-
piled by John Gumperz and Dell Hymes in 1964, 
the ethnography of speaking, as both a methodol-
ogy and as a model of how human beings con-
struct shared meaning from social experience, has 
studied diverse questions. It often analyses social 
issues reflected in language use, including dis-
crimination and stigma and their effects. Societies 
differ in the communicative resources available 
for their members. The relative status of speakers 
and their role relationship may be marked in a 
variety of ways. Role relationships may also be 
marked by the order in which participants speak, 
eye contact or avoidance and body position, as 
Saville-Troike (1982: 88) points out. In a cyclical 
or interactional event with several people speak-
ing in sequence, such as greetings, introductions, 
or expressing thanks, the order of address may 
mark relative deference or closeness (Saville-
Troike, 1982: 91).
Let us look at ethnographic studies of commu-
nication that examine the world of schooling and 
education, where sociolinguistic interference is 
frequently found (see also Rojo in this volume). 
School-induced socialization has enormous socio-
political significance, and as a result the forms and 
content of schooling are an enduring source of 
social conflict.
Susan U. Philips (1970, reprinted 2001) studied 
‘Participant Structures and Communicative 
Competence’ and showed that Native American 
children failed to participate in classroom interac-
tion because the social conditions for participation 
to which they become accustomed in their Indian 
community differ from those they encounter in 
school. Philips spent sufficient time on the Warm 
Springs Reservation in Oregon to observe classroom 
and reservation communicative situations and 
pinpoint sources of potential conflict for Warm 
Springs Native American children. The teachers 
repeatedly stated that Native American (Indian) 
children show a great deal of reluctance to speak 
in class. Philips writes (2001: 305) that the most 
immediate concern of the teachers is to teach chil-
dren the basic rules of classroom behaviour neces-
sary to maintain continuous and ordered activity. 

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
317
The teacher controls all the activities taking place 
in the classroom; in particular, she determines 
who can speak and when they can speak. The 
teacher often relates to the class as an undifferen-
tiated mass (one type of participation structure), 
much like a performer before an audience, or she 
relates to only some of the students (another type 
of participation structure). In comparing Indian 
and non-Indian first-graders, Philips noticed that 
the Indian first-graders are consistently slower in 
beginning to act in accordance with many basic 
class arrangements. They do not raise their hands 
before speaking, wander around the room and talk 
to other students. They show a great deal more 
interest in what other students are doing than in 
what the teacher is doing. A third participation 
structure consists in all students working inde-
pendently. A fourth consists of group projects 
with student chairpersons. In the first two settings, 
Native American children speak rarely or so softly 
that only their neighbours can understand them. In 
the other two participation frameworks, they are 
much more successful. Philips compares partici-
pation in the classroom to Indian children’s par-
ticipation in other contexts. For a Native American 
child it is very unusual that a person places herself 
outside the interaction and activity of the students 
(as the teachers do in the first two frameworks). In 
the Indians’ social experience, one is either part of 
a group or outside it. The notion of a single indi-
vidual such as the teacher being structurally set 
apart from all the others, and yet still part of the 
group organization, is one that these children 
encounter for the first time in school and continue 
to experience only in non-Indian derived activi-
ties. It is not the case that all the students in the 
classroom may participate in any given activity, as 
in Indian community activities. Nor are they given 
the opportunity to choose the degree of participa-
tion, which in Native American contexts would be 
based on the individual having already ascertained 
in private that he or she was capable of successful 
communication of competence. Educators, Philips 
concludes, cannot assume that because Indian 
children (or any children from cultural back-
grounds other than European American) speak 
English, they have assimilated all the sociolin-
guistic rules underlying classroom interaction. 
Her work aims at sensitizing teachers to cultural 
differences.
Whereas Philips shows a classroom situation in 
which children of more than one cultural background 
come together, and those who do not meet the 
dominant standards do not get equal opportunities 
within the system, Paul Willis’ Learning to Labour 
(1977)1 focuses on class distinctions in the British 
school system. He points to the resistance 
of working-class ‘lads’ to the oppression of a 
British school which attempts to mould them into 
compliant workers who will fill jobs in degrading 
occupations. Willis details creative ways in which 
working-class boys retain a sense of importance 
and identity at school in the face of an oppressive 
system which treats them as ‘deviant’. He points 
out that the sector of the educational system he 
studied was intended to reproduce a class struc-
ture marked by inequality resting on the backs of 
labourers.
School is not just a place where the dominant 
culture’s hegemony is expressed and reproduced, 
it is also the site of daily conflicts over legitimate 
vs illegitimate behaviours and languages, as well 
as over the recognition of the social relevance of 
hegemonic values, norms and knowledge. Jünger 
(2008) shows for contemporary Switzerland that 
school success depends decisively on what frame-
work conditions affect children and how school-
compatible their habitus is (in Bourdieu’s sense). 
Underprivileged and privileged primary school 
children have their own resource-specific school 
logic and experience and use the school in differ-
ent ways. As a result, in regard to the acquisition 
of competency, disadvantages arise for the one 
and, to the contrary, advantages for the other.
Recent studies of multicultural education have 
also shown that in the interaction between teach-
ers and pupils, popular ethnic, religious and 
cultural stereotypes shape teachers’ expectations 
about the pupils’ abilities. In language education, 
for example, a recent German study shows that 
teachers tend to attribute linguistic deficits to chil-
dren with immigrant backgrounds and to over 
look those of the native children (Weber, 2003). 
This phenomenon perpetuates the judgment that 
immigrant children have low linguistic and cul-
tural competence. Hugh Mehan et al. (2001) cite 
various studies demonstrating that in US schools 
as well, minority pupils’ deficiencies are attrib-
uted to cultural factors. Instead of an increased 
sensitivity to cultural differences, we often face a 
sort of ethnicization of social conflict. Conflicts 
among social groups can be projected onto immi-
grants or minorities, while other potentially mean-
ingful differences, like those between middle-class 
and working-class cultures or between various 
political milieux, are neglected (Scherr, 2007).
Recently, Monica Heller and Marilyn Martin-
Jones (2001) edited a volume of studies whose 
authors analyse school interactions as a window to 
the contradictions between educational policy 
idealism and classroom reality. All their authors 
aim at combining an analysis of structure with one 
of agency. In Part 1, discourse analysts from Hong 
Kong, England and Burundi show how even after 
the curriculum is opened up to marginalized lan-
guages, domination may still be re-established 
through unequal patterns of turn-taking and 
code-switching. Others analyse routinized talk 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
318
sequences characterized by heavy repetition, 
which prevents meaningful pupil engagement with 
the curriculum. Parts 2 and 3 explore responses by 
planners and students to dominant social catego-
ries and educational discourses. Here there is some 
optimism, as students exuberantly code switch, call 
attention to classroom rules, parody one another 
and reject unstated norms. The studies discuss 
students’ resistance strategies, situated in institu-
tional interactions such as, for example, choices of 
indigenous languages against the school norm.
The ethnography of communication is an inte-
grative approach which embraces various prac-
tices. Its approach to discourse in general often 
combines context description, speech events and 
interactional approaches within a larger frame-
work of inquiry. It views all phases and aspects of 
interaction (from the cognitive to the political) as 
relevant to cultural meanings (Schiffrin, 1994: 
144). Gumperz (1982: 12) later turned his atten-
tion to modern urban societies and their social and 
cultural heterogeneity. His studies of both inter-
racial and inter-ethnic settings show that, in 
particular, differences in the marginal features of 
language that can cause misunderstandings lead to 
the formation of racial and ethnic stereotypes and 
contribute to inequalities in power and status. He 
called these signalling mechanisms ‘contextuali-
zation cues’. When speakers share contextualiza-
tion cues, interactions proceed smoothly.
Researchers who regard themselves as interac-
tional or interpretive sociolinguists work with 
interactional data recorded in natural situations. 
They do not take isolated sequences, but rather 
situated interactions as their starting point, because 
context extends beyond the immediate context of 
the discourse sequence (local context). They inte-
grate ethnography, sociocultural structures, ideolo-
gies and power relations as resources for interpreting 
communication (Auer and di Luzio, 1992; Kotthoff, 
1996a). Since language and speech are viewed in 
their function for the (re)construction of social real-
ity, analyses of conversations should permit infer-
ences beyond structural patterns about:
• how social relationships and social identities are 
created, affirmed and changed
• how the cultural norms of life worlds are formed 
and
• how societies generate evaluations of speech 
and thereby create political orders (Gal and 
Woolard, 1995).
Qualitative approaches to data are regarded as 
important, since researchers reconstruct how 
speakers acquire social meaning through the 
simultaneous processing of verbal sequences and 
ethnographic surroundings. But quantification is 
often relevant, too.
Neither institutional nor other types of dis-
course are regarded as automatically obeying 
normative sociolinguistic appropriateness con-
straints. Everywhere, interpretive processes are 
responsible for the specific scope of action and the 
definition of social relationships that speakers 
negotiate within sociohistorically transmitted 
power structures. Parameters such as gender, 
class, group or ethnicity – structural dimensions 
of most societies – can be contextualized as more 
or less relevant categories in situated practice 
(Cook-Gumperz and Gumperz, 2007). Their influ-
ence is historically strong, but not set completely 
extra-situationally. Social stylistics is a further 
important domain of interactional sociolinguistics 
(Sandig and Selting, 1997; Eckert, 2000); differ-
ent ways of speaking are not merely attributed to 
speakers’ social conditions (to extra-situational 
factors), but rather the conversational dynamics 
are analysed from the complexity of the power 
distribution to style repertoires on up to the social 
distinction interests of the participants. The two 
summaries presented below demonstrate how 
interactional sociolinguists combine micro analy-
sis with reflections on power structures.
Cook-Gumperz and Gumperz (1996) focus on 
the hidden role that gender plays in a dissertation 
defence. They demonstrate how a turn-by-turn 
analysis can be connected with broader problems 
of gender ideology that affect many aspects of the 
proceedings. The authors demonstrate, contrary to 
official ideologies according to which academic 
assessments are solely based on personal achieve-
ment, that subtextual scientific ideologies play a 
role that, in the given defence, leads to a subtle 
devaluation of the student’s high involvement with 
her subject (‘lack of academic distance’). A sequen-
tial contextualization of the event is combined 
with a concentration on the sociohistorical roots 
of ideologies about professional judgment and 
gender. The authors show how contextualization 
choices constitute the event as a ritual. The article 
goes beyond microanalysis to deal with matters of 
broader context, such as the authority relations 
of traditional male dominance in academia (see 
also chapters by Pavlidou and Hellinger in this 
volume).
Marco Jacquemet’s book Credibility in Court 
(1996) analyses trials of members of the Nuova 
Camorra Organizzata (NCO) in Naples, Italy, a 
criminal organization which in the 1980s control-
led as much as a third of the economic activity 
in that region. In winter 1982, the NCO suffered a 
fatal blow: the desertion of some of its key men 
who, when arrested, broke the code of silence and 
provided evidence to incriminate their former 
associates. His study focuses on the relationship 
between the judges in charge of the court proceed-
ings and a new kind of witness: the so-called 

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
319
pentiti (repentants), who cooperated with the 
Justice Department in exchange for reduced sen-
tences. The mass trials lasted three years. The 
recordings stem from trials that took place in 
various political atmospheres. The construction of 
legal evidence was in each case a negotiated proc-
ess carried out mainly through communicative 
performance. Jacquemet does not deny the exist-
ence and importance of institutional authority, but 
points out that an ongoing, communicative nego-
tiation characterizes the regulation of conflicts in 
institutional settings. The unstable situation of the 
Italian legal system and its structural transforma-
tions examined in the book constitute a clear 
example of the dynamic nature of the relationship 
between social structures and communicative 
practices, showing the dynamic tension between 
so-called micro and macro dimensions. The 
social structure of the courtroom environment 
provided the initial ‘rules of the game’, as well as 
the necessary resources for acting in the 1983 
trial. These rules and resources both constrained 
and facilitated participants’ communicative behav-
iour. However, as soon as the trial started, the 
focus shifted to the manoeuvres, strategies and 
alliances of the courtroom participants, who used 
the given rules and resources to try to obtain a 
favourable outcome. Jacquemet documented the 
shifting relationship between the pentiti and the 
Justice Department – especially the trial judges. The 
confessions the pentiti made to law-enforcement 
agents had to be re-enacted in the courtroom in 
order to be accepted as judicial evidence for the 
prosecution’s case. In the courtroom, the pentiti 
had to produce a ‘true’ discourse, i.e. a discourse 
accepted as truthful by its recipients. In this quest 
for credibility, they drew on the communicative 
strategies available to them – ones acquired over 
the years in everyday interactions within their 
local networks, which were mainly made up of 
people engaged in ‘state-disapproved’ (i.e. illegal) 
activities. In an unfamiliar role and under stress 
caused by the close scrutiny, they based their 
performance in the witness stand on their local 
communal values – above all their code of honour 
(Jacquemet, 1996: 5). Coming from a moral 
universe which recognizes credibility on the basis 
of social reputation rather than on propositional 
accuracy, they presented themselves as ‘men of 
honour’ in order to get the Justice Department to 
acknowledge their credibility, not through an 
examination of the referential content of their 
testimony, but rather through the recognition of 
their high social standing. The judge–pentito 
rapport became the determining axis in the con-
struction of judicial evidence.
Anthropological studies of the legal process, 
sociocultural studies of Southern Italy, and com-
municative studies of courtroom interaction and 
conflict talk are blended into a single paradigm to 
explore the role of power, truth and credibility in 
courtroom communication. Jacquemet shows how 
social systems operate through dynamic feedback, 
become legitimized and eventually evolve (see 
also Ehrlich in this volume). By suggesting that 
truth is a field of communicative practice, he sheds 
light on the dynamic tension between communica-
tive practices and social structures. The discourse 
practices of judicial ritual provide the foundation 
upon which the apparent contradiction between 
rational truth and effective communication is 
resolved. Public speakers – lawyers, orators, medi-
ators, disputants and so on – employ such prac-
tices, recognizing that courtroom questioning 
techniques are primarily used to win cases, not to 
help the court discover the facts.
In order not to create a misleading image of 
strong lines of separation between the various 
sociolinguistic approaches to interaction, it should 
be noted that many analysts of talk-in-interaction 
combine ethnography and detailed conversation 
analyses (Deppermann, 2000). This ‘provides a 
way of understanding the meaning of particular 
forms of action within the larger repertoires of 
possible actions important to the ongoing social 
projects’ (Goodwin, 2008: 9). In her work on 
various groups of children (mostly girls) from dif-
ferent ethnic and class backgrounds, Goodwin 
describes the ways in which class- and gender-
based forms of inequality coexist, setting forth the 
idea that social differences arise in the course of 
the various activities. She uses traditional conver-
sation analyses of numerous detailed transcripts, 
besides describing the girls’ use of semiotic 
resources (not neglecting the differing income 
levels). The girls also perform victimization using 
the tactics of social exclusion and ridicule. Access 
to certain forms of cultural capital in the sense of 
Bourdieu (consumer products, sports) identifies 
who is included in an activity and who is not. 
Material resources thus play a role.
22.3  ETHNOMETHODOLOGY 
AND CONVERSATION ANALYSIS
Harvey Sacks (Sacks, 1992) is generally consid-
ered the great inspiration for conversation analysis, 
a sociological approach that is chiefly interested 
in the interactional organization of social activi-
ties (Hutchby and Woofitt, 1998: 14). Sacks him-
self was influenced by Harold Garfinkel, who 
wanted to explain the ‘ethnomethods’ (ethnos = 
folk) of sense-making by social actors. Garfinkel 
(1967) assumed that the members of a society 
behave in ways that can be interpreted by others in 
their society. Laypersons orient themselves to 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
320
each other with their ‘ethnomethods’, without 
being able to specify this in detail (p. 42). The 
term ‘ethno-’ refers, by analogy with ethno-medicine 
or ethno-botany, to people’s everyday systems of 
knowledge and action, beyond scientific theories. 
Garfinkel wanted to uncover such normative prac-
tices of seamless understanding upon which get-
ting-along is based. For the purposes of conducting 
their everyday affairs, it is not necessary to under-
stand ‘what people are really talking about’. The 
anticipation that persons will understand, the 
occasionality of expressions, the specific vague-
ness of references, the retrospective–prospective 
sense of a present occurrence, waiting for some-
thing later in order to see what was meant before, 
are sanctioned characteristics of common discourse. 
They furnish a background of seen but unnoticed 
features of common discourse, whereby actual 
utterances are recognized as events of common, 
reasonable, understandable, plain talk. Conven-
tional theories, by contrast, treated social orders as 
resulting from individual interests, external con-
straint and/or some conjunction between the two. 
For Garfinkel, however, individual motivation, 
power and constraint must be managed by com-
municators in and through the details of communi-
cation. He insists that the need of participants to 
mutually orient their ways of producing order on 
each subsequent occasion adequately explains the 
details of order and sense-making.
Derived from the principles and beliefs of eth-
nomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967), conversation 
analysis is a significant domain that interprets the 
patterns through which people handle conversa-
tions. Conversation analysis (CA) generally 
attempts to describe the orderliness, structure and 
sequential patterns of interaction, whether institu-
tional (in school, in the courtroom or elsewhere) 
or in casual conversation. Research in conversa-
tion analysis over the past 30 years has shown that 
the technical aspects of talk-in-interaction are 
structured, socially organized resources – or meth-
ods – whereby participants perform and coordi-
nate their activities through talking together. 
Conversational interaction is the primordial site of 
human sociality. Thus, these methods are the tech-
nical bedrock upon which people build their social 
lives and construct their social relations with 
one another. In the light of this, one of CA’s prin-
cipal practitioners, Emanuel Schegloff, has more 
recently identified ‘talk-in-interaction’ as CA’s cen-
tral subject. Perhaps for the same reason, some 
scholars, who do not limit themselves to using CA 
methods, call themselves discourse analysts 
(DAs), although that term was first used to iden-
tify researchers using methods different from CA 
(e.g. Levinson, 1983) and still identifies a group 
of scholars larger than the group that uses only 
CA methods.
Conversation analysts (as pragmaticists) assume 
that potentially ambiguous utterances are disam-
biguated in the specific context. Since the proce-
dures are recursive, the members of a culture can 
coordinate their actions. Their largely consistent 
‘ethnomethods’ are shown in the ‘display’ of utter-
ances. ‘Stick to your data’ is Schegloff’s instruc-
tion whenever anyone claims that an external 
category, such as, for example, power could have 
played a role in a conversation. The relevance of a 
certain identity category needs to be recognized as 
an orientation to this in the details of the interac-
tion. In 1987 he stated in ‘Between micro and 
macro: context and other connections’ that macro 
categories are only relevant if they have direct 
effects on the micro level of behaviour. We should 
even assume that the entire social structure is cre-
ated in interaction. Levinson (2005: 431ff.) criti-
cizes this as ‘interactional reductionism’. Schegloff 
opposes the importation of the macro (sociologi-
cal/sociolinguistic) into the micro (interaction 
analysis), suggesting innocently that one might 
reverse the strategy instead (as Levinson points 
out). Schegloff suggests we should think of inter-
action patterns as engendering social institutions.
Before getting back to Levinson’s article, I recall 
the critique of CA by Hymes (1974: 81):
Some sociologists become so absorbed in words as 
to fail to renew their relation to actual contexts. 
Admittedly, it is fascinating to discover the richness 
of speech, coming from a disciplinary background 
that has neglected it; but it is a bit absurd to treat 
transcribed tapes of interaction as if they were the 
Dead Sea Scrolls. When a society is gone, we must 
glean all we can from texts that remain, and con-
trary to some opinion, such work is arduous, disci-
plined, and often revealing. But again, it is a bit 
absurd to invent an amateur philology to deal with 
the life outside one’s door. I have read elaborate 
analysis of verbal interaction that failed to consider 
the other aspects of the parties’ presence to each 
other, attributing to complexities of words what 
may have depended on eye-contact; and imputa-
tions of intention and construal that neglected 
intonation [like many grammarians, to be sure] 
and that failed to consult or consider the interpre-
tations of the participants themselves.
For a field researcher like Hymes, it was simply 
incomprehensible that, in interaction analysis, he 
should proceed as though he were deciphering 
hieroglyphics instead of exploring the broader con-
text, which he as an ethnographer of communica-
tion regarded as self-evident. In the meantime we 
have many studies of gaze direction (Kendon, 1990) 
and prosody in interaction (Couper-Kuhlen and 
Selting, 1996), but the question remains of whether 
social order is the product of local interaction.

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
321
Goffman (1981: 14–15) referred to conversation 
analysts as ‘communication engineers’, because he 
saw them as only capturing ‘the sheer physical 
constraints of any communication system’. 
According to him, they are interested in ‘culture-
free formulations’. Above all, the omnipresent plea 
of conversation analysis to limit itself to the analy-
sis of local contexts provoked Goffman’s critique 
that historicity was being screened out. I would 
add that historicity starts where we take into 
account the shared history of the interactants.
Again and again there were reactions by lead-
ing conversation analysts to this sort of critique. 
Schegloff (1997: 166 ) writes:
… we need first to understand the object – the 
conversational episode in its endogenous constitu-
tion, what it was for the parties involved in it, in its 
course, as embodied and displayed in the very 
details of its realization. Only then can we even 
begin to explore what forms of critical approach it 
might take, and what political issue …
According to Levinson (2005: 432), there are two 
ways to read the CA literature with regard to the 
linkage of micro and macro. The one (the variant 
which some other discourse analysts would share) 
gives the interaction structure a certain autonomy, 
its own system with its own mechanisms; the 
other sees the overall social structure as interac-
tionally generated (in his view the ‘dangerous 
variant’ – as in mine):
The kernel idea – the dangerous idea of my title – 
is that social order is the local product of interac-
tion. Stated thus, it seems innocuous enough. But 
suppose we read it as all social order, everything 
– from institutions to economics, from kinship to 
politics, from etiquette to grammar. Now it is no 
longer innocent.
Above all, in the debate carried on in Discourse & 
Society, 5(6) (2002) on gender in CA, it became 
clear that Schegloff, for example, limits the rele-
vance of the social category of gender to an orien-
tation to this in the current context. In his examples 
this sometimes corresponds to a thematization, for 
example, of the ‘Ladies first’ type. It can be 
objected that ordinarily many identity categories 
remain in the background of interaction, and yet 
they can still be made quite relevant at a later 
point in time, e.g. in another conversation, e.g. the 
stylization of clothing is often done in a gendered 
way, but it is seldom explicitly thematized. Can 
we really assume that biographical, historical, 
institutional and socio-structural givens are always 
only relevant when they are on ‘display’ in the local 
interactional context, thus when they become vis-
ible in the details of speech? For gender studies, 
the limitation to ‘display in context’ has often led 
writers down the garden path.
Mey (1993: 271–2) formulates the following 
points of criticism:
However, restricting oneself to the problems of 
description that one encounters during the analysis 
of actual conversation puts a severe limitation on 
the explanatory potential of one’s analysis. A satis-
factory account of the realities of conversation 
relies heavily on the wider context of the conversa-
tional interaction, and will not limit itself to strictly 
linguistic, or strictly CA-relevant factors. A prag-
matic analysis cannot remain on the object lan-
guage level, describing ‘the facts, all the facts, and 
nothing but the facts’, as the conversational ana-
lysts (often implicitly) seem to advocate. A prag-
matic explanation requires a meta-level, where the 
facts and factors of the analysis are placed in an 
overall explanatory framework, and where the 
analyst him-/herself is engaged beyond the imme-
diate context. This higher level of analysis (often 
called ‘critical’) is where societal critique and social 
action have their places – topics which in the eyes 
of many scientists, including linguists, are as much 
anathema to their profession as the introduction of 
meaning into linguistic description used to be for 
the strict structuralists of the thirties and forties.
I will take the activity type of teasing as an exam-
ple to show that in order to interpret conversa-
tional data we have to draw on a lot of background 
knowledge.
With Drew (1987) we define ‘teasing’2 as a 
speech activity in which the actions or attitudes of 
another person who is present are taken as an 
occasion for amusement. Since as a rule this 
includes critical components, usually serious and 
humorous dimensions are combined in teasing. 
Also with Drew we assert that teasing episodes 
have a distinctive structure that is known. Even 
with a serious reaction to teasing, there are signs 
that it is still regarded by the participants as an 
amusing activity.
Drew discusses many examples: among others, 
is one found on a videotape of family interactions 
that he obtained from anthropologist Charles 
Goodwin. I present the example using Drew’s 
notation:
Example 1
Dot: 
 Do we have two forks cause we’re on 
    television?
Mother: 
No we-
Angie: 
huh huh huh hh h ( )
Father: 
Yeah h hah [hh =
Mother: 
[uh [huh huh huh

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
322
Angie 
[heh heh heh
Father:  
 = Right yeah probably the answer right 
   (the re)
Angie: 
eh hah hah
Mother: 
.hhh You have pie,
Mother: 
You have pie tonight.
(Goodwin according to Drew, 1987: 223)
A daughter teases her mother about the two forks 
that she has set at each place on the table. The 
mother at first dismisses the daughter’s interpreta-
tion, which imputes that she is displaying 
refinement in order to impress the researchers. 
Then, first the other daughter laughs; after that the 
father, and finally the mother herself. However, 
the mother afterwards reacts seriously to the 
teaser’s supposition that she wanted to make a 
good impression on the researchers. With their 
laughter, everyone signals that they have under-
stood the humorous dimension of the question. 
The mother, however, defends herself at first quite 
seriously, which Drew calls ‘po-faced’ (poker-
faced). Sometimes the person who was teased 
does not laugh at all and only reacts seriously. 
Drew is of the opinion that the teasing activity is 
nevertheless immediately understood as humor-
ous, since it contains strong indicators for this – 
e.g. the exaggerated and extreme formulations, 
reformulations of something that the recipient has 
said or done (1987: 231). They resemble other 
forms of humorous discourse, because they also 
contain a sudden frame change from a serious to a 
humorous keying (Kotthoff, 1998). The recipients 
of teasing in Drew’s study usually react seriously 
at first; some also laugh additionally, others do 
not. No one in his data immediately teases back 
(in my data there are some cases of teasing back; 
Kotthoff, 1998). The connection of the teasing to 
elements of reality is quite clear, although fic-
tional dimensions also play a role.
Teasing activities usually represent a sort of 
sociability that integrates disagreement and social 
difference into relationships of friendship or inti-
macy. Depending on the state of the relationship, 
face-threatening humorous utterances are received 
quite differently, be they teasing, ironic or even 
sarcastic. Tannen (1994) and Boxer (2002) have 
pointed to the dynamics of the communication of 
power and solidarity. For example, blunt expres-
sions of volition can point to a difference in power 
in some contexts, in others to social relationships 
of equality and solidarity. This makes it clear that 
speech activity alone tells us little. The dynamics 
of power and solidarity, of symmetry and asym-
metry, and of formality/informality are significant 
in humorous communication, but not just there. In 
familiar symmetrical relationships, stepping out-
side of conventional politeness patterns communi-
cates on a meta-level that the relationship does not 
depend on conventional safeguards and can also 
integrate differences (Kotthoff, 1996a).
Now an example of a humorous attack game 
whose harmlessness is not immediately apparent: 
The following interaction3 took place at a barbe-
cue while the speakers were trying to start a fire 
together. Donald and Manni compete with Holger 
and Ivo for the role of expert on starting a fire.
Example 2 (young men; Kotthoff, 
2009b)
Ivo (I), Thomas (T), Manni (M), Holger (H), 
Donald (D), all (a)
 1 D: sIEhsch wie=s gut brennt.
 2 H: °hei meier. (-) du bist=n Echtes genie.°
 3 D: ich weiß. (-) du musst halt nur=s richtige holz 
reinschmeißen,
 4 du wurscht.
 5 (1.0)
 6 H: danke. (-) vergiss es.
 7 D: darfsch halt keine buche anschmeißen und 
dann anzünden wollen.
 8 M: hehehehe
 9 I: da spricht der b(h)auer. hehehe
10 D: ha jA. bitte (-) was isch=n des?
11 M: buche macht man drauf wenn’s brennt 
mann.
12 D: ha ja.
13 (1.0)
14 D: hasch wohl noch nie e feuerle gemacht, oder?
15 I: doch schon.
16 D: ja isch klar.
17 (1.0)
18 H: in kroatien.
19 D: du hasch aufgelegt höchstens.
20 T: der Ivo hat=s haus seiner nachbarn verbrannt. 
mann.
21 scheissserben mann.
22 a: hahahahahahahahahaha
 1 D: see how good it burns.
 2 H: °hey meier. (-) you are a real genius.°
 3 D: I know. (-) you just have to throw in the right 
wood,
 4 you wiener.
 5 (1.0)
 6 H: thanks. (-) forget it.
 7 D: you can’t just throw on some beech-wood and 
set it on fire.
 8 M: hehehehe
 9 I: there speaks the peasant. hehehe
10 D: ha yeah. please (-) what is that?
11 M: you put on beech-wood when it is burning 
man.
12 D: ha yeah.
13 (1.0)

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
323
14 D: you’ve probably never started a fire, have you?
15 I: of course I have.
16 D: yeah it’s obvious.
17 (1.0)
18 H: in Croatia.
19 D: at most you put something on it.
20 T: Ivo burned down his neighbor’s house, man.
21 shit Serbs, man.
22 a: hahahahahahahahahaha
Donald’s first comment refers ironically to 
Holger’s fire-making skills. Holger parries the 
irony. He judges Donald’s attempts to ignite the 
stack of wood as unconvincing. In line 3 Donald 
gives further instructions, and with ‘du wurscht’ 
(you wiener) he underlines his opponent’s incom-
petence. Holger thanks him ironically and explic-
itly rejects the instructions with ‘vergiss es’ (forget 
it). Nevertheless, Donald continues to instruct him 
and presents himself as an expert. He insinuates 
that Holger has made the beginner’s mistake of 
trying to start a fire with beech-wood (7). This is 
especially amusing, because they had no beech-
wood at all. Thereby Holger’s competency is fur-
ther challenged before the public. Manni laughs. 
Accusing him of trying to use beech-wood is a 
fiction.
Ivo razzes Donald as a ‘Bauernsohn’ peasant’s 
son (country bumpkin). The formulation ‘da 
spricht der Bauer’ (there speaks the peasant) is 
clearly oriented to a public. The laughter modal-
izes the utterance. Ivo attacks Donald, who also 
promptly reacts. As well, Manni chips in with 
expert knowledge (line 11).
Donald insinuates that Ivo, who is pottering 
around, has never started a fire before. Ivo defends 
himself (15). Holger then points out that in 
Croatia, his country of origin, he could already have 
started one. Daniel objects that as well there he 
could, at best, have helped. Finally, Thomas 
chimes in by insinuating that in Croatia Ivo had 
burnt down his neighbour’s house. He alleges that 
out of envy he had set the house of some Serbian 
neighbours on fire. He comments: ‘scheissserben 
mann’ (shit Serbs, man) with a Slavic accent that 
Ivo in reality does not have. Despite this, it is meant 
as a quotation. Playfully he implies feelings of 
hatred and vengefulness that were reported in the 
press in connection with the armed conflict in the 
former Yugoslavia. Ivo was in Germany through-
out the conflict and is not known for harbouring 
hatred of Serbs. The teasing insinuation that he 
could have learned to make a fire while taking part 
in the war is fictitious, but not harmless. In the 
context everybody laughs, including Ivo. In many 
groups of youths we find forms of disparagement 
humour, sometimes including ethnic or religious 
allusions. When I interviewed the young men 
taking part in the fire-starting episode, they told 
me that they all know how to take such a joke, that 
nobody in this group of friends would feel offended 
and that their principle is to joke about everyone 
in equal measure. They would, however, not allow 
outsiders to make jests like those in Example 2. 
Aggressive teasing could serve as an index of 
belonging together. My point here is simply that 
we cannot decide what is going on in the young 
men’s circle just by looking at only one conversa-
tion in a certain context. We would need more data 
from that group and also comparative data to 
answer questions about the social order of the 
group, about ritualization and possible ideals of 
‘playing cool’ in some subcultures. We need to 
take a look at other texts and contexts (e.g., mass 
media products) to see whether such humour has 
to do with a display of masculinity or just of 
camaraderie or other identity categories. We 
accept the claim that teasing and all sorts of risky 
humour demand a long-term balance within a 
group. Negotiations of social relationships accord-
ingly require going beyond local contexts – both 
from an emic and an etic perspective.
Let us now look at another variant that Levinson 
finds ‘dangerous’. West and Fenstermaker (1995: 9) 
see ‘difference’ as an ongoing interactional accom-
plishment. Gender, race and class are regarded as 
‘doings’ that consist in the ‘local management of 
conduct in relation to normative conceptions of 
appropriate attitudes and activities’ (West and 
Fenstermaker, 2002: 541). Is only local manage-
ment relevant? How does it become global? 
Scharff (2008: 334) summarizes the approach as 
follows:
West and Fenstermaker (1995: 508) are critical of 
distinctions between ‘face-to-face interaction 
‘versus’ ‘structural discrimination’, arguing that 
the impact of social structure and history is realized 
in variously situated social relationships as the sites 
for doing difference. While West and Fenstermaker’s 
ethnomethodological approach to difference has 
been challenged for obfuscating power relations 
and neglecting the influence of macro-societal 
structures (Collins, 1995: 494; Weber, 1995: 500), 
their view of the interactional and structural levels 
as closely intertwined means that interaction is 
‘integral’ (West and Fenstermaker, 1995: 508) to 
the production of class divisions. The focus on 
social inequality as situated and dynamic does not 
erase the existence of broader unequal power 
structures, but offers insights into how they are 
produced.
It remains unclear whether and how the produc-
tion of power structures rests on specific 
resources and how it is embedded in political and 
institutional structures that also regulate access to 
the levels of power. Scharff claims that West and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
324
Fenstermaker do not erase the existence of une-
qual power structures, but she leaves out that they 
do not give us much of an idea about how the 
interplay between sociocultural systems and inter-
action systems works.
To CA we surely owe the most careful analysis 
of the organization of conversational interaction. 
In fact, it is the most appropriate method for 
studying the manner in which talk in interaction 
unfolds. But, ‘for CA what is found in the tran-
script is the only legitimate source of knowledge 
for inferring participants’ concern’ (Duranti, 1988: 
223). As always, the methods of inquiry chosen 
depend on the questions asked. There is certainly 
more to the reproduction of class, race, age or 
gender divisions.
22.4 (CRITICAL) DISCOURSE ANALYSIS
Östman and Virtanen (1995: 240) treat discourse 
analysis as an umbrella term for all the issues that 
have been dealt with in the linguistic study of texts 
and discourses. They have in some respects 
accepted Levinson’s (1983) controversial distinc-
tion between discourse analysis (including text 
linguistics) and approaches such as conversation 
analysis and dialogical analysis, which are closely 
related to ethnomethodology and attempt as much 
as possible to avoid a priori theorizing. While 
many of the interests of discourse analysis, such 
as those in the information structure of a text, in 
cohesion and coherence, do not necessarily have 
to do with social stratification, studies of intertex-
tuality and the management of point of view 
surely do. Discourse analysts who focus on face-
to-face interaction with a sociolinguistic perspec-
tive have shown that in institutional communication 
chances very often have to do with educational 
backgrounds (which in turn reflect the class struc-
ture in many societies).
A lot can be found out indirectly about the 
social structure of a group or an institution by 
studying its humorous interactions (Kotthoff, 
1996b; Holmes, 2006) or its politeness standards 
(see Kotthoff, 2009a ).
Holmes (1998) also focuses on the social 
functions of humour, exploring first the ways in 
which humour serves to express politeness, and, 
secondly, the ways in which humour may express 
or construct different types of power relations. 
Humorous utterances are typically multifunctional, 
conveying many types of meaning simultaneously. 
Hence, any instance of humour serves several 
functions at once. The examples below inevitably 
focus on and highlight particular aspects of 
the many potential meanings of a humorous 
utterance.
Humour in the workplace can have an aggres-
sive side (www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/lwp/research/
humour.aspx), although it is often used as a social 
lubricant. It can be used as a repressive discourse 
device: e.g. managers often use humour to soften 
directives or criticisms, making it harder for sub-
ordinates to contest them, as data on Holmes’ web-
page show: Neil, a manager, has come to remind 
his administrative assistant, Ken, that he is late for 
a meeting. Ken is working at his computer:
Example 3
 Neil: 
 hate to drag you away when you’re obvi-
ously having so much fun but it IS after ten
Ken: 
[laughs] some fun
In asymmetrical interactions, humour is often 
used to emphasize power relationships or to subtly 
steer the behaviour of others. Pizzini (1996: 205), 
for example, describes how gynaecologists used 
humour to ‘move interview talk along’ and ‘stop 
patients rambling on [sic]’. When humour is used 
downwards in this way, it can be analysed as evi-
dence of ‘repressive discourse’. It takes the sting 
out of a less than agreeable message.
In Example 4 (Holmes, 1998: Example 5), Sheila 
is advising her colleagues on how to extricate 
themselves from a situation she deplores. She has 
been diplomatic and kept the tone light throughout 
a protracted session of implicit criticism of their 
behaviour. Suddenly she uses blunt language, 
which has a shock effect, causing laughter because 
of its incongruity.
Example 4
She: 
how are we gonna get this thing resolved 
 
if she’s saying no and we’re saying no we 
 
might as well say no forever
Val: 
so shall we just
She: 
pay the bloody money
[All laugh]
The humorous tone masks her impatience with 
her subordinates’ handling of the situation, an 
excellent example of repressive discourse. She 
sugarcoats the pill, but still intends them to 
take it.
Humour may also be used by subordinates 
to challenge the power relations in the institu-
tional structures in their workplace. Here it func-
tions as a critical discourse device, a contestive 
strategy, and one of the few acceptable means 
available to subordinates who wish to contest, 
even if only momentarily, the existing authority 
structures.

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
325
In Example 5, during a planning meeting, May 
uses humour to suggest that Jenny, her superior, 
should make the next presentation.
Example 5
May: 
I’m sure you would just love to show off 
your new whizz-bang computer with all its 
special effects wouldn’t you Jenny.
 
[General laughter]
May is not in a position to give Jenny instructions. 
The humour serves as an expedient disguise for 
what could be regarded as an implicit challenge to 
the superior’s authority.
Humour is also used contestively in the work-
place data in cases where a subordinate expresses 
opinions that are ‘socially risky’ or where it serves 
to disguise criticism of a superior.
An analysis which considers the possibility that 
humour may function as repressive discourse thus 
involves a thorough examination of the underlying 
power relationships and the explicitness with 
which they are performed (Holmes, 2006).
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) would require 
a theorization and description of both the social 
processes and structures that give rise to the pro-
duction of an oral or written text and also of those 
within which individuals or groups, as sociohis-
torical subjects, create meanings in their interac-
tions with texts (Wodak, 1995: 204; van Dijk, 
2008). Consequently, three concepts are indispen-
sable in all CDA: the concept of power, the con-
cept of history and the concept of ideology.
Van Dijk (2003: 353) points out that CDA is 
not so much a direction, school, or specialization 
alongside many other ‘approaches’ in discourse 
studies, but rather it offers a perspective of analy-
sis and may well integrate pragmatics, conversa-
tion analysis, stylistics and many other methods. 
Common to them is a tradition of rejecting ‘value 
free’ science. CDA addresses social problems, 
power relations and links between texts and soci-
ety by integrating discourse data with political 
theory (such as, for example, with Habermas) (see 
Wodak and Meyer (2009) for an overview of the 
most recent developments in CDA).
Let us turn again to studies from the educational 
world. Wodak and Andraschko (1994) examined 
the relationship between power and interaction in 
schools: to be exact, in an Austrian ‘school part-
nership’ project. This concerned the participation 
of teachers, parents and pupils in school affairs 
and was meant to prescribe equal opportunity 
within what was formerly described as a rigidly 
hierarchical school system. Wodak (1996) com-
bined fieldwork and the interaction analysis of 
many committee meetings with interviews with 
teachers, directors, parents and students to show 
that, even after the reform, Austrian teachers were 
still being superintended by principals. Principals 
made decisions inside the school and had to 
defend these decisions to the Department of 
Education. Parents remained outside the power 
structure. They were needed in several ways, as 
fund-raisers and also as scapegoats (Wodak, 1996: 
173), ‘because problem pupils were always con-
signed to their mothers [sic!] (the school rarely 
sees itself as a cause of the problems)’. The team 
working with Wodak demonstrated that the imple-
mentation of the new law had not actually altered 
the previous hierarchy and dependencies in the 
schools. Even tenured teachers did not dare, or did 
not want, to participate in many discussions. 
When interviewed, they said that decisions were 
still being taken elsewhere.
What is methodically interesting is that a 
system of dependencies within an institutional set-
ting becomes apparent. We learn that there is more 
than a ‘local logic’ in a current situation, but also 
societal structures of inequality that cause con-
flicts and disorder (van Dijk, 2008).
22.5 GENDER STUDIES
For more than 30 years, interactional gender studies 
have shown how societal power asymmetries 
between the sexes, a gender-oriented division of 
labour and differences in socialization, result in 
subcultural interaction strategies. In the field of 
gender and interaction, there is no approach that, 
for example, assumes that sex/gender identity is 
first given, and, depending on this identity, people 
choose a gender-conditioned speech style. 
Discourse studies has never put it as simply as 
that. Early feminist linguistics enlightened women 
about being too modest in their positioning. In the 
first phase of linguistic gender studies, it was 
assumed that male dominance was always com-
municatively expressed in a similar way, regard-
less of context. This is not the case, however. 
Today, we see that there are very few conversa-
tional behaviours that are performed differently 
by men and women independently of the context. 
Many scholars have in the meantime showed the 
complex ways in which people practice turn-
taking and how little evidence there is that men 
generally interrupt more than women (James and 
Clarke, 1993; Kotthoff, 1993). Each sex commands 
an entire spectrum of styles that, however, manifest 
themselves differently depending on context and 
also co-produce the context as such.
Asking many questions, using the subjunctive, 
modality markers and hedges were, at the time, 
mono-functionally interpreted as expressing 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
326
insecurity and subordination. However, thanks to 
linguists like Robin Lakoff (1973), we came to see 
the connections between gender and men’s and 
women’s positions in society. Since the 1980s, 
intensive research has been carried out on the 
forms and functions of modality strategies. We 
now know that there is no overall gender differ-
ence in the use of these strategies (Günthner and 
Kotthoff, 1991).
Many studies on gender and communication 
have been strongly influenced by ethnomethodology 
and other schools of social constructivism. The field 
has borrowed ideas from ethnomethodological 
conversation analysis, and many gender researchers 
adopted, among others, its methodological 
approaches. From the very start, scholars drew on 
the works of Harold Garfinkel (1967) and Erving 
Goffman (1977, 1981), even if often not very 
consistently (as Günthner (2001) and Kotthoff 
(2002) point out).
With Connell (1987), most gender scholars 
stress the historicity of ‘gender’ and reject biologis-
tic approaches. Gender ‘is nothing but historicity’, 
and doing gender is regarded as a practice that 
shapes and transforms bodies as well as relation-
ships and cognitive categorizations. The self 
actively positions itself in regard to gender ideolo-
gies, mass media images, etc. – be it affirmatively 
or oppositionally (Kotthoff and Wodak, 1997).
Tannen and others, in a number of books (e.g. 
Tannen, 1990), promoted the thesis that women 
practice a more cooperative speech style, whereas 
men practice a more competitive style. Other 
authors see a certain mirror effect of preformed 
perception in some of Tannen’s findings (1990). 
Goodwin’s (2008) and Kyratzis’s (2001) studies 
of children’s speech behaviour show many gender 
tendencies and, at the same time, that these are not 
acted out in every context. They stress the impor-
tance of looking at communication in context, as 
do the studies published in Baron and Kotthoff 
(2002).
Gender studies bring together a variety of stud-
ies of parent–child interaction that have shown 
that the differences in the ways a father talks to a 
son as opposed to a daughter are much greater 
than the differences in the ways a mother interacts 
with a son as opposed to a daughter. Fathers are 
more direct with their sons than with their daugh-
ters. Eckert and McConnell-Ginet discuss in detail 
(2003; 41ff.) how influential ideologies are in our 
everyday interactions. The norms of heterosexual 
relationship formation become more and more 
relevant in later childhood. Success in teenage 
romantic efforts is highly respected by peer 
groups. Gender patterns are not simply copied, but 
vary in accord with differing environmental and 
personal conditions. In the USA, for example, 
studies by Carol Gilligan et al. (1990) show that 
unlike White middle-class girls, who suffer from a 
considerable loss of self-esteem during adoles-
cence, at this age lower-class Black girls show a 
strong tendency toward self-assertive and aggres-
sive behaviour. Ironically, many teachers regard 
this as antisocial. Not only was feminist linguis-
tics quite middle-class centred, so was research on 
schools, as mentioned above.
Although, fundamentally, it has been clear that 
gender research in discourse analysis has to deal 
with the communicative construction of both 
femininity and masculinity, for many years schol-
ars analysed only women’s speech. According to 
Johnson and Meinhof (1997), this phenomenon 
has to be interpreted as a remnant of a traditional 
ideology: female speech as a deviation from the 
(male) norm that has to be closely examined in its 
peculiarity. Coates (2003) pointed out how mascu-
linity is constructed in the types of stories that 
men tell each other in contexts such as the pub. 
She shows that they avoid self-disclosure and 
prefer to talk about impersonal topics such as cur-
rent affairs, travel or sport. Nowadays we start 
from the assumption of diverse ‘masculinities’ and 
‘femininities’ which, phenomenologically viewed, 
may differ considerably from person to person 
and situation to situation. However, there is also 
stability in performing and perceiving gendered 
styles of behaviour.
Eckert (2000: 56ff.) shows for Detroit adoles-
cents a gendered semiotics that also holds true for 
other heterosexual orders. For the girls a support-
ive role is formalized in many high school activi-
ties. There is a gender-based division of labour in 
many activities which is supported by a certain 
speech style. Violence, urban toughness and know-
how are prominent among lower-class boys. The 
girls from this milieu do not enjoy the same claim 
to physical prowess and autonomy, and they do 
not have the same admiration for a good fight (not 
even a verbal fight). Girls from the middle class 
try to avoid a ‘slut’ image, including styles of hair, 
makeup and demeanour. Middle-class boys show 
technical competence and demonstrate their inde-
pendence from adults (as do working-class boys).
Eckert (2000: 34ff.) focuses on Lave and Wenger’s 
‘community of practice’ construct to show that 
identity, social participation and speech styles 
develop in a mutual continuing engagement in 
practice. Class, ethnicity and gender gain signifi-
cance via ‘native’ categories such as being a certain 
type of adolescent (‘jock’ or ‘burnout’ in her case). 
Such categories emerge around aspects of social 
practice that are sufficiently salient in the com-
munity to warrant a differentiation and separation 
between people on the basis of their participation 
in these practices (p. 3). Her theory of variation 
as social practice sees speakers as constituting, 
rather than representing, broad social categories. 

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
327
The linguistic market is part of a broader symbolic 
market. Vernacular speech, for example, has a 
positive value in local communities. Standard 
language, in contrast, gains its power by virtue of 
its association with the institutions of societal 
hierarchy and cosmopolitan networks. It has to 
do with socioeconomic status, occupation and 
education, with whether an individual orients 
him- or herself either to local or to non-local 
marketplaces.
22.6 CONCLUSIONS
Speech styles and interaction patterns reflect, sup-
port, (re)create or sometimes undermine macro-
categories. The approaches discussed in this 
chapter vary in how they analyse verbal interac-
tion and in how they tie it to culture and social 
institutions. Some try to place the interaction 
system so centrally that they threaten to reduce all 
other systems to outcomes of the workings of 
interaction. Some accept interaction as a system 
among interrelated systems. How much a certain 
study of face-to-face interaction integrates other 
theories or how deeply it goes into the details of 
talk may be what differentiates critical discourse 
studies from interactional sociolinguistics. With 
Levinson (2005), we call for linking sociocultural, 
linguistic and interactional systems together in a 
Durkheimian manner – being aware that the last 
word on the intermediate variables of interaction 
and society has not yet been spoken.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I am grateful to Ruth Wodak for her valuable 
comments.
NOTES
1 I base this discussion on the summary of the 
book presented in Fitch and Philipsen (1995: 267).
2 The English word ‘teasing’ can be translated 
into German as Necken, Sticheln, Pflaumen, Foppen 
or Frotzeln. All these concepts refer to playful provo-
cations. Necken is more friendly than Frotzeln, 
Foppen or Pflaumen. On the ethnocategories and 
their equivalences cf. Günhner (1996).
3 I am indebted to Henrik Hügin for the record-
ing of the group of five young men, friends who 
finished their high school degree (German: Abitur) 
together.
REFERENCES
Auer, P. and di Luzio, A. (eds) (1992) Interpretive Sociolingui-
stics. Tübingen: Narr. pp. 87–113.
Baron, B. and Kotthoff, H. (eds) (2002) Gender in Interaction. 
Perspectives on Femininity and Masculinity in Ethnography 
and Discourse. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Boxer, D. (2002) Applying Sociolinguistics. Domains of Face-
To-Face Interaction. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Coates, J. (2003) Men Talk. London: Blackwell.
Collins, P. H. (1995) Symposium: On West and Fenstermarker’s 
'doing differences.' Gender and Society, 9(4): 491–594.
Connell, R. W. (1987) Gender and Power. Society, the Person 
and Sexual Politics. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Gumperz, J. (1996) Treacherous Words: 
Gender and Power in Academic Assessment. Folia 
Linguistica, XXX(3, 4): 167–89. (Special issue on 
Interactional Sociolinguistics.)
Cook-Gumperz, J. and Gumperz, J. (2007) ‘Discourse, cultural 
diversity and communication: a linguistic anthropological 
perspective’, in H. Kotthoff and H. Spencer-Oatey (eds), 
Handbook of Intercultural Communication. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter. pp. 13–31.
Couper-Kuhlen, E. and Selting, M. (1996) Prosody in 
Conversation. Interactional Studies. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Deppermann, A. (2000) ‘Ethnografische Gesprächsanalyse: 
Zu Nutzen und Notwendigkeit von Ethnografie für die 
Konversationsanalyse’, Gesprächsforschung – Online-
Zeitschrift zur verbalen Interaktion, 1: 96–124.
Discourse & Society (2002) 13(6). (Special issue on gender, 
language, conversation analysis and feminism. Edited by 
E. A. Stokoe and A. Weatherall.)
Drew, P. (1987) ‘Po-faced receipts of teases’, Linguistics 
25: 219–53.
Duranti, A. (1988) ‘Ethnography of speaking: toward a lingui-
stics of praxis’, in F. J. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: The 
Cambridge Survey. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 210–29.
Eckert, P. (2000) Linguistic Variation as Social Practice. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003) Language and 
Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fitch, K. L. and Philipsen, G. (1995) ‘Ethnography of speak-
ing’, in J. Verschueren, J.-O. Östman, J. Blommaert and 
C. Bulcaen (eds), Handbook of Pragmatics. Manual. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 263–9.
Gal, S. and Woolard, C. (1995) ‘Constructing languages and 
publics: authority and representation’, Pragmatics, 5(2): 
129–38.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodolgy. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gilligan, C., Lyons, N. P. and Hanmer, T. (eds) (1990) Making 
Connections: The Relational Worlds of Adolescent Girls at 
Emma Willard School. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Goffman, E. (1977) ‘The arrangement between the sexes’, 
Theory and Society, 4: 301–31.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
328
Goffman, Er. (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, M. (1990) He Said & She Said. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, M. (2008) The Hidden Life of Girls. London: 
Blackwell.
Gumperz, J. (1982) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J. (2001) ‘The speech community’, in A. Duranti 
(ed.), Linguistic Anthropology. A Reader. London: Blackwell. 
pp. 43–53. (1st edn, 1968.)
Günthner, S. (1996) ‘Zwischen Scherz und Schmerz. 
Frotzelaktivitäten im Alltag’, in H. Kotthoff (ed.), 
Scherzkommunikation. Beiträge aus der empirischen 
Gesprächsforschung. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
pp. 81–109.
Günthner, S. (2001) ‘Die kommunikative Konstruktion der 
Geschlechterdifferenz: Sprach- und kulturvergleichende 
Perspektiven’, Muttersprache, 3: 205–19.
Günthner, S. and Kotthoff, H. (1991) ‘Vorwort,’ in Günthner, 
S. and Kotthoff, H. (eds), Von fremden Stimmen. Weibliches 
und männliches Sprechen im Kulturvergleich. Frankfurt: 
Suhrkamp.
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. (eds) (2001) Voices of 
Authority: Education and Linguistic Difference. Westport, CT: 
Ablex.
Holmes, J. (1998) ‘No joking matter’, Australian Linguistic 
Papers, 98.
Holmes, J. (2006) ‘Sharing a laugh: pragmatic aspects of 
humour and gender in the workplace’, Journal of 
Pragmatics, 38(1): 26–50.
Holmes, J. and Meyerhoff, M. (eds) (2003) The Handbook of 
Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hutchby, I. and Woofitt, R. (1998) Conversation analysis. 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hymes, D. (1974): Foundations of Sociolinguistics. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Hymes, D. (2001) ‘On communicative competence’, in A. Duranti 
(ed.), Linguistic Anthropology. A reader. London: Blackwell. 
pp. 53–74. (1st edn, 1972.)
Jacquemet, M. (1996) Credibility in Court. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
James, D. and Clarke, S. (1993) ‘Women, men, and interrup-
tions: a critical review’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and 
Conversational Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Johnson, S. and Meinhof, H. (eds) (1997) Language and 
Masculinity. Oxford: Blackwell.
Jünger, R. (2008) Bildung für alle? Die schulischen Logiken 
von ressourcenprivilegierten undnichtprivilegierten kindern 
als Ursache der bestehenden Bildungsungleichheit. 
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Kendon, A. (1990) Conducting Interaction. Patterns of 
Behavior in Focused Encounters. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kotthoff, H. (1993) ‘Unterbrechungen, Überlappungen und 
andere Interventionen’, Deutsche Sprache, 2: 162–85.
Kotthoff, H. (ed.) (1996a) Interactional Sociolinguistics. Special 
issue. Folia Linguistica XXX(3, 4).
Kotthoff, H. (1996b) ‘Impoliteness and conversational joking: on 
relational politics’, Folia Linguistica XXX(3, 4): 299–327.
Kotthoff, H. (2008) Spass Verstehen. Zur Pragmatik von 
konversationellem Humor. Tuebingen: Niemeyer.
Kotthoff, H. (2002) ‘Was heißt eigentlich ‘doing gender?’’, 
Wiener Linguistischer Almanach. Sonderband, 55: 1–29.
Kotthoff, H. (2009a) ‘Politeness/Linguistik der Höflichkeit’, in 
B. Kortmann (ed.), WSK Dictionary on “Theories and 
Methods in Linguistics”. Freiburg: University of Freiburg. 
(http://www.anglistik.unifreiburg.de/seminar/abteilungen/
sprachwissenschaft/ ls_kortmann/WSK
Kotthoff, H. (2009b) ‘Humor mit Biss zwischen sozialer 
Konjunktion und Disjunktion’, in E. Koch and S. Krämer 
(eds), Gewalt in der Sprache. Munich: Fink.
Kotthoff, H. and Spencer-Oatey, H. (eds) (2007) Handbook of 
Intercultural Communication. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Kotthoff, H. and Wodak, R. (eds) (1997) Communicating 
Gender in Context. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Kyratzis, A. (2001) ‘Constituting the emotions: a longitudinal 
study of emotion talk in a preschool friendship group of 
boys’, in B. Baron and H. Kotthoff (eds), Gender in 
Interaction. Perspectives on Femininity and Masculinity in 
Ethno graphy and Discourse. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lakoff, R. (1973) ‘Language and women’s place’, Language in 
Society, 2: 45–79.
Levinson, S. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2005) ‘Living with Manny’s dangerous idea’, 
Discourse Studies, 7(4, 5) 431–53.
Machin, D. and Richardson, J. E. (2008) ‘Renewing an aca-
demic interest in structural inequalities’, Critical Discourse 
Studies, 5(4): 281–7.
Mehan, H., Lintz, A., Okamoto, D. and Wills, J. S. (2001) 
‘Ethnographic studies of multicultural education in class-
rooms and schools’, in J. A. Banks and C. A. M. Banks 
(eds), Handbook of Research on Multicultural Education. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. pp. 129–44.
Mey, J. (1993) Pragmatics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Östman, J.-O. and Virtanen, T. (1995) ‘Discourse analysis’, in 
J. Verschueren, J.-O. Östman, J. Blommaert and C. Bulcaen 
(eds), Handbook of Pragmatics. Manual. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. pp. 239–53.
Philips, S. U. (1970, reprinted, 2001) ‘Participant structures 
and communicative competence: Warm Springs children in 
community and classroom’, in A. Duranti (ed.), Linguistic 
Anthropology. A Reader. London: Blackwell. pp. 302–17.
Pizzini, F. (1996) ‘Hierarchie in der Scherzkommunikation. 
Kommunikation im gynäkologischen und geburtshilflichen 
Bereich’, in H. Kotthoff (ed.), Das Gelächter der Geschlechter. 
Konstanz: Universitätsverlag. pp. 201–17.
Romaine, S. (1995) ‘Sociolinguistics’, in J. Verschueren, 
J.-O. Östman, J. Blommaert and C. Bulcaen (eds), 
Handbook of Pragmatics. Manual. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
pp. 489–95.
Sacks, H. (1992) Lectures on Conversation. 2 volumes. Edited 
by G. Jefferson. Oxford: Blackwell.

FACE-TO-FACE INTERACTION
329
Sandig, B. and Selting, M. (1997) ‘Discourse styles’, in T. van 
Dijk (ed.), Discourse as Structure and Process: A 
Multidisciplinary Introduction. London: Sage. pp. 138–56.
Saville-Troike, M. (1982) The Ethnography of Communication. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scharff, C. M. (2008) ‘Doing class: a discursive and ethnometh-
odological approach’, Critical Discourse Studies, 5(4), 
331–45.
Schegloff, E. A. (1987) ‘Between micro and macro: contexts 
and other connections’, in J. C. Alexander, B. Giesen, 
R. Munch and N. J. Smelser (eds), The Micro–Macro Link. 
Los Angeles: University of California Press. pp. 207–34.
Schegloff, E. A. (1997) ‘Whose text? Whose context?’, 
Discourse and Society, 8: 165–87.
Scherr, A. (2007) ‘Schools and cultural difference’, in H. Kotthoff 
and H. Spencer-Oatey (eds), Handbook of Intercultural 
Communication. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 303–23.
Schiffrin, D. (1994) Approaches to Discourse. London: 
Blackwell.
Tannen, D. (1990) You Just Don’t Understand. Women and 
Men in Conversation. New York: William Morrow.
Tannen, D. (1994) ‘The relativity of linguistic strategies’, in 
D. Tannen (ed.), Discourse and Gender. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. pp. 19–52.
van Dijk, T. (2008) Discourse and Power. Houndsmill: Macmillan.
Wardhaugh, R. (2002) Sociolinguistics. London: Blackwell.
Weber, L. (1995) Symposium: On West and Fenstermarker’s 
'doing differences'. Gender and Society, 9(4): 499–503.
Weber, M. (2003) Heterogenität im Schulalltag. Wiesbaden: 
Westdeutscher Verlag.
West, C. and Fenstermaker, S. (1995) ‘Doing difference’, 
Gender and Society, 9: 8–37.
West, C. and Fenstermaker, S. (2002) ‘Accountability in 
action: the accomplishment of gender, race and class in a 
University of California Board of Regents’, Discourse and 
Society, 13: 537–63.
Willis, P. (1977) Learning to Labour: How Working-Class Kids 
Get Working-Class Jobs. Farnborough: Saxon House.
Wodak, R. (1995) ‘Critical linguistics and critical discourse 
analysis’, in J. Verschueren, J.-O. Östman, J. Blommaert 
and C. Bulcaen (eds), Handbook of Pragmatics. Manual. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 204–10.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. London: Longman.
Wodak, R. and Andraschko, E. (1994) ‘Frauen führen anders? 
Eine diskurssoziolinguistische Untersuchung, Teil 1’, 
Erziehung heute, 1: 41–9.
Wodak, R. and Krzyzanowski, M. (eds) (2008) Qualitative 
Discourse Analysis for the Social Sciences. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave.
Wodak, R. and Meyer, M. (eds) (2nd rev. edn, 2009) Methods 
of Critical Discourse Analysis. London: Sage. (1st edn, 
2001.)

Doctor–Patient Communication
F l o r i a n  M e n z
23
23.1  INTRODUCTION: SELECTION OF 
RESEARCH AREAS
Since the 1970s, doctor–patient communication 
has become increasingly well established as an 
area of inquiry within sociolinguistics and dis-
course analysis, initially focusing, in particular, on 
the institutional frames of communication (Becker-
Mrotzek, 1992; Drew and Heritage, 1992; Hein 
et al., 1985; Lalouschek et al., 1990; Menz, 1991; 
Sarangi and Roberts, 1999). At the time of writing 
this chapter, in 2008, a quick search in the biblio-
graphical database ‘medonline’ using the key-
words ‘doctor patient communication’ yielded 
over 7500 publication entries, while the keyword 
‘communication’ alone results in an astounding 
360,000 hits. The scope of the present chapter is 
therefore necessarily limited.
The area of patient–care communication (inter-
action between patients and nursing staff, which 
includes non-medical aspects; see e.g. Candlin, 
2006; Walther, 1997; see also Weinhold, 1997 for 
medical patient care and Sachweh, 2005, 2006 for 
care of the elderly) must be excluded here, as must 
be studies that focus on peer interaction among 
doctors (De Valck and Van den Wostijne, 1996; 
Herb and Streeck 1995; Lackner et al., 1996; 
Ploeger, 2005). Furthermore, the vast field of 
communication in psychotherapeutic and psychi-
atric contexts (Buchholz, 1998; Fritzsche and 
Wirsching, 2005; Kütemeyer, 2003; Morris and 
Chenail, 1995; Peräkylä, 2004; Schöndienst, 2002) 
as well as in medical consulting (see e.g. Sarangi 
and Brookes-Howell, 2006) cannot be treated 
here, nor can studies using experimental settings 
which thus analyse non-naturally occurring com-
munication between doctors and patients (e.g. Li, 
1999; Watson and Gallois, 1999). Lastly, neither 
the interface of transformation from oral to writ-
ten discourse and vice versa can be taken into 
consideration here (but see Iedema, 2003, 2006), 
nor can research concerned with the specifics of 
professional medical literature (Gotti and Salager-
Meyer, 2006; Pahta, 2006) be included. Rather, 
this chapter will be restricted to a discussion of the 
most recent investigations, referring the reader to 
existing anthologies (Atkinson and Heath, 1981; 
Ehlich et al., 1990; Fisher and Todd, 1983; Heritage 
and Maynard, 2006b; Köhle and Raspe, 1982; 
Löning and Rehbein, 1993; Morris and Chenail, 
1995; Neises et al., 2005; Redder and Wiese, 1994; 
Sarangi and Roberts, 1999; Tanner, 1976), and 
Hydén and Mishler’s (1999) review article for in-
depth coverage of past research and the status quo 
of linguistic inquiry into these subject matters.
Recent research on doctor–patient communica-
tion (DPC) from a linguistic perspective can 
be categorized under three broad headings: 
(1) microstructure-oriented analyses of both con-
versational organization and interaction dynamics 
at a syntactic and semantic level; (2) investiga-
tions into the influence of macrostructural social 
dimensions; and, increasingly, (3) practically-
oriented studies of the interest of social applicabil-
ity. Conversation-analytic research on DPC is 
particularly concerned with the different phases of 
doctor–patient talk and the interactional tasks it 
fulfils. Such research is therefore oriented towards 
formal and structural processes, increasingly 
taking an interest in settings that include more 
than two participants (‘triadic and multiparty 
interaction’ – see Section 23.2.1). Furthermore, 
actual language usage and different forms of rep-
resentation of symptoms, disorders and the sub-
jective experience of illness are of special interest 
for sociolinguistic analysis (see Section 23.2.3). 

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
331
Because the issue of the representation of pain also 
has great significance from a medical perspective, 
it is discussed in more detail in Section 23.2.3.
In contrast, the studies presented in Section 
23.3 also take macrosocial dimensions beyond the 
local conversation into consideration in their 
analyses. Issues of multilingualism and migration 
(see Section 23.3.1) and of gender (see Section 
23.3.2) constitute major areas of inquiry here, to 
which sociolinguistic research contributes notable 
insights. Questions regarding the practical appli-
cability and social relevance of scientific research 
play an increasingly central role in a knowledge 
society. This is reflected in linguistic inquiry as 
well. Thus, Section 23.4 summarizes those studies 
that concern themselves with issues of applicabil-
ity and are aimed at the (re-) integration of lin-
guistic findings into medical practice. The 
concluding Section 23.5 represents an attempt to 
assess future research questions and trends that 
will play a role within sociolinguistic and interac-
tional linguistic approaches to medical communi-
cation in the years to come. Content-based aspects 
will be discussed alongside those of methodologi-
cal and interdisciplinary concern.
23.2  MICROSTRUCTURAL ASPECTS OF 
DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
23.2.1  Phases of doctor–patient talk/
interaction dynamics
Starting with a first broad field study by Byrne 
and Long (1976), discourse analytic and sociolin-
guistic investigation has repeatedly pointed out a 
systematic overall structure in doctor–patient talk. 
With only slight variations, the following phases 
recur in the context of acute primary care visits: 
greetings and openings; presentation of the com-
plaint, exploration; examination; diagnosis; estab-
lishment of a therapeutic plan; closing of the talk; 
and leave-taking (Heritage and Maynard, 2006a; 
Nowak, 2009; Spranz-Fogasy, 2005). This overall 
structure can be further subdivided and differenti-
ated. Thus, Nowak (2009), in a broad-range 
empirical meta-study, identifies and categorizes 
48 activity types and over 100 activities within 
doctor–patient talk. Some special cases and recent 
findings will be discussed in the following.
At the opening of a conversation, doctors and 
patients must carry out a number of cooperative 
activities (greetings, offering a seat), as well as 
non-cooperative ones (patients closing the door, 
doctors reading the record, consulting the compu-
ter, etc.), to achieve mutual orientation and in 
order to establish their readiness to address the 
chief complaint, the reason for the patient’s visit. 
Communicating engagement or disengagement 
happens mainly via gaze and body orientation, 
whereby lower-body segments are used to deter-
mine the frame in which long-term action (com-
municating with patient vs studying records for 
example) is to be situated (Robinson, 1998: 114). 
Thus, multimodal resources are systematically 
employed to fulfil complex communication and 
orientation tasks here.
Subsequent medical exchange of information 
between doctors and patients is mainly carried out 
through question–response sequences, which have 
been discussed extensively in the linguistic litera-
ture. Different types of opening moves (Nowak, 
2009) define and delimit a frame for patient 
responses which may restrict their ‘room for 
maneuvering’ (Spranz-Fogasy, 2005). The extent 
to which minimal variations in wording may trig-
ger different responses was attested to in an 
experimental setting in a study by Heritage et al. 
(2007). The question ‘Is there something else you 
want to address in the visit today?’ elicited sig-
nificantly more hitherto unmet concerns than the 
same question using the word ‘anything’ instead 
of ‘something’. However, the length of the inter-
action did not increase.
Multi-topic presentations and so-called ‘door 
handle’ remarks (introduction of a new problem 
upon leaving a room), dreaded by many doctors, 
have in fact turned out not to present any real 
problems: such presentations and remarks have 
been shown to be the rule rather than the excep-
tion in medical consultations; and yet, because 
patients tend to announce them in the opening 
phase of presenting the complaint, doctors are 
able to process them successfully at the communi-
cative level (Campion and Langdon, 2004).
Even potential information discrepancies 
between doctors and patients can usually be proc-
essed and cleared up by doctors without difficulty: 
for example by integrating divergences in patients’ 
knowledge into their own knowledge and infor-
mation system, or by offering additional informa-
tion for support (Lehtinen, 2007).
Furthermore, Collins (2005) shows how doc-
toral explanations may in some cases be usefully 
supplemented with explanations by nursing staff. 
While doctors adopted the viewpoint of a bio-
medical intervention in their explanations, the 
latter, i.e. the nursing staff, incorporated the view-
point of patient responsibility and oriented their 
interactional moves towards patient contributions. 
Thus, clashes of the voice of medicine with the 
voice of the ‘life-world’, as attested to by Mishler 
(1984) and confirmed by Lalouschek (2002), 
could be attenuated or altogether circumvented.
Yet, doctors may comply only in a limited way 
with interactive pressures to provide answers to or 
explanations for questions. Thus, doctors were 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
332
shown to invoke clinical agendas to postpone cer-
tain types of patient questions if they did not want 
to reply, and once postponing has taken place, 
patients do not tend to pursue their questions further, 
so that they often remain unanswered (Roberts, 
2000). The exchange of information is driven by 
institutional agendas, and certain standard phrases 
and expressions in the initiation phase of medical 
diagnosis and treatment additionally inhibit patient 
participation (Diaz, 2000: 386) and reinforce the 
asymmetry in much doctor–patient talk. Also, the 
gate-keeping function that doctors have, by virtue 
of their power to make decisions about access to 
medical treatment, medication and other services, 
is also processed and reenacted via certain forms and 
content of questions. (Speer and Parsons, 2006). 
The situation increases in complexity in the case 
of multiparty encounters, for example in paedia-
trician consultations. Here, a number of factors 
naturally play a role in next speaker selection – 
both concerning the paediatrician’s selection of 
addressee as well as in the parent–child negotia-
tion of who will present the problem (Stivers, 
2001). Factors that increase the likelihood that a 
child will be the presenter of the problem, and 
which thus deserve attention in view of promoting 
active involvement of the patient, are the child’s 
age, preceding speaker selection/address (e.g. 
during the greeting phase) and direct addressing 
by the doctor. Adolescents, by contrast, may 
explicitly disallow the addressing of a parent, usu-
ally a mother, as a stand-in informant for the 
medical problem (Mondada, 2002).
23.2.2  Forms of representation of illness 
and its subjective experience
In addition to an interest in the interactive proc-
esses of doctor–patient talk, some sociolinguistic 
and discourse analytic studies have also concerned 
themselves with content/semantic representations 
of illness and ailments. The use of professional 
jargon in particular is frequently cited as a prob-
lem area. But it has also been shown that the use 
of (English) medical vocabulary can have a practi-
cal function in rural African contexts (Odebunmi, 
2006) – to avoid giving disturbing information as 
long as the diagnosis is not yet confirmed, and to 
avoid stigmatizing the patient in the presence of 
relatives. Mastery of code-switching is therefore a 
basic qualification for practitioners there.
Investigations of metaphorical language used in 
representations of illness constitute another impor-
tant area of inquiry, although here data are not 
always drawn from natural contexts (Rees et al., 
2007; Semino et al., 2004).
Metaphors and other forms of illustration are 
used as resources for a variety of purposes in the 
process of knowledge transfer between experts and 
laypersons (Brünner and Gülich, 2002: 77). Experts 
may use such resources to explain and break down 
complex facts, while patients may employ them to 
grasp and illustrate sensations and experiences that 
are otherwise difficult to describe, such as experi-
ences of pain, or of auras preceding epileptic sei-
zures. Metaphors and similes are commonly used 
in these contexts, while exemplification and expo-
sitions of scenarios are more frequent when the 
intention is to draw parallels to day-to-day life.
It is to be noted that such illustration processes 
are of course co-constructed, and that experts and 
laypersons do not necessarily employ different 
resources, but rather may employ the same ones in 
differentiated ways and for different purposes 
(Brünner and Gülich, 2002: 82ff.).
Divergences in usage preferences can also be 
analysed for the purposes of differential diagnos-
tics. For example, epilepsy patients tend to employ 
metaphor more frequently in their description of 
seizure attacks than patients with dissociative 
disorders (Surmann, 2005). The ways in which 
either group tends to reconstruct the gap in con-
sciousness during attacks show significant differ-
ences as well (Furchner, 2002). Analyses of 
divergences in linguistic strategies therefore lend 
themselves readily to support differential diagno-
sis, which in traditional terms and methods is 
complex, costly and prone to error.
23.2.3 Pain representation
The representation of pain, which is pivotal in 
medical communication, is typically rather 
problematic, because here, everyday language 
provides only a limited repertoire of expression, in 
contrast to, for example, the repertoires for the 
description of visual or acoustic phenomena, 
which are typologically highly developed in most 
languages. Category sets for the representation of 
pain have indeed been established from a medical 
perspective (see Reisigl, 2006 for systematic 
description and critique). These sets list dimen-
sions such as temporal occurrence (‘When?’), 
localization (‘Where?’), intensity (‘How severe?’), 
quality (e.g. ‘stinging’, ‘piercing’), side symptoms 
(e.g. nausea), conditions of occurrence (e.g. when 
walking, when lying down), and pain manage-
ment (‘What eases or increases the pain?’). One 
problem of such classifications is that it may not 
always be easy for patients to assign their subjec-
tive experience of pain to any particular medical 
category listed. For this reason, representations of 
pain typically also employ non-verbal, gestural 
resources, which nowadays can be easily captured 
with recording technology and have therefore 
become a strong focus in DPC research. 

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
333
Non-verbal resources are mainly used to accentu-
ate dimensions of the intensity and quality of 
pain. Such ‘demonstrative suffering’ (Heath, 2002) 
emphasizes the unique and particular qualities of 
pain.1 By expressing the severity of the illness, it 
also serves to gain access to the ‘sick role’ in the 
first place, thus legitimizing medical consultation 
(Heritage and Robinson, 2006).
Non-verbal activity is well integrated into the 
frame of medical consultation: the turn-by-turn 
structure is maintained, and gesture is usually 
accompanied by talk, in accordance with the sequen-
tial requirements of interaction (Heath, 2002).
Non-verbal activity also plays a role in connec-
tion with the localization of pain. Resources like 
gaze, pointing gestures and body movement are 
typically combined with verbal deictic expres-
sions (e.g. ‘here’), as in fact two interactional 
tasks have to be fulfilled: defining the locus of the 
pain and maintaining the interactive frame estab-
lished with the doctor. In this context, differences 
in the expression of visible versus invisible targets 
have been confirmed (Stukenbrock, 2008). With 
visible targets (e.g. pain in the knee), the domain 
of scrutiny for the verbal deictic is pre-established 
via a partly simultaneous employment of gaze and 
gesture. The gaze moves from the addressee to the 
pointing hand and from there to the target (the 
knee). The co-orientation is therefore multimodal, 
being gradually intensified through gaze, gesture 
and talk (in this order). In the case of an invisible 
target however (e.g. pain in the back), the patient’s 
gaze remains on the addressee, in order to main-
tain the interactional frame.
The expression of the quality of pain then falls 
back, to a large degree, on verbal resources. A lack 
of ‘basic pain terms’ forces patients to use indirect 
means of description such as metaphor or visuali-
zation, as evidenced in a recent study on written 
and oral German data (Overlach, 2008). Within 
the oral context, lexical and syntactic variation 
was more strongly focused on basic metaphors of 
possession (‘to have a pain’) and copula construc-
tion (‘the pain is …’).
In addition, not all resources that L1 speakers 
have at their disposal for the expression of pain 
are actually employed (Blasch et al., 2010). Thus, 
whenever patients are asked about their pain in 
non-medical contexts, they mainly talk about:
• subjective theories about the illness and possible 
sources of the pain
• various impairments they are subjected to due to 
the pain
• pain management in general – how they (suc-
cessfully) try to avoid pain, or measures taken to 
attain relief.
Thus, the dimensions of conditions of occur-
rence and pain management are foregrounded. 
By contrast, in medical contexts, the following 
themes dominate:
• talk about medication
• talk about side symptoms of the pain that occa-
sioned the medical consultation
• differentiated specification of the pain and its 
occurrence (quality of the pain, local and tempo-
ral dimensions, intensity).
The points of discrepancy here can be subsumed 
under the headings of contextualizing vs symptom-
oriented expressions of pain (see Figure 23.1). In 
informal, non-medical talk, patients put their 
expressions of pain into a broader context, and 
relate them to everyday experience, and in partic-
ular to personal experience and impairment. Thus, 
pain is not so much characterized in terms of its 
sensations and symptoms, but rather in terms of its 
suspected sources, its effects, and possibilities for 
avoidance or relief (Blasch et al., 2010).
Such divergences in strategies and foci in the 
representation of pain can lead to interactive dif-
ficulties. Thus, divergent concepts of ‘pain’ may 
result in communication problems: for example, 
when doctors explore pain as a measure of mental 
sensation that is to be isolated, while patients 
describe it in practical terms as a phenomenon that 
is relative to context and has observable conse-
quences (Deppermann, 2003). This manifests 
itself, for example, in divergences in the dimen-
sions of expressions of pain, which can again be 
subsumed under the headings ‘contextualizing’ 
and ‘symptom-oriented’ (Blasch et al., 2010; 
Menz and Lalouschek, 2006). Pain consultations 
that are adapted to the patient’s perception of pri-
orities and allow for narrative structuring may, 
instead of applying pre-established sets of catego-
rization, succeed in eliciting new facts and infor-
mation from patients with multiple complaints 
that other forms of anamnesis may be unable to 
reach. Thus, discourse analytic and/or conversa-
tion analytic preoccupation with forms of expres-
sion rather than content can contribute to the 
establishment and enhancement of medical diag-
noses (Gülich et al., 2003).
Gender-based variation in the representation of 
pain is discussed in Section 23.3.2.
23.3 MACROSTRUCTURAL ASPECTS
23.3.1  Migration: multilingualism in 
doctor–patient interactions
Despite the fact that, because of mass globaliza-
tion, multilingualism due to migration has become 
the norm in large urban areas, the issue has not yet 
been sufficiently addressed in research on medical 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
334
communication. There are indeed indications that 
doctors’ role expectations and communicative 
tasks change in interactions with non-native 
speakers, for example towards an increase in non-
medical questioning and a higher percentage of 
bureaucratic negotiation (Valero-Garcés, 2002). In 
addition, however, specific types of misunder-
standings occur, at all levels of the linguistic 
system and social interaction, such as (a) pronun-
ciation and word stress, (b) intonation and speech 
delivery, (c) grammar, vocabulary, and lack of 
contextual information, and, especially, (d) style 
of presentation (Roberts et al., 2005). The latter, in 
particular, typically plays a decisive role in misun-
derstandings, suggesting that differences in the 
styles of self-presentation may have more bearing 
on communication problems than, for example, 
culturally-specific health beliefs.
Of similar importance are structural discrepan-
cies that can be traced back to the bureaucratic 
(administrative) organization of the respective 
health systems (Roberts, 2006), such as, for exam-
ple, an increasing demand for documentation and 
the concomitantly required use of electronic forms 
and processes. These are geared towards monolin-
gual English speakers and put patients with lim-
ited English knowledge, who have yet to 
familiarize themselves with the ‘rules’, at a disad-
vantage. Moreover, the exigencies of a health 
bureaucracy concerning parameters such as length 
of consultation, active monitoring of cholesterol 
levels, addressing drug use, etc., which in part 
form the basis of calculation for a family doctor’s 
salary, may cause problems when patients do not 
adhere to unfamiliar structures and, for example, 
raise multiple topics in the course of one consulta-
tion, which in turn cannot easily be processed by 
computerized systems (Roberts, 2006).
Most importantly, however, patient-centred 
conversational strategies, which are increasingly 
in demand in Western society, may stand in direct 
contradiction to the expectations regarding the 
doctor–patient interaction sought by patients with 
a different cultural background. In such situations, 
an increase in metatalk (Roberts, 2006: 190) tends 
to complicate communication rather than facilitate 
it. Thus, increasing sensitivity and raising aware-
ness of different presentation strategies are impor-
tant measures for improvement of the status quo. 
Conventional communication coaching on the 
basis of monolingual native speaker contexts is 
obsolete here, as it fails to address discrepancies 
in self-presentation, expectations and assumptions 
regarding consultations.
One frequently-employed remedy to address 
potential interactivity problems in multilingual 
and multicultural encounters is to enlist the help of 
interpreters. Due to the extensive literature in this 
area, the present discussion will limit itself to 
discourse-based approaches, which have recently 
gained importance and increasing attention as a 
research strand within interpreting studies, to the 
point that some scholars have begun to speak of 
‘dialogic discourse in triadic interaction’ as a new 
research paradigm in its own right (Pöchhacker 
and Shlesinger, 2005: 157; see also Bolden, 2000; 
Bührig, 2001; Meyer et al., 2003; Bührig and 
Meyer, 2004b; Pöchhacker and Shlesinger, 2007).
Doctor–patient
interaction
INT
Contextualizing
Symptom-oriented
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Conversation type/main themes
Contextualizing
Symptom-oriented
Figure 23.1 Different topics according to conversation type (medical consultation vs 
interview). Reprinted with permission from Universitätsverlag Rhein-Ruhr OHG. 

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
335
In the literature on community interpreting, 
two broad areas can be distinguished: professional 
interpreting and un-trained (ad-hoc) interpreting. 
Those two areas represent two fundamentally dif-
ferent settings within multiparty communication. 
In addition, discourse analytic studies of profes-
sional interpreting are located on the interface 
between the classic research area of interpreting 
and translation, which to this day is strongly influ-
enced by the traditional norms applying within the 
interpreting profession, and the applied linguistic 
research paradigm that foregrounds the interactive 
functions of interpreting activity. Contradictions 
growing out of the tensions between role-specific 
postulations and the ethic rules of associations of 
interpreters, on the one hand, and interactive situ-
ations and activities, on the ground on the other, 
may result in veritable interactional dilemmas 
(Angelelli, 2004). For example, institutions for 
interpreter education frequently still insist on the 
notion that interpreters should not intervene as 
individual ‘entities’ in interpreting situations but 
rather should take care to remain ‘invisible’. Yet, 
Angelelli’s analysis of almost 400 communicative 
events involving interpretation (of which the 
majority occurred in the context of telephone 
conversations) evidences a number of linguistic 
activities that point to the ‘visibility’ of the inter-
preter. These activities notably include the follow-
ing: interpreters introducing themselves as 
participants in the interpreted event; verbalizing of 
interactional rules (e.g. for turn transition); para-
phrasing of professional jargon and terminology; 
register changes (e.g. rendering translation more 
informal than the original statement); filtering of 
information; and taking up the perspective of one 
of the parties.
In addition, the interactional participation of 
interpreters in itself is largely determined by their 
conception of the purpose of the interaction, not 
only by the immediate goal of interpreting 
(Bolden, 2000). Interpreters are not merely pas-
sive participants in interactional activity: rather, 
their interpretations are substantially shaped by a 
medical/doctoral perspective. They share the doc-
tors’ normative bias for objective, biomedically-
relevant information. Such an orientation is not 
only manifest in an amplification of the kinds of 
information that are deemed relevant in the above 
sense (e.g. an exhaustive listing of symptoms the 
interpreter holds to be relevant) but also in the 
suppression of more subjectively-oriented patient 
information concerning socio-psychological 
aspects.
While Bolden’s study thus attests to an amplifi-
cation of the ‘voice of medicine’ in Mishler’s 
(1984) sense, others have shown different results. 
In their analysis of (only three) interpreted conver-
sations, Merlini and Favaron (2005) found that 
interpreters develop an individual, third ‘interpret-
er’s voice’ in order to mediate between the voice of 
medicine and a patient’s ‘voice of lifeworld’. The 
investigation of a list of linguistic features (turn-
taking, topic development, the interpreter’s choice 
of footing, departures from the primary speakers’ 
utterances, prosodic resources) led the authors to 
regard strong interactional involvement on the 
interpreter’s part as characteristic of the voice of 
interpreting, though only as an amplification of the 
voice of lifeworld, and hence in concomitance with 
strong involvement of the patient.
Multiparty conversations with ad hoc inter-
preters face a different set of clear communica-
tive challenges. Such conversations appear to 
occur much more frequently in practice than is 
commonly assumed (see Pöchhacker and Kadric, 
1999). In the course of knowledge transfer during 
briefings for informed consent, the translation of 
professional terminology is a particularly salient 
source of trouble here; it is often negotiated using 
procedures such as repetition of the word in the 
source language (‘insertional code switching’) or 
replacement with non-terminological wordings 
(Meyer, 2004). Further support measures include 
pointing gestures indicating the afflicted body part 
on the body itself or on illustrations in information 
leaflets, as well as morpheme-by-morpheme 
translations into the target language. The latter, 
however, may be prone to causing comprehension 
problems, so that the quality of interpreted brief-
ings for informed consent can suffer and informa-
tion is less exact and complete than in monolingual 
situations (Bührig and Meyer, 2004a; Meyer, 
2002, 2004).
Additional differences in multilingual interac-
tions without interpreting, with professional inter-
preting, or with ad hoc interpreting have been 
noted in the literature. For example, Valero Garcés 
(2002; 2005) finds that professional interpreters 
translate all doctoral questions and rarely add new 
ones, while ad hoc interpreters only translate 
about 14% of questions, answering an average of 
50% of questions themselves, and raise a consid-
erable number of new questions (with the inter-
preter and patient in this case being a spouse). 
More notable, however, are qualitative differences 
and commonalities in the different scenarios. 
Thus, the ad hoc interpreted conversations fre-
quently exhibit shifts in the assignment of partici-
pant roles, in interaction order and in contribution 
type, whilst demonstrating a relatively low lin-
guistic competence of the ad hoc interpreter. 
Similar to non-interpreted conversations, ad hoc 
interpreted interactions typically feature strategies 
meant to ensure comprehension, such as frequent 
questions, repetitions and recasts. In contrast to 
professionally interpreted conversations, situa-
tions of ad hoc interpretation are additionally 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
336
characterized by the interpreter’s changing of 
roles, in the sense that s/he may take over ques-
tioning from the doctor, or give answers directly 
without translation. When the interpreter talks 
directly to one of the parties, those passages usu-
ally remain untranslated for the other, which is 
never the case in professionally interpreted set-
tings. Thus, according to Valero Garcés, ad hoc 
interpretations carry a high risk of misunderstand-
ing. Professional interpreters, furthermore, fre-
quently use the first person in their translation, 
while ad hoc interpreters often use the third 
person in the context of reporting verbs (‘she 
says’).
Bot (2007) reports similar findings with regards 
to therapy sessions. However, Bot does not 
consider the shift in perspective from first to third 
person to be as problematic as commonly 
described in the literature; rather, she casts it as a 
necessary adaptation to interactive reality. These 
findings are, however, relativized by the small size 
of the corpora used, and thus must be regarded as 
tentative.
23.3.2 Gender
The fact that gender plays a role in institutional 
communication, including medical consultation, 
has been well established in past research, both 
with regards to the patient’s as well as the doctor’s 
gender (West, 1990). In particular, research has 
investigated interruptions as indices of status and 
power (Holmes, 1992; West, 1984), though with 
discrepant results that were later traced back to 
shortcomings in the methodology, such as the fact 
that interruptions were technically defined on the 
basis of overlaps, with no allowance for the fact 
that overlaps are not necessarily disruptive but can 
also be communicatively supportive.
Controlling for and taking into account these 
methodological issues gives rise to more differen-
tiated results (Menz and Al-Roubaie, 2008: 657ff.). 
Thus, non-supportive interruptions (meaning those 
that involve a change of topic or addressee) seem 
to grow out of status rather than gender differ-
ences: doctors of either sex interrupt more often 
than male or female patients (Li et al., 2004). 
Furthermore, interruption attempts by patients are 
increasingly less successful as the status of the 
doctor becomes higher. In all, this points to the fact 
that with regards to dominant linguistic behaviour, 
position and (social) status play a more important 
role than gender, as illustrated in Figure 23.2.
The situation is different in the case of support-
ive interruptions. Here, the numbers are signifi-
cantly higher for both female patients and female 
doctors, in comparison with male doctors and 
patients, as illustrated in Figure 23.3.
This appears to be evidence for the fact that in 
the institutional setting of medical communica-
tion, women are more strongly consensus-oriented 
and cooperative than men, just as they are in other 
settings (Menz and Al-Roubaie, 2008: 659).
In addition to showing differences regarding 
interactional dynamics, the variable of gender 
also correlates with differences of linguistic reali-
zations in, for example, representations of pain 
Interruptions, non-supportive
Doctors–Patients
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Frequency
Duration (Number of Lines)
Doctors
Patients
Doctors trend
Patients trend
Figure 23.2 Distribution of non-supportive interruptions by doctors and patients over 
the course of an anamnesis (p = 0.000) (Menz and Al-Roubaie, 2008: 657).

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
337
(Blasch et al., 2010). Thus, in the context of 
medical consultations:
• Women, on referring to pain, use semantically-
rich concepts and fewer ‘empty subject’ construc-
tions (‘it’, ‘this’) than men.
• Women use significantly more ‘marked’ (non-
formulaic) processes to represent pain than men. 
While men more frequently fall back on ready-
made formulations (‘to have a pain’, ‘to hurt’), 
women’s expressions show more diversity and 
variation.
• Women produce a higher number of relativizing 
temporal qualifiers (often, sometimes ... ) than 
men, who more frequently use the absolute 
qualifier ‘always’. This can also be interpreted in 
the sense that female patients appear to produce 
more differentiated representations.
Overall then, representations of pain appear to 
exhibit more variation and diversity when pro-
duced by women than by men. However, some 
medical studies (Penque et al., 1998; Shaw et al., 
1994) have pointed out that it may in fact be due 
to these divergences in strategies for the represen-
tation of pain that certain syndromes like coronary 
heart disorders are more frequently overlooked in 
female patients than in males, which in turn 
increases women’s mortality rate. Because the 
description of pain is a central diagnostic tool 
used to distinguish severe from less harmful com-
plaints and thus to assess the necessity of (life-
saving) measures, verbal representation plays a 
central role that is not to be underestimated. 
Differences in verbal expression occur notably in 
the following four areas (Menz and Lalouschek, 
2006; Vodopiutz et al., 2002):
1 Women tend to downplay their pain (making 
light of it or focusing more on the psychological 
and social context); men, by contrast, tend to 
overstate their pain (taking it seriously, showing 
they are interested and well informed).
2 From an interactional perspective, women are 
more likely to view themselves as being able to 
endure the pain (passively, and ready to delegate 
and entrust the treatment to the medical institu-
tion), while men tend to present themselves 
interactively as mastering the pain (actively, and 
to undertake therapy).
3 Men tend to show a stronger wish to know the 
cause of pain than women.
4 Men tend to describe pain in (very) concrete 
terms, by providing ample descriptions of symp-
toms, while women’s descriptions of pain tend 
to be more contextualizing, showing little focus 
on symptomatic aspects and frequently using 
markers of diffusion as well as metacommunica-
tive remarks that topicalize the impossibility of 
providing an exact description of the pain.
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
f
Interactive Support
Male
Female
by Patients
by Doctors
Figure 23.3 Cross-tabulation of the distribution of supportive interruptions for doctors 
vs patients, male vs female (p=0.013) (Menz and Al-Roubaie, 2008: 659).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
338
The reason why such divergences are important 
issues for study within doctor–patient communi-
cation is that the linguistic enactments typically 
found with men correspond more closely to doc-
tors’ expectations with regards to providing the 
desired information than do women’s enactments. 
Doctors require and demand symptomatic descrip-
tions of pain, which means as exact an indication 
of the locality, intensity, duration and frequency of 
(e.g. chest) pain as possible. Thus, patients who 
themselves prefer and pursue a diagnostic path of 
investigating causes and producing symptomatic 
descriptions of pain are more readily regarded 
as precise, informative and cooperative by 
doctors. This mainly applies to male patients. 
Furthermore, due to the fact that the majority of 
cardiologists to this day are male and that, histori-
cally, descriptions of symptoms and clinical 
differential diagnoses in the realm of coronary 
heart disorders were developed mainly with male 
patients, the bias may actually be immanent in 
the system (Menz and Lalouschek, 2006; Vodopiutz 
et al., 2002).
23.4  APPLICATIONS: 
TEACHING/EDUCATION
In recent years, an increasing number of linguistic 
findings in the area of DPC have given rise to 
considerations of transference to and practical 
applicability within medical practice. Here, differ-
ent theoretical models lead to preferences for dif-
ferent propositions. From a conversation analytic 
perspective, sequential turn-by-turn analyses 
lend themselves readily to the comparative study 
of, and ultimately to the differentiation between, 
successful and less-than-successful interactions, 
underlining the notion that both (all) conversa-
tional parties share equal responsibility in the 
co-construction of a setting. Thus, conversation 
analysis (CA) is particularly conducive to find-
ings in the context of patient-centred and bio-
psychosocial approaches (Maynard and Heritage, 
2005). Discourse analytic approaches take up 
another focus, integrating more strongly theme-
oriented aspects such as frames, footing and face-
work, but also content-related aspects such as 
shared decision-making into their propositions 
(Roberts and Sarangi, 2005). Considerations of 
grammar, intonation, vocabulary, as well as of 
rhetorical processes of facework, are all integral 
parts of discourse analytic models.
Proposals growing out of the ‘Vienna School’ 
(see e.g. Lalouschek, 2004; Menz and Nowak, 
1992; Wodak, 1996) are more strongly oriented 
towards practice and the development of specific 
training programmes.
Furthermore, Menz et al. (2008a), using an 
innovative two-phase study design, report vali-
dated results for a set of communication charac-
teristics that proved to be salient. Data from a first 
series of recordings formed the basis for a short 
(and thus easily implemented) one-hour training 
programme focusing on two areas that analysis 
had shown to be significant: orientation with 
regards to the local interactional process as well as 
the global context of the treatment and also trans-
parency with regards to laying out the conversa-
tion. A second set of recordings served to test the 
effectiveness of the training programme. Compared 
to the first data-set, the second set attested to clear 
modifications in the participating doctors’ conver-
sation design: doctors provided more orientation 
for the patients regarding the course of the conver-
sation that was to be expected; there were fewer 
topic jumps, and doctors reacted more sensitively 
towards indications of patients’ concerns, while 
nevertheless adhering more closely to their origi-
nal mapping of the conversation. Thus, even 
short-term didactic intervention was shown to 
have noticeable ramifications for conversational 
conduct. It would be desirable for similar pro-
grammes, addressing further linguistic processes 
such as the use of relevance markers (Sator et al., 
2008: 169), to be introduced into the medical 
curriculum.
Also of great importance is the work on seizure 
disorders (epilepsy, dissociative disorders, etc.) 
conducted by a research group around Elisabeth 
Gülich and Martin Schöndienst. Their work is not 
only relevant to focusing and improving doctors’ 
communicative competence but also on a more 
immediate level for the development of diagnoses. 
Thus, Gülich and her collaborators, in a series of 
conversation analytic studies (Furchner, 2002; 
Furchner and Gülich, 2001; Gülich and Furchner, 
2002; Gülich and Schöndienst, 1998, 1999) have 
provided evidence for the fact that different sub-
types of epilepsy can be distinguished on the basis 
of the forms of representations of seizure attacks 
and so-called auras. Hesitation phenomena, refor-
mulations, elaborations on the description of 
auras, as well as the use of adversative structures 
and of ready-made phrases, were all shown to
be discriminatory features of certain types of epi-
lepsy and dissociative attacks. Thus, the genera-
tion of findings, which in traditional medicine 
would have taken up long periods of observation 
during hospitalization or even invasive measures 
such as surgery, can now be elicited in more 
straightforward and comparatively easy ways in 
the course of careful anamnesis, due to the param-
eters established. (For similar results in the con-
text of chest pain, see Vodopiutz et al., 2002.) 
The work of Sator (e.g. 2009) promises to yield 
results of comparable significance with regards to 

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
339
the differentiation of headaches, the classification 
of which has, until now, proved impossible using 
medical testing and machinery. Here too, careful 
and precise anamnesis is of vital importance.
Differently cast, but also of increasing signifi-
cance, are discussions following Roberts and 
Sarangi’s (2003) treatise that problematizes 
attempts to disseminate discourse analytic find-
ings among medical practitioners in the form of 
academic publications. In particular, potential 
clashes of inherently different methodological 
paradigms (quantitative vs qualitative), the pres-
entation of qualitative conversational data, as 
well as issues of academic writing style warrant 
reflection in view of a dissemination via out-of-
discipline (i.e. medical) scientific journals. Such 
discussions vividly illustrate both the opportuni-
ties afforded by and the limits imposed on inter-/
trans-disciplinary research (see also Menz et al., 
2008b; Nowak, 2009).
23.5  TRENDS AND FUTURE RESEARCH: 
INTERDISCIPLINARITY, 
CONSOLIDATION, GENERALIZATION
Research on doctor–patient interaction is an area 
of analysis approached from the perspectives of a 
variety of disciplines (medical psychology, medi-
cal sociology, medical science per se, sociolin-
guistics) using a variety of methods and research 
questions. As the analysis of medical communica-
tion is, by definition, located on the interface of 
two fields, the interdisciplinary approach will 
continue to gain importance. This is likely to have 
direct bearings on methodological and topical 
issues and concerns, which shall be briefly con-
sidered in the following.
From a methodological perspective, medical 
and sociolinguistic research on doctor–patient 
communication developed out of two very differ-
ent scientific paradigms. In sociolinguistics/con-
versation analysis (CA)/discourse analysis (DA), 
the qualitative approach dominates, which treats 
comparatively small corpora of data in depth and 
great detail. By contrast, medical research, includ-
ing research on communication and interaction, is 
traditionally rooted in, and thus held accountable 
to, the standards of evidence-based medicine, 
whose findings primarily grow out of statistical 
calculations of probabilities and significances. 
Thus, detailed analyses that do not lend them-
selves easily to broad generalization are not nec-
essarily considered reliable from this perspective.
Overall, three approaches can be discerned that 
attempt to bridge or at least narrow this perceived 
gap and prepare the ground for sociolinguistic 
research to be more readily integrated into medical 
and medico-social work. First, within discourse 
analysis, there appears to be a noticeable trend 
towards combining genuinely qualitative analysis 
with quantification of observations (see, for exam-
ple, a recent collection by Heritage and Maynard, 
2006b; see also, for example, Haakana, 2002; 
Menz and Al-Roubaie, 2008; Stivers, 2001). Such 
combinations of different empirical methods 
(Wodak, 1997) is conducive to giving sociolin-
guistic studies more prominence within the field 
of medical science and to bringing it in closer 
contact with well-established medical research.
Secondly, modern approaches to the aggrega-
tion and dissemination of scientific data and find-
ings are continually gaining importance in general. 
A first step here is the compilation of a database 
registering all linguistic studies on the topic of 
German-based doctor–patient communication that 
have been published (see Menz et al., 2008b). It is 
hoped this database will contribute to the internal 
consolidation and theoretical development of the 
research area and, ideally, constitute a pivotal 
point of reference for future sociolinguistic stud-
ies. To this end, the primary studies captured in 
the database, along with the concomitant systema-
tized metadata and individual analyses, were 
made publicly and freely accessible to the scien-
tific community in an open-access-database 
format. At the same time, all interested research-
ers and scholars are invited to become involved in 
the critical assessment of the database as well as 
its development and expansion. In that sense, the 
database partakes in an international trend towards 
open access to scientific data and findings gener-
ated on the basis of public funding. Through sys-
tematic, comprehensive presentation and electronic 
accessibility, such findings are henceforth availa-
ble for research and discussion far beyond the 
linguistic discipline and tradition. This is in line 
with a strong desire within sociolinguistic and 
discourse analytic research to establish close link-
ages with other scientific discourse communities 
in the realm of medical and health communica-
tions. As a third point, so-called metastudies must 
be mentioned as a further method of generalizing 
and systematizing research findings, along with 
comprehensive bibliographies (see, for example, 
Nowak and Spranz-Fogasy, 2007). The purpose of 
metastudies is to collect and evaluate individual 
studies systematically. This method of generating 
scientific insight is well established within quanti-
tatively-oriented disciplines such as psychology 
or medical science, and plays an important role 
with regards to the generalization and validation 
of results there. In a more recent development, the 
methodology of metastudies has been adapted for 
qualitatively-oriented disciplines as well. Here, 
Nowak’s (2009) work is pioneering in the context 
of DPC, showing how systematic metastudy of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
340
comprehensive analyses of conversational compo-
nents of DCP can supplement or even replace 
entire collections of individual studies.
Beyond methodological innovations and trends, 
it can be predicted that, from a content-oriented 
perspective, attention will increasingly focus on 
multilingual, inter- and transcultural settings and 
issues (see Section 23.3.2 above). It is in this area 
in particular that doctors face special challenges, 
and here interactional sociolinguistics has much 
insight to offer by virtue of its long-standing and 
rich tradition (see also the chapters on multilin-
gualism in this handbook).
Last but not least, a notable trend within the 
development of medical science itself should be 
mentioned. The traditional paradigm of Western 
medicine is gradually being supplemented with, 
or partially even replaced by, alternative, more 
holistic conceptions of illness and health, which 
may to some extent be due to the fact that within 
alternative forms of medicine such as homeopathy 
(Konitzer et al., 2002; Ruusuvuori, 2005), psycho-
somatic approaches, bio-psychosocial medicine 
(Lalouschek, 2005), or Traditional Chinese 
Medicine (TCM), different, and unconventional, 
forms of communication pertain that may be more 
conducive to patient satisfaction. The global 
development in the direction of post-bureaucratic 
forms of organization (Iedema, 2003), in the 
course of which communication and negotiation 
are increasingly gaining in importance, is another 
factor contributing to the high significance 
accorded to communicative needs and demands 
today. This situation will continue to call for and 
challenge sociolinguistic research on doctor–
patient communication in the years to come.
NOTE
1 By contrast, Heath (1989) shows that forms of 
expressions of pain such as groaning, whimpering, 
or interjections can actually be inhibiting in the 
medical setting. Doctoral diagnosis relies on an exact 
description of pain, while the acute expression of 
pain is diagnostically not helpful or even a hindrance 
in the sense that other witnesses have to be con-
sulted for the description of pain in cases where 
patients are themselves unable to provide an ‘objec-
tive’ assessment (Heath 1989: 114).
REFERENCES
Angelelli, C. V. (2004) Medical Interpreting and Cross-Cultural 
Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Atkinson, P. and Heath, C. (eds) (1981) Medical Work: 
Realities and Routines. Farnborough: Gower.
Becker-Mrotzek, 
M. 
(1992) 
Diskursforschung 
und 
Kommunikation in Institutionen. Heidelberg: Groos.
Blasch, L., Menz, F., and Wetschanow, K. (2010) 
‘Texttypspezifische und gendertypische Unterschiede in der 
Darstellung von Kopfschmerzen’, in F. Menz J. Lalouschek, 
M. Sator and K. Wetschanow (eds), Sprechen über 
Schmerzen. Duisburg: Universitätsverlag Rhein-Ruhr 
(UVRR). pp. 225–94.
Bolden, G. B. (2000) ‘Toward understanding practices of 
medical interpreting: interpreters’ involvement in history 
taking’, Discourse Studies: An Interdisciplinary Journal for 
the Study of Text and Talk, 2: 387–419.
Bot, H. (2007) ‘Dialogue interpreting as a specific case of 
reported speech’, in F. Pöchhacker and M. Shlesinger (eds), 
Healthcare Interpreting: Discourse and Interaction. 
Amsterdam: Jon Benjamins. pp. 77–99.
Brünner, G. and Gülich, E. (2002) ‘Verfahren der 
Veranschaulichung in der Experten-Laien-Kommunikation’, 
in G.Brünner and E. Gülich (eds), Krankheit verstehen. 
Interdisziplinäre 
Beiträge 
zur 
Sprache 
in 
Krankheitsdarstellungen. Bielefeld: Aisthesis Verlag. 
pp. 17–94.
Buchholz, M. B. (1998) ‘Die Metapher im psychoanalytischen 
Dialog’, Psyche, 545–71.
Bührig, K. (2001) ‘Interpreting in hospitals’, in S. Cigada, 
S. Gilardoni and M. Matey (eds), Communicare in Ambiente 
Professionale Plurilingue. Lugano: Universitá della Svizzera 
italiana. pp. 107–9.
Bührig, K. and Meyer, B. (2004a) Ad Hoc-Interpreting and the 
Achievement of Communicative in Specific Kinds of Doctor-
Patient Discourse. (Rep. No. 57). Hamburg: Universität 
Hamburg: Sonderforschungsbereich Mehrsprachigkeit.
Bührig, K. and Meyer, B. (2004b) ‘Ad-hoc-interpreting and 
the Achievement of Communicative Purposes in Doctor-
Patient-Communication’, in J. House and J. Rehbein (eds), 
Multilingual Communication. Amsterdam: Benjamins. 
pp. 43–62.
Byrne, P. S. and Long, B. E. L. (1976) Doctors Talking to 
Patients: A Study of the Verbal Behaviour of General 
Practitioners Consulting in their Surgeries. London: HSMO, 
Royal College of General Practitioners.
Campion, P. and Langdon, M. (2004) ‘Achieving multiple topic 
shifts in primary care medical consultations: a conversation 
analysis study in UK general practice’, Sociology of Health 
and Illness, 26: 81–101.
Candlin, S. (2006) ‘Constructing knowledge, understanding and 
meaning between patients and nurses’, in M. Gotti and 
F. Salager-Meyer (eds), Advances in Medical Discourse Analysis: 
Oral and Written Contexts. Berne: Peter Lang. pp. 65–86.
Collins, S. (2005) ‘Explanations in consultations: the combined 
effectiveness of doctors’ and nurses’ communication with 
patients’, Medical Education, 39: 785–96.
Deppermann, A. (2003) ‘Wenn Semantik zum praktischen 
Problem wird: Divergierende Schmerzkonzepte von Ärztin 
und Patientin in der psychosomatischen Exploration’, 
Psychotherapie und Sozialwissenschaft. Zeitschrift für qual-
itative Forschung, 5: 165–81.
de Valck, C. and Van den Wostijne, K. P. (1996) ‘Communication 
problems on an oncology ward’, Patient Education and 
Counseling, 29: 131–6.

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
341
Diaz, F. (2000) ‘The social organisation of chemotherapy 
treatment consultations’, Sociology of Health and Illness, 
22: 364–89.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. C. (eds) (1992) Talk at Work. 
Interaction in Institutional Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Ehlich, K, Koerfer, A., Redder, A. and Weingarten, R. 
(eds) 
(1990) 
Medizinische 
und 
therapeutische 
Kommunik ation. Diskursanalytische Untersuchungen. 
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Fisher, S. and Todd, A. D. (eds) (1983) The Social Organization 
of Doctor Patient Communication. Washington, DC: Center 
for Applied Linguistics.
Fritzsche, K. and Wirsching, M. (2005) Psychosomatische 
Medizin und Psychotherapie. Berlin: Springer.
Furchner, I. (2002) ‘ “Keine absence gleicht der anderen.” 
Die Darstellung von Bewusstseinslücken in “Anfallsbe -
schreibungen"', in G. Brünner and E. Gülich (eds), Krankheit 
verstehen. Interdisziplinäre Beiträge zur Sprache in 
Krankheitsdarstellungen. Bielefeld: Aisthesis Verlag. 
pp. 121–42.
Furchner, I. and Gülich, E. (2001) ‘L´expertise des patients 
dans l´établissment d´un diagnostic médical’, Bulletin 
VALS-ASLA, 74: 83–107.
Gotti, M. and Salager-Meyer, F. (eds) (2006) Advances in 
Medical Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written Contexts. 
Berne: Peter Lang. p. 148.
Gülich, E. and Furchner, I. (2002) ‘Die Beschreibung von 
Unbeschreibbarem. 
Eine 
konversationsanalytische 
Annäherung an Gespräche mit Anfallskranken’, in I. Keim 
and W. Schütte (eds), Soziale Welten und kommunikative 
Stile. Festschrift für Werner Kallmeyer zum 60. Geburtstag. 
Tübingen: Narr. pp. 161–86.
Gülich, E. and Schöndienst, M. (1998) Anfallsbeschreibung 
von PatientInnen mit epileptischen oder pseudoepilep-
tischen Anfällen: Differentialdiagnostische Aspekte 
und interventionstechnische Implikationen. Bielefeld. 
21-2-2007. Unpublished work.
Gülich, E. and Schöndienst, M. (1999) ‘ “Das ist unheimlich 
schwer zu beschreiben” ’. Formulierungsmuster in Kran k-
heitsbeschreibungen anfallskranker Patienten: differential-
diagnostische und therapeutische Aspekte’, Psy chotherapie 
und Sozialwissenschaft, Zeitschrift für Qualitative 
Forschung, 199–227.
Gülich, E., Schöndienst, M. and Surmann, V. (2003) ‘Schmerzen 
erzählen Geschichten – Geschichten erzählen Schmerzen’, 
Psychotherapie und Sozialwissenschaft. Zeitschrift für 
qualitative Forschung, 5: 220–49.
Haakana, M. (2002) ‘Laughter in medical interaction: from 
quantification to analysis, and back’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 6: 207–35.
Heath, C. (1989) ‘Pain talk. The expression of suffering in 
the medical consultation’, Social Psychology Quarterly, 
52: 113–25.
Heath, C. (2002) ‘Demonstrative suffering: the gestural 
(re)embodiment of symptoms’, Journal of Communication, 
52: 597–616.
Hein, N., Hoffmann-Richter, U., Lalouschek, J., Nowak, P. and 
Wodak, R. (1985) ‘Kommunikation zwischen Arzt und 
Patient’, Wiener Linguistische Gazette, 1–87.
Herb, G. and Streeck, S. (1995) ‘Der Diagnoseprozess bei 
Spina bifida: Elterliche Wahrnehmung und Sicht des 
klinischen Fachpersonals’, Praxis der Kinderpsychologie 
und Kinderpsychiatrie, 44: 150–8.
Heritage, J. C. and Maynard, D. W. (2006a) ‘Introduction: 
analyzing interaction between doctors and patients in pri-
mary care encounters’, in J. C. Heritage and D. W. Maynard 
(eds), Communication in Medical Care: Interaction between 
Primary Care Physicians and Patients. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 1–21.
Heritage, J. C. and Maynard, D. W. (eds) (2006b) Communication 
in medical care: interaction between primary care physicians 
and patients. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heritage, J. C. and Robinson, J. D. (2006) ‘Accounting for the 
visit: giving reasons for seeking medical care’, in J. C. Heritage 
and D. W. Maynard (eds), Communication in medical care: 
interaction between primary care physicians and patients. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 48–85.
Heritage, J. C., Robinson, J. D., Elliott, M. N., Beckett, M. and 
Wilkes, M. (2007) ‘Reducing patients’ unmet concerns in 
primary care: the difference one word can make’, Journal 
of General Internal Medicine, 22: 1429–33.
Holmes, J. (1992) ‘Women’s talk in public contexts’, Discourse 
and Society, 3: 131–50.
Hydén, L.-C. and Mishler, E. G. (1999) ‘Language and medi-
cine’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 19: 174–92.
Iedema, R. (2003) Discourses of Post-Bureaucratic 
Organization. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Iedema, Ri. (2006) ‘(Post-)bureaucratizing medicine: health 
reform and the reconfiguration of contemporary clinical 
work’, in M. Gotti and F. Salager-Meyer (eds), Advances in 
Medical Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written Contexts 
Berne: Peter Lang. pp.111–31.
Köhle, K. and Raspe, H.-H. (eds) (1982) Das Gespräch 
während der ärztlichen Visite. Empirische Untersuchungen. 
Wien: Urban and Schwarzenberg.
Konitzer, M., Schemm, W., Freudenberg, N. and Fischer, G. C. 
(2002) ‘Therapeutic interaction through metaphor: a tex-
tual approach to homeopathy’, Semiotica, 141: 1–27.
Kütemeyer, M. (2003) ‘Psychogener Schmerz als Dissoziation’, 
Psychotherapie und Sozialwissenschaft. Zeitschrift für 
quali tative Forschung, 3: 203–20.
Lackner, M., Jager, B. and Kunsbeck, H. W. (1996) ‘ Patient 
– medical staff – consultant triad: Conditions for satisfac-
tion in psychosomatic consultation service (translation)’, 
Psychother Psychosom Med. Psychol., 333–9.
Lalouschek, J. (2002) Ärztliche Gesprächsausbildung. Eine 
diskursanalytische Studie zu Formen des ärztlichen 
Gesprächs. Radolfzell: Verlag für Gesprächsforschung.
Lalouschek, J. (2004) ‘Kommunikatives Selbst-Coaching 
im beruflichen Alltag. Ein sprachwissenschaftliches 
Trainingskonzept 
am 
Beispiel 
der 
klinischen 
Gesprächsführung’, in M. Becker-Mrotzek and G. Brünner 
(eds), Analyse und Vermittlung von Gesprächskompetenz. 
Radolfzell: Verlag für Gesprächsforschung. pp.137–58.
Lalouschek, J. (2005) ‘Medizinische Konzepte und ärztliche 
Gesprächsführung – am Beispiel der psychosomatischen 
Anamnese’, in M. Neises, S. Ditz and T. Spranz-Fogasy 
(eds), Psychosomatische Gesprächsführung in der 
Frauenheilkunde. Ein interdisziplinärer Ansatz zur verbalen 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
342
Intervention. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche Verlagsge-
sellschaft. pp. 48–72.
Lalouschek, J., Menz, F. and Wodak, R. (1990) Alltag in der 
Ambulanz. Gespräche zwischen Ärzten, Schwestern und 
Patienten. Tübingen: Gunter Narr Verlag.
Lehtinen, E. (2007) ‘Merging doctor and client knowledge: on 
doctors’ ways of dealing with clients’ potentially discrepant 
information in genetic counseling’, Journal of Pragmatics: 
an Interdisciplinary Journal of Language Studies, 39: 
389–427.
Li, H. Z. (1999) ‘Grounding and information communication in 
intercultural and intracultural dyadic discourse’, Discourse 
Processes: a Multidisciplinary Journal, 28: 195–215.
Li, H. Z., Krysko, M., Desroches, N. G. and Deagle, G. (2004) 
‘Reconceptualizing interruptions in physician – patient 
interviews: cooperative and intrusive’, Communication and 
Medicine: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Healthcare, Ethics 
and Society, 1: 145–57.
Löning, P. and Rehbein, J. (eds) (1993) Arzt-Patienten-
Kommunikation. Analysen zu interdisziplinären Problemen 
des medizinischen Diskurses. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Maynard, D. W. and Heritage, J. C. (2005) ‘Conversation 
analysis, doctor – patient interaction and medical commu-
nication’, Medical Education, 39: 428–35.
Menz, F. (1991) Der geheime Dialog. Medizinische Ausbildung 
und institutionalisierte Verschleierungen in der Arzt-
Patient-Kommunikation. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Menz, F. and Al-Roubaie, A. (2008) ‘Interruptions, status and 
gender in medical interviews: the harder you brake, the 
longer it takes’, Discourse and Society, 19: 645–66.
Menz, F. and Lalouschek, J. (2006) ‘ ‘‘I just can’t tell you how 
much it hurts.” Gender-relevant differences in the descrip-
tion of chest pain’, in M. Gotti and F. Salager-Meyer (eds), 
Advances in Medical Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written 
Contexts. Berne: Peter Lang.
Menz, F. and Nowak, P. (1992) ‘Kommunikationstraining 
für Ärzte und Ärztinnen in Österreich. Eine Anamnese’, in 
R. Fiehler and W. Sucharowski (eds), Kommunikationsberatung 
und -ausbildung. Anwendungsfelder der Diskursforschung. 
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. pp. 79–86.
Menz, F., Lalouschek, J. and Gstettner, A. (2008a) Effiziente 
ärztliche Gesprächsführung. Optimierung kommunikativer 
Kompetenz in der ambulanten medizinischen Versorgung. 
Ein gesprächsanalytisches Trainingskonzept. Münster: 
LIT-Verlag.
Menz, F., Nowak, P., Rappl, A. and Nezhiba, S. (2008b) ‘Arzt-
Patient-Interaktion im deutschsprachigen Raum – eine 
Online-Forschungsdatenbank (API-on) als Basis für 
Metaanalysen’, Gesprächsforschung – Online-Zeitschrift 
zur verbalen Interaktion, 9: 129–63.
Merlini, R. and Favaron, R. (2005) ‘Examining the “voice of 
interpreting” in speech pathology’, Interpreting: 
International Journal of Research and Practice in 
Interpreting, 7: 263–302.
Meyer, B. (2002) ‘Medical interpreting: some salient features’, 
in G. Garzone, M. Viezzi, D. C. Snelling, A. Amato, and 
P. Mead (eds), Interpreting in the 21st Century: Challenges 
and Opportunities. Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 159–69.
Meyer, 
B. 
(2004) 
Dolmetschen 
im 
medizinischen 
Aufklärungsgespräch. Eine diskursanalytische Untersuchung 
zur Wissensvermittlung im mehrsprachigen Krankenhaus. 
Münster: Waxmann.
Meyer, B., Apfelbaum, B., Pöchhacker, F. and Bischoff, A. 
(2003) ‘Analysing interpreted doctor-patient communica-
tion from the perspectives of linguistics, interpreting stud-
ies and health sciences’, in L. Brunette, G. Bastin, I. Hemlin 
and H. Clarke (eds), The Critical Link 3: Interpreters in the 
Community. Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 67–79.
Mishler, E. G. (1984) The Discourse of Medicine. Dialectics of 
Medical Interviews. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Mondada, L. (2002) ‘Die interaktive Formulierung der 
medizinischen 
Beschreibung’, 
Psychotherapie 
und 
Sozialwissenschaft. Zeitschrift für qualitative Forschung, 
5: 341–53.
Morris, G. H. and Chenail, R. J. (eds) (1995) The Talk of the 
Clinic. Explorations in the Analysis of Medical and 
Therapeutic Discourse. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Neises, M., Ditz, S. and Spranz-Fogasy, T. (eds) (2005) 
Psychosomatische Gesprächsführung in der Frauenheilkunde. 
Ein interdisziplinärer Ansatz zur verbalen Intervention. 
Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft.
Nowak, P. (2009) Eine Systematik sprachlichen Handelns von 
Ärzt/inn/en. Metastudie über Diskursforschungen zu 
deutsch sprachigen Arzt-Patient-Interaktionen. Frankfurt/ 
am Main: Peter Lang.
Nowak, P. and Spranz-Fogasy, T. (2007) Literatur zur Arzt-
Patient-Kommunikation. Mannheim: Institut für Deutsche 
Sprache.
Odebunmi, A. (2006) ‘Locutions in medical discourse in 
Southwestern Nigeria’, Pragmatics: Quarterly Publication 
of the International Pragmatics Association, 16: 25–41.
Overlach, F. (2008) Sprache des Schmerzes – Sprechen über 
Schmerzen. Eine grammatisch-semantische und gesprächs-
analytische Untersuchung von Schmerzausdrücken im 
Deutschen. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Pahta, P. (2006) ‘‘‘This is very important”: a corpus study of 
amplifiers in medical writing’, in M. Gotti and F. Salager-
Meyer (eds), Advances in Medical Discourse Analysis: Oral 
and Written Contexts. Berne: Peter Lang. pp. 357–81.
Penque, S., Halm, M., Smith, M., et al. (1998) ‘Women and 
coronary disease: relationship between descriptors of signs 
and symptoms and diagnostic and treatment course’, 
American Journal of Critical Care, 175–82.
Peräkylä, A. (2004) ‘Making links in psychoanalytic interpreta-
tions: a conversation analytical perspective’, Psychotherapy 
Research, 289–307.
Ploeger, A. (2005) ‘Verbale Interaktion im Kollektiv’, in M. Neises, 
S. Ditz and T. Spranz-Fogasy (eds), Psychosomatische 
Gesprächsführung in der Frauenheilkunde. Ein interdiszi-
plinärer Ansatz zur verbalen Intervention. Stuttgart: 
Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft. pp. 285–98.
Pöchhacker, F. and Kadric, M. (1999) ‘The hospital cleaner as 
healthcare interpreter. A case study’, The Interpreter, 5: 
161–78.
Pöchhacker, F. and Shlesinger, M. (2005) ‘Introduction. 
Discourse-based research on healthcare interpreting’, 

DOCTOR–PATIENT COMMUNICATION
343
Interpreting: International Journal of Research and Practice 
in Interpreting, 7: 157–67.
Pöchhacker, F. and Shlesinger, M. (eds) (2007) Healthcare 
Interpreting: Discourse and Interaction. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins.
Redder, A. and Wiese, I. (eds) (1994) Medizinische 
Kommunikation. Diskurspraxis, Diskursethik, Diskursanalyse. 
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Rees, C. E., Knight, L. V. and Wilkinson, C. E. (2007) ‘Doctors 
being up there and we being down here: a metaphorical 
analysis of talk about student/doctor – patient relation-
ships’, Social Science and Medicine, 65: 725–37.
Reisigl, M. (2006). Semiotik des Schmerzes – das 
medizinsemiotische Framework der Untersuchung. Wien: 
Institut für Sprachwissenschaft.
Roberts, C. (2006) ‘Continuities and discontinuities in doctor 
– patient consultations in a multilingual society’, in 
M. Gotti and F. Salager-Meyer (eds), Advances in Medical 
Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written Contexts. Berne: Peter 
Lang. pp. 177–95.
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. (2003) ‘Uptake of discourse 
research in interprofessional settings: reporting from medi-
cal consultancy’, Applied Linguistics, 24: 338–59.
Roberts, C. and Sarangi, S. (2005) ‘Theme-oriented discourse 
analysis of medical encounters’, Medical Education, 39: 
632–40.
Roberts, C., Moss, B., Wass, V., Sarangi, S. and Jones, R. 
(2005) ‘Misunderstandings: a qualitative study of primary 
care consultations in multilingual settings, and educational 
implications’, Medical Education: 465–75.
Roberts, F. D. (2000) ‘The interactional construction of asymme-
try: the medical agenda as a resource for delaying response to 
patient questions’, The Sociological Quarterly: 151–70.
Robinson, J. D. (1998) ‘Getting down to business. Talk, gaze and 
body orientation during openings of doctor – patient consul-
tations’, Human Communication Research, 25: 97–123.
Ruusuvuori, J. (2005) ‘Comparing homeopathic and general 
practice consultations: the case of problem presentation’, 
Communication and Medicine, 2: 123–35.
Sachweh, S. (2005) ‘“Gut Herrr Doktor!” Gespräche mit alten 
Patientinnen’, in M. Neises, S. Ditz and T. Spranz-Fogasy 
(eds), Psychosomatische Gesprächsführung in der 
Frauenheilkunde. Ein interdisziplinärer Ansatz zur verbalen 
Intervention. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche Verlags-
gesellschaft. pp. 339–51.
Sachweh, S. (2006) ‘“Noch ein Löffelchen?” Effektive 
Kommunikation in der Altenpflege’, (2., vollst. überarb. 
und erw. Aufl. ed.) Hans Huber.
Sarangi, S. and Brookes-Howell, L. (2006) ‘Recontextualising 
the familial lifeworld in genetic counseling: case notes’, in 
M. Gotti and F. Salager-Meyer (eds), Advances in Medical 
Discourse Analysis: Oral and Written Contexts. Berne: Peter 
Lang. pp. 197–225.
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (eds) (1999) Talk, Work and 
Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and 
Management Settings. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Sator, M. (2009) ‘ “Irgendwie schwierig zu differenzieren!’ ” 
Schmerzdifferenzierung in ärztlichen Erstgesprächen an der 
Kopfschmerzambulanz. 
Eine 
gesprächsanalytische 
Untersuchung’. Unpublished work.
Sator, M., Gstettner, A. and Hladschik-Kermer, B. (2008) 
‘Seitdem mir der Arzt gesagt hat “Tumor” – Das war’s’, 
Wiener Klinische Wochenschrift, 120: 158–70.
Schöndienst, M. (2002) ‘The Role of psychotherapy in the 
treatment of epilepsies’, in M. R. Trimble and B. Schmitz 
(eds), The Neuropsychiatry of Epilepsy. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 313–23.
Semino, E., Heywood, J. and Short, M. (2004) ‘Methodological 
problems in the analysis of metaphors in a corpus of conver-
sations about cancer’, Journal of Pragmatics: an 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Language Studies, 36: 1271–94.
Shaw, L. J., Miller, D. D., Romeis, J. C., et al. (1994) ‘Gender 
differences in the noninvasive evaluation and management 
of patients with suspected coronary disease’, Annals of 
Internal Medicine: 559–66.
Speer, S. A. and Parsons, C. (2006) ‘Gatekeeping gender: 
some features of the use of hypothetical questions in the 
psychiatric assessment of transsexual patients’, Discourse 
and Society: An International Journal for the Study of 
Discourse and Communication in Their Social, Political and 
Cultural Contexts, 17: 785–812.
Spranz-Fogasy, T. (2005) ‘Kommunikatives Handeln in ärztli-
chen 
Gesprächen 
– 
Gesprächseröffnung 
und 
Beschwerdenexploration’, in M. Neises, S. Ditz and 
T. Spranz-Fogasy (eds), Psychosomatische Gesprächsführung 
in der Frauenheilkunde. Ein interdisziplinärer Ansatz zur 
verbalen Intervention. Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche 
Verlagsgesellschaft. pp. 17–47.
Stivers, T. (2001) ‘Negotiating who presents the problem: 
next speaker selection in pediatric encounters’, Journal of 
Communication, 51: 1–31.
Stukenbrock, A. (2008) ‘“Wo ist der Hauptschmerz?” – 
Zeigen am menschlichen Körper', Gesprächsforschung – 
Online-Zeitschrift zur verbalen Interaktion, 9: 1–33.
Surmann, V. (2005) Anfallsbilder. Metaphorische Konzepte 
im Sprechen anfallskranker Menschen. Würzburg: 
Königshausen u. Neumann.
Tanner, B. A. (eds) (1976) Language and Communication in 
General Practice. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Valero-Garcés, C. (2002) ‘Interaction and conversational 
constructions in the relationships between suppliers of 
services and immigrant users’, Pragmatics: Quarterly 
Publication of the International Pragmatics Association, 12: 
469–95.
Valero Garcés, C. (2005) ‘Doctor–patient consultations in 
dyadic and triadic exchanges’, Interpreting: International 
Journal of Research and Practice in Interpreting, 7: 
193–210.
Vodopiutz, J., Poller, S., Schneider, B., et al. (2002) ‘Chest 
pain in hospitalized patient: cause-specific and gender-
specific differences’, Journal of Women’s Health and 
Gender-Based Medicine, 11: 1–9.
Walther, S. (1997) Im Mittelpunkt der Patient? 
Übergabegespräche im Krankenhaus. Stuttgart: Thieme.
Walther, S. (2005). Erstgespräch zwischen Pflegepersonal und 
Patienten im Krankenhausalltag. Ein Transkriptband. 
Radolfzell: Verlag für Gesprächsforschung.
Watson, B. M. and Gallois, C. (1999) ‘Communication accom-
modation between patients and health professionals: 
themes and strategies in satisfying and unsatisfying 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
344
encounters’, International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 
9: 167–83.
Weinhold, C. (1997) Kommunikation zwischen Patienten und 
Pflegepersonal. Berne: Verlag Hans Huber.
West, C. (1984) Routine Complications. Troubles with Talk 
Between Doctors and Patients. Bloomington; IN: Indiana 
University Press.
West, C. (1990) ‘Not just "doctors’ orders”: directive-
response sequences in patients’ visits to women and men 
physicians’, Discourse and Society, 1: 85–112.
Wodak, R. (1996) Disorders of Discourse. London: Longman.
Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse analysis and the study of 
doctor – patient interaction’, in B.-L. Gunnarsson, P. Linell, 
B. Nordberg and C. N. Candlin (eds), The Construction of 
Professional Discourse London: Longman. pp. 173–200.

24
24.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, I present an overview of the broad 
field of discourse and schools, focusing mainly on 
its key topics, the evolution of this field of study, 
the questions which remain open and foreseeable 
future developments. On occasion, I present texts 
and examples from my own research in order to 
illustrate particular points and approaches.1 
Nevertheless, given the scope of the field and the 
amount of research that has been conducted, 
throughout the world, in countries with dissimilar 
educative and linguistic situations, this chapter 
cannot cover all the contributions made, nor even 
all the topics addressed. Therefore, I shall focus 
this review from the standpoint of a particular 
research question, one shared by many sociolin-
guists and discourse analysts: namely, that of the 
role played by linguistic practices in construct-
ing inequalities in schools – and in this respect, 
the use made by the speakers of linguistic resources 
in this construction.
The fact that this question has become a main-
stream focus of research in sociolinguistics is 
justified by the assumption that school plays a key 
role not only in capacity building and social devel-
opment but also in normalization and social 
mobility. This significant role played by schools, 
as social institutions, is rooted in the production 
and distribution of knowledge and other forms 
of symbolic capital, which take place through 
educational practices. By analysing the produc-
tion and distribution of these resources, we can 
explore the processes of social stratification, as 
Heller notes. Furthermore, in schools this distribu-
tion often contradicts the principles of democracy 
and equity that schools are committed to (Heller, 
2007: 634–6).
Sociolinguists, linguistic anthropologists and 
discourse analysts have a common interest in this 
research question because of the key role played 
by discursive practices in the field of education. 
Everyday life in schools and classroom activities 
is organized and takes place through linguistic 
practices (this view of institutions and the role of 
communicative practices refers to Ervin Goffman; 
see, for example, Goffman (1961) and Gumperz 
(1989)). Organizing a school, applying its rules, 
teaching and learning, assessing and studying, 
legitimating particular languages and knowl-
edge, and accepting or rejecting authority, among 
other actions, always involve discourse production 
and textual and conversational practices. In these 
daily practices, teacher–student and student–
student relations are reproduced and recreated, as 
are the school rules, the syllabus asserted to be 
necessary and legitimate, the essential demands 
made of students and the characteristics of that 
which is considered to be adequate, good or useful, 
and of those who are attentive or disciplined, as 
well as the characteristics of items and people not 
meeting these criteria. These are routines, but not 
Discourse and Schools
L u i s a  M a r t í n  R o j o

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
346
mechanical actions. Neither are they anonymous: 
on the contrary, they are produced by real social 
agents (Giddens, 1984: 3). The members of the 
school community are familiar with them and even 
seek to influence them, as is revealed in the dis-
courses they produce, in which they build up a 
representation of their tasks and behaviour patterns 
and those of the community.
These communicative exchanges are triggered, 
guided and constrained by organizational policies 
(often implicit or tacit) and routine work practices 
(Cicourel, 2002: 3–4). Thus, interaction within the 
classroom is influenced by the institutional order 
(for example, how the school is organized, what 
principles and rules are applied, what values and 
ideologies underpin its existence, what pro-
grammes are applied, etc.). This institutional 
order, in turn, is part of the social order that 
governs it and assigns it a function in society 
(for example, that of education, or of integration) 
to be implemented in the context of differences 
in wealth, class, gender or other factors. 
Simultaneously, both of these orders may be 
modified through local linguistic practices. As 
Fairclough and Wodak remark, the understanding 
of discourse as ‘social practice’, ‘implies a dialec-
tical relationship between a particular discursive 
event and the situation(s), institution(s) and social 
structure(s) which frame it. As a dialectical rela-
tionship, it is a two-way relationship: the discur-
sive event is shaped by situations, institutions 
and social structures, but it also shapes them’ 
(1997: 258).
24.2  LINGUISTIC PRACTICES IN THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF INEQUALITY 
IN SCHOOLS
From the outset, sociolinguistics has sought to 
clarify the role played by linguistic processes 
in the construction of inequality in schools. 
This debate has evolved over time from a stand-
point of evaluating and defending ‘difference’ to a 
more critical one in which it is observed that 
linguistic discrimination ‘intersects’ with many 
other forms of discrimination, such as those based 
on race/ethnicity, social class, gender, religion, 
nationality or sexual orientation (for the concept 
of ‘intersectionality’, see McCall 2007: 1786–8). 
These forms of oppression interrelate, and the 
dissimilar evaluation of linguistic differences 
intervenes in their production, naturalization 
and legitimation. The debate, too, has evolved, 
reflecting the fact that multilingualism has 
emerged as a major concern, focusing on the pro-
gressive commodification of languages in the new 
economy.
The dissimilar social valuation 
of linguistic varieties
One of the processes revealed by the research on 
discourse and education is the dissimilar social 
valuation of linguistic varieties. Some speakers, 
from the outset, possess the linguistic varieties 
valued and demanded in significant social con-
texts, such as schools, while others have to acquire 
them. Furthermore, the vernacular forms used by 
the latter speakers were rejected. For linguists, 
differences in valuation are only explained by the 
unequal status of individuals and groups, and 
have, in turn, a profound impact on the image of 
those who are ‘different’ as not-competent, and in 
predicting their potential success or failure (Labov, 
1972; Bernstein, 1975). Following these views, 
the Linguistics Society of America (see Kroch and 
Labov, 1972: 17–18; Baugh, 1988: 65–8) refuted 
the linguistic arguments (judgements on the 
primitivism and the non-grammaticality of certain 
linguistic varieties) of ‘deficit theorists’ (Jensen, 
1969), and showed that one of the causes of 
educational failure is, rather than any ‘deficit’, the 
unequal social evaluation of linguistic differences. 
Since then, reactions against this notion have 
multiplied among linguistics theorists in several 
countries. Instead of enrichment, difference is 
seen as a ‘disadvantage’ that needs to be compen-
sated for. Frequently, these children are separated 
in order to receive the compensatory ‘injection’ 
that will bring them up to speed, and they receive 
the same kind of guidance as do students lagging 
behind their peers for other, non-language-related, 
reasons.
Current sociolinguistic research has shown that 
linguistic and cultural differences have a negative 
effect on minorities when they have a weak posi-
tion in the social structure and have to overcome 
structural obstacles for their social and economic 
success (see Ogbu, 1993; see also Heller, 2004, 
for a review of the deficit vs difference debate). 
It is precisely through the unequal valuation of the 
languages spoken by students in multilingual and 
multicultural schools that the construction of 
the ‘other’ as deficient, as part of a domination 
process, takes place (Heller and Martin-Jones, 
2001; Heller, 2007; Rassool, Canvin, Heugh 
and Mansoor, 2007). Monolingualism at school 
limits the possibilities of academic success of the 
neediest social classes in most of the world (the 
bibliography on this question is very extensive: 
for example, García and Baker, 2007; Rassool, 
2007; Cummins and Hornberger, 2008; May and 
Hornberger, 2007; Skutnabb-Kangas, 2007; 
Skutnabb-Kangas, 2008). Educational actions and 
resources are directed preferentially to ensuring 
the teaching of the language of instruction, and 
the substitution of other student languages.

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
347
Furthermore, English is becoming a language 
of instructions in many countries, on occasion 
even displacing homegrown languages – in par-
ticular, minority and regional languages within 
states (Watts, 2008). The influence of English in 
education extends in parallel to processes of glo-
balization, and is linked to current forms of post-
colonial re-colonialization (e.g. Cooke, 1988; 
Pennycook, 1999; Phillipson and Skutnabb-
Kangas, 1992, 1999; Canagarajah, 1999, 2002; 
Negri and Hardt, 2000; Macedo, Gounari and 
Dendrinos, 2003). The emergence of a deregu-
lated, hypercompetitive, post-industrial, glo-
balized economy during the 1980s and 1990s, 
accompanied the rapid growth of the tertiary 
sector and the increased importance of informa-
tion activities in the provision of, and as part of, 
services, and produced important shifts both in the 
valuation of languages (Heller, 2003), and in the 
conceptualization and the experience of work. As 
Heller and Duchene point out, in such tertiary 
sector sites, language is the primary working tool, 
the primary materiality of work and often its prin-
cipal product (see Cameron, 2000; Duchêne, 
2009; and Duchene and Heller, forthcoming).
Thus, globalization has increased the impor-
tance of English as a dominant language and/or 
medium of instruction in the education system. As 
Pennycook (2000) observes, this process cannot 
be seen simply as ‘the Empire strikes back’, 
because currently the ‘Empire’ is taking the form 
of various (sometimes conflictual) forces of 
globalization, and is not necessarily one-sidedly 
against national and local community interests. 
Appropriated by local agents, English can serve 
diverse sets of intentions and purposes in their 
respective local contexts (Lin and Martin, 2005: 
4–5). Furthermore, the resulting ‘new work order’ 
makes new demands on workers, and puts more 
pressure on literacy and interpersonal communi-
cation skills (Cameron, 1992: 72). Key actors in 
the new economy – including neoliberal govern-
ments – invest in training a new task force, in the 
use of a global language, as a way to ensure their 
participation in the new economy.
The example of European policies on lan-
guages is paradigmatic of this dissimilar valuation 
of linguistic resources (see also chapter by 
Berthoud and Lüdi, this volume). European laws 
reveal the different values attributed to languages, 
and they also illustrate how language programmes 
and policies are traversed by nationalist ideolo-
gies, both within the nation-states that constitute 
the European Union (EU), and in the migrants’ 
countries of origin. While languages from 
EU nation-states such as English or German 
are highly valued and introduced into the curric-
ula, resources are not provided, nor are steps 
taken to promote the learning and development 
of ‘migrant languages’.2 Migration flux in Europe 
is producing challenges to the monolingual model 
of ‘one state – one language’, and in this context 
some languages are seen as a resource while 
others as a threat (see Extra and Verhoeven, 1993). 
In fact, as Mijares notes (2006: 59–65), the ELCO 
programme (the Teaching of the Language and 
Culture of Origin programme) is developed 
through bilateral agreements between European 
States and the non-EU countries which finance 
them (see the 1987: European Parliament 
Resolution on the languages and cultures of 
regional and ethnic minorities in the European 
Community). It was not until the late 1990s that 
the teaching of ‘migrant languages’ started to be 
seen as a bridge between cultures, i.e. an essential 
part of intercultural education within European 
countries, rather than ways to keep open the possi-
bilities of return. However, this new orientation 
does not enjoy any financing (Bekemans and Ortiz 
de Urbina, 1997), nor, indeed, any official recogni-
tion from the EU (EURYDICE, 2004: 71).
In European policies, no emphasis is placed on 
the integrating effect of this kind of programme, 
although it formally seeks to ensure that everyone 
can become proficient in several languages in 
Europe, in which mobility and cooperation 
are intensifying. Against this background, CLIL 
(content and language integrated learning) pro-
grammes began to be adopted in Europe as an 
integral part of foreign language teaching in the 
1990s. Although the stated aim of CLIL is to pro-
mote language learning and linguistic diversity, 
close examination of CLIL target languages 
reveals that English, followed by French and 
German, are the most widespread foreign target 
languages in the 30 countries in which these pro-
grammes have been implemented (EURYDICE, 
2006: 18).
In spite of a critical shift, from research into 
students’ competences and the acquisition proc-
esses in linguistic programmes to concern about 
the effects of the social distribution of linguistic 
resources, the ideology of monolingualism has yet 
to be rejected. Similarly, despite the reaction of 
linguistic research against the ‘deficit theory’, the 
core assumptions of this theory are still to be 
encountered quite frequently in schools in many 
parts of the world. Deficit arguments are evoked 
to explain and justify the educational failure of 
minorities (poor command of the language of 
instruction, poverty of expression, weak speaking 
skills, etc.), which in turn is considered to be the 
consequence of educational, cultural and eco-
nomic shortcomings (poor school attendance 
record, dysfunctional families, rural background, 
etc.). The arguments of the deficit theory persist, 
and they are especially prevalent in sociocultural 
and linguistic terms. Thus, for example, in Spain, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
348
it is relatively frequent to hear teachers and tutors 
referring to the previous ‘poor schooling’ of these 
students, to ‘cultural distance’, to the ‘dysfunc-
tional families’ or to the ‘lack of fluency in the 
teaching language’. Whichever of these judge-
ments is applied, the result is the same: an 
inadequate evaluation of the student body in ques-
tion, and an attitude tending to favour segregation 
(see, for a detailed analysis, Martín Rojo, 2010). 
Consequently, many linguists feel the need to 
intervene. The fact that compensatory education 
programmes are still aimed at the descendants of 
immigrant workers in several European countries 
is further evidence of the continuing acceptance 
of these propositions in European countries (see 
Luciak’s report (2004), for the European 
Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia).
Differences in the sociocultural 
regulation of communicative 
practices
The second process singled out in sociolinguis-
tic and linguistic anthropologist research is 
the different sociocultural regulation of communi-
cative practices. This regulation varies from 
one community to another; accordingly, it is 
not uncommon to find ways and means of 
communication that are clearly differentiated 
(Gumperz and Roberts, 1979; Gumperz, 1982). 
Misunderstandings emerge when people from 
different speech communities interact. Diverse 
values may be attributed to a given linguistic 
resource (for example, the use of an imperative, or 
a certain tone of voice, or a closer or more distant 
interpersonal distance) by speakers from different 
linguistic communities.
Research into intercultural communication, 
building upon the interactional sociolinguistic 
tradition and on equally interactional pragmatic 
developments, has contributed to the analysis of 
this type of interactions (Scollon and Scollon, 
1981, 2001; Wiercbicka, 1991; Kasper and Blum-
Kulka, 1993; Singy and Trudgill, 1997). Scollon 
and Scollon, in their early research, claim that 
‘much of the miscommunication between mem-
bers of different ethnic groups occurs because of 
fundamental differences in the values placed on 
communication itself, and because of differences 
in interpretation caused by differences in the 
values placed on interpersonal face relations’ 
(1981: 4). Recent studies in this field have high-
lighted the effects resulting from misunderstand-
ings during interactional encounters when 
differences in conversational attitudes among 
communities are underestimated; at the same 
time, it is often assumed that one’s own behaviour 
is the ‘normal, logical’ one. In fact, speakers often 
seem unaware that these differences reflect differ-
ent cultural values or, at least, different scales of 
values (for example, individualism versus collec-
tivism). Thus, intercultural misunderstandings are 
interpreted as failures of communicative compe-
tence by the other party (in general, those who 
belong to the cultural minority), and these are then 
brandished as ‘evidence’ to reinforce negative 
stereotypes or to justify social exclusion.
In my research conducted in multilingual class-
rooms in Madrid, I found many examples of 
cross-cultural differences in interactions. The 
local teachers and even the students choose forms 
of address that are fairly symmetrical (through the 
mutual choice of the pronominal form tú, ‘you’), 
and that illustrate a well-established trend in 
Spanish classrooms. However, this style of address 
conflicts with that normally encountered in the 
classrooms of Colombia, Ecuador and the 
Dominican Republic, which is where a significant 
number of the students are from. They remark 
that, in their countries, a politeness of deference 
and an asymmetric relation (marking social differ-
ences between participants, with some speakers in 
a superordinate position and others in a subordi-
nate one) are prevalent in classrooms (Scollon and 
Scollon, 2001). In Spanish classrooms, though, 
teachers often resort to forms that are typical of 
the linguistic style of carers (see Wodak, 1986), 
such as ‘¿Nos callamos?’ (‘Can we have some 
quiet?’). The choice of this inclusive form makes 
the action of silencing the conversation seem to be 
a collective one, including the teacher in its scope. 
Newcomers might assign an incorrect value to this 
form of address, taking it as a contextual cue, 
which indexes a moment of relaxation or for play 
within the lesson. However, for the teacher, the 
expression ‘Can we have some quiet?’ is an order 
that must be obeyed. The same is true when s/he 
demands not to be ‘cheeked’ by choosing a col-
loquial register. Moreover, the value of these 
politeness resources changes, when the conflict 
develops. In all these cases, what the teacher is 
doing is giving orders. Certainly, the teacher’s 
colloquial register may induce the students to say 
what they otherwise wouldn’t dare, if asymmetries 
had been emphasized, with answers such as ‘not 
now, teacher, this is important’. But, on the other 
hand, the students are well aware that, irrespective 
of the speech style employed, it is the teacher who 
has the authority; they realize that s/he is telling 
them to be quiet, even when the inclusive ‘us’ is 
chosen. In addition, they know the value of their 
replies, and they understand that their replies 
could heighten or resolve the conflict. It would be 
naive to believe these replies to be the product of 
a misunderstanding arising from cultural differ-
ences, and simplistic to deny the repercussions of 
these differences.

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
349
A careful analysis of speakers’ choices and 
their interpretations reveals the risk of adopting an 
approach which contributes to an essentialist re-
conceptualization of diversity. First, communica-
tive styles and linguistic choices are presented as 
essential traits in the construction of cultural 
groups as homogeneous entities, suppressing dif-
ferences among group members. Secondly, broad 
categories emerge from approaches like this, such 
as Asian or Southern European communicative 
styles, which are defined by a selection of what is 
considered to be ‘essential’ to the group and what 
is not. This view of diversity presents itself as a 
given entity, and ignores the fact that it is the prod-
uct of power relations among individuals and 
groups, embedded in a particular context.
Thus, the issue is not merely the existence of 
cultural differences, but the fact that these are 
viewed and valued differently in asymmetric 
interactions. In the above examples, if the stu-
dents, who are not native speakers of ‘Castilian’ 
Spanish, do not adapt to dominant systems of 
politeness within this institutional context, they 
risk reinforcing their image as being ‘undisci-
plined’ students, who are not legitimate partici-
pants in the class, with the subsequent impact on 
the teacher’s expectations regarding these students 
and their academic results. Thus, focusing 
intercultural communication on purely linguistic 
elements is a reductionist attitude. Cross-cultural 
communication occurs, precisely, in spheres in 
which there are profound social differences and 
where the members of the host community are in 
a position of control (education, social services, 
health clinics), which is a factor that clearly 
restrains conversational dynamics (Ogbu, 1987; 
Singh, Lele and Martohardjono, 1988).
This role of members of the host society as 
gatekeepers in service encounters, in multilingual 
and multicultural settings, has received a great 
deal of attention in recent years. As Erickson 
(1975) found, discrimination in these encounters 
has a linguistic basis: members of a minority 
community require the approval of majority-
community members to advance professionally. 
Various studies have investigated the impact of 
current social and cultural changes on the valua-
tion and legitimizing of linguistic resources and 
practices (Heller, 2004, 2007; Blommaert, Collins 
and Slembrouck, 2005), in the same area as that of 
Sarangi and Roberts (1999), or more recently: 
Maryns (2006); Moyer and Martín Rojo, 2007; 
Codó (2008); and Valero Garcés and Martin 
(2008). However, few of these studies focused on 
the context of schools, apart from Pérez-Milans 
and Martín Rojo (2007), who showed that in 
the classroom, peers may assume the role of 
gatekeepers, obliging their classmates to speak 
standard Spanish, and that this communicative 
behaviour is linked to the perception of 
nationality.
Thus, there has occurred a critical shift in the 
field, one highlighting the role of communicative 
styles as a gatekeeper to education, and the role of 
larger social and economic differences in it: the 
styles demanded and imposed constrain the pos-
sibilities of success of those who are not familiar 
with them. In consequence, what is at stake is the 
production and distribution of linguistic resources 
in schooling. This shift reveals the complexity and 
significance of the role of linguistic practices as 
part of the stratification processes taking place in 
schools as well as the fact that, in order to under-
stand this role, it is necessary to examine the proc-
ess by which value is assigned to linguistic 
varieties and communicative practices. The analy-
sis of linguistic practices reveals the active 
involvement 
of 
social 
agents 
(students 
and teachers, in this case) in the production and 
reproduction of (but also in challenging) the 
sociolinguistic order.
The impact of Bourdieu’s work has been 
crucial in this change of viewpoint. Bourdieu 
explained just how schools perform the gatekeep-
ing role, through processes that ‘convert’ 
economic relations into symbolic capital (Bourdieu 
1977: 195). By means of this ‘conversion’, 
relations of dependence are presented as the con-
sequence of inequalities of talent or educational 
ability. This is what happens in remedial and com-
pensatory programmes, and others supposedly 
justified by the existence of ‘different levels’ 
or by a ‘lack of knowledge’. The concepts of 
‘conversion’ and ‘capital’ immediately bring to 
mind others proposed by Bourdieu: namely, those 
of ‘value’ and ‘measure’. This value-giving proc-
ess is inextricably bound to the representation of 
students as legitimate or non-legitimate partici-
pants in the classroom. Furthermore, social and 
cultural conditions are changing and there is 
currently a great deal of tension and contradiction 
in the valuation and legitimization of knowledge-
capital, including languages. As Heller (1992, 
1995) has shown, dominant groups rely on norms 
of linguistic resources and practices to maintain 
symbolic domination, while subordinate groups 
may use linguistic resources and practices, such 
as code-switching, to resist or redefine the 
value of symbolic resources in the linguistic 
marketplace.
The construction of social inequality 
within discursive practices
The third process remarked upon by discourse 
researchers is the construction of social inequality 
within discursive practices. Interactions may 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
350
constitute, at given times, resources ‘for con-
structing, levelling, contesting, and blurring 
boundaries in order to attempt to maintain, contest 
and modify relations of power’ (Heller and Martín-
Jones, 2001: 4). The analysis of local discursive 
practices shows how they are embedded and shape 
the social order (Martin-Jones, 2007:171 and ff.; 
for a review of current trends in discourse studies, 
see Martín Rojo, 2001). From this perspective, the 
analysis should go beyond the fine-grained scru-
tiny of language practices in educational settings 
in multilingual contexts, and thus distance itself 
from research into the characteristics of classroom 
interaction. This change in perspective entails a 
parallel change in the aim of research: not just to 
reveal interactional patterns or to investigate the 
acquisition process that takes place in the class-
room (e.g. Sinclair and Coulthard, 1975; Gajo and 
Mondada, 2000; Nussbaum and Unamuno, 2006). 
According to this critical shift, the aim is rather to 
discover how linguistic resources are allocated 
and how this allocation affects the construction of 
inequalities. In fact, the relations constructed in 
the classroom cannot be understood in ignorance 
of the context of colonial processes, globalization 
and national and supranational ideologies and 
projects (Ramptom, 1995; Heller, 2006).
The guiding question in this overview, namely 
the extent to which the unequal yardstick applied 
to students’ linguistic and cultural resources con-
tributes to the construction of inequality, preceded 
a second one. The question, in this case, is to what 
extent are the cultural forms underlying this valu-
ation of linguistic and cultural resources presented 
in schools as natural or given? Students’ failures 
would thus be understood as the effect of their 
‘cultural’ or ‘linguistic’ deficit instead of as the 
result of an unequal distribution of capital among 
different social classes and groups, established as 
the norm. From this point of view, education not 
only plays an essential part in the reproduction of 
social inequalities but also naturalizes and legiti-
mates them (Bourdieu and Passeron, 1977). The 
reproduction of structures of domination in soci-
ety therefore depends on the imposition of cultural 
values which are presented as universal but whose 
content and context are politically and historically 
determined – and therefore arbitrary. This process 
was termed ‘symbolic violence’ by Bourdieu, a 
form of domination that masks its concrete 
sources. The decision to tackle this second ques-
tion had significant repercussions on research, 
because social agents’ discourse representations 
and social practices were also to be analysed.
In fact, studies of naturalization and legitimiza-
tion have led to the identification of a fourth 
process in the construction of inequality mediated 
by linguistic practices. Critical discourse analysis  
(CDA) has focused on the social construction of 
the learner, particularly in textbooks in education 
(e.g. Peled-Elhanan, 2008), and in teachers’ dis-
course and practices (e.g. Martín Rojo, 2008a, 
2008 b). Similarly, contradictions in policies have 
been highlighted in the discourses of education 
planning and language pedagogy (e.g. Dendrinos, 
1992, 2000).3 ‘Critical linguistic awareness’ needs 
to be taken into the classroom (Fairclough, 1992), 
in order to integrate the characteristics of language 
in use in society, and to reveal the ways language 
works in relation to social mobility and other social 
processes. (For an overview of the contributions of 
this approach, see Rogers, 2004).
It should be taken into account, nonetheless, 
that it is also important to consider how social 
agents represent their role within schools. In fact, 
the very process of assigning value can only be 
understood in relation to a shared body of social 
representations. Thus, the view of students as 
being poorly educated and lacking competence, 
interest and motivation results in little effort being 
made to integrate their knowledge. These repre-
sentations are presented as true – entering into the 
‘game of truth and falsehood’, in Foucault’s terms 
(see Foucault, 1994, Vol. 4: 670). Thus, discursive 
representations play a decisive role in the 
naturalization and legitimization of education 
policies and in the distribution of capital which 
takes place through their implementation. Analysis 
of these representations also highlights teachers’ 
contradictions and unresolved dilemmas, together 
with students’ search to discover just why they are 
where they are in the school. For an analysis of 
discursive representations, Foucault’s concept of 
‘conditions of possibilities’ has to be considered: 
What enables a particular understanding and rep-
resentation of ‘language’, ‘diversity as deficit’ or 
‘education’, at a particular time and in a particular 
place? Key issues are the conditions explaining 
how social change, like the increasing linguistic 
diversity in schools, has given rise to particular 
discourses and social representations. Specifically, 
we explore the sociocultural conditions that 
explain the emergence of discourses representing 
diversity as a deficit or as richness, and particular 
languages and knowledge as legitimate, and 
particular students as competent or skilful.
Thus, in our research conducted in Madrid 
schools (from 2000 to 2003), we found a distinc-
tion between ‘our students’ and ‘immigrant 
students’. This category did not have clear bound-
aries and sometimes included naturalized citizens, 
second-generation students, while at other times it 
included only newcomers (see Luciak, 2004, 
for the use of this category in education in 
several European countries). The macro category 
‘immigrant students’ seems to share some 
significant traits that specifically challenge the 
education system, if not actually representing a 

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
351
problem for it. However, over time, this single 
category no longer appears to be perceived as 
homogeneous, and some national and gender dif-
ferences are established (‘Moroccan students are 
the worst’, ‘Students from Ecuador have a very 
low level’, ‘Students from Eastern Europe are 
really, really good’) (Martín Rojo et al., 2010). 
While fuzzy boundaries still exist, distinctions are 
made according to national or cultural origins, 
including differences in religion and language. 
These categories seem to present an explanatory 
power of students’ school performance and skills 
as a process of ethnicization. Ethnicization is pro-
duced in discourse and generates knowledge about 
students, their capacities and communities. It has 
a crucial role in the legitimation of the implemen-
tation of some educational programmes and lin-
guistic policies. This process also impacts not only 
on teachers’ but also on students’ expectations.
However, discourses and representations 
are not solely linked to domination, but also to 
‘colonization’, i.e. what Goffman (1961) sees as 
the construction of a tolerable world within 
the interstices of managed time and space, and a 
‘situational withdrawal’, refusing to behave as a 
capable agent is expected to do, and, moreover, 
with resistance. As observed by Scott (1990: xvi), 
this includes ‘foot dragging, dissimulations, deser-
tion, false compliance, pilfering, feigned igno-
rance, slander, arson, sabotage’. Examples can 
be found in interactions among peers, or when 
students respond to a teacher’s indirect directive 
acts as if they were requests for information: 
‘What are you doing?’ or ‘Why don’t you shut 
up?’. In these cases, the students may produce 
replies such as ‘Looking for a pen’ or ‘Because 
it’s important’. Thus, as Scott suggests, some-
times a direct symbolic confrontation with author-
ity is avoided, and sometimes students do not 
fear confrontation. Covert resistance involves 
playing with the norm in order to mask resistance, 
creating ambiguity, and feigning enthusiasm to 
cooperate and participate in activities. D’Amato 
(1993: 187) labelled this attitude ‘playful mischie-
vous challenges’ involving playing with legitimate 
performance parameters so as to produce actions 
which are legal in form but subversive in intent. 
Among these challenges, linguistic transgressions 
play a significant role, as the ‘playful linguistic 
sabotage’ studied by Jaspers (2005: 285), which 
involves exaggerated performances by Moroccan 
students of varieties of Dutch and was explicitly 
related to non-authenticity and juxtaposed (‘doing 
ridiculous’ vs ‘talking serious’, in his terms), or 
language ‘crossing’, when speakers use a linguis-
tic variety s/he is not expected to use (Rampton 
1995: 299).
Both the ‘conversion’ of economic relations 
into symbolic capital and the production and 
legitimization of social representation are related 
to the social order they stem from and impact 
upon, and also to their inherent conflicts and 
inequalities. Both are core issues in the research 
of discourse and education, shaping the two proc-
esses I consider paramount to my interpretation of 
the data collected: namely, the ‘decapitalization’ 
and the ‘hierarchization’ of students. At the same 
time, the devaluation of other languages, knowl-
edge and national/ethnic groups is also neutral-
ized, resisted and even contested in classrooms.
24.3  LOCAL PRACTICES AND SOCIAL 
PROCESSES: THE DECAPITALIZATION 
OF STUDENTS
In this section, I focus on the process of students’ 
decapitalization, through classroom interaction 
and discursive representations, as a key process 
in building inequality. The examples examined in 
this section illustrate how the dissimilar evalua-
tion of languages and knowledge leads to students 
becoming decapitalized, such that their symbolic 
capital is considered inadequate in the construc-
tion of knowledge. I use the term ‘decapitaliza-
tion’ to refer to acts by which capital is taken away 
and capital formation discouraged. This approach 
enables us to study how the valuation and distribu-
tion of capital take place within interactions, and 
the role of social agents in not just reproducing, 
but also challenging and resisting the value of 
symbolic resources in the linguistic marketplace. 
The term should be considered within the context 
of Bourdieu’s theory of symbolic capital: on the 
one hand, so that we may further develop his 
metaphor of the market of symbolic resources; but 
on the other, in order to avoid his unified and static 
viewpoint. The concept of decapitalization also 
focuses on the practices through which the distri-
bution of capital takes place and, in consequence, 
on processes of deprivation and constraints to 
capital formation.
I refer to the data compiled in the research 
projects conducted by the MIRCO team in 
Madrid.4 We studied two educational linguistics 
programmes implemented in the Madrid region: 
the Spanish as a Second Language programme for 
newcomers, called Bridging Classes, and the 
English–Spanish bilingual programmes currently 
being implemented in public secondary schools, 
and particularly the programme run jointly by the 
Spanish Ministry of Education and Science and 
the British Council. This is a programme designed 
for compulsory education students (3–16 years 
old) where students learn curricular contents 
through two languages, English and Spanish.5 Our 
main research goal was to explore how these two 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
352
programmes are managed by the ‘actors’ involved: 
first, by the regional administration (concerning 
issues such as funding, training, planning, teacher 
training and other resources); secondly, by the 
schools (their involvement, and how the pro-
grammes stand in relation to all other activities at 
the school); thirdly, by the teachers (methods of 
language teaching, the integration of content and 
language learning, teachers’ aims and expecta-
tions). Finally, we studied the students’ progress, 
in order to discover which programmes, methods, 
practices and integration strategies are used to 
favour academic success and to integrate student 
diversity.
My analysis illustrates that linguistic order in 
the classroom is shaped by the distribution of 
capital, with power relations within the classroom 
setting, and within the social order itself.
In the first example (Example 1), I study what 
happens when Latin-American varieties of Spanish 
are located at the front-stage area in a History 
lesson at a Madrid secondary school.6 (The code 
(*number*) refers to the discourse text following 
the “(letter a, b, c, ... )” in the excerpt).
(1)
 1 Profesor Genaro: ¿un producto que gracias a 
consumirle / que era barato / que dabas 
muchas energías y permitía que la gente no 
pasase hambre y por tanto no cogiera pestes y 
en-/ enfermedades y virus de todo tipo? / ¿eh? 
/ a partir del siglo dieciocho / un producto que 
se con- / que se consigue en América y se esta-
blece en Europa / permite que todo el mundo 
pueda comer lo mínimo y tener las calorías 
suficientes como para poder resistir //
 2 Jose: ¡pan! / no
(...) 
 3 Brian: ¡patata!
 4 Alumnos: ¡patata!
 5 Profesor Genaro: PATATA! O BANANA *1* / 
¿eh? /
[risas] 
 6 Jorge: banana [risa]
 7   Profesor Genaro: ¡no la *2* banana es el 
plátano! / *3* perdón! / ¡la PATATA! / ¿otro 
nombre de patata que *4* tenéis en América? /
 8 Paola: ¡papa!
 9 Estudiantes: ¡las papas! /
10 Jorge: papa [risas]
11 Profesor Genaro: las papas
(...) 
12 Michael: ¡ las patatas no son papas!
(1)
Teacher Genaro: something that when it was eaten 
/ it was cheap / and gave you lots of energy and 
meant people didn’t go hungry and so didn’t catch 
germs and ill-/ illnesses and viruses of all kinds? / eh? 
/ from the eighteenth century / something that you 
f-/ that you find in America and that was brought to
Europe / it allows everyone to eat just a little 
and have enough calories so they can keep 
going //
 2 Jose: bread! / no
(...) 
 3 Brian: potatoes!
 4 Students: potatoes!
 5 Teacher Genaro: POTATOES! OR PLANTAIN 
PLANTAIN / eh? /
[laughter]
 6 Jorge: plantain [laughter]
 7   Teacher Genaro: no a plantain is a banana! / 
sorry! / a POTATO! / another name for potato 
that you have in America? /
 8 Paola: spud!
 9 Students: spuds! /
10 Jorge: spud [laughter]
11 Teacher Genaro: spuds
(...)
12 Michael: potatoes aren’t spuds!7
In this example, the teacher uses a Latin American 
expression ‘banana’ instead of ‘plátano’, the 
normal term in the Madrid region. In *1* in turn 5, 
he makes a mistake, and the students laugh, 
‘banana’ is not a synonym of ‘patata’ (potato). In 
line 13, the teacher corrects himself, evoking the 
local norm: ‘a plantain is a banana’. In *2* in 7, 
he then seeks to incorporate other lexical variants. 
The pronominal choice shows that this strategy is 
only apparently inclusive: ‘another name for 
potato that you have in America’. As a result, he 
divides the class between himself, the (Spanish) 
teacher, and the (Latin American) students, and 
national identities are highlighted. In line 17, we 
see that the teacher’s inclusion of linguistic differ-
ences is considered by the students as something 
exceptional, and they greet this with laughter. In 
line 12, a student corrects the teacher: ‘potatoes 
aren’t spuds!’. We can see, then, to what extent 
this inclusion challenge the traditional teacher-
centred order in the class, given that when these 
non-standard forms are included, the student can 
correct the teacher, and thus the asymmetry 
between the two is reduced. We can also see how 
knowledge asymmetries are levelled. The teacher 
cannot continue to present himself as the only 
source of knowledge. Students’ voices have a 
place in the front stage.
In Example 2, we see how, when migrant lan-
guages appear in the lesson, something similar is 
happening. Here, migrant languages are located in 
the back stage area, and are exchanged among 
students quickly, in low voices. In this case, the 
use of Arabic marks a distinction between 
the organization of an activity (the instructions, 
the tools), and the task (answers to the questions 

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
353
and exercises) (for similar uses of code-switching 
among peers, see Nussbaum and Unamuno, 2006; 
Unamuno, 2008). This use also illustrates how 
students seek cooperation, and often a guide 
(interaction between an expert and a learner), that 
they do not find in front-stage activities in the class-
room, and which the teacher does not provide.
(2)
1 Aisha: {to Amina}! 
{transliteration: ashnu hiya?}
translation: what is it?
2 Amina: {to Aisha} 
{transliteration n: qalet‚ lik t‚ekt‚eb profesiones}
translation:: she told you to write down the jobs}
3 Aisha: {to Amina} 
 
{transliteration: Ashenu? Ma-fehemet‚-sh hena. 
Shenu nekt‚eb? Ahhhh.}
{translation: what? I didn’t understand that. 
what do I write? Ahhhhh.}
4 Amina: {to Aisha} 
{transliteration:}
{translation: incomprehensible}8
In example 2, students use migrant languages as a 
strategy to improve their performance in the class-
room and to gain capital. This linguistic choice 
shows how they seek to cooperate with the teacher 
and are open to learning. However, as in Example 1, 
the inclusion of these languages challenges the 
traditional teacher-centred order in the class. 
When they are included, the student gets help 
from her peers and thus the teacher–student asym-
metry is reduced, as are knowledge asymmetries. 
When students’ voices have a place in the front-
stage area, (monolingual) teachers cannot con-
tinue to present themselves as the only source of 
knowledge.
However, the monolingual norm imposed in 
Madrid classrooms neutralizes these challenges, 
relegating migrant varieties to the back stage. This 
imposition is naturalized and legitimized through 
the lower evaluation granted to migrant languages 
as an instrument of communication, but also as a 
learning tool. In this case, a decapitalization proc-
ess took place through the imposition of a mono-
lingual norm: competence in the language of 
instruction is required and is a key factor in 
achieving integration within the school and in 
society in general. Indeed, speaking Spanish is 
one of the most important membership criteria to 
be considered a Spaniard. However, the access to 
this capital is restricted. And, as the linguistic 
choice in Example 2 shows, subordinate groups 
may use linguistic resources and practices, such as 
code-switching, to gain capital, or even to resist or 
redefine the value of symbolic resources in the 
linguistic marketplace.
In contrast to the increasing multilingual order, 
a monodialectal and monolingual norm was 
built up through interaction. I observed three 
interactional patterns. The first, and often the 
most common, pattern is the explicit or implicit 
rejection or negative evaluation of the use of 
other languages, by means of directive acts, such 
as ‘not Chinese / eh ?/, only in Spanish /’. The 
second pattern is the teachers’ lack of response 
(indifference), as in Example 2, in which the 
students’ languages are not integrated into the 
class but retain a position of non-focal side-play. 
Rarely did I find inclusive responses such as 
those reported by Mondada and Gajo (2001: 250) 
in the classes d´accueil in Switzerland, where 
together with the rule ‘say it in French’, the teach-
ers allow the use of migrant languages in eliciting 
exchanges in order to facilitate the task or to 
reduce tension in students with interventions like: 
‘say it in your language’ or ‘try … it doesn’t 
matter’, ‘say it, even though it’s wrong’. As a 
result, ‘migrant’ languages are made invisible and 
minorized.
The sociolinguistic order which emerges from 
the English–Spanish bilingual instruction pro-
grammes in Madrid illustrates to what extent this 
monolingual norm depends on the evaluation of 
languages.
(3)
1 Teacher: ok can-can we can we read it aloud and 
... . So / let me
2 (18)
3 Teacher: ok? Right?
4 Female Student: empiezo
5 Translation.: Shall I start?
6 Teacher: You want to begin? Ok perfect
7 Female Student: {she starts to read} Drake wasn’t 
just an explorer 9
If we compare Examples 2 and 3, extracted from 
a different language educational programme, a 
similar interactional pattern appears, with code-
switching taking place in events programmed by 
the teacher. Students resort then to patrimonial 
migrant languages, migrant languages in Example 2 
and to the national and official language in 
Example 3, particularly when the teacher explains 
the day’s agenda, an exercise, the meaning of a 
term, or transition points between tasks. In both 
cases, code-switching is a strategy for self-
facilitation, in order to follow the activities. 
However, a significant difference is apparent: 
while in Example 2, these sequences occur in par-
allel conversations between peers; in Example 3, 
the teacher can be addressed in a language differ-
ent from that of the language of instruction 
(line 4), but which, as the patrimonial and national 
language, is shared by all the participants.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
354
The third pattern I detected was the teacher’s 
exceptional suspension of the monolingual norm. 
In this case, the dissimilar valuation of languages 
also contributes to explaining these transgres-
sions. In Example 4, Mandarin Chinese is allowed 
in the front-stage area.
(4)
1 ShiQing:  and 
{trasliteración: cha duoshao mao? and / wo bu 
zhidao lu cha duoshao mao}
{traducción: ¿más o menos a cuánto está de 
distancia? / yo no sé a cuánto está}
2 Investigador Miguel: 
{trasliteración: ah! / wo bu zhidao wo ye bu 
zhidao}
{traducción: ¡ah! / no lo sé / yo tampoco lo sé}
3 Amina: *1* ¡español / chino no!
4 Investigador Miguel:  
[(( ))]
5  Profesora Vistoria: *2* {a Fátima} [aquí se 
permite] 
6  Investigador Miguel: {a la profesora} [está 
cerca de shanghai]
7 Amina: *3* [¡aquí no se permite!]
8 Profesora Victoria: está cerca de Shanghai
1 ShiQing: and 
{transliteration: cha duoshao mao? and / wo bu 
zhidao lu cha duoshao mao}
{translation: roughly how far is it? / I don’t know 
how far}
2 Researcher Miguel: 
{transliteration:  ah! / wo bu zhidao wo ye bu 
zhidao}
{translation: ah! / I don’t know / I don’t know 
either}
3 Amina: *1* Spanish! / not Chinese!
4 Researcher Miguel: [(( ))]
5 Teacher Victoria:  *2* {to Amina} [here it’s 
allowed] 
6  Researcher Miguel:  {to the teacher} [it’s near 
Shanghai]
7 Amina: *3*[it’s not allowed here]
8 Teacher Victoria: it’s near Shanghai.10
The researcher’s competence in Mandarin and his 
status as a legitimate member of the class modi-
fied the value assigned to the migrant language 
and challenged the monolingual norm. Mandarin 
appears in the front stage, but not to help the 
students follow the activity (with translations of 
the topics and of the instructions given), but to 
establish closer interpersonal relations. In *1* in 
line 3, the student demands the use of the mono-
lingual norm, as the teacher does when other lan-
guages are involved. Amina chooses a chain 
of directive speech acts: ‘Spanish; not in Chinese’. 
In *2* in line 5, the teacher takes the floor to 
re-establish her authority to implement the 
norm: ‘Here, it’s allowed’. Amina’s response, in 
line 9, appears to stem from the arbitrary way the 
norm is applied, since the use of a particular 
migrant language and the exclusion of others 
causes ill-feeling amongst the students. This 
example shows to what extent the inclusion or 
exclusion of migrant languages from the front 
stage is related to the status of the speaker and the 
valuation of the language(s) in question.
The same may be observed with respect to the 
Spanish language in the bilingual programme. In 
this case, as in other bilingual programmes (Lin, 
2008), the patrimonial language is introduced by 
the teachers themselves in disciplinary or proce-
dural sequences. In the data we compiled, it is 
apparent that the monolingual norm can be sus-
pended by the teacher when so required for the 
purposes of the language programme.
(5)
1 Teacher: what about modern times let me 
think What did you understand tell me that in 
Spanish // what did you understand by modern 
times
2 David: Now
3 Students: now
4 Teacher: now ok that’s the problem because this 
part of history we are studying is called Modern 
history.11
The sociolinguistic order in the Spanish as a 
Second Language programme is different from that 
found in the English–Spanish bilingual programme. 
In the former, the prevalent interactional patterns, 
disapproval and indifference, relegate other lan-
guages to the back stage of the class, delegitimiz-
ing them, and contribute to reinforcing asymmetries 
in the classroom. The imposition of a monolingual 
norm not only reflects the adoption of an asym-
metrical and traditional educational model but also 
constitutes resistance to changes in the social, lin-
guistic and cultural make-up of the student body. In 
the English–Spanish bilingual programme, how-
ever, Spanish is omnipresent in the lessons taught 
in English, as usually happens when the aim of 
such a programme is to teach a language different 
from that of the community (see Lin, 2008: 274, 
for similar examples). Both languages are legiti-
mized as a language of instruction. Spanish is 
legitimate for explaining procedures, for negotiat-
ing relationships and for ensuring understanding; 
i.e. it functions as a community language.
The previous examples highlight that the 
‘valuation’ of the different linguistic varieties 
plays a key role in explaining the sociolinguistic 
order within classrooms. Only linguistic varieties 
which are highly valued – being ‘well-mannered’, 
‘appropriate’ and ‘useful’ – as a tool for integra-
tion, are allowed on front stage in the lessons. 

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
355
In Example 6, this hierarchization of language is 
linked to a ranking of students, as more or less 
competent.
(6)
1 Teacher Elena: [they’re very good at-] you know/ 
they’re very good 
at the- I’m a language teacher / right?// well 
they’re really (*1*) very good at spoken lan-
guage 
// you’ve heard all the // Bolivians and- or- they 
speak [fantastic/ (*2*) better than our 
students]
2 Chairperson Cristina: [the Colombians do speak 
so well / don’t they? / (( ))]
3 Teacher Elena: =but nevertheless then / when it 
comes to writing //skills and such / 
terrible/ I mean/ terrible// starting with the 
*3*problems of seseo or not / well our students 
from here / even the ones from Andalusia / 
myself, I’m from Andalusia they don’t have 
it // from a very young age it’s corrected / they 
don’t / don’t- don’t manage to -> // 
they’re in the fourth grade and they still have this 
problem // I mean // *4* it’s really hard 
for them / to express ideas / eh and- well/ our 
Spanish students do too / but really //.12
The teacher’s line of argument begins with super-
lative and comparative (*1*, *2*) structures (very 
… better than), which explicitly affirm the superi-
ority of the Latin American students’ oral skills 
and the superiority of American varieties of 
Spanish. Such superlatives and comparisons 
implicitly presuppose the existence of an ‘us’ (‘our 
students’) and a ‘them’, created, among other ele-
ments, on the basis of linguistic differences – 
‘they’ speak better than ‘our students’. In this 
excerpt, however, a counter-argument is begun, 
from the use of the discursive marker ‘but’; 
superlative and comparative structures remain, but 
they are now used to point out the lack of compe-
tence of these same students in writing skills.
‘Problems’ arise from the seseo (i.e. the lack of 
distinction between /θ/ and /s/) that the teachers 
cannot manage to ‘correct’ (*3*). This linguistic 
difference presents consequences for the school: as 
many studies have revealed, the written language 
is considered the model of legitimate language.
In the arguments deployed, two generalizing 
moves are present. First, with respect to the 
student body: the teacher extends her judgements, 
relating these particular students to the entirety of 
Latin American students. And secondly, that of 
skills – from excellence in oral skills, the focus 
switches to the lack of ability at writing. 
Subsequently, what seems to be a spelling prob-
lem becomes an inability to express oneself (*4*). 
In this final equivalence, established through the 
connector ‘I mean’, we again encounter some of 
the traits, attributed to Latin American students, 
related to two features of colonial narrative 
(Mignolo, 1998; Castro-Gómez, 2002). The colo-
nization of geographic space is maintained, 
thus pointing to the notion of European centrality. 
As observed by Moreno Cabrera, colonialism 
remains in the area of language which is no longer 
possible in a political context (Moreno and Carlos, 
2008: 133).
Migrant linguistic varieties are kept off-stage. 
Thus, the representation of students as being 
poorly educated and lacking competence, interest 
and motivation results in little effort being made 
to integrate their knowledge and languages. Social 
representations of this kind are widespread in 
society, and are also shared by some teachers. 
It should be noted, however, that in interactions 
it is difficult to ascertain just what exactly the 
students’ representations are, as shared by teach-
ers. However, interviews and focus group discus-
sions, where speakers are confronted with their 
representations and the ideologies shaping them, 
reveal more elaborate representations. Moderators 
and interviewers have also attempted to arrive at 
the reasoning underlying the legitimization of the 
answers given. Thus, argumentation schemes have 
emerged to explain, question and legitimize every-
day classroom practices and representations, 
regarding the academic integration of students 
from migrant backgrounds.
In analysing these code-switching instances, as 
a contextualization cue (Gumperz, 1982: 131), it 
is revealed that the interpretation of this linguistic 
element is not necessarily shared by all the par-
ticipants in the class (Martín Rojo, 2009). In rela-
tion to the use of migrant languages in the Spanish 
short-term immersion programme, for students, 
migrant languages are a tool to follow that activ-
ity, and to carry out tasks more efficiently. In this 
way, code-switching shows students’ interest and 
involvement. When migrant languages are evoked 
in peer interactions, this means that the student 
needs help or is trying to be more efficient. Thus, 
other students must be ready to provide assistance. 
For teachers, it apparently indexes just the oppo-
site, being considered a side-play event, one 
showing that students are not following the activ-
ity, and that they are trying to subvert the class. 
Although code-switching sequences among peers 
would seem to indicate that something had not 
been understood or that instructions have to be 
clarified in order to carry out tasks, teachers in 
these classes do not perform clarification or com-
prehension checks (‘Have you got any questions? 
Haven’t you understood?’), or reformulations 
(such as the use of synonyms or paraphrasing to 
illustrate terms or uses that might not have been 
understood).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
356
The lack of adaptation to linguistic diversity 
revealed by our analysis of interactional local 
practices not only reflects the existence of a 
monolingual order despite the emergence of mul-
tilingual practices in classrooms. What seems to 
be significant is that the inclusion of some linguis-
tic varieties, and the exclusion of those other than 
the local language of instruction, produces a 
decapitalization of students. Their participation in 
classroom activities is limited, their competences 
in other languages are ignored, and the access to 
learning tools is restricted. Thus, the building of a 
monolingual norm points to a monolingual under-
standing of linguistic competence by means of 
which languages are not seen as tools for learning 
other languages or for improving performance in 
class. This is possible in the context of very 
traditional educational models, characterized 
as being teacher-centred, highly asymmetrical, 
non-cooperational, and so forth.
24.4 SCHOOL AND SOCIAL MOBILITY
The panorama presented above shows that it is not 
sufficient to demonstrate the existence of an une-
qual valuation of linguistic varieties; we must also 
attempt to understand why it occurs. This question 
immediately takes us away from a culturalist-
oriented approach, by which educational success 
and failure are related to cultural and linguistic 
differences, to consider instead how the latter 
diverge from what is viewed as ‘normal’ at school. 
On asking why this unequal yardstick is applied, 
it is necessary to adopt a sociohistoric standpoint, 
examining migratory flows, the creation of minor-
ity populations and the process(es) by which a 
population evolves. Moreover, it involves taking a 
socio-institutional standpoint, focusing on the 
functioning of the school system itself and on 
the possibilities offered to students. An approach 
like this avoids the dangers of ‘tunnel vision’, in 
Erickson’s terms, which focuses so closely on 
specific features of talking that the global aspects 
of talk’s ecologies are overlooked (2004: 108). 
Such an approach builds upon prior work aimed at 
connecting linguistic variability with the ways in 
which schools act as institutions of social selec-
tion (e.g. Erickson, 1998, 2004; Erickson and 
Shultz, 1982; Gumperz, 1982, 1986; Hymes, 
1974; and Duff, 200213 ).
In this chapter, I discuss how the distribution of 
symbolic resources accounts for those who are 
integrated into school but at the same time mar-
ginalized, in the context of late modernity and the 
increasing flow of population from Third-World 
countries towards the ever more fortified prom-
ised lands of Europe and North America. The role 
of the school is analysed in a socio-demographic 
context that threatens the previous cultural domi-
nance and homogeneity. In the case of Spain there 
seems to be occurring, moreover, a progressive 
ethnic stratification of the job market and of soci-
ety as a whole (Cachón, 2002). Schools seem to 
be influencing this stratification, given the rising 
dropout rate of the immigrant population at the 
conclusion of compulsory education, and of their 
premature entry into the job market as unskilled 
labour (Serra, 2007). Following Rampton (1995), 
the present overview tells us a great deal about 
contemporary society. Social class identities do 
not seem to have lost their significance, and 
remain intertwined with ethnic and national iden-
tities. Thus, by focusing on language-in-education 
practices, a window is opened onto wider social, 
political and ideological processes (Martin-Jones, 
2007: 174–8).
An analysis focusing on the distribution of sym-
bolic capital through classroom interaction also 
points to a dominant, although not completely 
closed, homogeneous market. The linguistic, cul-
tural and curricular order is not only reproduced but 
also contested (Woolard, 1985; Martin-Jones, 2007: 
173). Finally, symbolic domination, exercised 
through the devaluation of other languages, can also 
be neutralized, resisted and even contested in class-
rooms (see, Heller, 2006; Martín Rojo, 2009).14
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author wishes to acknowledge the suppport 
received from the Ministerio de Ciencia e 
Innovación, Plan Nacional de la Ciencia I+D+I 
through project HUM2007-64694/FILO, ‘School 
and multilingualism: a critical sociolinguistic 
study on educational linguistic programmes set in 
the Madrid Region’.
NOTES
1 The R and D research project, ‘School and 
multilingualism: a critical sociolinguistic study on 
educational linguistic programmes set in the Madrid 
Region (HUM2007-64694/FILO)’.
2 The designation of these varieties as ‘migrant 
varieties’ or ‘migrant languages’ is preferable to 
more traditional ones such as ‘home languages’, or 
more recently coined ones like ‘community lan-
guages’, which are increasingly used within the EU 
(McPake et al., 2006). The latter term refers to all 
languages used in EU countries that do not possess 
an officially recognized status (see Baker and Jones, 
1998; Corson, 1999; Wiley 2001, 2005).

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
357
 3 For a review of the findings of CDA in educa-
tional research, see Rogers et al., 2005.
 4 The group I lead, MIRCO (Multilingualism, 
Social identities, Intercultural communication and 
Relationships), has conducted several studies since 
1990. The data used in this paper come mainly from 
the two latest research projects, ‘Socio-pragmatic 
analysis of intercultural communication in educa-
tional practices: toward integration in the classroom’ 
(BFF 2003-04830), and ‘School and multilingualism: 
a critical sociolinguistic study on educational linguis-
tic programmes set in the Madrid Region’ (HUM2007-
64694/FILO). 
 5 The Bilingual Schools Project is the Ministry of 
Education (MEC) and the British Council joint pro-
gramme which aims to ‘provide students from the 
age of three to sixteen with a bilingual, bi-cultural 
education through an integrated Spanish/English 
curriculum’, according to the guidelines for the 
development of the integrated curriculum in second-
ary education. (MEC/ British Council)
 6 Transcription conventions are:
 7 Ethnographic observation and recording by 
Patiño Santos [1d_E220104S1].
 8 Ethnographic observation and recording by 
Pérez-Milans [3v_V200404A-C].
 9 Corpus MIRCO 2-bilingual programme.
10 Ethnographic observation and recording by 
Pérez-Milans [3d_V090605DS].
11 Corpus MIRCO-2, bilingual programme. 
12 Focus 
group 
of 
school 
Principals 
[1a_080606GD].
13 In particular, Duff’s research shows that the 
ethnography of communication is a viable, context- 
and culture-sensitive method for recognizing the role 
of participation in language-mediated activities in 
students’ development as fully competent members of 
mainstream classes, in which for them the language of 
instruction is a second language (Duff, 2002).
14 The analysis of contestation also puts into 
question a reading of Bourdieu’s analysis of the 
education field, by which he is purported to be a 
structuralist, allowing no room for other factors 
or any individual agency. This theoretical point neu-
tralizes the potentially deterministic nature of 
Bourdieu’s work.
REFERENCES
Baker, C. and Jones, S. P. (1998) Encyclopedia of Bilingual 
Education and Bilingualism. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Baugh, J. (1988) ‘Language and race: some implications for 
linguistics science’, in F. Newmeyer (ed.), Linguistics: The 
Cambridge Survey. Vol. 4, Language. The Socio-Cultural 
Context. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 64–74.
Bekemans, L. and Ortiz de Urbina, J. (1997) The Teaching of 
Immigrants in the European Union. Working Document. 
Luxembourg: European Parliament. Education and Culture 
Series. EDUC 100 EN.
Bernstein, B. (1975) Class, Codes and Control: Towards a 
Theory of Educational Transmission. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005) ‘Spaces of 
multilingualism’, Language and Communication, 25(3): 
197–216.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bourdieu, P. and Passeron, J.-C. (1977) Reproduction in 
Education, Society and Culture. Tr. Richard Nice. 
London: Sage.
Cachón, L. (2002) ‘La formación de la ‘España inmigrante’: 
mercado y ciudadanía’, Revista Española de Investigaciones 
Sociológica, 97: 95–126 (en www.cis.es).
Cameron, D. (1992) ‘Globalization and the teaching of 
“communication skills”’, in D. Block and D. Cameron (eds), 
Globalization and Language Teaching. New York: 
Routledge. pp. 67–82.
Cameron, D. (2000) Good to Talk? Living and Working in a 
Communication Culture. London: Sage.
Canagarajah, A. S. (1999) Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in 
English Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002) Globalization, methods, and prac-
tice in periphery classrooms. In Block, D. and Cameron, D. 
(eds) (2002) Globalisation and Language Teaching. London: 
Routledge.
Castro-Gómez, S. (2002) ‘Latinoamericanismo, modernidad, 
globalización: prolegómenos a una crítica postcolonial de 
la razón’ [Latin-Americanism, Modernity, Globalization: 
Introduction to a Post Colonial Critique of Reason.] 
(http:www.ensayo.rom.uga.edu/teoria/castro/castroG.htm)
Cicourel, A. (2002) ‘Organisation et communication en régime 
de surcharge cognitive’ [Discourse and organizational 
practices in the workplace: coping with ‘normal’ task inter-
ruptions and ‘cognitive overload’], Actes de la Recherche 
en Sciences Sociales, 143: 3–17.
{ }
Comments made by the transcriber
and
Turn latched to previous turn
=
Maintaining of a participant’s turn in an 
overlap
[ ]
Turn overlapping with similarly-marked 
turn
-
Re-starts and self-interruptions without any 
pause
/
Short pause (0.5 seconds)
//
Long pause (0.5–1.5 seconds)
(5”)
Silence (lapse or interval) of 5 seconds. 
When it is particularly meaningful, the 
number of seconds is indicated in pauses 
longer than 1 second
RIGHT Loud talking
(( ))
Non-understandable fragment
pa´l
Syntactical phonetic phenomena between 
words
( )°
Quiet talking

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
358
Codó, E. (2008) Immigration and Bureaucratic Control. 
Language Practices in the Public Administration. Berlin: 
Mouton de Gruyter.
Corson, D. (1999) ‘Community-based education for indigenous 
cultures’, in S. May, (ed.), Indigenous Community-Based 
Education. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 8–19.
Cummins, J. and Hornberger, N. H. (eds) (2008) Encyclopedia 
of Language and Education. Vol. 5, Bilingual Education. 
2nd edn. New York: Springer.
d’Amato, J. (1993) ‘Resistance and compliance in minority 
classrooms’, in E. Jacob and J. Cathie (eds), Minority 
Education. Anthropological Perspectives. London: Ablex. 
pp. 181–207.
Dendrinos, B. (1992) The EFL Textbook and Ideology. Athens: 
Griva.
Dendrinos, B. (2001) Linguoracism in European foreign 
language education discourse. In M. Riesigl and R. Wodak 
(eds), The Semiotics of Racism: Approaches in Critical 
Discourse Analysis, 177–198. Vienna: Passagen Verlag.
Dendrinos, B. (2005) Conflicting Ideologies in Discourses of 
Resistance to the Hegemony of English. São Paulo: 
Parábola Editorial.
Duchêne, A. (2009) ‘Marketing, management and perform-
ance: multilingualism as commodity in a tourism call 
centre’, Language Policy, 8: 27–50.
Duchêne, A. and Heller, M. (forthcoming) Language, Ideologies 
and the New Economy.
Duchêne, A. and Heller, M. (in progress) Pride and Profit. 
Language in Late Capitalism.
Duff, P. (2002) ‘The discursive co-construction of knowledge, 
identity, and difference: an ethnography of communication 
in the high school mainstream’, Applied Linguistics, 23(3): 
289–322.
Erickson, F. (1975) Gatekeeping and the melting pot: interac-
tion in counseling encounters. Harvard Educational Review, 
45(1): 44–70.
Erickson, F. (2004 [1998]) Talk and Social Theory. Cambridge: 
Polity Press. (1st edn, 1998.)
Erickson, F. and Shultz , J.  (1982) The Counsellor as 
Gatekeeper: Social Interaction in Interviews. New York: 
Academic Press.
European Parliament Resolution (1987) ‘On the languages 
and cultures of regional and ethnic minorities in the 
European Community’, Official Journal of the European 
Communities, No C 318, 30.11.1987. pp. 160–4.
EURYDICE (2004) The Academic Integration of the Immigrant 
Student Body in Europe. Brussels: Bruselas Eurydice. 
European Commission: http://eurydice.org.
EURYDICE (2006) Content and Language Integrated 
Learning (CLIL) at School in Europe. European Commission: 
http://www.eurydice.org/ressources/eurydice/pdf/
0_integral/071EN.pdf
Extra, G. and Verhoeven, L. (eds) (1993) Immigrant Languages 
in Europe. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Fairclough, N. (1992) Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse 
analysis’, in T. van Dijk (ed.), Discourse as Social Interaction. 
London: Sage. pp. 258–84.
Foucault, M. (1994) ‘Le souci de la verité’ [The concern for 
truth], in D. Defert, and F. Ewald (eds), Dits et Écrits. Vol. 4. 
Paris: Gallimard. pp. 668–78.
Gajo, L. and Mondada, L.  (2000) Interactions et Acquisitions 
en Contexte. Modes d’appropiation de Compétences 
Discursives Plurilingues par des Jeunes. [Interactions 
and Acquisitions in Context. How Young People Acquire 
Plurilingual Discourse Competence.] Fribourg: Editions 
Universitaires.
García, O. and Baker, C. (eds) (2007) Bilingual Education. An 
Introductory Reader. Clevedon, Buffalo and Toronto: 
Multilingual Matters. pp. 137–44.
Giddens, A. (1984) The Constitution of Society: Outline of the 
Theory of Structuration. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Goffman, E. (1961) Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of 
Mental Patients and other inmates. New York: Doubleday.
Gumperz, J. (1982) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Gumperz, J. (1986) 'Interactional sociolinguistics in the study 
of schooling’, in J. Cook-Gumperz (ed.), The Social 
Construction of Literacy. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 45–68.
Gumperz, J. (1989) Engager la Conversation. [Engaging in 
Conversation.] Paris: Les Editions de Minuit. Collection 
‘Le Sens Commun’.
Gumperz, J. and Roberts, C. (1979) Crosstalk. A Study of 
Cross-Cultural Communication. The National Centre for 
Industrial Training by BBC Continuing Education 
Department.
Heller, M. (1992) ‘The politics of codeswitching and language 
choice’, in C. Eastman (ed.), Codeswitching. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. pp. 123–42.
Heller, M. (1995) ‘Language choice, social institutions 
and symbolic domination’, Language and Society, 24(3): 
373–405.
Heller, M. (2003) ‘Globalization, the new economy, and the 
commodification of language and identity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 7(4): 473–92.
Heller, M. (2004) ‘Pratiques et structuration à l’école 
en milieu multilingue’ [School practices and struc-
turation in a multilingual context]’, Sociolinguistica, 18: 
73–85.
Heller, M. (2006) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: a 
Sociolinguistic Ethnography. London: Longman. 2nd. edn. 
London: Continuum. (1st edn, 1999.)
Heller, M. (2007) ‘Distributed knowledge, distributed power: 
a sociolinguistics of structuration’, Text and Talk, 27(5, 6): 
633–53.
Heller, M. and Martin-Jones, M. (eds) (2001) Voices of 
Authority: Education and Linguistic Difference. Westport, 
CT: Ablex.
Hymes, D. (1974) Foundations in Sociolinguistics: An 
Ethnographic Approach. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Jaspers, J. (2005) ‘Linguistic sabotage in a context of 
monolingualism and standardization’, Language and 
Communication, 25(3): 279–97.
Jensen, A. (1969) ‘How much can we boost IQ and scholastic 
achivement?’, Harvard Educational Review, 39: 1–123.

DISCOURSE AND SCHOOLS
359
Kasper, G. and Blum-Kulka, S. (eds) (1993) Interlanguage 
Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kroch, A. and Labov, W. (1972) ‘Linguistic Society of America: 
resolution in response to Arthur Jensen (1969)’, Linguistic 
Society of American Bulletin. March. Washington, DC: 
Linguistic Society of America.
Labov, W. (1972) ‘The logic of nonstandard English’, in 
W. Labov (ed.), Language in the Inner City: Studies in the 
Black English Vernacular. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press. pp. 200–40.
Lin, A. M. Y. (2008) ‘Code-switching in the classroom: 
research paradigms and approaches’, in A. Creese, 
P. Martin and N. H. Hornberger (eds), Encyclopedia of 
Language and Education. Vol. 9. 2nd edn. New York: 
Springer Science. pp. 3–14.
Lin, A. and Martin, P.  (2005) ‘From a critical deconstruction 
paradigm to a critical construction paradigm: an introduc-
tion to decolonisation, globalisation and language-
in-education policy and practice’, in A. Lin and P. Martin 
(eds), Decolonisation, Globalisation. Language-In-
Education Policy and Practice. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Luciak, M. (2004) ‘Migrants, minorities and education. 
Documenting: discrimination and integration in 15 member 
states of the E.U.’, report submitted by European Monitoring 
Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC). Luxembourg: 
Office for official publications of the European 
Communities.
McCall, L. (2007) ‘The complexity of intersectionality’, Journal 
of Women in Culture and Society, 30.02005 1771–1800. 
26 Nov 2007. Available at: http://www.journals.uchicago.
edu/doi/pdf/10.1086/426800?cookieSet=1.
Macedo, D., Gounari, P. and Dendrinos, B. (2003) The 
hegemony of English. Boulder, CO: Paradigm.
McPake, J., Waldemar M., Aarts, R., et al., (2006) Community 
Languages in Europe: Challenges and Opportunities. 
Manuscript.
Martin-Jones, M. (2007) ‘Bilingualism, education, and the 
regulation of access to language resources’, in M. Heller 
(ed.), Bilingualism: A Social Approach. New York: Palgrave. 
pp.161–82.
Martín Rojo, L. (2001) New developments in discourse 
analysis: Discourse as social practice. Folia Linguistica 
35(1 & 2), 41–78.
Martín Rojo, L. (2008a) ‘Imposing and resisting ethnic 
categorization in multicultural classrooms’, in R. Dolón and 
J. Todolí (eds), Analysing Identities in Discourse. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
Martín Rojo, L. (2008b) ‘Competent vs. incompetent students: 
polarization and social closure in Madrid schools’, in 
G. Delanty, P. Jones, and R. Wodak (eds), Identity, Belonging, 
and Migration. Liverpool: Liverpool University Press.
Martin Rojo, L. (2009) Constructing Inequality in Multilingual 
Classrooms. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Martín Rojo, L., A. M. Relaño and I. Rasskin (2009) ‘Who is a 
“legitimate participant” in multilingual classrooms? 
Essentializing and naturalizing culture’, in L. Martin Rojo 
(ed.), Constructing Inequality in Multilingual Classrooms. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Maryns, K. (2006) The Asylum Speaker. Language in the 
Belgian Asylum Procedure. Manchester: St. Jerome.
May, S. and Hornberger, N. H. (2007) Encyclopedia of 
Language and Education. Vol. 1. Language Policy and 
Political Issues in Education. 2nd edn. New York: Springer.
McPake, J., Waldemar M., Aarts, R., et al., (2007) Valuing all 
languages in Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe/ Graz: 
European Centre for Modern Languages.
Mignolo, W. (1998) ‘Globalization, civilization process, and 
the relocation of languages and cultures’, in F. Jameson 
and M. Miyoshi (eds), The Cultures of Globalization. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Mijares, L. (2006) Aprendiendo a ser marroquíes. Inmigración, 
diversidad lingüística y escuela. [Learning to be Moroccan. 
Immigration, Lnguistic Diversity and Schools.] Madrid: 
Ediciones del Oriente y del Mediterráneo.
Mondada, L. and Laurent, G. (2001) Bilingual resources of 
migrant students and their role in classroom interactions. 
In Monica Heller and Marilyn Martin-Jones (eds), Voices 
of Authority: Education and Linguistic Difference, 235–69. 
Westport: Ablex.
Moreno C. and Carlos, J. (2008) El nacionalismo Lingüístico. 
Análisis crítico. [Linguistic Nationalism. A Critical Analysis.] 
Barcelona: Península.
Moyer, M. G. and Martín Rojo, L. (2007) ‘Language, migration 
and citizenship: new challenges in the regulation of 
bilingualism’, in M. Heller (ed.), Bilingualism: A Social 
Approach. Palgrave: Macmillan. pp. 137–60.
Negri, A. and Hardt, M. (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Nussbaum, L. and Unamuno, V. (2006) ‘Les compétences 
comunicatives multilingues’ [Multilingual communicative 
competence], in L. Nussbaum, and V. Unamuno (eds), 
Usos i competències multilingües entre escolars d’origen 
immigrants. [Multilanguage Uses and Competences among 
Students of Immigrant Origin.] Barcelona: Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona.
Ogbu, J. U. (1987) ‘Variability in minority school performance: 
a problem in search of an explanation’, Anthropology and 
Education Quarterly, 12(1): 2–29.
Ogbu, J. U. (1993) ‘Variability in minority school performance: 
a problem in search of an explanation’, in E. Jacob and 
C. Jordan (eds), Minority Education: Anthropological 
Perspectives. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 83–111.
Peled-Elhanan, N. (2008) ‘The denial of Palestinian national 
and territorial identity in Israeli schoolbooks of history and 
geography 1996–2003’, in R. Dolón and J. Todolí (eds), 
Analysing Identities in Discourse. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Pennycook, A. (1999) English and the Discourses of 
Colonialism. New York: Routledge.
Pennycook, A. (2000) ‘English, politics, ideology: from 
colonial celebration to postcolonial performativity’, 
in T. Ricento (ed.), Ideology, Politics and Language 
Policies: Focus on English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 107–19.
Pérez Milans, M. and Martín Rojo, L. (2007) ‘Barreras interac-
cionales en aulas multilingües: una aproximación crítica a 
la comunicación intercultural’, [Interactional Barriers in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
360
Multilingual Classes: A Critical Approach to Intercultural 
Communication] Revista Cultura, Lenguaje y Repre-
sentación, 4: 203–26.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Phillipson, R. and Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (1999) ‘Englishisation: 
one dimension of globalisation, English in a changing 
world’, in D. Graddol and U. H. Meinhof (eds), English in a 
Changing World. AILA Review. Oxford: Catchline/AILA. 
pp. 19–36.
Rampton, B. (1995) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity among 
Adolescents. London: Longman.
Rassool, N., Canvin, M., Heugh, M., and Mansoor, S., (2007) 
Global Issues in Language, Education and Development. 
Perspectives from Post-Colonial Countries. Clevedon: 
Multilingual Matters.
Rogers, R. (2004) (ed.), An introduction to critical discourse 
analysis in education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sarangi, S. and Roberts, C. (1999) (eds) Talk, Work and 
Institutional Order: Discourse in Medical, Mediation and 
Management Settings. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. (1981) Narrative, Literacy and Face 
in Interethnic Communication. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2001) Intercultural 
Communication: A Discourse Approach. 2nd edn. London: 
Blackwell. (1st edn, 1995.)
Scott, J. (1990) Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden 
Transcripts. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Serra, C. and Palaudàrias, J. M. (2007) L'alumnat de nacion-
alitat estrangera en els estudis postobligtoris [Students with 
a foreign background in secondary education]. In  Jesús 
Larios and Monica Nadal (dirs.), L'estat de la immigració a 
Catalunya. Anuari 2006 [The state of education in Catalonia. 
2006 survey], 301–334. Barcelona: Mediterrània.
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of 
Discourse. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Singh, R., Lele, J. and Martohardjono, G. (1988) 
‘Communication in a multilingual society: some missed 
opportunities’, Language in Society, 17: 43–59.
Singy, P. and Trudgill, P. (1997) ‘Communication et 
pragmatique interculturelles’, Journal de l’Association 
Suisse de Linguistique Appliquée, 65: 9–24. Neuchâtel: 
Institut de Linguistique de l’Université de Neuchâtel.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2007) ‘Linguistic human rights in educa-
tion?’, in O. García and C. Baker (eds), Bilingual Education. 
An Introductory Reader. Clevedon, Buffalo and Toronto: 
Multilingual Matters. pp. 137–44.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2008) Linguistic Genocide in 
Education–or Worldwide Diversity and Human Rights? 
New Delhi: Orient Longman. http://www.orientlongman.
com/search.asp?txt1=Tove&list1=2&B1=SEARCH
Unamuno, V. (2008) ‘Multilingual switch in peer classroom 
interaction’, Linguistics and Education, 19(1): 1–19.
Valero Garcés, C. and Martin, A. (2008) (eds) Crossing 
Borders in Community Interpreting: Definitions and 
Dilemmas. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Watts, R. (2008) ‘The price of English in Switzerland: decon-
structing language ideologies’. Farewell Lecture University 
of Berne. May 2008.
Wierzbicka, A. (1991) Cross-Cultural Pragmatics: the Semantics 
of Human Interaction. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wiley, T, G., (2001) On defining heritage languages and their 
speakers. In J. Kreeft, D. A. Ranard and S. McGinnis (eds), 
Preserving a National Resource, 29–36. Washington, DC 
and McHenry, IL: Center for Applied Linguistics and Delta 
Systems.
Wodak, R. and Muriel S., (1986) The Language of Love 
and Guilt. Mother-Daughter Relationships from a Cross-
Cultural Perspective. Amsterdam: John Benjamins 
Publishing.
Woolard, K. (1985) ‘Language variation and cultural 
hegemony’, American Ethnologist, 12: 738–48.

25
25.1  INTRODUCTION
A recurring theme in the study of courtroom 
discourse has been the role of language and lin-
guistic practices in the creation and maintenance 
of social power in the courtroom. For example, 
early research in the area, conducted by O’Barr 
(and others) in the United States (e.g. Conley, 
O’Barr and Lind, 1978; O’Barr and Atkins, 1980; 
O’Barr, 1982) and by Wodak in Austria 
(e.g. Wodak, 1981, 1985), found that linguistic 
variation in witness testimony was socially-
conditioned and that this socially-conditioned 
variation influenced the decision-making of judges 
and juries. In particular, witnesses who produced 
linguistic variables that correlated with social 
powerlessness (e.g. the working class), as opposed 
to social power, were generally found to be less 
credible in the eyes of the law.1 Among the meth-
odologies adopted by O’Barr and Wodak in their 
investigations of courtroom discourse was varia-
tionist analysis, i.e. correlating linguistic variables 
found in witness testimony with social factors 
such as class, educational background or sex. 
Indeed, Conley and O’Barr (1998: 63) remark that 
when they first began their collaborative research 
on courtroom discourse, they were very much 
influenced ‘by sociolinguistics’ then-current focus 
on the social conditioning of language variation’. 
While subsequent work by Conley and O’Barr – 
and by other investigators of courtroom discourse 
– has not generally adopted a variationist approach 
to sociolinguistics, Conley and O’Barr’s research 
in the 1980s continued to examine the social con-
sequences of witnesses’ linguistic practices, taking 
larger linguistic units (i.e. narratives) into consid-
eration. Their 1990 book (Conley and O’Barr, 
1990), for example, demonstrated that litigants 
in small claims court who structured their 
legal problems according to the logic of the 
law (‘rule-oriented’ accounts) – as opposed to 
the logic of morality (‘relational’ accounts) – were 
more comprehensible to judges and thus more 
likely to receive rulings in their favour. And, 
according to Conley and O’Barr (1998: 73), the 
ability to recount legal problems according to 
the logic of the law is intimately connected to 
social power: ‘the crucial factor associated 
with this skill is exposure to the culture of 
business and law’.
Research in the 1980s not only investigated the 
talk of courtroom witnesses, as Wodak’s and 
Conley’s and O’Barr’s did, but also examined talk 
that was co-constructed by lawyers and wit-
nesses. In particular, this research developed 
typologies of question types used by lawyers in 
both direct- and cross-examination (e.g. Danet, 
Hoffman, Kermish, Rafn and Stayman, 1980; 
Harris, 1984; Philips, 1987; Walker, 1987; 
Woodbury, 1984), with the aim of determining the 
extent to which lawyers’ questions could constrain 
or control witnesses’ answers and, by extension, 
impose lawyers’ interpretations or words on 
witness testimony (Woodbury, 1984: 199). Since 
the vast majority of research in courtroom 
discourse has, since the 1980s, focused on the 
Courtroom Discourse
S u s a n  E h r l i c h

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
362
interaction between lawyers and witnesses as 
well as how this interaction constructs the various 
versions of events that emerge in trial contexts, the 
remainder of this chapter will also focus on these 
two dimensions of courtroom discourse.2 The 
research that I report on draws from a range of 
methodologies. For example, much of the litera-
ture describing the interaction between lawyers 
and witnesses employs methods from conversa-
tion analysis (CA), given CA’s concern with the 
sequential aspects of interaction (see Schegloff, 
2007), and from pragmatics, given pragmatics’ 
concern with meaning in context (see Levinson, 
1983). And, much of the literature describing the 
way courtroom language constructs ‘facts’ in the 
courtroom employs methods from critical dis-
course analysis (CDA), given CDA’s emphasis on 
the constitutive nature of discursive practices (see 
Fairclough and Wodak, 1997). I close the chapter 
by returning to the issue of language and social 
power in the courtroom.
25.2  QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS IN 
COURTROOM DISCOURSE
Like much work on institutional discourse, inves-
tigations of courtroom discourse have devoted a 
great deal of attention to the study of questions 
and answers. This is perhaps not surprising given 
that the primary discursive activity within trials is 
the examination of witnesses – direct examination 
or examination-in-chief, cross-examination and 
re-examination. Adversarial dispute resolution, of 
which trials (in the Anglo-American common law 
system) are a notable example, requires that two 
parties come together formally, typically with 
representation (e.g. lawyers), to present their 
(probably different) versions of the dispute to a 
third party (e.g. judge, jury, tribunal) who hears 
the evidence, applies the appropriate laws or 
regulations, and determines the guilt or innocence 
of the parties. Lawyers have as their task, then, 
that of convincing the adjudicating body that their 
(i.e. their client’s) version of events is the most 
credible. Apart from making opening and closing 
arguments, however, lawyers do not themselves 
testify. Rather, it is through the posing of ques-
tions that lawyers must elicit, from witnesses, 
testimony that will build a credible version of 
events in support of their own clients’ interests in 
addition to testimony that will challenge, weaken 
and/or cast doubt on the opposing parties’ version 
of events.3 Atkinson and Drew (1979: 70) note 
that while trial discourse is conducted predomi-
nantly through a series of question–answer 
sequences, other actions are accomplished in 
the form of such questions and answers. For 
example, in cross-examination, questions may be 
designed to accuse witnesses or to challenge 
or undermine the truth of what they are saying. 
To the extent that witnesses recognize these 
actions are being performed in questions, they 
may design their answers as rebuttals, denials, 
justifications, etc.4
Atkinson and Drew (1979) have called the 
question–answer turn-taking system characteristic 
of the courtroom ‘turn-type pre-allocation’, indi-
cating that the types of turns participants can take 
are predetermined by their institutional roles. 
Indeed, for many scholars in CA, what distin-
guishes ordinary conversation from institutional 
discourse is this ‘direct relationship between 
status and role, on the one hand, and discursive 
rights and obligations, on the other’ (Drew and 
Heritage, 1992: 49). In courtrooms, for example, 
lawyers have the right to initiate and allocate turns 
by asking questions of witnesses but the reverse is 
not true; witnesses are obligated to answer ques-
tions or run the risk of being sanctioned by the 
court. An important dimension of this kind of 
turn-type pre-allocation, according to Drew and 
Heritage (1992: 49), is the interactional control it 
bestows upon questioners: answerers, typically 
laypeople, have little opportunity to initiate talk, 
while questioners, typically institutional repre-
sentatives, are able ‘to gain a measure of control 
over the introduction of topics and hence of the 
“agenda” for the occasion’. Discussing doctor–
patient interactions, Drew and Heritage note that 
the question–answer sequences that characterize 
most such interactions not only allow doctors to 
gather information from patients but can also 
result in doctors’ directing and controlling 
the talk: introducing topics, changing topics, 
and selectively formulating and reformulating 
the terms in which patients’ problems are 
expressed.
Within the context of the courtroom, the discur-
sive power afforded to questioners (i.e. lawyers) is 
most extreme, many researchers (e.g. Conley and 
O’Barr, 1998) have argued, in cross-examination. 
While direct examination is typically character-
ized by relatively open-ended questions (Barry, 
1991; Maley, 1994; Woodbury, 1984) that ostensi-
bly encourage and facilitate witness testimony, the 
closed-question forms of cross-examination have 
been said to control witnesses in at least two 
ways: (1) they impose lawyers’ own (i.e. their 
clients’) version of events on evidence and (2) they 
restrict the types of answers witnesses can logi-
cally provide. Not surprisingly, these features of 
cross-examining questions correspond to what 
Gibbons (2003: 97) has said are the two goals of 
cross-examining lawyers: (1) constructing a par-
ticular version of events (i.e. that of their own 
clients) for the benefit of judges and juries 5 and 
(2) committing an opposing witness to this par-
ticular version of events.

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
363
Syntactic form of questions
Given that the form of questions is closely related 
to the issue of interactional control, a number of 
researchers (e.g. Danet et al., 1980; Harris, 1984; 
Philips, 1987; Walker, 1987), as noted above, have 
developed taxonomies of questions used in the 
courtroom based on the extent to which a ques-
tion’s syntactic form logically constrains or limits 
a witness’s response – this is associated with the 
second of Gibbons’ functions identified above. 
For example, in Danet et al.’s (1980) taxonomy, 
the most ‘coercive’ of question types is the declar-
ative question (e.g. ‘As a matter of fact, you 
signed that letter, didn’t you?’) because its form 
functions to severely restrict the expected response. 
First, it is a question that expects a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ 
answer, what Raymond (2003) calls a ‘type-
conforming response’; secondly, its declarative 
form and negative tag (i.e., its ‘preference’ organ-
ization in the terms of conversation analysis) 
favours a ‘yes’ (as opposed to a ‘no’) response. By 
contrast, what Danet et al. call the imperative 
question (e.g. ‘Tell us what took place at the meet-
ing with the patient’) is the least ‘coercive’ of 
question types within their taxonomy because it 
imposes few constraints on the form of the 
expected response. While Danet et al. (1980) 
found ‘coercive’ questions to be more frequent in 
cross-examination than in direct examination, the 
effectiveness of coercive questions in influencing 
the responses of witnesses varied. That is, although 
coercive questions were found to restrict the form 
of responses (i.e. they elicited shorter responses, 
for example, ‘yes’ or ‘no’), they did not necessar-
ily elicit the response that was ‘preferred’ by the 
design of the questions. For example, a declarative 
question with a negative tag (e.g. ‘As a matter of 
fact, you signed that letter, didn’t you?’) was just 
as likely to receive a ‘no’ response (i.e. a dispre-
ferred response) as it was to receive a ‘yes’ 
response (i.e. a preferred response).
The use of ‘coercive’ questions in the court-
room has also been connected to lawyers’ ability 
to impose their (i.e. their clients’) interpretation of 
events on evidence for the benefit of judges and 
juries – this is associated with the first of Gibbons’ 
functions identified above. As Gibbons (2003: 98) 
says, ‘one way of constructing a particular version 
of events during questioning is to include ele-
ments of this desired version of the events in the 
questions’. Indeed, Woodbury (1984) developed a 
taxonomy of question types that classifies ques-
tions according to questioners’ ability to ‘control’ 
information. ‘Control’, according to Woodbury 
(1984: 199), refers ‘to the degree to which the 
questioner can impose his [sic] own interpreta-
tions on evidence’. (Note that while Woodbury’s 
principle of categorization differs from the one 
used by Danet et al., which categorizes question 
types according to their expected responses, the 
two taxonomies essentially categorize questions 
in the same way in the sense that the most 
‘coercive’ of question types are also the most 
‘controlling’ of question types, etc.) Within 
Woodbury’s continuum of ‘control’, a broad 
wh-question such as ‘And, then what happened?’ 
displays little control because it functions to 
impose little of the questioner’s interpretation or 
words on the testimony: there is no proposition 
contained within the wh-question other than the 
notion that ‘something happened’. (Notice that 
this wh-question would also not be ‘coercive’ 
within Danet et al.’s taxonomy.) By contrast, a 
question such as ‘You were attracted to Brian, 
weren’t you?’ (which Woodbury calls a prosodic 
yes–no question and Danet et al. call a declarative 
question) displays more control (and is more coer-
cive) than a wh-question because it contains a 
more substantive proposition – that the addressee 
was attracted to Brian. It is in this respect that 
prosodic yes–no questions (or declarative ques-
tions in Danet et al.’s taxonomy) are more 
‘controlling’ than broad wh-questions or impera-
tive questions: they make available to third-party 
recipients (i.e. judges and/or juries) the ques-
tioner’s interpretation of events, irrespective of the 
addressee’s answer. Indeed, for Conley and O’Barr 
(1998: 26), ‘controlling’ questions are instrumen-
tal in transforming cross-examination ‘from 
dialogue into self-serving monologue’.
The following two examples from a Canadian 
sexual assault trial (Ehrlich, 2001) show a cross-
examining lawyer asking the complainant 
‘controlling’ questions in Woodbury’s sense. As 
Woodbury suggests, these types of questions have 
the function of imposing a particular interpreta-
tion on the events in question: in this case, that the 
events in question were not sexual assault but 
rather were consensual sex. (SC is the cross-
examining lawyer and CD is the complainant.)
 1.  SC: And all of this happened fairly quickly. 
Again, I realize it’s ridiculous to suggest that 
you are looking at a watch, but I take it that 
we’ve got this ongoing behaviour, that it’s so 
physical that you are in no position to leave or 
do anything?
    CD: That’s right. I mean, before I could be in a 
position to pick up a phone to, to leave, I had to 
be in a position to move and I wasn’t. So before 
thinking of I have to pick up the phone and I have 
to walk out the door, I had to think of how am I 
going to get out from underneath this man.
    SC: Right. Did you try to push him off?
    CD: Yes, I did.
    SC: You weren’t able to?
    CD: No, I wasn’t.
    SC: Is that because you weren’t able to get your 
arms free or because he was on top of you?

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
364
    CD: I couldn’t get my arms free and I couldn’t 
push him off.
    SC: At one point you were naked?
    CD: Yes.
    SC: At what point was that?
    CD: I can’t even pinpoint a specific time.
    SC: Well, your shirt came off first as a result of 
the fondling of your breasts, right?
    CD: Yes.
 2.  SC: And there was no response to that because 
he just kept going as if he never even heard it?
    CD: That’s right.
    SC: So did you realize that it was so futile 
at that point that you wouldn’t try and do 
anything at this point?
    CD: At that point is when he grabbed my hair 
and wrapped it around his hands and pushed 
my face down between his legs and gave me 
an ultimatum. At that point that became 
the more pressing matter to get out of that 
situation more than to get him out of my 
room.
    SC: So in fact was the fellatio, was that the last 
act of sex that was between the two of you 
before everything died down and before Mr. A. 
went to sleep and you went into the chair?
    CD: Yes.
In both of these examples, CD is describing sexual 
acts of aggression committed by the accused: in 
Example 1, the situation CD describes is one in 
which the accused is on top of her as she attempts 
(unsuccessfully) to push him off; in Example 2, 
the situation CD describes is one in which the 
accused forces her to perform oral sex on him. By 
contrast, the italicized questions in Examples 1 
and 2 (‘controlling’ questions in Woodbury’s 
sense) show the cross-examining lawyer reformu-
lating the complainant’s version of events so that 
the accused’s responsibility for these acts of 
sexual aggression is obscured and/or so that the 
events in question are represented as consensual 
sex. For example, the italicized question of 
Example 1, Well, your shirt came off first as a 
result of the fondling of your breasts, right?, con-
tains both an unaccusative construction,6 your 
shirt came off, and a nominalization, fondling. 
Both of these constructions allow the accused’s 
agency vis-à-vis these acts to be obscured; moreo-
ver, the word, fondling, represents the acts as 
affectionate and consensual sex. In a similar way, 
the italicized question of Example 2, So in fact 
was the fellatio, was that the last act of sex that 
was between the two of you before everything died 
down and before Mr. A. went to sleep and you 
went into the chair? transforms CD’s representa-
tions of the accused’s violent acts (i.e. At that 
point is when he grabbed my hair and wrapped it 
around his hands and pushed my face down 
between his legs and gave me an ultimatum) into 
a scene of non-violent and consensual sex. That is, 
what CD describes in the language of coercion 
and force is characterized by SC as the last act of 
sex. Atkinson and Drew (1979: 180) have argued 
that cross-examining lawyers will design their 
questions so as to repeat some aspects of the 
cross-examined witnesses’ version of events, 
while ‘retaining the crucial features’ of their 
clients’ own version of events. This is precisely 
what we see in the italic questions of Examples 
1 and 2. The cross-examining lawyer designs his 
utterances so as to represent the events described 
in the complainant’s prior talk, but obscures/dis-
cards crucial aspects of her rendition of events – 
specifically, that the accused was the agent of 
sexually violent and aggressive acts. Moreover, 
the cross-examining lawyer is successful in com-
mitting CD to these reformulations even though 
they are more compatible with the accused’s 
defence strategy than they are with the complain-
ant’s charges of sexual assault.
While the examples above show the complain-
ant assenting to the version of events put forward 
by the cross-examining lawyer, Danet et al.’s 
(1980) study, as noted above, demonstrates that 
coercive or controlling questions do not necessar-
ily produce the responses that are favoured by 
their preference design. For example, in excerpt 
Example 3 below, CD denies the damaging char-
acterization of her behaviour – that she did little to 
resist the accused’s sexual aggression – contained 
within SC’s controlling question (what Woodbury 
calls a prosodic yes–no question).
 3.  SC: So do I take it then – correct me if I am 
wrong – that the only effort that you would 
have made to try and jolly him out of this or 
have him leave was to say that ‘I have a class in 
the morning so you’ll have to leave’ or words to 
that effect?
    CD: No. That was not the only effort I made 
with regards to making him stop doing what he 
was doing. It may have been the only time that 
I outright said, “Now you have to leave,” but 
I certainly did make it clear beforehand.
Given the possibility that witnesses may deny 
these kinds of damaging formulations (contained 
within controlling questions), Gibbons (2003: 
101) has commented that a ‘particularly clever … 
technique for controlling information’ is the use of 
questions with presuppositions because the infor-
mation content of presuppositions is ‘difficult 
to challenge’. Presupposition is a term used by 
linguists ‘to refer to propositions whose truth is 
taken for granted in the utterance of a linguistic 
expression’ (Green, 1996: 72). For example, 

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
365
the sentence ‘John realizes that Mary is seriously 
ill’ presupposes the truth of the proposition ‘Mary 
is seriously ill’. That is, in uttering such a 
sentence, the speaker takes for granted that the 
proposition ‘Mary is seriously ill’ is assumed 
knowledge between speaker and addressee, form-
ing the background for the assertion ‘John realizes 
X’. By contrast, the sentence ‘John thinks that 
Mary is seriously ill’ does not presuppose the truth 
of the proposition ‘Mary is seriously ill’. 
The speaker who utters such a sentence does not 
take for granted or assume that ‘Mary is seriously 
ill’; in fact, the sentence could be appropriately 
produced by a speaker who knows the embedded 
proposition to be false. What these two examples 
demonstrate is that certain linguistic constructions 
(e.g. the predicate ‘realize’ in ‘John realizes 
that Mary is seriously ill’) act to trigger presup-
positions whereas others do not (e.g. the predicate 
‘think’ in ‘John thinks that Mary is seriously ill’). 
Indeed, a variety of linguistic forms (e.g. words, 
phrases, syntactic constructions) have been isolated 
as sources of presuppositions and thus designated 
as ‘presupposition-triggers’ (Levinson, 1983).
One of the defining features of presupposition 
is its ability to remain constant or true under nega-
tion and interrogation. Thus, like the sentence 
‘John realizes that Mary is seriously ill’, both its 
negative – ‘John doesn’t realize that Mary is 
seriously ill’ – and interrogative – ‘Does John 
realize that Mary is seriously ill?’ – versions 
presuppose the proposition ‘Mary is seriously ill’. 
This ability to survive negation and interrogation 
has consequences for the way presuppositions 
‘control’ information in the courtroom. While 
controlling questions make available to third-
party recipients certain propositions, they do not 
presuppose or even assert these propositions. That 
is, by definition, a question always contains a 
variable or unknown quantity, which the addressee 
of a question is being asked to supply (Lyons, 
1977). And, as we have seen, the damaging infor-
mation contained within cross-examining lawyers’ 
controlling questions can be denied. By contrast, 
propositions that are presupposed by linguistic 
expressions cannot be denied (easily) and thus are 
made available to judges and juries, even if the 
primary proposition of a question is denied.
Consider the following example from Eades’ 
(2008) analysis of a preliminary hearing in the 
Pinkenba case, an Australian case in which six 
police officers faced criminal charges for alleg-
edly abducting three young Australian Aboriginal 
boys. (The police officers were charged with 
‘unlawful deprivation of liberty’.) According to 
Eades, even though the three Aboriginal boys 
were not themselves on trial (but rather served as 
prosecution witnesses in the state’s case against 
the six police officers), their evidence was so 
undermined by the defence that ‘the magistrate 
not only dropped the charges against the police 
officers, but also devoted a considerable part of 
his decision to delivering a negative evaluation of 
the character of the boys’ (Eades, 2008: 3). As the 
following example demonstrates, representing the 
boys as criminals was one of the strategies 
employed by the defence in its attempt to discredit 
the boys’ testimony.
 4.  DC1: What sort of things did you steal – when 
you were wan-prowling around the streets?
    Barry: (3.5) Just purses.
Significant about Example 4 for the current dis-
cussion is the fact that the wh-question presup-
poses that Barry prowled around the streets, even 
though in previous testimony Barry had rejected 
the verb, prowl, as a way of describing what he 
and his friends used to do. And, because Barry 
answers the question in a direct way, the presup-
position that Barry prowled around is confirmed. 
What we see here, then, is the cross-examining 
lawyer communicating damaging evidence in the 
form of a presupposition and, given that presup-
positions, by definition, are never the primary 
focus of questioning, Barry has difficulty denying 
this particular piece of evidence. In the words of 
Luchjenbroers and Aldridge (2007), the lawyer 
has managed to ‘smuggle’ information into the 
context of the court proceedings.
The power of answers to 
‘control’ information
The claim that ‘asking questions amounts to inter-
actional control’ (Eades, 2008) is a pervasive one 
in the literature courtroom discourse, but it is not 
a claim that has gone unchallenged. Eades (2000), 
for example, questions the idea that the syntactic 
form of questions has any predictable effect on the 
form of responses. Based on a study of Aboriginal 
witnesses in Australian courts, Eades (2000: 171) 
determined that coercive or controlling questions 
were often interpreted by witnesses as ‘an invita-
tion to explain some situation or present a narra-
tive account’. Ultimately, Eades (2000: 189) 
concludes that ‘witnesses are not necessarily con-
strained or controlled by question-type’. In a 
similar way, Matoesian (2005: 621) challenges the 
assumption that ‘questions … are more powerful 
than answers’, arguing that such an assumption 
‘risks the problem of reifying structure’.
Just as we assume questions do more than merely 
question (for instance in court they may work as 
accusations, etc.), why presume any less of answers 
(which may recalibrate the question, produce 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
366
a new question and so on)? A more detailed 
consideration of answers and how they function in 
detail may demonstrate just how powerful they 
are (Matoesian, 2005: 621).
Drew (1992) provides precisely this kind of 
‘detailed consideration of answers’ in his analysis 
of a rape victim’s cross-examination. In particular, 
Drew shows how the complainant (i.e. the rape 
victim) in this particular trial often produced 
‘alternative descriptions’ in her answers – descrip-
tions that contested the cross-examining lawyer’s 
version of events. That is, rather than providing 
‘yes’ or ‘no’ answers to the cross-examining law-
yer’s yes–no questions (i.e. type-conforming 
answers to questions), the complainant provided 
competing descriptions that transformed the law-
yer’s damaging characterizations into more benign 
ones. In Example 5 below, for example, the cross-
examining lawyer, through the use of ‘controlling’ 
questions, attempts to represent the events that 
preceded the alleged rape as precursors to a con-
sensual sexual relationship.
 5.  16 A:  Well yuh had some uh (p) (.) uh fairly 
lengthy conversations with the defen-
    17 
  dant uh: did’n you?
    18 
 (0.7)
    19 A:  On that evening uv February fourteenth?
    20 
   (1.0)
    21 W:  We:ll we were all talkin.
    22 
   (0.8)
    23 A:  Well you kne:w, at that ti:me. that the
    24 
   defendant was. in:terested (.) in you (.)
    25 
   did’n you?
    26 
   (1.3)
    27 W:  He: asked me how I’(d) bin: en
    28 
   (1.1)
    29 W:  J- just stuff like that
While the lawyer’s questions in lines 16–17 and 
23–25 suggest that there was a closeness or inti-
macy developing between the defendant and the 
complainant, Drew argues that the complainant’s 
answers, although not containing any ‘overt cor-
rection markers’ (Drew, 1992: 487), do not sup-
port this version of events. Rather, the complainant 
provides answers that depict a lack of intimacy 
between the complainant and the defendant: i.e. a 
scene in which there were a number of people 
who were all talkin and in which the defendant 
issued a greeting that was more friendly than 
intimate. What is significant about Drew’s analy-
sis for the present discussion is the fact that 
the answerer is shown to ‘control’ evidence (in 
Woodbury’s sense) by resisting and transforming 
the (pseudo)assertions contained in the lawyer’s 
questions. In fact, Drew comments explicitly on 
the need to be attentive to the way that competing 
descriptions from witnesses may influence 
third-party recipients, in this case, juries: ‘the 
complainant’s attempts to counter the lawyer’s 
descriptive strategies, and hence herself control 
the information which is available to the jury, 
should not be overlooked’ (Drew, 1992: 517).
A similar finding is reported by Galatolo and 
Drew (2006) in the context of a 1998 Italian 
criminal trial. They found that expanded answers 
to yes–no questions (i.e. answers that ‘control’ 
evidence to some extent) were in fact more fre-
quent than ‘yes’ or ‘no’ responses in this particular 
trial and that when the expanded answers were 
preceded by the expected ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response 
they rarely received negative sanctions. By con-
trast, if witnesses produced expanded answers 
without first answering ‘yes’ or ‘no’ they were 
more likely to be sanctioned. For Galatolo and 
Drew (2006: 688), then, expanded answers pre-
ceded by yes/no responses represent a valuable 
conversational resource for witnesses to resist the 
interactional control of questioners: expanded 
answers permit ‘witnesses to respect the con-
straints imposed by the form of … questions and, 
at the same time, to gain a conversational space in 
which they can exert a partial control over … 
information’ (emphasis added).
A more dramatic example of an answerer’s 
interactional resistance can be seen in Ehrlich and 
Sidnell’s (2006) study of a 2001 Canadian public 
inquiry where a prominent politician consistently 
challenged the damaging presuppositions encoded 
in cross-examining lawyers’ questions. Because 
the politician was not compelled to produce 
type-conforming responses to yes–no questions 
(i.e. ‘yes’ or ‘no’), Ehrlich and Sidnell (2006: 674) 
argue that he was able to address the presupposi-
tions of questions directly, ‘either challenging 
their status as appropriately presupposed or deny-
ing the presuppositions themselves’. For example, 
in the following excerpt (Example 6), the ex-
premier of Ontario, Michael Harris, is asked a 
question that presupposes that he did not intervene 
in the business plan process for the Ministry of 
Environment. Notice that the question (in lines 
49–52) contains the predicate, ‘have regret’, which 
like the predicate, ‘realize’ (discussed above), 
presupposes the truth of its complement clause.
 6.  49  M:    knowing what you know no:w (.)
    50      do you have any regret in not 
interve:ning in the business plan
    51      p-process 
and 
saying: 
you’re 
go:ing:
    52      too fa:r.
    53  Harris:  Well:you assumed that I didn’t 
intervene
    54      in the business process and I think
    55      that’s-that’s not an assumption you 
ought

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
367
    56      to make.=I have no concern ah: that-
that everybody involved in the
    57      business planning process didn’t 
take
    58      their job seriously,
    59      an 
didn’t 
do 
ah-an 
honest, 
conscientious job. of assessing
    60       potential risks,
    61      identifying them, and assessing them.
If Harris had answered (or had been forced to 
answer) the question in lines 49–52 with a ‘yes’ or 
‘no’ response (i.e. with a type-conforming 
response), the presupposition – that he had not 
intervened in the business plan – would have 
remained intact. This presupposition, in turn, would 
have implicated Harris in the water contamination 
scandal that the public inquiry was set up to inves-
tigate. Recognizing the potential damage of the 
lawyer’s presupposition, Harris withholds a type-
conforming response to the question and instead 
explicitly challenges the presupposition, character-
izing it as an ‘assumption’ that the lawyer ought 
not to make (lines 55–56). On the basis of these 
kinds of examples, Ehrlich and Sidnell (2006: 655) 
argue that Harris managed to ‘usurp control over 
the topical agenda of the proceedings’.
There are two points that are important to make 
about this particular study and its finding that 
answerers are able to assume the interactional 
control normally associated with questioners in 
institutional discourse. First, as Eades (2008: 154) 
points out, this particular witness may be some-
what unique in the sense that he had ‘remarkable 
astuteness and ability to challenge presupposi-
tions’, an ability that may be connected to ‘his 
experience as a leading politician’. By contrast, 
witnesses without comparable experience may not 
be able to resist presuppositions in the same way.7 
Secondly, while Ehrlich and Sidnell conclude that 
Harris’s ability to control ‘the topical agenda of 
the proceedings’ was a function of his not being 
compelled to produce type-conforming responses 
to questions, in many trials witnesses are com-
pelled to produce type-conforming responses. 
Indeed, the Italian study by Galatolo and Drew 
(2006), as noted above, found that witnesses who 
provided expanded answers to yes–no questions 
that were not preceded by a type-conforming 
response were negatively sanctioned. The exam-
ple below, from Matoesian’s (2001) analysis of 
the William Kennedy Smith rape trial, provides an 
illustration of such a negative sanction: the 
witness initially produces an expanded answer to 
the cross-examining lawyer’s yes–no question 
but is subsequently forced to produce a type
-conforming response.
 7. 1  RB: You meet up with this man who your
   2 friend says is a rapist isn’t that correct.
   3  (1.6)
   4  AM: I was not uhfraid of him (.) no (.) I was 
not uhfraid of (him)
   5  RB: That’s not my question Miss Mercer, you 
understand my question?
   6  (.) my question is did you meet this man (.) 
who your friend says
   7  is the alleged rapist?
   8  (0.6)
   9  AM: Yes.
According to Matoesian’s analysis, in this exam-
ple the cross-examining lawyer, Roy Black, is 
attempting to create an inconsistency between the 
fact that Ann Mercer (a witness for the rape victim, 
Patricia Bowman) was told that William Kennedy 
Smith had raped her friend yet, at the same time, 
was willing to enlist his help in order to find 
Patricia Bowman’s shoes. The establishment of 
such inconsistencies was a recurring theme in Roy 
Black’s questioning of both Patricia Bowman and 
Ann Mercer and was meant to undermine the 
claim that William Kennedy Smith had raped 
Patricia Bowman. By answering Roy Black’s first 
question above (in lines 1–2) with a non type-
conforming response, Ann Mercer (in line 4) fails 
to confirm the presupposition contained within 
Black’s question – that Bowman had told Mercer 
that Smith was a rapist. Since this presupposition 
is crucial to Black’s establishment of the inconsist-
ent nature of Mercer’s behaviour (and, more gen-
erally, to Black’s strategy of calling into question 
Bowman’s accusation of rape), he forces Mercer 
to answer the question directly, that is, to produce 
a type-conforming response that leaves the presup-
position of his question intact. On the basis of 
examples such as this one (in contrast to those like 
Example 6 above where a witness is not forced to 
produce type-conforming responses), Ehrlich and 
Sidnell (2006: 655) conclude that the power of 
cross-examining lawyers does not derive solely 
from their ability to ask controlling and restrictive 
questions of witnesses, ‘but rather is crucially 
dependent on their ability to compel witnesses 
to produce type-conforming answers to these 
controlling and restrictive questions’.
25.3  CONSTRUCTING AND 
CONSTITUTING ‘FACTS’ 
IN THE COURTROOM
As noted above, the adversarial nature of the 
Anglo-American legal system means that various 
versions of events will emerge within the context 
of a trial as the prosecution and the defence each 
attempt to put forward an account of the events 
that will support their own clients’ interests. 
The trial, therefore, provides a good illustration of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
368
the role of language in constructing and constitut-
ing different kinds of social realities. Put some-
what differently, lawyers, through their questions, 
and witnesses, through their answers, do not 
simply describe events in a transparent and 
straightforward way: they are actively involved in 
shaping and ‘building the character’ of those 
events (Hutchby and Wooffitt 1998: 228). Duranti 
(1994: 4–5) elaborates on this view of language as 
constitutive of social realities:
Reality is routinely negotiated by participants in an 
interaction and “facts” are constituted differently 
according to the points of view of the actors 
involved, the norms evoked, and the processes 
activated within specific institutional settings 
(e.g. legal, medical, educational). This view does 
not imply that there is no reality outside of talk or 
that all interpretations are equally acceptable, but 
rather it holds that in institutional as well as in 
mundane settings various versions of reality are 
proposed, sustained or challenged precisely by the 
language that describes or sustains them and that 
such negotiations are not irrelevant linguistic 
games but potentially important social acts.
While the previous section of this chapter dis-
cussed the ways that both lawyers and witnesses 
can potentially control evidence through their 
questions and answers respectively, this section 
considers the ways that linguistic features of such 
questions and answers help to build the ‘facts’ of 
legal cases for the benefit of judges and juries. And, 
given the adversarial nature of courtroom dis-
course, it is perhaps not surprising that these ‘facts’ 
come to be built differently depending on the inter-
ests and points of view of the parties involved. In 
Examples 1 and 2 above, for instance, the lexical 
and syntactic features of the cross-examining law-
yer’s questions function to construct the events as 
consensual sex, whereas those of the complainant 
construct these same events as coerced sex. (e.g. So 
in fact was the fellatio, was that the last act of sex 
that was between the two of you before everything 
died down. versus At that point is when he grabbed 
my hair and wrapped it around his hands and 
pushed my face down between his legs and gave me 
an ultimatum.)
Lexical items and the construction 
of ‘facts’
That lexical items designating objects and events 
in a trial can constitute the ‘facts’ of cases differ-
ently is convincingly demonstrated by Danet 
(1980) in her analysis of a Massachusetts trial 
in which a Boston obstetrician–gynecologist 
was charged with manslaughter for performing 
a late abortion. Focusing on the ways that the 
prosecution and the defence named and catego-
rized the aborted entity, Danet illuminates the 
strategic significance of such choices. Because a 
conviction of manslaughter was dependent on 
proving that the doctor had ‘killed’ the foetus, the 
prosecution consistently used terms that presup-
posed the foetus to be a ‘living’ entity, terms such 
as baby, child and little baby boy. By contrast, the 
defence used terms such as foetus and product of 
conception as a way of communicating that the 
aborted entity had no independent life and there-
fore could not be ‘killed’.
Cotterill (2003) also examines the strategic use 
of lexical items within trial contexts; in particular, 
she analyses the ‘connotational and collocational 
properties of the lexical items selected’ by the 
prosecution and the defence in the opening state-
ments of the O. J. Simpson trial. Cotterill argues 
that lawyers exploit these features of lexical items 
in order to create for the jury ‘a particular concep-
tualization of the trial events and personalities’ 
(Cotterill, 2003: 67). Indeed, the prosecution 
in the O. J. Simpson case ‘conceptualized’ 
O. J. Simpson as a violent and aggressive 
husband, whose long history of abuse of Nicole 
Brown Simpson ‘culminated in the double murder 
of Nicole Brown and Ron Goldman in a jealous 
rage killing’ (Cotterill, 2003: 68). According to 
Cotterill, this particular portrayal of O. J. Simpson 
resulted from a series of ‘significant lexical 
choices’ in the prosecution’s opening statement. 
First, the word control was used 66 times in the 
opening statement, with O. J. Simpson as its agent 
and Nicole Brown Smith as its recipient. An 
examination of the collocational profile of the 
word control (i.e. a profile of words that typically 
co-occur with control) showed that the sorts of 
people who are typically agents of the verb are 
those with some official authority to do so. And, 
the kinds of entities that are typically the recipi-
ents of the verb are ‘things that represent a danger 
or a negative influence of some kind’ (Cotterill, 
2003: 72). Because O. J. Simpson was not in an 
official position to control Nicole Brown Simpson 
(i.e. husbands are no longer thought to be the 
masters of their household) and because Nicole 
Brown Simpson did not ‘represent a danger’ to 
Simpson, Cotterill argues that the prosecution 
used control in an atypical way (i.e. its colloca-
tions were atypical) and that this atypical use 
represented Simpson’s controlling behaviour as 
‘unjustified and unreasonable’ (p. 73). In keeping 
with this kind of representation of Simpson was 
a second term used by the prosecution – the 
violence perpetrated by Simpson was character-
ized as a cycle of violence. Cotterill’s examination 
of the collocational profile of cycle of violence 
showed that it is typically associated with 

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
369
violence that ‘increase[s] in severity over a long 
period of time’ (p. 77). Thus, by representing the 
events that led up to Nicole Brown Simpson’s 
murder as a long series of increasingly brutal acts 
of violence perpetrated by an over-controlling 
husband, the prosecution was able to construct the 
murder as the logical outcome of an escalating 
cycle of violence.
In response to the prosecution’s representation 
of O. J. Simpson, the defence, according to 
Cotterill, used lexical items that challenged both 
the systematic and the physical nature of Simpson’s 
violence. For example, the lexical item incident 
was used throughout the defence’s opening argu-
ment to refer to acts of violence committed by 
Simpson against Nicole Brown Simpson. Cotterill 
shows that a collocational profile of the word 
incident reveals its association with random and 
unrelated events. Unlike the prosecution, then, the 
defence represented Simpson’s acts of violence as 
sporadic events that were unconnected to one 
another as opposed to repeated events that consti-
tuted a pattern of abuse. In addition, ‘the theme of 
verbal debate rather than physical violence … was 
developed by [Johnny] Cochran through the use of 
verbal process nominalizations – dispute, discus-
sion and conversation’ (Cotterill, 2003: 83). 
A striking example of this kind of lexical strategy 
was evident when Cochran employed the lexical 
item discussion to refer to Simpson’s shouting of 
expletives during one of Nicole Brown Simpson’s 
911 calls. As Cotterill points out, terms such as 
discussion and conversation do not ‘involve any 
degree of violence or aggression’ (p. 87), and 
thereby contributed to the defence’s construction 
of the Simpson marriage as fundamentally 
non-violent.
Eades’ (2008) analysis of the Pinkenba case, 
discussed above, also involves a discussion of 
lexical items; indeed, Eades argues that there was 
a significant lexical struggle between the two 
defence lawyers and the three Aboriginal boys 
over how to label the central issue in the case, 
i.e. whether the boys were coerced by the police 
officers to enter the police cars or whether they 
did so voluntarily. (Recall that the police officers 
were charged with ‘unlawful deprivation of lib-
erty’ for allegedly abducting the three Australian 
Aboriginal boys.) For example, the boys used the 
verb told in describing the central speech act of 
the police officers (e.g. They told us to jump in the 
car), whereas the defence lawyers consistently 
substituted asked for told in their questions to the 
boys (e.g. Did you say you were asked to jump in 
the car – and you jumped in the car?). In a similar 
way, while the boys said that the police officers 
forced them to enter the police car, we see in the 
following example one of the defence lawyers 
downplaying the coercive nature of this charac-
terization:
 8.  DC2:   When you say forced –  all you mean 
is –  the police said so?
    David:  Yeh.
And, in line with what we have seen in Examples 1 
and 2 above, the cross-examining lawyer here 
(DC2) is successful in committing David (one of 
the boys) to this lexical reformulation. Eades 
labels these kinds of corrections and substitutions, 
‘lexical perversions’, as a way of capturing ‘the 
manipulative and sinister ways’ in which the 
defence lawyers performed such operations on the 
witnesses’ answers (Eades, 2008: 126). Indeed, 
Eades’ more general argument about this case is 
that the court legitimized the police officers’ 
actions, i.e. their abduction of the boys, and, in so 
doing, upheld and reinforced the control that the 
Australian state has exercised over Aboriginal 
peoples for more than 200 years (Eades, 2008: 3).
Syntactic choices and the 
construction of ‘facts’
Just as lexical items can help to build the ‘facts’ of 
legal cases, so can the syntactic features of law-
yers’ questions and witnesses’ answers. Cotterill 
(2003), for example, notes that the defence in the 
O. J. Simpson case reinforced the idea that 
Simpson’s violence towards his wife consisted of 
a few unrelated incidents by using syntactic struc-
tures, such as agentless passives, that minimized 
Simpson’s responsibility for the violence (e.g. He 
and his wife got into an altercation and she was 
struck on January 1st 1989). Ehrlich’s (2001) 
work on the language of a sexual assault case 
documents a similar phenomenon: the defendant 
in the case, charged with sexual assault within the 
context of a university tribunal and a criminal 
trial, used a variety of syntactic constructions that 
obscured his agency vis-à-vis the acts of violence 
he allegedly committed against the two complain-
ants. These included agentless passives (e.g. all 
our clothes at one point were taken off ) and unac-
cusative constructions (e.g. the sexual activity 
started escalating even further). The defendant’s 
representatives also employed structures in their 
questions that de-emphasized and obscured the 
defendant’s agency, as can be seen in Example 1 
above (your shirt came off and fondling), and in 
the following question: So you do admit that you 
said nothing to him at that point about the inser-
tion of his finger in the vagina? The nominaliza-
tion insertion allows for the deletion of the 
defendant as the agent of this action.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
370
Coherence and the construction 
of ‘facts’
Because the examples of lexical and syntactic 
features discussed above are necessarily decon-
textualized for the purposes of presentation, it 
may be difficult to perceive the cumulative effect 
of a series of lexical items and/or a series of syn-
tactic structures in conveying a certain version of 
events. Matoesian’s (2001) work on the William 
Kennedy Smith trial is useful in this respect as he 
specifically analyses what happens when a series 
of similar syntactic structures are repeated over an 
extended piece of talk.
William Kennedy Smith, the nephew of the late 
President John Kennedy, the late Senator Robert 
Kennedy and Senator Edward Kennedy, was 
charged with, and subsequently acquitted of, 
simple battery (unwanted touching) and second-
degree sexual battery (rape without the use of a 
weapon) in the state of Florida in 1991. A striking 
feature of this case was the jury’s unanimous 
acquittal of Kennedy Smith (on both counts) 
within the first five minutes of its deliberations. As 
noted above, a major theme in Matoesian’s analy-
sis of this trial involves the inconsistencies in 
‘logic’ created by the defence attorney, Roy Black, 
in his cross-examination of the complainant, 
Patricia Bowman, and her primary witness, Ann 
Mercer. While Matoesian notes that the exposing 
of inconsistencies in witness testimony is a 
generic trial practice designed to undermine the 
credibility of witnesses, in this particular case he 
argues that the ‘logical’ standard against which the 
two women’s testimonies were measured – and 
rendered inconsistent – was not a gender-neutral 
standard, but rather a male standard of sexuality: 
what he terms ‘the patriarchal logic of sexual 
rationality’. In Example 9 below, Matoesian 
(2001: 46) argues that Roy Black’s (RB) questions 
to Patricia Bowman (PB) functioned to create an 
inconsistency ‘between the victim’s claim of 
having been raped and her actions with the 
defendant before the alleged incident’ and thereby 
helped to undermine the charges that Kennedy 
Smith had raped Patricia Bowman.
 9.  1 RB:  And you were interested in him as a 
person.
   (0.9)
    2 PB:  He seemed like a nice person.
   (0.5)
    3 RB:  Interested enough that tuh- (0.5) to 
give him a ride home.
   (0.9)
    4 PB:  I saw no-(.) no problem with giving him 
a ride home as I stated because it was
    5     up the street it wasn’t out of my way (.) he 
hadn’t tou::ched me (.) I felt no threats
   6    from him and I assumed that there 
would be security at the home.
   (0.5)
    7 RB:  You were interested enough (.) that 
you were ho:::ping that he would ask 
for
    8    your pho::ne number.
   (0.7)
    9  PB:  That was later.
   (0.7)
   10 RB:  Interested enough (.) tha:t when he 
said to come into the hou::se you 
went 
   11   into the hou::se with him.
    (1.6)
   12 PB:  I (woul-) it wasn’t necessarily an inter-
est with William (.) it was an interest 
in
   13    the house. (0.6)
   14  RB:  Interested enough that uh:: at some-
time during that period of time you took
    15    off your panty hose?
    (1.2)
   16  PB:  I still don’t know how my panty hose 
came off.
In this excerpt, Roy Black puts forward a number 
of propositions in his questions that are confirmed 
by Patricia Bowman: that she gave the defendant 
a ride home, that she went into the house with 
him, that she took off her panty hose and that she 
hoped he would ask for her telephone number. 
And, as Matoesian (2001: 47) points out, when 
these propositions were brought together, Patricia 
Bowman’s actions began to look more like precur-
sors to a consensual sexual relationship than to the 
crime of rape. For Matoesian, however, it was 
not just the propositional content of a series of 
questions like the ones above that functioned to 
construct Patricia Bowman’s testimony as incon-
sistent, it was also the coherence created by their 
juxtaposition.
The defence attorney, Roy Black, had impres-
sive oratorical skills and, according to Matoesian, 
employed these skills to amplify and intensify the 
‘inconsistencies’ in the complainant’s testimony. 
More specifically, Black foregrounded the refer-
ential content of his questions (and his talk, more 
generally) by using ‘creative and improvisational 
poetic structures’ (Matoesian 2001: 33), such 
as structural repetition and parallelism. In 
Example 9, for example, an element of the main 
clause of line 1 – interested – is incorporated into 
the syntactic frame, interested enough plus 
complementizer, and then this syntactic frame is 
repeated four times (in lines 3, 7–8, 10–11 and 
14–15), each time with a different complement 
clause. In this way, a semantic link is created 
between the referential content of the complement 

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
371
clauses that are embedded within the syntactic 
frame, interested enough plus complementizer. As 
Matoesian says, ‘incremental repetition … unifies 
and organizes otherwise disparate particulars of 
evidence into a coherent, gestalt-like pattern of 
persuasive parallelism’ (Matoesian 2001: 57). 
That is, the syntactic repetition in Example 9 
functions to create a link among a series of ‘facts’ 
that might not otherwise appear connected; and, 
once this link is created, the linked ‘facts’ of 
the case seem more compatible with consensual 
sex than with the crime of rape. For Matoesian, 
then, this particular construction of events is 
not just the result of lexical and syntactic features 
of Roy Black’s questions, but also a result of 
the coherence created when certain of these 
features are repeated over extended sequences 
of talk.
25.4  DETERMINING THE ‘OFFICIAL’ 
STORY: POWER AND IDEOLOGY
Given the presence of competing and contradic-
tory ‘facts’ within the courtroom, Cotterill (2003: 
25) has argued that ‘the name often given to the 
jury in adversarial trial procedure, that of the 
“factfinder”, is actually something of a misno-
mer’. For Cotterill, juries do not determine the 
facts, rather they ‘adjudicate between more and 
less plausible narrative accounts’. Capps and Ochs 
(1995: 21) make similar observations about 
adjudicators in trials:
On the basis of divergent versions of events, jury 
members construct a narrative that is plausible and 
coherent in their eyes, but the truth is beyond their 
reach. In this sense, rendering a verdict is analo-
gous not to ascertaining the facts but to determin-
ing an official story.
So, if the truth and the facts are ‘beyond the reach’ 
of juries, and adjudicators more generally, what 
kind of criteria are used in determining ‘official 
stories’? Capps and Ochs (1995: 20) suggest that, 
while the internal consistency and external cor-
roboration of stories told in the courtroom are 
important to their believability,8 of equal impor-
tance is the ‘rhetorical prowess’ of the witnesses and 
lawyers who tell the stories. Matoesian’s (2001) 
analysis of Roy Black’s ‘rhetorical prowess’ in the 
William Kennedy Smith trial certainly supports 
this idea. According to Matoesian (2001: 31), the 
testimonies of Patricia Bowman and Ann Mercer 
were not ‘that inconsistent’; rather, ‘Black knew 
how to create inconsistency through powerful and 
affective forms of language, much more so than 
prosecutor Lasch’ (emphasis in original).
But, Black’s success was not solely the result of 
his impressive oratorical skills. According to 
Matoesian (2001: 31), ‘persuasive forms of 
language’ and ideology worked together to create 
an interpretive lens ‘through which jurors 
evaluate[d] legal issues such as consent, coercion, 
and violence’. In particular, when Black success-
fully created inconsistencies in the testimony of 
Bowman and Mercer, he did so by measuring their 
behaviour against ‘the expectations of patriarchal 
ideology governing victim identity’. For example, 
through the lens of ‘patriarchal ideology’, the 
actions of Patricia Bowman, as represented in 
Example 9, were inconsistent with her claim that 
she was a victim of rape.
The idea that power and ideology are at play 
when adjudicators decide between conflicting 
stories in the courtroom is also evident in the work 
of Ehrlich (2001) and Eades (2008). Ehrlich 
(2001) notes that the judge in the Canadian sexual 
assault case described above seemed to authorize 
and legitimize the representations of the defendant 
(put forward by the defendant and his representa-
tives) as a non-agent of sexual aggression. 
Specifically, the judge invoked the ‘male sexual 
drive’ discourse9 (Hollway, 1989) in acquitting the 
defendant on one count of sexual assault, citing 
hormones as responsible for men’s sexual aggres-
sion. While Ehrlich does not make the strong 
claim that the defendant’s representation of him-
self as a non-agent of a sexual aggression ‘caused’ 
the judge to rule in the way that he did, she does 
claim that the defendant and his defence put 
forward a version of events that was consistent 
with dominant understandings of male sexuality 
and violence against women and thus seemed to 
resonate with the adjudicator.
In the same way that Matoesian’s and Ehrlich’s 
analyses elucidate the workings of gendered 
ideologies in the courtroom, Eades’ analysis of the 
Pinkenba case shows how ideologies of race and 
ethnicity can be strategically invoked by lawyers. 
The lawyers defending the police officers con-
structed the Aboriginal boys, not as victims of 
police abuse who were coerced into entering 
police cars, but as lying criminals who were ‘the 
legitimate subject of removal by police, even 
when they [had] not committed any offence’ 
(Eades, 2008: 24). And, given the long history of 
racism against Aboriginal peoples in Australia, it 
is fair to say that these ideas resonated in a power-
ful way with those adjudicating the case.
25.5  CONCLUSION
I began this chapter by reporting on early 
research in the area of courtroom discourse that 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
372
investigated (1) the relationship between social 
power and the linguistic variables used by court-
room witnesses and (2) the effect of such variables 
on witnesses’ ability to access justice. In closing 
this chapter, I have returned to a similar theme – 
how power and ideology influence the way that 
juries and judges adjudicate among conflicting 
narratives that emerge within the courtroom. One 
of the accomplishments of this chapter, then, has 
been to demonstrate the continuities between 
early work in the field and more recent work, in 
spite of the difference in sociolinguistic methods. 
As we have seen, early work (e.g. O’Barr, 1982; 
Wodak, 1985) was influenced by variationist 
sociolinguistics and thus focused on the standard 
or non-standard nature of witnesses’ linguistic 
variables, whereas more recent work (e.g. Eades, 
2008; Ehrlich, 2001; Matoesian, 2001) has been 
influenced by critical approaches to discourse 
analysis and thus has focused on the ideological 
nature of narratives produced in the courtroom. 
What unifies this work is the concern with varia-
tion in courtroom linguistic practices and the 
effect of such variation on the decision-making of 
judges and juries. Conley and O’Barr (1998) have 
argued that language and the law scholars need to 
move beyond the mere description of linguistic 
variation in the legal system in order to understand 
how language and discourse is consequential for 
the law. This chapter has attempted to show the 
range of linguistic phenomena that can have social 
consequences within the legal system.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I thank Ruth Wodak for her very helpful com-
ments on an earlier version of this chapter. This 
research was supported, in part, by a Standard 
Research Grant from the Social Sciences and 
Humanities Research Council of Canada, Grant 
#410-2006-0647.
NOTES
1 The most highly-publicized finding of the 
Duke University’s Law and Language Project, led by 
William O’Barr, concerned the use of ‘powerful’ and 
‘powerless’ speech styles: speech styles associated 
with social power were judged by mock jurors to 
be more believable, more credible, and more 
intelligent than speech styles associated with social 
powerlessness.
2 While investigations of courtroom discourse 
have generally acknowledged that the trial is a 
‘complex genre’ (Heffer, 2005), consisting of a 
number of ‘trial phases’, this chapter, like the major-
ity of studies of courtroom discourse, will focus on 
the evidential phase of the trial (Cotterill, 2003: 93), 
i.e. the examination and the cross-examination of 
witnesses, and the opening and closing arguments 
that frame the examination of witnesses. Cotterill 
(2003: 93) identifies the three major stages of the 
trial as:
the preliminary phase, involving jury selection 
questionnaires and voir dire interviews; the evi-
dential phase, consisting of the examination 
and cross-examination of witnesses, framed by 
the opening and closing arguments; and finally 
the judicial phase, where the judge and jury 
take centre stage, in the adjudicatory portion of 
the trial, including the delivery of jury instruc-
tions and the deliberation process, followed by 
the verdict and the sentencing or release of the 
defendant.
For examples of work that deals with the judicial 
phase of the trial, specifically, judicial rulings, see 
Solan (1993) and Philips (1998).
3 Technically, only witness testimony (as opposed 
to the talk of lawyers) constitutes evidence in a trial. 
However, as this chapter demonstrates, lawyers’ 
questions can function to shape and control the way 
this evidence comes to be expressed. 
4 Atkinson and Drew (1979: 136) note that wit-
nesses often display their recognition that a series of 
questions is leading to a ‘blame allocation’ by pro-
ducing ‘justification/excuse components in answers’ 
prematurely, i.e. before ‘blame allocations’ are actu-
ally produced by lawyers. 
5 On a very superficial level, trials involve dia-
logue, the examination and cross-examination of 
witnesses by lawyers, and monologue, the opening 
and closing arguments of lawyers. However, given 
that these modes of speech are produced for the 
benefit of adjudicators – judges and/or juries – trial 
talk is more accurately characterized as multiparty in 
its structure (Cotterill, 2003).
6 Unaccusative constructions are intransitive verbs 
that take as their grammatical subjects non-agents 
(i.e. non-causers) of the actions or processes desig-
nated by the intransitive verbs.
7 Cotterill (2003) has argued that it is problematic 
to treat witnesses as a homogeneous group in rela-
tion to claims about the interactional asymmetry 
between witnesses and lawyers. Indeed, a number of 
researchers have shown that the interaction between 
expert witnesses and lawyers is not as asymmetrical 
as has been claimed for the interaction between 
lay witnesses and lawyers (e.g. Cotterill, 2003; 
Matoesian, 2001; Stygall, 2001).
8 Early work on this issue (i.e. Bennett and 
Feldman, 1981) concluded that a well-constructed 

COURTROOM DISCOURSE
373
story may be more important to jurors’ assessments 
of plausibility than the existence of evidence.
9 This discourse constructs male sexuality as 
driven by a powerful biological imperative such that 
women become responsible for controlling men’s 
‘uncontrollable’ sexual urges.
REFERENCES
Atkinson, J. M. and Drew, P. (1979) Order in Court. Atlantic 
Highlands, NJ: Highlands Humanities Press.
Barry, A. (1991) ‘Narrative style and witness testimony’, 
Journal of Narrative and Life History, 1: 281–93.
Bennett, L. and Feldman, M.S. (1981) Reconstructing Reality 
in the Courtroom. London: Tavistock.
Capps, L. and Ochs, E. (1995) Constructing Panic: The 
Discourse of Agoraphobia. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Conley, J. M. and O’Barr, W. M. (1990) Rules versus relation-
ships. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Conley, J. M. and O’Barr, W. M. (1998) Just Words: Law, 
Language and Power. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press.
Conley, J. M., O’Barr, W. M. and Lind, E. A. (1978) ‘The power 
of language: presentational styles in the courtroom’, Duke 
Law Journal, 78: 1375–99.
Cotterill, J. (2003) Language and Power in Court: A Linguistic 
Analysis of the O. J. Simpson trial. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Danet, B. (1980) ‘”Baby” or “fetus”?: language and the 
construction of reality in a manslaughter trial’, Semiotica, 
32: 187–219.
Danet, B., Hoffman, K., Kermish, N., Rafn, H. and Stayman, D. 
(1980) ‘An ethnography of questioning’, in R. Shuy 
and A. Shnukal (eds), Language Use and the Uses of 
Language. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
pp. 222–34.
Drew, P. (1992) ‘Contested evidence in courtroom 
examination: the case of a trial for rape’, in P. Drew and 
J. Heritage (eds), Talk at Work: Interaction in Institutional 
Settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 470–520.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (eds) (1992) ‘Analyzing talk at work: 
an introduction’, in Talk at work: interaction in institutional 
settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 3–65.
Duranti, A. (1994) From Grammar to Politics: Linguistic 
Anthropology in a Western Samoan Village. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Eades, D. (2000) ‘I don’t think it’s an answer to the question: 
silencing Aboriginal witnesses in court’, Language in 
Society, 29: 161–95.
Eades, D. (2008) Courtroom Talk and Neocolonial Control. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual 
Consent. London: Routledge.
Ehrlich, S. and Sidnell, J. (2006) ‘“I think that’s not an 
assumption you ought to make”: challenging presupposi-
tions in inquiry testimony’, Language in Society, 2006: 
655–76.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse 
analysis’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Discourse as Social 
Interaction. London: Sage. pp. 258–84.
Galatolo, R. and Drew, P. (2006) ‘Narrative expansions as 
defensive practices in courtroom testimony’, Text and Talk, 
26: 661–98.
Gibbons, J. (2003) Forensic Linguistics: An Introduction to 
Language in the Justice System. Oxford: Blackwell.
Green, G. (1996) Pragmatics and Natural Language 
Understanding. 2nd edn. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Harris, S. (1984) ‘Questions as a mode of control in magis-
trates’ courts’, International Journal of Sociology of 
Language, 49: 5–28.
Heffer, C. (2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided 
Analysis of Legal-Lay Discourse. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Hollway, W. (1989) Subjectivity and Method in Psychology: 
Gender, Meaning and Science. London: Sage.
Hutchby, I. and Wooffitt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis. 
Oxford: Polity Press.
Levinson, S. (1983) Pragmatics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Luchjenbroers, J. and Aldridge, M. (2007) ‘Conceptual manip-
ulation by metaphors and frames: dealing with rape victims 
in legal discourse’, Text and Talk, 27: 339–59.
Lyons, J. (1977) Semantics. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Maley, Y. (1994) ‘The language of the law’, in J. Gibbons 
(ed.), Language and the Law. London: Longman. 
pp. 11–50.
Matoesian, G. (2001) Law and the Language of Identity: 
Discourse in the William Kennedy Rape Trial. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Matoesian, G. (2005) ‘Review of J. Cotterill, Language and 
Power in Court: A Linguistic Analysis of the O. J. Simpson 
Trial ’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9: 619–22.
O'Barr, W. M. and Atkins, B. K. (1980) ’”Women's language” 
or “powerless language”?' in S. McConnell-Ginet, 
R. Borker, and N. Furman (eds.), Women in Language and 
Society. New York: Praeger. pp. 193–210.
O’Barr, W. M. (1982) Linguistic Evidence: Language, Power 
and Strategy in the Courtroom. New York: Academic Press.
Philips, S. (1987) ‘The social organization of questions and 
answers in courtroom discourse’, in L. Kedar (ed.), Power 
Through Discourse. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 83–113.
Philips, S. (1998) Ideology in the Language of Judges. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Raymond, G. (2003) ‘Grammar and social organization: yes/no 
type interrogatives and the structure of responding’, 
American Sociological Review, 68: 939–66.
Schegloff, E. A. (2007) Sequence Organization in Interaction. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Solan, L. M. (1993) The Language of Judges. Chicago: 
Chicago University Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
374
Stygall, G. (2001) ‘A different class of witnesses: experts in the 
courtroom’, Discourse Studies, 3: 327–49.
Walker, A. G. (1987) ‘Linguistic manipulation, power and the 
legal setting’, in L. Kedar (ed.), Power Through Discourse. 
Norwood, NJ: Ablex. pp. 57–80.
Wodak, R. (1981) ‘Discourse analysis and courtroom interac-
tion’, Discourse Processes, 3: 369–80.
Wodak, R. (1985) ‘The interaction between judge and 
defendant’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Handbook of 
Discourse Analysis, Vol. 4. New York: Academic Press. 
pp. 181–91.
Woodbury, H. (1984) ‘The strategic use of questions in court’, 
Semiotica, 48: 197–228.

26
The magical power of talk derives from the fact 
that it is, in every instance, the manifestation of a 
systematic resource, a resource which has been 
built up through acts of conversation in the first 
place, and which goes on being modified in each 
of us as we talk our way through life.
Halliday (1984: 32)
26.1 INTRODUCTION
Conversation is an all-pervasive phenomenon 
found in all societies. It must have emerged early 
in human history as an important mode of interac-
tion, creating and sustaining interpersonal rela-
tions in social groups and societies (see e.g. 
Dunbar, 1996) and giving our ancestors the advan-
tage of a ‘collective’ brain and collective learning 
(cf. Christian, 2004: 146).
Conversation is a critical site for the mainte-
nance and modification of our social identities: it 
both creates and reflects our social worlds. It plays 
a key role in many of the key institutions of any 
society, including the core institutions of family, 
friendship, recreation and mateship in workplaces. 
Since conversation is so central to the operations 
of any society, the analysis of conversation is 
central to sociolinguistics. The study of conversa-
tion is our most important window on the relation-
ship between language (and other accompanying 
semiotic systems) and the social system of any 
society.
In conversation, the interactants taking part 
construe their experiences, unselfconsciously 
constructing commonsense understandings of the 
world around them and inside them, often reach-
ing consensus and sometimes identifying areas of 
conflict but always negotiating their understand-
ings. Interpersonally, conversation is the primary 
site where people take on roles as interactants to 
enact their social values and relationships. 
Textually, it is where interactants collaborate in 
constructing a shareable and shared semiotic 
reality. And as Berger and Luckman (1966: 172–3) 
pointed out many years ago, it is precisely because 
of the essential spontaneity and informality of 
conversation that it can do the work it does.
In the life of an individual, conversation 
emerges very early as a child learns how to mean 
(see Halliday, 1975, 1984, 2004); researchers have 
even identified very early exchanges of attention 
between mother and child (e.g. Trevarthen, 1979, 
1987) – what Bateson (e.g. 1979) has called 
‘proto-conversation’. The steps leading from early 
interaction to the exchange of meaning in true 
dialogue have been documented, described and 
theorized by Halliday (1984).
Thus the role conversation plays in our forma-
tion as social beings starts from when we are very 
young. It is the form of language to which we are 
all first exposed – it is the prototypical kind of 
Analysing Conversation
C h r i s t i a n  M . I . M .  M a t t h i e s s e n 
a n d  D i a n a  S l a d e

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
376
language use and so it provides a gateway into 
language. But how do we characterize conversa-
tion and how do we study it? The general answer 
is that conversation is a very complex phenome-
non involving many strands of patterned activity, 
within different orders of system (see. Figure 26.3). 
Consequently, conversation can – and must – be 
investigated from different angles if we are to 
arrive at a well-rounded understanding of what 
it is like.
In this chapter we will first describe what we 
mean by conversation, and then turn to an outline 
of the different approaches to the analysis of con-
versation. The final section will demonstrate some 
analytical tools for describing conversation.
26.2  TYPES OF CONVERSATION
While technical uses of the term ‘conversation’ 
are related to the everyday sense of conversation, 
they differ in where they draw the boundaries and 
how they relate ‘conversation’ to other kinds of 
text. To avoid confusion and to emphasize the 
scope of the phenomenon they study, researchers 
within the originally sociological framework 
for the analysis of conversation known as 
conversation analysis have used the term ‘talk-
in-interaction’ (see e.g. Schegloff, 1988; Psathas, 
1995; Hutchby and Wooffitt, 1998). For the 
purposes of our discussion of approaches to the 
analysis of conversation, we will use the term 
‘conversation’ to denote dialogic text where the 
control of turn-taking is relatively low, thus 
contrasting it with more formal dialogues where 
turn-taking is more controlled or pre-allocated 
(see e.g. Halliday and Plum 1983). Figure 26.1 
below locates conversation as a type of dialogic 
text, where the there is little or no formal turn 
assignment.
Using turn control as one of the criteria, we can 
describe conversation as follows (cf. Thornbury 
and Slade, 2006: 25):
… dialogue (i.e. interactive text) between two or 
more people with a high degree of freedom in 
turn allocation – spontaneous (rather than pre-
planned), unfolding in real time, typically with an 
orientation towards interpersonal meaning and 
often involving interactants with symmetrical 
rights.
As outlined in Figure 26.1, the continuum of con-
versations ranges from the most casual of spoken 
interactions – chatting with a friend at coffee time 
at work, gossiping at a dinner party or telling 
anecdotes at a family gathering – to what we have 
called task conversations and chatting during a 
service encounter.1 These are all conversations 
that are informal, dialogic and where turn-taking 
is not pre-allocated (as opposed to for example, a 
job interview, a lecture, a debate). Conversations 
then are primarily concerned with the interper-
sonal – the creation and maintenance of social 
relationships. Conversations can operate in many 
institutional settings: before, after and in the 
middle of lectures at university; during informal 
meetings at work; an informal chat with the doctor 
that is interspersed with medical and pragmatic 
interaction. Task (-oriented) conversations are 
those which enable two or more people to under-
take some joint activity such as moving a heavy 
piece of furniture or cooking a meal. Conversation 
is primarily spoken (or signed in the case of 
sign language of deaf communities) but also, 
increasingly, in forms of written discourse, such 
as online chat:
1 It includes conversation carried out in any 
medium – spoken, written or signed, or some 
mixture of these, and through any channel – face-
to-face, telephonic, online chat and so on. There 
are tendencies for preferred combinations, but it is 
important to recognize that medium and channel 
are, in principle, independently-variable parame-
ters. With respect to channel, there has been a 
recent dramatic expansion of the range of conver-
sation – technology has paved the way for new 
modes of conversation such as email exchanges, 
electronic chat (written, audio, or audio and 
video), and text messages by mobile phones. These 
developments are interesting from a social point of 
view since they have fairly far-reaching implica-
tions for the formation and maintenance of social 
groups and communities.
2 It Does not restrict the nature or the number 
of the interactants involved in a conversation. 
There can be anywhere from two interactants to a 
large group of interactants. (Sometimes the 
term ‘multilogue’ is used to designate dialogues, 
including conversations, involving more than two 
interactants.)
3 It is not restricted in terms of the field of dis-
course; we include different kinds of activity such 
as sharing, joint doing, recommending, and we 
have not imposed any restrictions in terms of the 
topic or subject matter of conversation. (Some 
scholars would restrict conversation in terms 
of field, e.g. excluding task-oriented dialogue; 
cf. e.g. Ruhlemann, 2007.)
In the Section 26.3 we outline the different 
approaches to the analysis of conversation, and in 
Section 26.4 we demonstrate a range of analytical 
tools for describing and focusing on different 
aspects of conversation.

text
(spoken, written, signed)
dialogue
conversational
casual conversation
task conversation
consultation
interview
...
...
disputation
debate
discussion (e.g. panel)
service encounter
...
gossip
anecdote
opinion
chat
chunk
pre-allocated
low
high
TURN FREEDOM
Monologue
DEGREE OF
INTERACTION
high interaction
low interaction
Figure 26.1 Conversation as a kind of dialogic text.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
378
26.3  DIFFERENT APPROACHES TO 
ANALYSING CONVERSATION
Ways of characterizing approaches
There are many ways of characterizing approaches 
to the analysis of conversation. For example, it is 
possible to survey such approaches in disciplinary 
terms, taking note of work in linguistics, anthro-
pology, sociology and social psychology, 
philosophy and artificial intelligence (AI), human-
computer interaction (HCI) and natural language 
processing (NLP). This can be helpful in identify-
ing relevant work that might otherwise be over-
looked simply because of the boundaries between 
disciplines. For example, while speech act theory 
was first proposed and developed in philosophy, it 
has now been incorporated in work in linguistics 
and also in AI/HCI/NLP, and most of the work 
involving the theory that is relevant to sociolin-
guistics is arguably done within this cluster of 
related disciplines. Similarly, while conversation 
analysis was pioneered in sociology, it has been 
taken up in linguistics. Therefore it is more 
helpful to develop a map of approaches to the 
analysis of discourse based on the orientation 
towards phenomena in discourse, regardless of 
the discipline in which these phenomena are 
investigated.
For present purposes, we have selected two fac-
tors, shown in Figure 26.2: on the one hand, 
approaches to the analysis of conversation may 
focus on individuals or on persons (social agents) 
operating in groups; (ii) on the other hand, 
approaches to the analysis of conversation may 
interpret conversation in social terms – conversa-
tion as a form of interpersonal behaviour – in the 
first instance, or in semiotic terms – conversation 
as exchange of meaning (or of knowledge, in a 
more cognitive frame of interpretation).
Taking these two factors into consideration, 
we can locate major approaches to conversation, 
as shown in Figure 26.2. A number of approaches 
focus on the investigation of conversation in terms 
of individuals and what they intend and know – 
speech act theory and various types of dialogue 
modelling in AI/HCI/NLP. Other approaches 
focus on persons in social groups, interpreting 
conversation as an ongoing exchange of mean-
ing – systemic functional linguistics (SFL), the 
Birmingham school, critical discourse Analysis. 
Yet other approaches also focus on persons in 
social groups, but tend to interpret conversation as 
interpersonal behaviour rather than as exchange 
of meaning – conversation analysis, interactive 
sociolinguistics.
Some of the approaches shown in Figure 26.2 
have developed as frameworks dedicated to the 
study of conversation, e.g. speech act theory and 
conversation analysis. In contrast, other approaches 
have developed as part of a general theory of 
language, e.g. systemic functional linguistics and 
the closely related Birmingham school. Not sur-
prisingly, these other approaches tend to come 
from linguistics, and include a technical account 
of intonation in conversation.
In addition to the two factors we have just men-
tioned, there are other factors that are important in 
a comprehensive account of approaches to the 
study of conversation. We will mention just one of 
them. This is the question of how conversation is 
approached, in terms of system and text. Like any 
other linguistic phenomenon, conversation can be 
observed as instance – as spoken, written or 
signed texts unfolding in particular contexts; and 
conversation can be described and theorized as 
potential – as the system that lies behind such 
discursive instances. Here classical speech act 
theory and conversation analysis represent a sharp 
contrast. speech act theory focused on the system, 
and researchers probed it by constructing exam-
ples. In contrast, CA focused on the instance, and 
researchers worked with corpora of situated 
discourse, basing their generalizations on exam-
ples found in these corpora. In this respect, both 
differ from SFL, which has been concerned with 
the relationship between system and text. Here 
system and text are modelled as the outer poles of 
a cline – the cline of instantiation – and research-
ers have shunted between these two poles in their 
account of conversation and also identified inter-
mediate patterns associated with particular institu-
tional settings (e.g. conversation during tea breaks 
in the workplace, conversation during dinners 
among close friends).
In this chapter we will review two approaches, 
CA and SFL, to the analysis of conversation that 
can be seen as complementary in a socially-
oriented analysis of conversation. These two 
approaches are both concerned specifically with 
the social nature of conversation, analysing the 
relationship between language and its context of 
use; and each has engaged in the analysis of natu-
rally-occurring data. Coming from sociology and 
linguistics, respectively, they both went through 
formative stages in the 1960s and 1970s and have 
continued to flourish since then. During the 
formative period, the Atlantic still constituted a 
considerable divide between American (CA) and 
British (SFL) efforts. Thus, when Coulthard and 
Sinclair worked out the framework reported on in 
Sinclair and Coulthard (1975), the early CA work 
was still not known,2 so what we have are two 
fairly independent lines of development. It is 
therefore important that both these approaches 
focus on text as well as lexical and grammatical 
features of language, and share a concern with 

Speech Act Theory,
Dialogue Modelling in AI
(e.g. Dialogue Game Theory)
Systemic Functional Linguistics [+
ontogensis] & Birmingham School;
Critical Discourse Analysis
Interactional Sociolinguistics
Conversation Analysis
persons in groups
conversation
oriented towards:
conversation
interpreted as:
coverage: account of
conversation as
stand-alone theory
of conversation
coverage: account of
conversation as part of
general multi-stratal
theory of language
(including intonation)
semiotic
  (meaning, knowing)
social
  (behaving)
individuals
Figure 26.2 Approaches to the study of conversation differentiated in terms of (i) orientation and (ii) level of interpretation.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
380
describing interaction and the dynamic unfolding 
of talk. It is also interesting to note that both these 
approaches developed during a time when they 
had to struggle on the margins of the disciplines 
that they emerged from, and both have to a certain 
extent been more warmly welcomed in other 
disciplines. Unlike CA, SFL has had the added 
challenge of developing outside the USA during 
a period when US scholarship has tended to 
dominate the world.
In Section 26.4 we outline some analytical 
techniques for describing conversation, drawn 
from aspects of these three different approaches.
Conversation analysis: a sociological 
approach to the analysis of 
conversation
Background to development of 
conversation analysis
Conversational analysis was stimulated by the 
sociological initiatives of Garfinkel (1967)3 and 
Goffman (e.g. 1981), and developed into a distinc-
tive field of enquiry by Sacks (e.g. Sacks, 1972a, 
1972b, 1974, 1978, 1992). Like Garfinkel’s 
ethnomethodology, it was developed partly as 
reaction against the mainstream macro sociology 
that was current at the time; and CA researchers 
have been very careful to work only with catego-
ries that emerge from the study of conversation 
and which interactants can be shown to orient 
towards. Sacks also worked in collaboration with 
Schegloff and Jefferson to develop this field of 
sociological enquiry further (Schegloff and Sacks, 
1973, Jefferson, Sacks and Schegloff, 1987; 
Schegloff, 2006; Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson, 
1974). More recently, there has been a good 
deal of work devoted to linking CA to features 
of grammar as interpreted by West-Coast 
Functionalists (see e.g. Ochs, Schegloff and 
Thompson, 1996), and on applications involving 
CA work (see e.g. Hutchby and Wooffitt, 1998: 
Part III; McHoul and Rapley, 2001).
CA is a distinctive research paradigm located 
within the wider field of enquiry of ethnomethod-
ology, the focus of which, according to Heritage 
(1989: 21), is:
…the study of the common-sense reasoning skills 
and abilities through which the ordinary members 
of a culture produce and recognise intelligible 
courses of action.
CA is based on the insight that it is in and through 
conversation that most of our routine everyday 
activities are accomplished. It also argues that it 
is through more formal or ‘institutional talk in 
interaction’ (e.g. Schegloff, 1987) that the institu-
tional world is constructed and significant 
decisions are made. In either case, naturally-
occurring texts constitute the only real form 
of data.
A primary concern is to explain how it is that 
everyday talk makes sense: how it is for example 
that, normally, only one person speaks at a time, 
and that speakers know when to change turns, 
when to initiate new topics, when it is appropriate 
to interrupt or to complete another’s utterance, 
and recognize the signals that speakers use to 
indicate they want to close the conversation.
CA research has focused, therefore, on the 
micro-interactional features of conversation:4 the 
turn-taking mechanisms we use in conversation; 
how speakers initiate, shift and close topics 
(referred to as topic management); and how it is 
that conversations can keep going indefinitely and 
continue to make sense.5 We will look briefly at 
each of these areas in turn.
Turn-taking
Sacks (1974) describes how turn-taking works in 
English. The current speaker can either select the 
next speaker by, for example, naming them, look-
ing at them, directing a question to them – or the 
next speaker can self-select, with many possible 
strategies, such as ‘that reminds me of’ or ‘have 
you heard what Bron did yesterday’.
In trying to explain how it is that speakers keep 
taking turns, Sacks (1974) argued that it is because 
interactants in the conversation recognize points 
of potential speaker change, these being indicated 
by linguistic units which he calls turn construc-
tional units (TCUs). A TCU is the minimal unit 
that can constitute one complete turn of talk. For 
example:6
+A: Let‘s go to the cinema tonight?
+B: No, I have to finish my assignment
In this invented example, each of these turns is a 
TCU. However, in the following example, there 
are two TCU within one speaker turn:
 + A:  Let's go to the cinema tonight? We could 
have dinner beforehand
Here each utterance could constitute a complete 
turn in its own right so there are two TCUs.
The turn-constructional unit is a central con-
cept in the CA explanation of how it is that in 
conversation:
 (i) only one speaker speaks at a time
 (ii)  speaker change recurs (Sacks, Schegloff and 
Jefferson, 1974: 700)

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
381
It is at the end of the TCU that interactants in 
conversation recognize points of potential speaker 
change. One of the problems with using the TCU 
as the basic descriptive unit of conversational 
interaction is that it is not clear how to identify the 
boundaries of a TCU, and there have been various 
proposals put forward (cf. Ford and Thompson, 
1996).
CA researchers are also interested in how, at 
the end of the TCU, interactants determine who 
the next speaker will be. There are two possibili-
ties: the first is that the current speaker selects 
the person who is to be the next speaker, and the 
second possibility is that the next speaker self-
selects. Sacks, Schegloff and Jefferson (1974) 
argue that this needs to be negotiated at every turn 
and, in fact, in conversation, interactants avoid 
the possibility of a lapse – the possibility of 
no-one speaking. Thus, central to CA’s modelling 
of conversation, is the existence of a turn-taking 
mechanism, having the function of assigning turns 
to interactants in conversation.
Adjacency pairs
Another significant contribution of CA is the con-
cept of the adjacency pair (cf. Taylor and Cameron, 
1987). An adjacency pair is composed of two 
turns produced by different speakers which 
are placed adjacently. Schegloff and Sacks 
(1973: 239) defined the rules of adjacency pair 
production as:
Given the recognisable production of a first pair 
part, at its first possible completion, its speaker 
should stop, a next speaker should start, and 
should produce a second pair part of the same pair 
type.
Adjacency pairs are (in our terms) sequences of 
moves in an exchange with paired speech func-
tions such as: question/answer; complaint/denial; 
compliment/rejection; request/grant; and offer/
accept. As Heritage (1984: 247) points out, an 
adjacency pair is a structural organization to 
which speakers orient, expecting an appropriate 
second pair part to follow the first pair part.
A sequence is an adjacency pair and any expan-
sions of that adjacency. There are three types of 
expansions – pre-sequences, insertion sequences 
and post-sequences – where the sequence is the 
base adjacency (Adj.) pair and its expansions. For 
example:
In this example, taken from recorded conversa-
tional data, each turn is a TCU. Turns 3 and 6 
constitute a question/answer pair; however, turns 
1–6 are all related semantically – there is a sense 
of these belonging together. It is instances such as 
these that CA refers to as sequences.
The significance of the adjacency pair and 
sequence is twofold. First, it provides an environ-
ment in which the conversational principle of 
sequential relevance can be assigned across 
utterances (cf. Grice, 1967/75), and secondly it 
provides a way of capturing the local organization 
of talk.
CA researchers have also described the differ-
ent feedback mechanisms used in conversation, as 
well as ways in which interactants open and close 
conversations, the ways interactants repair and 
clarify, etc.
Like leading text-oriented linguists active in the 
first half of the twentieth century, such as 
C. C. Fries and J. R. Firth, and the linguists who 
pioneered the compilation of corpora of spoken 
language in the late 1950s and early 1960s, CA 
researchers, coming initially from sociology, have 
emphasized the importance of the analysis of 
authentic data collected in naturally-occurring 
interactions. Their research has confirmed the 
pervasiveness of local organization in talk and 
the need to account for this organization. It has 
offered a powerful way of thinking about the 
dynamic unfolding of conversation, as well as 
ways of modelling the procedures and expecta-
tions employed by interactants in producing 
and understanding conversation. In addition, its 
insistence that categories should only be postu-
lated when interactants can be shown to orient 
towards them has been methodologically very 
important, and has resonated with approaches 
such as SFL that are also grounded in authentic 
textual data.
Systemic functional linguistics
Background
Systemic functional linguistics (SFL) is largely 
derived from the work of M. A. K. Halliday (see 
Halliday, 1961, 1978, 1985a/1994; Halliday and 
Matthiessen, 2004; Hasan, Matthiessen and 
1 Pre-sequence First Pair Part: A: What are you 
doing now? 
2 Pre-sequence Second Pair 
Part 
B: Not sure, maybe I 
will grab a cup 
of tea.
3 Base Adj. Pair First Pair Part A: Do you want to 
come and get a 
real coffee?
4 Insertion seq. First Pair Part B: Where?
5 Insertion seq. Second Pair 
Part
A: We could go to 
that restaurant 
across the road.
6 Base Adj. Pair Second Pair 
Part
B: That sounds 
great.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
382
Webster, 2005, 2007; Matthiessen, Teruya and 
Lam, forthcoming), and it was originally grounded 
in his own experience of doing fieldwork in China 
in the late 1940s, in his work on Chinese text 
and, towards the end of the 1950s, his work on 
spoken English text. As Halliday’s teacher, Firth 
(e.g. 1957) was an important influence, including 
his emphasis on the importance of conversation. 
Throughout its history, SFL has been inter-disci-
plinary – or rather trans-disciplinary – in orienta-
tion; and in the area of the study of social systems, 
two key influences have been the anthropology of 
Bronislaw Malinowski and the sociology of Basil 
Bernstein.
A central concern of SFL is to relate language 
to its social context, by linking the functions of 
language to the organization of the context it 
operates in. SFL stresses the centrality of the 
study of conversation to the study of language, 
both because conversation is the most important 
vehicle by means of which social reality is repre-
sented and enacted in language, and because 
conversation is, as it were, the frontier in the evo-
lution of language. Moreover, ‘to understand the 
nature of text as social action we are led naturally 
to consider spontaneous conversation, as being the 
most accessible to interpretation’ (Halliday, 
1978: 140).
In SFL, the focus on conversation is on the way 
that language is organized to enable conversation 
to work and to have the power it does. By contrast, 
in CA, the focus is on social life and conversation 
is seen as a key to that. However, the two 
approaches are similar in that they are both con-
cerned with describing the dialectic between lan-
guage and its social context; both are concerned 
with describing ways in which conversation 
socializes individuals and regulates the social 
order.
Overview (1): systemic orders and 
instantiation
SFL has made many contributions to the study of 
conversation since around 1960, including the 
study of intonation (Halliday, 1963a, 1963b, 1967, 
1970a), the study of mood (Halliday, 1970b), the 
study of speech function and exchange (Halliday, 
1984) and the study of tenor relations (Halliday, 
1978); but the most important contribution it has 
made, and can make, is arguably that it provides 
us with a comprehensive account of language in 
context that we can use as a resource in investigat-
ing conversation.7
We can locate conversation on a schematic 
map representing (1) systems of different 
orders (2) extended along the cline of instantia-
tion, from instance to potential, as shown in 
Figure 26.3.
(1) Hierarchy of systemic orders. 
A conversa-
tion is simultaneously (i) physical activity, 
(ii) biological activity, (iii) social activity and 
(iv) semiotic activity (see Halliday and 
Matthiessen, 1999; Halliday, 2006; Matthiessen, 
2007). (i) In terms of orders of systems, we can 
observe and analyse a given conversation as sound 
waves, in its physical order of manifestation, 
as we do in acoustic phonetics, e.g. with the 
help of speech analysis software such as Praat 
(see e.g. Halliday and Greaves, 2008: Ch. 2). 
(ii) Taking one step up the ordered typology of 
systems, we can also observe and analyse a given 
conversation as bodily activity, in its biological 
order of manifestation, e.g. as articulatory/
auditory activity or as neural activity. (iii) Taking 
one more step up the ordered typology of systems, 
we can observe and analyse a given conversation 
as interactive behaviour – as social interaction, in 
its social order of manifestation, as people in 
different roles taking turns. This is of course the 
‘level’ of analysis where conversation analysis has 
made a significant contribution, deriving origi-
nally from sociology. As Hutchby and Wooffitt 
(1998: 14) put it, ‘CA is only marginally inter-
ested in language as such; its actual object of 
study is the interactional organization of social 
activities’ (italics in original). To treat language as 
the object of study, we need to move from the 
order of social systems to that of semiotic sys-
tems. (iv) Thus, taking a final step up the ordered 
typology of systems, we can observe and analyse 
a given conversation as exchanges of meanings, 
in its semiotic order of manifestation. All these 
orders of analyses are relevant to our understand-
ing of conversation, but in the context of ‘sociolin-
guistics’, we are likely to focus on the relationship 
between the two ‘immaterial’ orders of system – 
the social and semiotic orders.
(2) Cline of instantiation. 
In terms of the cline 
of instantiation, a given conversation in its context 
of situation unfolds as an instance. We may inves-
tigate this conversation purely as an instance, 
without trying to relate it to any more general pat-
terns further towards the potential pole of the cline 
of instantiation. This would be a kind of commen-
tary on the conversation – a kind of explication de 
texte – without the benefit of a description of the 
systemic potential that lies behind the conversa-
tion and without any attempt to make any gener-
alizations beyond the particular conversation 
being investigated. However, for most purposes in 
sociolinguistics, we would analyse the conversa-
tion by relating it to a description of the system 
that lies behind it.8 This is the standard practice in 
the analysis of any text, as text analysis has devel-
oped in the last few decades under the headings of 

INSTANTIATION
context
culture
institution
meaning potential
range of registers
situation type
text type
situation
text
[acts of meaning]
behaviour potential
behaviour
‘immaterial’
‘material’
physical
biological
social
semiotic
system
subsystem / instance type
instance
language
[other semiotic
systems]
SYSTEMIC ORDER
     [STRATIFICATION]
conversation, as social
interaction
conversation, as
bodily activity
conversation, as
sound waves
conversation as type
of dialogue
conversation, as
exchanges of meanings
Figure 26.3 Location of ‘conversation’ in terms of orders of system and in terms of the cline of instantiation.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
384
‘text linguistics’ and ‘discourse analysis’ – with 
the analysis of conversation as a special case, as 
illustrated by Halliday (1985c). At the same time, 
every text that is analysed will provide material 
for the description of the general system that lies 
behind the text: the analysis of texts and the 
description of the system are always dialectically 
related.
As just noted, a given conversation unfolds in 
its context of situation at the instance pole of the 
cline of instantiation (as discussed in the next sec-
tion and illustrated there in Figure 26.3). But this 
instance is an instance of some more general 
instance type; for example, in the conversation 
presented in Text 26.1, ‘Joanne’ is an instance of a 
recurrent type of conversation – a type of conver-
sation that has been called ‘gossip’. More gener-
ally, we can interpret conversation as a kind of 
dialogic text (see the typology presented in Figure 
26.1), locating it mid-region along the cline of 
instantiation between the potential pole and the 
instance pole. Conversation operates in a range of 
different institutions, such as those of family and 
of friendship; and particular types of conversation 
operate in different situation types, such as those 
of a dinner among close friends (e.g. Eggins, 
1990) and a tea break in a workplace (e.g. Slade, 
1996).
Overview (2): stratification and metafunction
In text analysis in general, and in conversation 
analysis in particular, we thus carry out the analy-
sis by relating the text we are concerned with to a 
description of the system that lies behind it 
(always allowing for the possibility that this 
description will need to be revised in the light of 
the analysis of each new text). We can provide an 
overview of the system of language in context by 
intersecting two ‘semiotic dimensions’, the hierar-
chy of stratification and the spectrum of metafunc-
tions, as shown in Table 26.1. This overview 
identifies systems such as SPEECH FUNCTION 
that are likely to be important in the analysis of 
conversation.
(1) Hierarchy of stratification. 
In terms of the 
hierarchy of stratification, conversation unfolds in 
context as patterns of meaning (semantics), word-
ings (lexicogrammar) and sounding (phonology).9 
A stratally-comprehensive analysis of con-
versation thus involves contextual, semantic, 
lexicogrammatical and phonological analysis 
(cf. Halliday, 1984; Matthiessen et al., 2005):
• Context: Contextual analysis of conversation 
involves characterizing the context in which the 
conversation unfolds in terms of three param-
eters (see e.g. Halliday, 1978; Martin, 1992; 
Ghadessy, 1999): what’s going on (field), who’s 
taking part (tenor) and what role the context is 
playing in the context (mode) – and in terms of 
the structure of the context as reflection of these 
parameters (see e.g. Hasan, 1984; Eggins and 
Slade, 1997: Ch. 6). This is done by relating the 
context of the conversation to the situation type, 
or genre, that it instantiates.
• Semantics: Semantic analysis of conversation 
involves tracking the meanings that are made 
in the course of the unfolding of the conversa-
tion, relating them to the meaning potential of 
Table 26.1 Function-stratification matrix showing key systems of context and language of 
importance in the analysis of conversation
Ideational: logical
Ideational: experiential Interpersonal
Textual
Context
Field
SOCIO-SEMIOTIC PROCESS
EXPERIENTIAL DOMAIN
Tenor
INSTITUTIONAL ROLES
POWER ROLES
SOCIOMETRIC ROLES
FAMILIARITY
Mode
MEDIUM
CHANNEL
DIVISION OF LABOUR
Situation types (genres) [as combinations of field, tenor and mode values, with distinctive contextual 
(generic) structures]
Semantics
 [above ‘move’]
RHETORICAL COMPLEXING 
[macro to micro]
EPISODE
TRANSACTION
EXCHANGE
PROGRESSION [macro to 
micro]
[move]
FIGURATION
SPEECH FUNCTION
Lexicogrammar
 [clause]
TAXIS and LOGICO-SEMANTIC 
TYPE
TRANSITIVITY
MOOD (including MODALITY, 
MODAL ASSESSMENT, POLARITY)
THEME; CONJUNCTION
[information
 unit]
INFORMATION
Phonology
 [tone group]
TONE
TONICITY

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
385
the language (see e.g. Eggins and Slade, 1997; 
Halliday and Matthiessen, 2006: Hasan et al., 
2007; Chs 4 and 5). Semantic analysis ranges 
in scale from whole conversations to local ele-
ments of meaning. The nature and number of 
units along this scale will depend on the nature 
of the context. For example, dialogic texts in a 
formal institutional setting, such as a classroom, 
will have more intermediate units, as Sinclair 
and Coulthard’s (1975) classic study showed, but 
dialogic texts of a more conversational kind tend 
to be organized and managed mainly locally.
• Lexicogrammar: Lexicogrammatical analysis 
of conversation involves tracking the word-
ings that realize the meanings made in the 
course of the unfolding of the conversation, 
relating them to the wording potential of the 
language (see e.g. Halliday, 1985c; Eggins and 
Slade, 1997; Halliday and Matthiessen, 2004: 
Ch. 3). Lexicogrammatical analysis ranges in 
scale from clauses (and clause complexes) 
to morphemes; and through the analysis of 
cohesion (see Halliday and Hasan, 1976), we 
can also detect patterns beyond the domain of 
grammatical units.
• Phonology: Phonological analysis of conversa-
tion involves tracking the soundings that realize 
the wordings made in the course of the unfold-
ing of the conversation, relating them to the 
sounding potential of the language. Phonological 
analysis ranges in scale from tone groups (and 
tone-group sequences) to phonemes. While all 
aspects of sounding are in principle relevant, in 
the context of research in sociolinguistics, higher-
ranking aspects are likely to be of greater inter-
est – those of the tone group (intonation) and of 
the foot (rhythm) (see Halliday, 1967; Halliday 
and Greaves, 2008).
(2) Spectrum of metafunction. 
The spectrum 
of metafunction is the organization of language, 
according to the functions it has evolved to serve, 
into three simultaneous strands of meaning (see 
e.g. Halliday, 1978):
• ideational metafunction – construing our 
experience of the world as meaning
• interpersonal metafunction – enacting our 
roles and relationships as meaning
• textual metafunction – constructing ideational 
and interpersonal meanings as discourse.
As these different strands of meaning operate 
simultaneously in text, conversations can be ana-
lysed ideationally, interpersonally and textually.
  (i) We can focus on the ideational meanings 
(e.g. Halliday and Matthiessen, 2006). This 
involves looking at what activities and what 
topics get talked about, when, by whom, and how 
topic transition and closure are achieved, etc. 
Here we may be concerned with what kind of 
‘world view’ the interactants in conversation 
construe together. These patterns can be seen in 
the analysis of TRANSITIVITY.
 (ii) We can focus on the interpersonal meanings 
(e.g. Eggins and Slade, 1997: Chs 4 and 5). This 
involves looking at what kinds of role relations 
are established through talk, what attitudes 
interactants express to and about each other, 
what kinds of things they find funny, and how 
they negotiate taking turns, etc. These patterns 
can be seen from the analysis of MOOD at the 
grammatical level, or at the semantic level by the 
analysis of SPEECH FUNCTION (move analysis) and 
of EXCHANGE, and by the analysis of APPRAISAL – 
evaluative meanings (see Martin, 2000; Martin 
and White, 2005).
(iii) We can focus on the textual meanings. This 
involves looking at different types of COHESION used 
to tie chunks of the talk together (e.g. Halliday 
and Hasan, 1976), different patterns of salience 
and foregrounding, etc. Here a key concern is 
how interactants manage the flow of information 
in such a way that they can guide each other’s 
processes of analysis and interpretation.
In summary, in our analysis of conversation, we 
can focus on contextual or linguistic systems. In 
the linguistic analysis of conversation, we can 
focus on any of the units of semantics, lexico-
grammar and phonology, undertaking the analysis 
in terms of their ideational (logical, experiential), 
interpersonal and textual systems: see Figure 26.4.
26.4  ANALYTICAL TOOLS
In this section we draw on a range of analytical 
techniques discussed above to describe different 
aspects of conversation. Using the stratal organi-
zation of language in context set out in Table 26.1 
above as a guide, we start with context, focusing 
on the concept of genre, to describe the macro-
structure of conversation; we then move down to 
semantics to examine the discourse structure; and, 
finally, we move further down to the micro-
patterns of the grammar and phonology of conver-
sation. We will only be focusing on some selected 
analytical techniques at each level, so these are 
intended to be illustrative only and by no means 
comprehensive.
Context: genre (situation type)
Any conversation operates in a context of com-
munication – a context of situation; thus, we can 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
386
analyse the conversation ‘from above’, exploring 
it in terms of the contextual parameters of field, 
tenor and mode and in terms of the contextual 
structure they jointly determine10 (see Table 26.1). 
It is, of course, possible to treat each conversation 
as if it was unique – the first of its kind; however, 
a given conversation is typically an instance of a 
recurrent type of conversation and the situation that 
it operates in is similarly an instance of a recurrent 
type of situation. In other words, in our analysis of 
a given conversation in its context of situation, we 
can relate these to patterns that are intermediate 
between the instance pole and the potential pole of 
the cline of instantiation – the mid-region of the 
cline shown in Figure 26.3 above.
Thus, the excerpt from the conversation set out 
in Text 26.1 (‘Joanne’) is an instance of a gossip 
text (shown here together with some types of 
analysis to be discussed below), and when we 
look at it ‘from above’, from the point of view of 
its context of situation, we can see that this situa-
tion instantiates a recurrent situation type, or 
genre. This situation type is one that is likely to 
occur during tea breaks in workplace institutions: 
it is a situation type in which interactants who are 
workmates share personal experiences and values 
– more specifically, they set out to judge the 
behaviour of a colleague who is not part of the 
in-group, in casual face-to-face interaction. We 
can also recognize the stages that are characteris-
tic of such situation type: the bid to put a col-
league on trial for behaviour that is judged to be 
unacceptable to the members of the in-group 
(Third Person Focus), the negative judgement of 
this colleague (Pejorative Evaluation), and the 
evidence cited to support this judgement 
(Substantiating Behaviour).
The excerpt in Text 26.1 is taken from our 
corpus of spoken conversational Australian 
English, OzTalk. The most commonly occurring 
texts types in the OzTalk corpus are story-telling 
(narratives, anecdotes, exempla and recounts), 
observation/comment, opinion texts, gossip and 
joke-telling. These chunks of talk (see Eggins 
and Slade, 1997: Ch. 6) are those sections of 
talk where interactants get to hold the floor 
for extended turns. However, there are large 
sections of the conversational data that cannot 
be characterized in terms of generic structure. 
These sections we have labelled chat. Conversation, 
we argue, therefore consists of different types of 
talk: the ‘chunks’ and the ‘chat’. The chunks are 
those types of talk that have an identifiable generic 
structure. The ‘chat’ sections are those that do not 
display such structure. For these ‘chat’ sections, a 
dynamic approach to conversational analysis is 
move
figure
message
clause
foot
tone group
information unit
(experiential [TRANSITICITY]/
interpersonal [MOOD]/
textual [THEME])
group/phrase
exchange
transaction
dialogic text
Semantics
Lexicogrammar
Phonology
experiential
textual
interpersonal
Figure 26.4 Metafunction and stratification, with indication of some compositional 
hierarchies.

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
387
needed, which focuses on the processes by which 
moves succeed other moves.
Genres that occur in spontaneous, informal 
conversation are analysed in detail by Eggins and 
Slade (1997). (For purposes of comparison, it 
is also helpful to refer to spoken texts in other 
contexts such as those of service encounters 
(e.g. Ventola, 1987), the analysis of spoken, peda-
gogic discourse (e.g. and narratives elicited by 
means of sociolinguistic interviews (Plum, 1988).)
Text 26.1 ‘Joanne’ (from OzTalk), with examples of contextual, semantic and 
lexicogrammatical analyses.
Context
Semantics
Lexicogrammar
Speaker Clause
Generic stage
Exchange: move (SPEECH 
FUNCTION)
Clause (MOOD)
Clause 
(TRANSITIVITY)
Third Person 
Focus
initiating and 
statement
declarative
material
Bron:
I’m about to throw Joanne 
out the window.
→
initiating and 
question
interrogative: wh-
material
Pat:
Joanne who?
responding 
and answer
declarative
material
Bron:
Blackwell.
initiating and 
question
interrogative: wh-
material
Pat:
Why?
Pejorative 
Evaluation
responding and 
answer
declarative
relational
Bron:
She gets really pushy.
Substantiating 
Behaviour
initiating and 
statement
declarative
behavioural
I’m looking for a file for 
Gary; 
declarative
material
Kerry gave me three others 
declarative
relational
and I was in the middle 
of finding the third one 
for her.
initiating and 
question
declarative: tagged
material
Gary:
Kerry gave you three, did 
she?
responding and 
answer
declarative
mental: 
cognitive
Bron: 
Yeah, you know 
bound
material
they have to be done
declarative
material
and Joanne came up
declarative
verbal
and she said
interrogative: yes/no material
“oh, can you do this?”
declarative
verbal
and I said 
[…]
declarative
verbal
and she went
declarative
relational
“oh it’s just that they can 
wait until after this one
bound
relational
‘cause they’re needed 
today.”
declarative
material
Oh I was about ready to 
strangle her =
she gets
responding and 
acknowledge
declarative
relational
Gary:
Joanne’s too busy.
responding and 
acknowledge
declarative
mental: 
cognitive
Bron:
I know 
declarative
mental: 
cognitive
and I appreciate 
bound
relational
that she’s busy 
Pejorative 
Evaluation
declarative
relational
but she gets really pushy.
responding and 
acknowledge
declarative
mental: 
emotive
Pat:
Yeah, I don’t like pushy 
people either.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
388
To illustrate the contextual, generic analysis 
of conversation, let us now return to Text 26.1 
(‘Joanne’). It takes place in the coffee room of a 
hospital at morning break time. There are four 
interactants: Gary, Pauline, Bron and Pat. They are 
all clerical staff in the hospital, and have worked 
together for over two years. They are in their 
mid- to late twenties.
This conversation instantiates the conversation 
type we have labelled gossip (see Eggins and 
Slade, 1997; Thornbury and Slade, 2006). This 
means that it operates in a context of situation 
with certain field, tenor and mode values:
• Field: Socio-semiotic process – sharing personal 
values and experiences – judging negatively 
(condemning) a colleague who’s not a member 
of the in-group; experiential domain – the behav-
iour and properties of the person being judged.
• Tenor: Institutional roles – workmates (mem-
bers of in-group); status and power roles – 
equal; familiarity daily – contact as workmates; 
socio-metric roles – supportive alignment (but 
antagonistic towards person being judged); 
valuation – condemnation of the behaviour of 
the person being judged.
• Mode: Mode – spoken; channel – face-to-face; 
orientation – oriented towards tenor, with field 
being concerned with tenor relations; division 
of semiotic labour – semiotic activity constitu-
tive (rather than ancillary) of the context, with 
language as primary semiotic but accompanied 
by selections from other semiotic systems.
These field, tenor and mode values together deter-
mine the contextual or generic structure of the 
text. The obligatory elements of this structure 
occur in a specified sequence and are defining of 
this genre. These elements are (see Eggins and 
Slade, 1997, and Thornbury and Slade, 2006, for 
a characterization of these elements):
Third Person Focus ^ Substantiating Behaviour ^ 
Pejorative Evaluation ^ Wrap-up
As the characterization of field, tenor and mode sug-
gests, the key element here is Pejorative Evaluation.
In a similar way, any conversation can be ana-
lysed in contextual terms – in terms of their field, 
tenor and mode values and the generic structure 
determined by these values (unless we are 
concerned with a ‘chat’ phase of a conversation). 
In the case of our gossip texts, all the elements of 
the gossip situation are realized by passages of 
conversation; however, such contextual elements 
may be realized non-verbally, either by contribu-
tions from semiotic systems other than language 
or by non-semiotic, social acts (cf. Steiner, 
1991).
Semantics: moves and exchanges
Semantics is the highest stratum of language; it is 
the interface between language and context, and 
between language and other semiotic system. It 
covers the three modes of meaning outlined 
above – ideational, interpersonal and textual 
meanings11 (see Table 26.1 above). These differ-
ent strands of meaning are thus covered in the 
semantic analysis of conversation, bringing out 
how the interactants jointly construe their experi-
ence of the world (ideational) enact their roles and 
relations (interpersonal), and manage the flow of 
information (textual).
It is the interpersonal metafunction that 
provides interactants in conversation with the 
resources for creating conversation through the 
exchange of meaning, and in this section we will 
focus on interpersonal meaning. We will build on 
the contextual description of Text 26.1 (‘Joanne’) 
by exploring the unfolding of conversational 
exchanges, describing how one speaker’s move 
leads to another, and then to another. The concern 
in this interpersonal analysis is to account for 
the interactivity of the conversation – how the 
conversation unfolds.
In the interactive development of conversation, 
each utterance serves as a move (described in CA 
as one pair part of an adjacency pair); it is the 
basic interpersonal semantic unit in conversation 
and other types dialogue. It indicates a point of 
possible turn-transfer, and therefore carries with it 
the idea of ‘it could stop here’. (This is what the 
CA researchers call a TCU.) In a move, by select-
ing a speech function from the system of SPEECH 
FUNCTION, the speaker takes on a speech role 
(e.g. questioner), and assigns a complementary 
speech role to the addressee (e.g. answerer).12 
The primary initiating speech functions are com-
mand, statement, offer and question, set out in 
Table 26.2 together with typical grammatical 
realizations (see Halliday, 1984; Halliday and 
Matthiessen, 2004: Ch. 4). They embody two cru-
cial variables in an exchange: the nature of the 
commodity being exchanged (information [a 
knowledge exchange] vs goods-and-services [an 
action exchange]) and the orientation of the 
exchange (giving vs demanding).
For each initiating speech function, there is an 
expected response and a discretionary alternative 
(see Halliday, 1984; Halliday and Matthiessen, 
2004: Ch. 4): see Table 26.3.
Both expected and discretionary responses 
engage with the initiating move. However, the 
difference is that the expected responses tend to 
finish the exchange as there has been a resolution 
(e.g. an offer followed by an acceptance; or a 
question followed by an answer). Discretionary 
responses, on the other hand, tend to open out the 

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
389
exchange because, for example, if an offer is 
rejected or a statement contradicted, further nego-
tiation is needed – such as a reason, an excuse or 
an apology. Expected responses (preferred second 
pair parts in CA terms) support the proposition or 
proposal of the speaker and thereby serve to create 
alignment and solidarity. By contrast, the discre-
tionary responses (dispreferred second pair parts) 
are either disengaging and non-committal or 
openly confronting.
When we focus on the interactional structuring 
of exchanges, we find that a single move will 
often make a distinct contribution to the develop-
ment of the exchange. However, at other times, 
these functions in an exchange will be achieved 
not by a single move but by a group of moves. We 
will refer to this as a move complex (cf. Ventola, 
1988). Such move complexes can be modelled as 
rhetorical complexes, using rhetorical structure 
theory (RST; see e.g. Mann, Matthiessen and 
Thompson, 1992), which may – but need not – be 
realized grammatically by clause complexes (see 
Matthiessen, 2002). For example, in Text 26.1: 
Joanne below Bron’s response to Gary’s question 
is not a single move but three rhetorically-related 
moves that form her answer to the question; this 
rhetorical move complex is realized grammati-
cally as a clause complex. This then is followed 
by a new exchange, initiated by Jessie asking 
another question. For this reason, functional 
linguists refer to this basic interactive pattern as an 
exchange (e.g. Coulthard and Brazil, 1979; 
Halliday, 1984), which is similar to the concept of 
an adjacency pair in CA. An exchange then can be 
defined as (adapted from Eggins and Slade, 1997: 
222):
…the sequence of moves concerned with negoti-
ating a proposition or proposal presented in an 
initiating move. An exchange can be identified as 
beginning with an initiating move, and continuing 
until another initiating move occurs.
We will now analyse ‘Joanne’ in terms of its 
exchange structure made up of moves selecting in 
the system of SPEECH FUNCTION: see Text 26.1 
(‘Joanne’) above. Bron’s first initiating statement, 
I’m about to throw Joanne out the window, imme-
diately establishes Joanne as the Focus of New 
information. Since there is presumably more than 
one person called Joanne at the hospital, Pat 
initiates another exchange by demanding a clarifi-
cation, Joanne who? After Bron responds, Pat 
asks Bron why she is annoyed with Joanne and 
Bron provides a detailed response, clearly stating 
her negative evaluation. Bron then initiates another 
statement, providing evidence or justification for 
her negative evaluation of Joanne. In the rest of 
the text, Bron develops the ‘case’ that Joanne is 
really pushy. Gary and Pat contribute to the 
construction of the gossip sequence by means of a 
few simple moves where they ask for further 
Table 26.2 The basic system of SPEECH FUNCTION (semantics) as the intersection 
of orientation (giving/demanding) and commodity (information/goods-and-
services), with grammatical realization (MOOD, indicative by ↘)
Information
Goods-and-services
giving
statement
↘ declarative
he gave her a cup of tea
offer
↘ various
have a cup of tea!; would you like a cup of tea?
demanding
question
↘ interrogative
did he give her a cup of tea?
command
↘ imperative
give me a cup of tea!
Table 26.3 Initiating and responding speech functions
Initiating speech function
Expected response
Discretionary alternative
offer [O]
Do you want to get married? 
acceptance [R/O]*
Absolutely!
rejection
Certainly not!
command [I/C]
Get married first!
compliance [R/C]*
Okay.
refusal
I won’t!
statement [I/S]
Sally is getting married.
acknowledgment [R/K]
Is she?
contradiction
No, she isn’t.
question [I/Q]
Is Sally getting married?
answer [R/A]
Yes.
disclaimer
I don’t know.
*These responses are frequently non-verbal.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
390
information from Bron. She then responds, in 
turn, using a series of move complexes in each 
case. Initially, Pat and Gary are reluctant to gossip 
about Joanne, but Pat’s final ‘response: acknowl-
edgement’ provides tacit approval of the gossip, 
with her comment: I don’t like pushy people 
either.
The exchange structure analysis has demon-
strated that the gossip text is jointly constructed 
by the two roles of gossip provider and gossip 
seeker/participant, where the gossip provider then 
launches into longer move complexes in order to 
build up a case against ‘the absent other’. The 
analysis has also demonstrated whom the domi-
nant and incidental interactants are, which inter-
actants produced the most moves and move 
complexes, and the kind of speech functional 
selections the speakers made. In this way, we can 
create interactant profiles to show, for each inter-
actant, what his or her preferred selections are 
(cf. Matthiessen, 1995; Lam and Webster, 2009).
Lexicogrammar
Lexicogrammar consists of both grammar (gram-
matical items and structures, including both 
‘syntax’ and ‘morphology’) and lexis (lexical 
items, or ‘vocabulary’). It stands in a natural 
relationship to semantics: wordings are semanti-
cally transparent as patterns of meaning, although 
this natural relationship is more complex and 
less direct in the case of lexical and grammatical 
metaphor.
Like semantics, lexicogrammar is organized 
metafunctionally into resources concerned with 
different modes of meaning – ideational (experi-
ential and logical), interpersonal and textual. 
Moves and exchanges are part of the interpersonal 
organization of semantics, and moves are realized 
by clauses in the lexicogrammar. At the same 
time, clauses also realize messages: quanta of 
information in the flow of information (textual) 
and figures (process configuration); quanta of 
change in the flow of events (experiential). Clauses 
consist of groups and phrases, and these consist of 
words, which in turn consist of morphemes.
All these grammatical units contribute to the 
construction of conversation and are consequently 
relevant to comprehensive lexicogrammatical 
analysis of conversation. However, the clause – 
with its potential to form clause complexes – is the 
‘gateway’ into lexicogrammar from semantics; it 
constitutes the window on patterns of meaning in 
conversation. 
Therefore, 
lexicogrammatical 
analysts of conversation have tended to start with 
the clause, as shown and modelled by, for 
example,  Halliday (1985c, 1994), and Eggins 
and Slade (1997).
The major systems of the clause are set out in 
Table 26.1 above. We have tracked the selection in 
two of them in Text 26.1 (‘Joanne’), the interper-
sonal system of MOOD and the experiential system 
of TRANSITIVITY. Let us just illustrate these two 
systems, together with the textual system of 
THEME for a couple of key clauses in our conversa-
tion: see Figure 26.5.
We’ll comment only on the first clause, I’m 
about to throw Joanne out of the window. This 
clause realizes the move that serves as Third 
Person Focus in the structure of the context in 
which the text unfolds.
 (i) THEME. Textually, it gives the speaker (I) the 
status of Theme – the point of departure of the 
clause as a message. In other words, Bron is 
setting herself up as the orientation for what’s 
to follow – her angle as the context in which 
the remainder of the clause is to be interpreted. 
She also chose throw Joanne out of the window 
as New Information and out of the window as 
the Focus of New information; in other words, 
the person who is to be judged in the gossip is 
presented as newsworthy and her destiny as the 
focus of this news.
 (ii) MOOD. Interpersonally, the clause realizes the 
statement selected by this initiating move of 
the gossip; its mood is ‘declarative’, with the 
speaker as the element upon which the validity 
of the statement rests. In the groups realizing the 
Finite/ Predicator and the Adjunct, the speaker 
has chosen lexical items with negative conno-
tation (throw out of the window). Such inter-
personal lexical resources have been described 
under the heading of APPRAISAL in SFL (see Martin 
and White, 2005), and this description has been 
applied in the study of conversation (see Eggins 
and Slade, 1997).
(iii) TRANSITIVITY. Experientially, the clause realizes 
a figure of ‘doing’, one in which the speaker is 
construed as the Actor bringing about the act of 
throwing and Joanne as the one impacted, the 
Goal. This is of course figurative, representing 
the speaker’s extreme frustration with Joanne; 
but it is interesting that she has construed herself 
as the aggressor in an act of punishing Joanne 
for her transgression. This motif is in fact picked 
up later in the conversation: [Actor:] I [Process:] 
was about ready to strangle [Goal:] her.
The discussion of I’m about to throw Joanne out 
of the window gives a hint of the contribution that 
the lexicogrammatical analysis of conversation 
can make to an understanding of how the selec-
tions made by the speakers create the patterns of 
meaning that make up the conversation. For more 
detailed illustrations see, for example, Halliday 
(1985c, 1994).

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
391
Phonology
In addition to analysing conversation at the levels 
of context, semantics and lexicogrammar, we can 
also analyse the ‘expression’ of conversation. 
Prototypically, conversation is spoken – although, 
as we have noted, new technology has opened up 
new channels for written conversation, and con-
versations are signed in sign languages in deaf 
communities. Spoken conversation can also be 
analysed phonologically and phonetically; and a 
well-rounded comprehensive analysis of conver-
sation needs to take these levels of expression into 
account. In phonological and phonetic analysis, 
conversation is interpreted in terms of patterns of 
sounding. In phonological analysis, patterns of 
sounding are analysed in abstract terms, with an 
orientation towards patterns of wording: phonol-
ogy is, as it were, an interface between linguistic 
content and the material manifestation of 
language as sound. The material manifestation 
of language in sound is the responsibility of 
phonetic analysis.
Phonetic analysis of conversation will clearly 
be important in a range of contexts of research and 
application such as clinical contexts (e.g. in 
speech therapy), forensic contexts (e.g. speaker 
identification) and speech processing contexts 
(e.g. in the development of dialogue systems). All 
these have – or should have – a prominent social 
component (see chapter by Coulthard et al., this 
volume).
Phonological analysis of conversation is impor-
tant in all the contexts where phonetic analysis 
may be considered; but it is also important more 
generally whenever analysis of conversation is 
undertaken. Phonological analysis includes both 
prosody and articulation. Prosodic analysis 
involves tone groups (intonation units) and feet 
(rhythm units), whereas articulatory analysis 
involves syllables and phonemes. In most analy-
sis of conversation, it is prosodic analysis that is 
I
’m 
about to throw 
Joanne 
out the window
THEME
Theme
Rheme
MOOD
Subject
Finite
Predicator
Complement
Adjunct
Mood
Residue
TRANSITIVITY
Actor
Process
Goal
Place
nom. gp. verbal group
[lexis: negative]
nominal group
prepositional phrase
[lexis: negative]
she
gets
really pushy
THEME
Theme
Rheme
MOOD
Subject
Finite
Predicator
Complement
Mood
Residue
TRANSITIVITY
Carrier
Process
Attribute
nom. gp.
verbal group
nominal group
[lexis: negative]
Figure 26.5 Analysis of two key clauses from Text 26.1 (’Joanne‘).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
392
particularly critical to an understanding of conver-
sational patterns. Therefore, the inclusion of anno-
tation of intonation (tone groups) and rhythm 
(feet) in transcripts of conversation is a valuable 
step in the analysis of conversation. Here are some 
examples from ‘Joanne’:
//1 ^ I’m a/bout to /throw Jo/anne out the 
/window //
// 1 Kerry gave you / three // 2 did she? //
// 2 ^ Did Kerry / give you those / files / there? //
// 1 Why / couldn’t she / grab / someone / else? //
// 1 ^ I was a/bout /ready to /strangle her //
//3 yeah I don’t // 1 like /pushy /people /either //
(Here double slashes mark boundaries between 
tone groups, single slashes boundaries between 
feet; Arabic numeral at the beginning of tone 
groups indicate the tone selected, and bold indi-
cates the location of the Tonic. The caret indicates 
a silent beat in the rhythmic pattern.)
Both intonation and rhythm play a significant 
role in the construction of conversation. But while 
rhythm is largely internal to the level of phonol-
ogy, intonation is directly related to grammatical 
systems, so we will say a few more words about 
it. Various descriptions of intonation in English 
have been put forward: the more widely used ones 
include Halliday’s account (e.g. Halliday, 1967, 
1970a; Tench, 1996; Halliday and Greaves, 2008); 
Brazil’s account, which is similar to Halliday’s 
(e.g. Brazil, 1985); Crystal’s account (e.g., Crystal, 
1969; used in the London-Lund corpus of spoken 
English); and the ToBI framework developed by 
Janet Pierrehumbert and Mary Beckman. 
Halliday’s account of intonation is part of a holis-
tic account of language in context and his analysis 
of intonation in conversation complements and 
extends the semantic and lexicogrammatical anal-
yses. With the help of Halliday and Greaves 
(2008), the analysis of conversation in terms of 
intonation is now very accessible.
Language and other semiotic systems
In this section, we have looked at some analytical 
tools for describing the generic, discourse, lexico-
grammatical and phonological structure of con-
versation. We have analysed the same authentic 
extract of casual conversation from different per-
spectives. Other semiotic systems may also play 
an important role in accompanying language. The 
range of other semiotic systems will depend not 
only on the mode variable within context – 
whether the channel is graphic or aural – but also 
on more delicate differentiations such as the 
distinction within aural between face-to-face 
and other channels such as over the telephone 
(cf. Matthiessen, 2009, pp. 11–38). Conversation 
must have evolved as face-to-face conversation, 
and conversational language must therefore have 
evolved together with paralanguage, gestures and 
other forms of ‘body language’ (cf. Thibault’s 
(2004) notion of the signifying body). These 
other semiotic systems accompanying language in 
conversation have been studied by a growing 
number of researchers; see for example, McNeill 
(2000) for recent contributions to the study of 
gesture.
26.5  CONCLUSION
In this chapter, after describing conversation, we 
briefly reviewed key ideas from the approaches 
we consider most relevant to the analysis of con-
versation, suggesting that an eclectic approach to 
analysing conversation is not only richer but also 
essential when dealing with the complexities of 
spoken language. We then outlined a range of 
analytical techniques for describing the different 
levels of conversational structure–from genre, to 
discourse, to lexicogrammar to phonology. What 
we hope to have demonstrated is that, to analyse 
conversation, multidimensional interpretations are 
needed and that these different analyses provide 
complementary perspectives on the nature and 
description of conversation in English. By analys-
ing the same text (‘Joanne’) from different per-
spectives, we can build up a picture of how 
conversation functions to achieve ‘social work’ at 
both the micro (interaction) and macro (cultural) 
levels.
In presenting this text and the descriptions used 
in the analysis of conversation, we have drawn on 
English. We have done this purely for practical 
reasons, not for theoretical ones. From a theoreti-
cal point of view, any general account of conver-
sation must take a wide range of languages into 
account. This is certainly a real challenge – there 
are just over 6900 languages spoken today (accord-
ing to the best source, the Ethnologue13), although 
many, perhaps even most, will have disappeared in 
another century or so. Only a few languages have 
been described in rich comprehensive ways that 
would give us sufficient information about the 
nature of conversation in these languages and a 
true basis for robust generalizations across lan-
guages. There are of course valuable contributions 
to the description of conversation in a range of 
languages, particularly in anthropologically-ori-
ented linguistics such as the Ethnography of 
Speaking framework and Tagmemics; and there 
are investigations in cross-cultural pragmatics that 
will give us some important indications of the 
degree of variation we can expect to find. For a 

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
393
typological perspective on the interpersonal 
resources of languages, see Teruya et al. (2007) 
and Matthiessen, Teruya and Wu (2008); and for 
sketches of the interpersonal resources of the 
grammars of eight different languages, see 
Caffarel, Martin and Matthiessen (2004).
NOTES
 1 There are obviously many ways of classifying 
conversation. In the field of human–computer 
interaction, a well-known contribution is Winograd’s 
(1987: Section 5) taxonomy: ’conversation for clarifi-
cation, conversation for possibilities, and conversa-
tion for orientation’.
 2 Malcolm Coulthard (pers comm 2006).
 3 Psathas (1995: 2) suggests that the concerns 
of conversation analysis would be reflected by the 
name ’ethnomethodological interaction analysis‘.
 4 For transcription method and conventions, 
see e.g. http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/soc/faculty/
schegloff/TranscriptionProject/index.html 
 5 For research on turn-taking, see Sacks, 
Schegloff and Jefferson 1974; on topic manage-
ment, see Sacks, 1992; and on adjacency pairs, see 
Sacks 1992.
 6 + indicates a constructed example.
 7 In addition to the work we will deal with 
here, there have also been SFL contributions made 
in the context of computational modelling, e.g. 
Bateman (1985) and O’Donnell and Sefton (1995).
 8 The system that lies behind it is of course a 
collective resource; the cline of instantiation is an 
important dimension in linking the ‘micro-patterns’ 
of a particular conversation to the ‘macro-patterns’ 
of the system of language in the context of 
culture.
 9 This is the prototypical expression of conver-
sation, as in spoken face-to-face conversation; but 
conversation may also be signed, in the case of sign 
languages of deaf communities, or written, as on 
online chat.
10 The focus on context is due to the anthro-
pologist Bronislaw Malinowski. Other schemes for 
describing context include those proposed in linguis-
tics by J. R. Firth, Dell Hymes (as part of the 
Ethnography of Communication), in AI by Roger 
Schank (frames and scripts), and in sociology (e.g. 
Argyle, Furnham and Graham, 1981).
11 In certain other approaches, the realm of 
meaning is divided into ‘semantics’ and ‘pragmatics’; 
but in SFL, they are treated as a unified system of 
meaning, differentiated in metafunctional terms.
12 Speech functions have also been interpreted 
in philosophical terms in the different versions of 
speech act theory, covered in an extensive literature. 
Here the emphasis tends to be on individual action 
rather than on interaction between persons, 
but speech acts have been used quite widely in the 
analysis of dialogic texts.
13 See http://www.ethnologue.com/ 
REFERENCES
Argyle, M., Furnham, A. and Graham, J. A. (1981) Social 
Situations. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bateman, J. A. (1985) ‘Utterances in context: towards a 
systemic theory of the intersubjective achievement of 
discourse’. PhD thesis, Department of Artificial Intelligence / 
School of Epistemics, University of Edinburgh.
Bateson, M. C. (1979) ’”The epigenesis of conversational 
interaction“: a personal account of research development’, 
in Bullowa M. (ed.). Before Speech the Beginnings of 
Interpersonal Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press pp. 63–77.
Berger, P. L. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The Social Construction 
of Reality. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Brazil, D. (1985) ‘Phonology: intonation in discourse’, in 
T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Handbook of Discourse Analysis. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 57–75.
Bullowa, M. (ed.) (1979) Before Speech: The Beginnings of 
Interpersonal Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Caffarel, A., Martin, J. R. and Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (eds) 
(2004) Language Typology: A Functional Perspective. 
(Current Issues in Linguistic Theory 253.) Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. xiii, p. 690, index.
Christian, D. (2004) Maps of Time: An Introduction to Big 
History. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Coulthard, M. and Brazil, D. (1979) Exchange Structure. 
Discourse analysis Monograph No. 5. English Language 
Research, University of Birmingham, Birmingham. (Abridged 
version appears in M. Coulthard and M. Montgomery (eds) 
Studies in Discourse Analysis. London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul: pp. 82–106.)
Crystal, D. (1969) Prosodic Systems and Intonation in English. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Dunbar, R. (1996) Grooming, Gossip and the Evolution of 
Language. London: Faber and Faber.
Eggins, S. (1990) ‘Conversational structure: a systemic-
functional analysis of interpersonal and logical meaning in 
multiparty sustained talk’. PhD thesis, Department of 
Linguistics, University of Sydney.
Eggins, S. and Slade, D. (1997) Analysing Casual Conversation. 
London: Equinox. (Previously published by Continuum.)
Firth, J. R. (1957) Papers in Linguistics 1934–51. London: 
Oxford University Press.
Ford, C. and Thompson, S. A.  (1996) ‘Interactional units in 
conversation: syntactic, intonational, and pragmatic 
resources for turn management’, in E. Ochs, E. Schegloff 
and S. A. Thompson, (eds), Interaction and Grammar 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 134–84.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood 
Cliffs; NJ: Prentice Hall.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
394
Ghadessy, M. (ed.) (1999) Text and Context in Functional 
Linguistics. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Grice, P. (1967/75) ‘Logic and conversation’, William James 
Lectures, Harvard University. Reprinted in Cole, P. and 
Morgan, J. (eds) (1975) Syntax and Semantics. Vol. 3: 
Speech Acts. New York: Academic Press. pp. 43–58.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1961) ‘Categories of the theory of 
grammar’, Word, 17(3): 242–92.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1963a) ‘The tones of English’, Archivum 
Linguisticum, 15(1): 1–28.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1963b) ‘Intonation in English grammar’, 
Transactions of the Philological Society. pp. 143–69.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1967) Intonation and Grammar in British 
English. The Hague: Mouton. (Janua Linguarum Series 
Practica 48.)
Halliday, M. A. K. (1970a) A Course in Spoken English: 
Intonation. London: Oxford University Press.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1970b) ‘Functional diversity in language, as 
seen from a consideration of modality and mood in 
English’, Foundations of Language, 6: 322–61. Reprinted 
in Halliday, M. A. K. (2005) Studies in English Language. 
Volume 7 in the Collected Works of M. A. K. Halliday, 
edited by J. Webster. London: Continuum. Chapter 5: 
164–204.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1975) Learning How to Mean: Explorations 
in the Development of Language. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotic: The 
Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning. London: 
Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1984) ‘Language as code and language as 
behaviour: a systemic-functional interpretation of the 
nature and ontogenesis of dialogue’, in M. A. K. Halliday, 
R. P. Fawcett, S. Lamb and A. Makkai (eds), The Semiotics 
of Language and Culture. London: Frances Pinter. Volume 
1. pp. 3–35. Reprinted in Halliday, M. A. K. (2003) On 
Language and Linguistics. Volume 3 of Collected Works of 
M. A. K. Halliday. Edited by J. Webster. London: Continuum. 
Chapter 10: 226–50.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994) 'So you say "pass" ... thank you three 
muchly'. A.D. Grimshaw (ed.), What’s going on here: 
complementary studies of professional talk. Norwood, N.J.: 
Ablex. 175–229.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985a/1994) An Introduction to Functional 
Grammar. 2nd edn. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985c) ‘Dimensions of discourse analysis: 
grammar’, in T. A. van Dijk (ed.), Handbook of Discourse 
Analysis. New York: Academic Press. pp. 29–56.
Halliday, M. A. K. & C. M. I. M Matthiessen (2004) An intro-
duction to functional grammar. 3rd Edn. London: Edward 
Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (2004) The Language of Early Childhood. 
Volume 4 of Collected Works of M.A.K. Halliday. Edited by 
Jonathan Webster. London & New York: Continuum.
Halliday, M. A. K. (2005) ‘On matter and meaning: the two 
realms of human experience’, Linguistics and the Human 
Sciences, 1(1): 59–82.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Greaves, W. S. (2008) Intonation in the 
Grammar of English. London: Equinox.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Hasan, R. (1976) Cohesion in English. 
London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2006) 
Construing Experience through Meaning: A Language-
Based Approach to Cognition. (Study Edition.) London: 
Continuum.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Plum, G. (1983) ‘On casual conversa-
tion’, in R. Hasan (ed.), Discourse on Discourse. Occasional 
Papers No. 7, 1983. Macquarie University.
Hasan, R. (1984) ‘The nursery tale as a genre’, Nottingham 
Linguistic Circular, 13: 71–102.
Hasan, R., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. and Webster, J. (eds) 
(2005) Continuing Discourse on Language. Volume 1. 
London: Equinox.
Hasan, R., Cloran, C. Williams, G. and Lukin, A. (2007) 
‘Semantic networks: the description of linguistic meaning 
in SFL’, in R. Hasan, C. M. I. M. Matthiessen and J. Webster 
(eds), Continuing Discourse on Language. Volume 2. 
London: Equinox. pp. 697–738.
Hasan, R., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. and Webster, J. (eds) 
(2007) Continuing Discourse on Language. Volume 2. 
London: Equinox.
Heritage, J. 1989. ‘Current developments in conversation 
analysis.‘ In D. Roger and P. Bull (eds.), Conversation. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters. pp. 21–47.
Heritage, J. (1984) Garfinkel and Ethnomethodology. 
Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hutchby, I. and Wooffitt, R. (1998) Conversation Analysis: 
Principles, Practices and Applications. Cambridge: Polity 
Press.
Jefferson, G., Sacks, H. and Schegloff, E. (1987) ‘Notes on laugh-
ter in the pursuit of intimacy’, in G. Button and J. Lee (eds), 
Talk and Social Organisation. London: Multilingual Matters.
Lam, M. and Webster, J. (2009) ‘The lexicogrammatical reflec-
tion of interpersonal relationship in conversation’, Discourse 
Studies, 11(1): 37–57.
McHoul, A. and Rapley, M. (eds) (2001) How to Analyse Talk 
in Institutional Settings: a casebook of methods. London: 
Continuum.
McNeill, D. (ed.) (2000) Language and Gesture. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Mann, W. C., Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. and Thompson, S. A. 
(1992) ‘Rhetorical structure theory and text analysis’, in 
W. C. Mann and S. A. Thompson (eds), Discourse 
Description: Diverse Linguistic Analyses of a Fund Raising 
Text. Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 39–78.
Martin, J.R. (1992) English Text: System and Structure. 
Amsterdam:  Benjamins.
Martin, J. R. (2000) ‘Beyond exchange: appraisal systems in 
English’, in S. Hunston and G. Thompson (eds), Evaluation 
in Text: Authorial Stance and the Construction of Discourse. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press pp. 142–175.
Martin, J. R. and White, P. R. R. (2005) The Language of 
Evaluation: Appraisal in English. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (1995) Lexicogrammatical 
Cartography: English Systems. Tokyo: International 
Language Sciences Publishers.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2002) ‘Combining clauses into 
clause complexes: a multi-faceted view’, in J. Bybee and 

ANALYSING CONVERSATION
395
M. Noonan (eds), Complex Sentences in Grammar and 
Discourse: Essays in Honor of Sandra A. Thompson. 
Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp. 237–322.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2007) ‘The “architecture” of 
language according to systemic functional theory: develop-
ments since the 1970’, in R. Hasan, C. M. I. M. Matthiessen 
and J. Webster (eds), Continuing Discourse on Language. 
Volume 2. London: Equinox. pp. 505–61.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (forthcoming) ‘Multisemiotic and 
context-based register typology: registerial variation in the 
complementarity of semiotic systems’, in E. Ventola, and 
A. J. M. Guijarro (eds), The World Shown and the World 
Told. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M., Lukin, A. Butt, D. G. Cleirigh, C. and 
Nesbitt, C. (2005) ‘Welcome to Pizza Hut: a case study of 
multistratal analysis’, Australian Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 19: 123–50.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M., Teruya, K. and WU, C. (2008) 
‘Multilingual studies as a multi-dimensional space of inter-
connected language studies’, in J. Webster (ed.), Meaning 
in Context. London: Continuum. pp. 146–221.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M., Teruya, K. and Lam, M. (in press) 
Key Terms in Systemic Functional Linguistics. London: 
Continuum.
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M., Teruya, K. and Lam, M. (forthcoming) 
Key Terms in Systemic Functional Linguistics. London: 
Continuum.
Ochs, E., Schegloff, E. A. and Thompson, S. A. (eds) (1996) 
Interaction and Grammar. (Studies in Interactional Socio-
linguistics 13.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Donnell, M. and Sefton, P. (1995) ‘Modelling telephonic 
interaction: a dynamic approach’, Journal of Applied 
Linguistics, 10(1): 63–78.
Psathas, G. (1995) Conversation Analysis: The Study of Talk-
In-Interaction. (Qualitative Research Methods.) London: 
Sage.
Plum, G.A. (1988) Textual and contextual conditioning in 
spoken English: a genre-based approach. University of 
Sydney:  Ph.D. Dissertation.
Ruhlemann, C. (2007) Conversation in Context: A Corpus-
Driven Approach. London: Continuum.
Sacks, H. (1972a) ‘An initial investigation of the usability of 
conversational data for doing sociology’, in D. Sudnow 
(ed.), Studies in Social Interaction. New York: Free Press. 
pp. 31–74.
Sacks, H. (1972b) ‘On the analysability of stories by children’, 
in J. H. Gumperz and Hymes, D. (eds), Directions in 
Sociolinguistics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Sacks, H. (1974) ‘An analysis of the course of a joke’s telling 
in conversation’, in R. Bauman and J. Sherzer (eds), 
Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Sacks, H. (1978) ‘Some technical considerations of a dirty 
joke’, in J. Schenkein (ed.). Studies in the Organization at 
Conversational Interaction. New York: Academic Press 
pp. 249–69.
Sacks, H. (1992) Lectures on Conversation. Volumes I and II. 
Edited by G. Jefferson with Introduction by E.A. Schegloff. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organisation of turn-taking for conver-
sation’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Schegloff, E. A. (1986) ‘The routine as achievement’, Human 
Studies, 9: 111–51.
Schegloff, E.A. (1987) `Some Sources of Misunderstanding 
in Talk-in-Interaction.' Linguistics 25: 201–218.
Schegloff, E. A. (1988) ‘Description in the social sciences I: 
talk-in-interaction’, Papers in Pragmatics, 2: 1–24.
Schegloff, E. A. (2006) Sequence Organization in Interaction. 
Vol. 1, A Primer in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press,
Schegloff, E. A. and Sacks, H.  (1973) ‘Opening up closings’, 
Semiotica, 7(3, 4): 289–327.
Schenkein, J. (ed.) (1978) Studies in the Organization of 
Conversational Interaction. New York: Academic Press.
Sinclair, J. and Coulthard, M. (1975) Towards an Analysis of 
Discourse. London: Oxford University Press.
Slade, D. M. (1996) ‘The texture of casual conversation 
in English’. PhD thesis, University of Sydney.
Steiner, E. (1991) A Functional Perspective on Language, 
Action and Interpretation. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Taylor, T. J. and Cameron, D. (1987) Analysing Conversation: 
Rules and Units in the Structure of Talk. Oxford: Pergamon 
Press.
Tench, P. (1996) The Intonation Systems of English. London: 
Cassell.
Teruya, K., Akerejola, E. Andersen, T. H. et al., (2007) 
‘Typology of MOOD: a text-based and system-based 
functional view’, in R. Hasan, C. M. I. M. Matthiessen and 
J. J. Webster (eds), Continuing Discourse on Language: 
A Functional Perspective. Volume 2. London: Equinox. 
pp. 859–920.
Thibault, P. J. (2004) Brain, Mind and the Signifying Body: 
An Ecosocial Semiotic Theory. London, New York: 
Continuum.
Thornbury, S. and Slade, D. (2006) Conversation: From 
Description to Pedagogy. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Trevarthen, C. (1979) ‘Communication and cooperation in 
early infancy: a description of primary intersubjectivity’, in 
Bullowa (ed.), Before Speech: The Beginnings of 
Interpersonal Communication. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 321–47.
Trevarthen, C. (1987) ‘Sharing making sense: intersubjectivity 
and the making of an infant’s meaning’, in R. Steele and 
T. Threadgold (eds), Language Topics: Essays in Honour of 
Michael Halliday. Volume 1. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Ventola, E. (1987) The structure of social interaction: a 
systemic approach to the semiotics of service encounters. 
London: Frances Pinter.
Ventola, E. (1988) ‘The logical relations in exchange’, 
in J. D. Benson and W. S. Greaves (eds), Systemic 
Functional Approaches to Discourse. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 
pp. 51–72.
Winograd, T. (1987) ‘A language/action perspective on the 
design of cooperative work’, Human–Computer Interaction, 
3(1): 3–30.

Narrative Analysis
A l e x a n d r a  G e o r g a k o p o u l o u
27
27.1 INTRODUCTION
The current fascination with oral (cf. vernacular, 
non-literary) narrative spans a wide range of 
social science disciplines, e.g. sociology, psychol-
ogy, social anthropology, etc., and is frequently 
referred to as the ‘narrative turn’ (see papers in 
Bamberg, 2006; Brockmeier and Carbaugh, 2001; 
Daiute and Lightfoot, 2004; and De Fina, Schiffrin 
and Bamberg, 2006). In these disciplines, 
narrative is seen as an archetypal, fundamental 
mode for making sense of the world and, as such, 
as a privileged structure, system, or mode for 
tapping into the teller’s social identities and sense 
of self. The significance of narrative for identity 
analysis does not however mean that there is con-
sensus on the definitions and views of narrative as 
an object of inquiry. In fact, narrative remains a 
particularly elusive, contested and indeterminate 
in meaning concept. It is variously used not only 
as an epistemology, a quintessentially qualitative 
method, but also as a fundamental communication 
mode, an archetypal or supra-genre. It is also 
sometimes used as an all-encompassing term – in 
a sort of ‘everything is narrative’ way – defined so 
broadly as to be equated with experience, time, 
history and life itself. On the other hand, it is also 
viewed more specifically as a kind of discourse or 
text-type with conventionalized textual features 
(see Georgakopoulou and Goutsos, 2000: 64–8).1 
The downsides to this diversity have been fre-
quently noted (e.g. Josselson, 2006) and there is 
concern that it often breeds an interpretative 
vacuum, thus leaving the area exposed to impres-
sionistic work that does not contribute to the crea-
tion of a critical mass. A related issue is the 
narrative turn which has celebrated narrative as a 
way of doing research that privileges the experien-
tial, and as a welcome antidote to the traditional 
positivist-based science that was dominant for 
a long time, well into the 1970s and 1980s 
(cf. Bruner, 1997: 62). This has often resulted in 
the idealization and essentialization of narrative. 
In turn, as we will see below, it has hampered 
empirical research on the numerous genres 
and 
situated 
micro 
instances 
of 
stories 
(cf. Georgakopoulou and Goutsos, 2000). 
In the light of the above, to talk about well-
defined and delimited schools of narrative analy-
sis necessitates a crude process of abstraction 
which does not do justice to the many different 
strands of existing work. Bearing this in mind, 
I will propose here that within sociolinguistic 
research on narrative, we can talk about two dis-
tinct ways of doing narrative analysis: one inspired 
by a conventional and largely canonical paradigm; 
the other based on a social interactional view of 
narrative (for a detailed discussion see De Fina 
and Georgakopoulou, 2008a). The former is 
traceable to Labov and Waletzky’s (1967) founda-
tional model of narrative analysis, but is also 
informed by the narrative turn in the social 
sciences. Social interactional approaches on the 
other hand stress variously the role of context in 
the shaping of narrative tellings and see them as 
being intimately linked with the production of 
social life. 
In this chapter, I focus more on the social inter-
actional approaches and register their latest 
advances. This is, in part, a conscious attempt to 
redress the balance. Until recently, ample time and 
space have been devoted to the ‘Labovian’ model 
and its importance has been duly acknowledged 
(not least in my own work; for example, see 
Georgakopoulou, 1997; Georgakopoulou and 
Goutsos, 2004; see also Toolan, 1988). As of late, 
however, sociolinguistic approaches to narrative 
have been making a decisive shift towards social 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
397
interactional approaches, which we have described 
as the shift from narrative as text to narrative as 
social practices (De Fina and Georgakopoulou, 
2008a, 2008b). 
27.2  THE LABOVIAN MODEL AS THE 
CONVENTIONAL PARADIGM 
In 1997, the then Journal of Narrative and Life 
History (now Narrative Inquiry) produced a 
substantial Special Issue (also published as a 
book) entitled ‘Oral versions of personal experi-
ence: three decades of narrative analysis’ (ed. by 
Michael Bamberg). The dozens of contributions 
by a galaxy of names in the area confirmed two 
things: first, the undeniably profound – and for 
some, surprising2 – influence that Labov’s model 
has had within sociolinguistics to the point that 
narrative analysis has, until recently, been synony-
mous with it. In addition, those contributions 
registered the fierce critique that the model has 
been on the receiving end of, sometimes from 
allies’ sources: i.e. from scholars who had more or 
less taken the model on board and who showed in 
their empirical studies that it did not quite work or 
that it needed further systematization. As already 
suggested, a full account of the model is beyond 
the scope of this chapter. Instead, I will single out 
what I see as its key elements. By examining oral 
narratives of personal, past experience in inter-
view settings, Labov and Waletzky (1967), and 
later Labov working alone (1972), showed that 
there is structure and systematicity in the story-
telling of ordinary people of a kind that was 
expected to be found in artful forms of narrative. 
They defined narrative in functional terms as ‘one 
verbal technique for recapitulating past experi-
ence, in particular a technique of constructing 
narrative units which match the temporal sequence 
of that experience’ (Labov and Waletzky, 1967: 
13). Their analysis resulted in the description of a 
fully-formed (or classic) narrative which ‘begins 
with an orientation, proceeds to the complicating 
action, is suspended at the focus of evaluation 
before the resolution, concludes with the resolu-
tion and returns the listener to the present time 
with the coda’ (p. 369).3
Of these structural components, evaluation (i.e. 
the expression of the narrator’s point of view of 
the events) has been the most influential and at the 
same time controversial one. With its addition, the 
model was instrumental in incorporating into 
narrative structure what least lent itself to that: 
namely, the affective, emotive, subjective and 
experiential aspects of narrative. This was done by 
means of postulating evaluation both as a separate 
structural unit and as a micro-level mechanism 
that can apply to the entire narrative. In later 
writings, and in response to critics, Labov 
rephrased his definition of narrative in the follow-
ing terms: ‘A narrative of personal experience is a 
report of a sequence of events that have entered 
into the biography of the speaker by a sequence of 
clauses that correspond to the original events’ 
(1997: 393). Labov’s revisions did no more 
than emphasize and reinforce some of the most 
heavily-contested aspects of his model: for 
instance, the fact that it privileges stories of past, 
personal experience events, at the expense of a 
wide range of different types of stories that 
abound in conversational settings, also, that the 
credibility of a story, i.e. the way a teller shields 
their telling against accusations of lying, is pre-
sented as a ‘universal’ need and value. The role of 
credibility is intimately linked with Labov sub-
scribing to what is often referred to as the minimal 
definitional criterion of narrative – namely, that of 
the temporal ordering of events.4 In addition, cred-
ibility goes hand in hand with a referential and 
realist view of the relationship between a story’s 
events and real-world events. In contrast, con-
structionist views of this relationship, which are 
nowadays in wide currency, stress that there is no 
such thing as a one-to-one mapping between what 
really happened and what is recounted as having 
happened. Instead, what is presented and how it is 
presented in a telling are ultimately shaped by the 
here and now of the story’s telling and the teller’s 
current perspective on the past.5 
As sustained critique of Labov’s model has 
shown (e.g. see contributions in Bamberg 1997a), 
one of the model’s main problems is that it sees 
narrative as a detached, autonomous and self-
contained unit with clearly identifiable parts. 
Many scholars have pointed out that, as stories in 
Labov’s data occurred in research interviews and 
as responses to an interviewer’s questions, they 
tended to be well-organized, with a beginning, 
middle and an end, and largely monological. In 
this respect, the teller appeared to be the main 
producer of meaning. Since then, conversational 
stories in ordinary environments have been found 
to be highly collaborative (e.g. Goodwin 1990). 
More generally, the context-sensitivity of the 
forms that the telling of a story can take has, by 
now, been amply demonstrated by, amongst others, 
studies that were inspired in the first place by 
Labov’s model. This substantial line of inquiry 
consists of numerous empirically-based projects6 
in a wide range of settings that have documented: 
the culturally-based expectations about what sto-
ries are about and how they are told (e.g. Chafe, 
1980; Polanyi, 1985; Tannen, 1978); the sociocul-
tural and situational variability of narrative struc-
ture, in particular evaluation (e.g. Linde, 1993); 
the dispensability of certain structural components 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
398
(particularly the abstract and the coda) and 
the infrequent occurrence of other factors 
(e.g. evaluation as a separate component); and the 
context-specific degrees of audience participation 
during the telling of a story (e.g. Cedeborg and 
Aronsson, 1994; Goodwin, 1984). Labov’s model 
coincided with and surely benefited from the 
insights of the narrative turn in the social sciences. 
As we will discuss below, these two influential 
trends have, together, based their insights on the 
study of narratives about the teller’s past experi-
ences that are told in research interviews.
27.3  THE SOCIAL INTERACTIONAL 
APPROACHES
Narrative as talk-in-interaction
Some of the biggest challenges to Labov have 
originated in research on conversational storytell-
ing, much of which broadly aligns itself with the 
sociologically-informed school of analysing con-
versational data called conversation analysis 
(henceforth CA). CA advocates attention to the 
details of the sequential management of any 
interaction and, in the case of narrative, this means 
that where a story occurs, the ‘how and why’ and 
what local actions it performs would be of para-
mount importance for the analysis. Narrative in 
any context is therefore seen as talk-in-interaction, 
as an embedded unit, enmeshed in local business, 
not free-standing or detached. From the CA point 
of view, viewing narratives as more or less self-
contained texts that can be abstracted from their 
original context of occurrence misses out on the 
fact that both the telling of a story and the ways in 
which it is told are shaped by previous talk and 
action. Stories occur in some kind of discourse 
environment, before and after other discourse 
activities, and are thus enmeshed in its local sur-
roundings. Stories are also sequentially managed; 
their tellings unfold online, moment by moment in 
the here and now of interactions. As such, they can 
be expected to raise different types of action and 
tasks for different interlocutors (Goodwin, 1984). 
In his critique of Labov’s model, one of the most 
influential CA proponents, Emmanuel Schegloff, 
argues that it is to this view of narrative as a 
sequence, in itself part of a sequentially-ordered 
event, that subsequent work on narrative ‘should 
be redirected’ in order for us to get ‘toward a 
differently targeted and more compelling grasp of 
vernacular storytelling’ (1997: 101).
A view of narrative as unfolding sequentially, 
as outlined above, goes hand in hand with a 
view of it as emergent. In this sense, its tellings 
emerge in specific interactional contexts as a joint 
venture and as the outcome of negotiation by 
interlocutors. Put differently, we cannot talk about 
a universal narrative structure, as Labov did, a 
priori of specific contexts of storytelling where 
the analysis of narrative ‘opens up rather than 
closes off the investigation of talk’s business’ 
(Edwards, 1997: 142). Narrative tellings are thus 
seen as irreducibly situational and locally occa-
sioned: ‘a good part of [their] meaning is to be 
found in the occasion of their production, in the 
local state of affairs that was operative at that 
exact moment of interactional time’ (Antaki and 
Widdicombe, 1998: 4). CA advocates attention to 
the details of their sequential management in 
specific kinds of interaction: where they occur, 
how and why; what local actions they perform. 
The CA view of narrative as talk-in-interaction 
presents important implications not only for the 
analysis of narrative but also for the processes and 
methods of data collection and transcription. In 
contrast to the conventional paradigm, the 
narrative data that form the mainstay of research 
arise naturally in conversations (be they in every-
day, informal or institutional contexts). There is 
thus a clear privileging of conversational sites as 
the main event under scrutiny and in that respect 
narrative is not seen a priori as a special or unique 
mode of communication but simply as ‘another 
format of telling’ (Edwards, 1997) within that 
event. By extension, it is recognized that narrative 
interviews are ultimately interactional data in 
which the researcher is very much part of the 
narrative telling, and that their role should be 
recorded as faithfully as possible in the transcrip-
tion process. This means that any verbal or non-
verbal contributions on the researcher’s part 
should be included in the transcript. As Potter and 
Hepburn have argued in relation to interview data 
in general, ‘they should be transcribed to a level 
that allows interactional features to be appreciated 
even if interactional features are not the topic of 
study’ (2005: 295). 
Conversation analysts have been successful and 
influential in documenting stories as sequentially-
ordered activities (e.g. see Sacks, Schegloff and 
Jefferson 1974) by paying attention to the ways in 
which they are introduced into the local context of 
a conversation and subsequently exited from 
(e.g. Jefferson 1978, Sacks 1974). However, as 
I have argued elsewhere (Georgakopoulou, 2007: 
61–87), there is still much scope for study of the 
part that comes between a story’s opening and a 
story’s ending. In this respect, whether structural 
components of a Labovian kind, e.g. complicating 
action or evaluation, are generally accepted (even 
if redefined) by CA is not altogether clear, 
nor is what would replace them if they were 
dismissed.7 Furthermore, the stories analysed 
within CA are by and large of the ‘prototypical’ 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
399
kind – i.e. involving personal experience past 
events – and, in that respect, not too dissimilar to 
Labov’s data, even if the approach has been differ-
ent. As we will see in Section 27.4, narrative 
analysis is currently moving away from this long-
standing emphasis towards the study of more 
atypical stories. 
Generally speaking, CA as its name suggests, 
privileges conversation as the main unit of social 
order from the outset and, in that respect, neither 
historically nor epistemologically does it share 
with narrative analysis the commitment to study-
ing narrative in its own right. This fundamental 
difference in outlook has perhaps hampered cross-
fertilization between the two. More than that, 
within socially-minded linguistics, CA has become 
implicated in a larger debate about the role of 
context in the analysis of interaction in general 
(e.g. see the dialogue between Wetherell, 1998, 
and Schegloff, 1998). This debate is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, but it is worth noting that 
CA has generally come under fire as being a too 
nose-to-data approach that does not easily abstract 
itself from local contexts, and that does not pro-
vide a way for forging links between local 
instances of interactions and larger contexts and 
processes pertaining above and beyond single 
communicative events.8
Narrative in context
As I argued above, a view of narrative as talk-
in-interaction allows us to explore narrative as a 
socially-meaningful and orderly activity. It affords 
an intimate view of what is going on in the here 
and now of any narrative interaction, firmly locat-
ing us in the flow of everyday lived experience. 
It does, however, diverge from the tradition of 
contextualized approaches to language that set out 
to navigate between the here and now of interac-
tions and the discourses impacting on them, 
recognizing that any strip of activity is configured 
on momentary-quotidian-biographical-historical 
frames and across socio-spatial arenas. In the case 
of narrative, this forging of relationships between 
local and global contexts has been attempted 
by, broadly speaking, post-Labovian work on the 
one hand and the ethnography of communication 
studies on the other. 
To take each separately, in post-Labovian work, 
evaluation appeared to be the most appealing of 
the structural components: not only did the model 
allow for different positions and different types of 
evaluation but also evaluation was the component 
that rested on the intersection between narrative 
organization and narrative affectivity. Evaluation  
did not just bind a story together, it also showed 
what the story’s point or moral. Consequently, it is 
no accident that there have been various attempts 
to expand on the scope of evaluation and further 
systematize it on the one hand (e.g. see Polanyi, 
1985)9 and, on the other hand, to develop concepts 
that present various degrees of more or less 
explicitly acknowledged affiliation with evalua-
tion, such as that of involvement (Tannen, 
1989).10 As suggested above, there is indeed a 
volume of work which has documented the 
culture-specificity of evaluation, particularly in 
relation to the following questions: 
• Who is entitled to tell whose stories? 
• What is the attitude of audiences to telling, tales 
and tellers?
• How do cultures vary in the relative support 
granted by recipients to tellers, tellings and 
tales? (Blum-Kulka, 1997)
• What is the role of fact and fiction in 
storytelling? 
• What culture-specific values are attached to 
each?
• How do stories invoke and re-inscribe the 
physical and social space familiar to the tellers 
and audience?
A case in point is Johnstone’s study of story-
telling in a Middle American community, Fort 
Wayne (1990). The study brought to the fore 
largely monologic and teller-led tellings that 
placed emphasis on situating the stories locally, 
mainly by means of the (over)use of details about 
place. In the same spirit as Tannen, Johnstone 
viewed details as involvement strategies that 
invite audience participation in meaning-making. 
She also attributed their use to the prevailing 
cultural attitudes to factuality. 
Specifically, as Johnstone stated, ‘for Fort 
Wayners, personal experience stories are taken to 
be iconic representations of events, as the events 
were experienced by the teller. They cannot appear 
to be fictions. Or else they will count as lies’ (1990: 
101). Fort Wayners thus valued good stories as 
opposed to good storytellers. Within this cultural 
bias towards factually-verifiable events, details in 
stories acted as a conventional mechanism for 
enhancing the ‘reality’ and ‘actuality’ of stories, by 
precisely locating them in time and space. 
Post-Labovian work on the context-sensitivity 
of storytelling has contributed rich insights into, to 
borrow Schiffrin’s terms, how stories are situated 
locally, in the here and now of their tellings, but 
also globally too, in their sociocultural contexts, 
by means of invoking cultural knowledge and 
norms (1996: 168). Nonetheless, at the time that 
these studies were conducted, there was still a 
strong lingering of social, psychological and 
anthropological approaches that defined culture as 
a unifying, homogeneous, static and a priori 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
400
defined set of values, beliefs and behaviours that 
are invoked in communication (e.g. Markus and 
Kitayama, 1991; Triandis, 1989). It is fair to 
say that many of the sociolinguistic studies of 
storytelling in context were thus informed by 
these views and invoked them as their interpreta-
tive framework. This is evident in the fact that 
there was a preoccupation with uncovering certain 
communication styles in storytelling that, in turn, 
provided evidence for or were interpreted in the 
light of ‘core’ cultural values (e.g. sociability, 
solidarity). In some cases, these values were 
more or less directly traceable to the distinction 
between individualist and interdependent cultures 
(e.g. Polanyi, 1985). Since then, views of culture 
that prioritize fluidity and heterogeneity have 
become increasingly accepted and there has been 
a decisive shift away from earlier normative 
accounts of culture. At the linguistic level, there is 
also nowadays a reluctance to form one-to-one 
conceptual links between linguistic forms and 
social meanings. Similarly, attributing singular 
functions to linguistic devices is widely recog-
nized as a complex enterprise.11 
In parallel with what I have broadly called here 
post-Labovian studies, another tradition of study-
ing language in general and storytelling in particu-
lar in context was developing in the 1970s and 
1980s that has set beacons for the current study of 
narrative in social life. This tradition can be 
broadly classified as being linguistic-anthropolog-
ical in nature, but some of its main proponents are, 
more specifically, ethnographers of communica-
tion, as we will see below. The main foci of 
inquiry in this research are: the linguistic means 
by which cultural meanings are encoded in narra-
tive; the social situations in which narratives occur 
and how these shape narrative tellings; and the 
culturally-shaped communicative functions ful-
filled by narratives and their role in socialization 
within communities. The data that have mainly 
been studied in this respect come from tradi-
tional storytelling in non-Western communities. 
However, as we will see below, more recent work, 
inspired by earlier studies, has turned attention to 
narratives in institutional contexts and has exam-
ined their role in the formation and transmission 
of institutional values and norms as well as in the 
exclusion of certain social groups (e.g. see 
Jacquemet, 2005, and chapters in Briggs, 1996, 
and in Mumby, 1993).
What brings together work with this focus is 
the recognition that narrative tellings are shaped 
by, as well as being instrumental in, shaping the 
macro processes that constitute them. There is 
constant navigation between the fine-grained 
analysis of narrative data and the study of socio-
cultural processes. This rests on the notions of 
social practice, genre and performance as being 
central to the understanding of narrative. These 
ideas have been instrumental in precipitating a 
shift in the study of narratives from types of texts 
to types of events, with an emphasis on the social 
spaces, in which stories occur and are habitually 
associated with, their local functions in those 
spaces and the participants’ roles and relations. 
Increasingly then, as we will see below, this line 
of inquiry has moved from earlier views of 
context as a surrounding frame, a list of situational 
and cultural elements that determine narrative 
tellings, to a dynamic notion of contextualization. 
This captures both the irreducible contingency 
of narrative tellings and their active role in (re)
shaping their contexts. In a similar vein, viewing 
narratives as practices and not just as texts has 
meant that there is an emphasis on both the 
habituality and regularity of tellings (in the sense 
of recurrent evolving responses to given situa-
tions) and their emergence and situational contin-
gency. This is in tune with the recent re-theorizing 
of genres away from formal classifications as the 
basis for text-distinctions, and with an emphasis 
on members’ conventionalized expectations about 
the activities they are engaged in, the roles and 
relationships typically involved and the organiza-
tional systems of those activities. In this way, 
more than a ‘constellation of systematically 
related, co-occurring formal features’ (Bauman, 
2004: 3), genre becomes a ‘primary means for 
dealing with recurrent social exigencies … a 
routinized vehicle for encoding and expressing 
particular orders of knowledge and experience’ 
(p. 6). As orienting frameworks of conventional-
ized expectations, genres force the analytical 
attention to routine and socioculturally shaped 
‘ways of telling’ (Hymes, 1996) in specific 
settings and for specific purposes.
What this means for the study of narrative is 
that instead of treating it as a macro genre with 
fixed structural characteristics (i.e. invariant and 
inflexible structural units), emphasis is placed on 
narrative forms as dynamic and evolving responses 
to recurring rhetorical situations and as resources 
more or less strategically drawn upon, negotiated 
and reconstructed anew in local contexts. As 
I have argued in detail elsewhere (Georgakopoulou, 
2007: 12–29), the move to such a practice-
oriented view of narrative genres also requires that 
we firmly locate them in place and time and 
scrutinize the social and discourse activities they 
are habitually associated with. In particular, it 
focuses our attention on the ‘social values of 
space as inscribed upon the practices’ (Hanks, 
1996: 246) that take place within narrative 
tellings. 
Many of the above recent advances in the study 
of narrative are traceable to insights gained from 
the influential work of Dell Hymes (e.g. 1981) 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
401
who studied narrative organization in Native 
American communities. To capture the ways in 
which narrative forms are both shaped by and (re)
create cultural knowledge and norms, Hymes 
developed ethnopoetics, a painstaking and fairly 
technical modus operandi involving intense and 
repeated listening of recorded data. Its basic units 
of analysis (e.g. line, verse, stanzas, scenes and 
acts) were identified with a combination of into-
national, thematic, lexical and syntactic criteria. 
Despite the lack of convergence on the number 
and definition of such units in subsequent studies 
(e.g. see Gee, 1986), what is important to note is 
how, with their introduction to the study of narra-
tive, the poetic organization of oral narratives was 
recognized, visually displayed (in the form of 
stanza-like segments) and respected in the tran-
scripts. Furthermore, it was shown that this organ-
ization embodied a ‘rhetoric of action, that is, an 
implicit schema for the organization of experi-
ence’ (Hymes, 1996: 121) that was culturally-
specific and revolved around numbers of cultural 
importance. For instance, Chinookan narratives 
were found to be organized in patterns of two and 
four.12 This organization was reflected in the 
stories’ units (i.e. lines, verses, stanzas, scenes). 
In other words, Chinookan stories routinely 
presented two-line verses, stanzas made up of two 
or four verses, and so on.
Ethnopoetic analysis has had little application 
to narratives that are produced outside oral cul-
tures.13 Gee (1986) further documented its value 
as a tool for uncovering oral culture influences in 
narrative form with his analysis of the stories told 
by a black girl during sharing-time at a school 
that had been previously studied by Michaels 
(1981).14 Gee uncovered a host of rhythmical 
patterns characteristic of oral cultures. In his 
study, as in more recent work (e.g. Blommaert and 
Maryns, 2001), the visually-poetic display of 
narrative organization becomes an epistemologi-
cal statement on how narrative units more or less 
subtly point to sociocultural forces at work. In this 
way, a model of narrative structure becomes 
something more than a sophisticated apparatus for 
segmenting text: it actually serves to document 
social inequalities and differential access to differ-
entially-valued storytelling styles. 
Another strand of inquiry within linguistic 
anthropology, espousing comparable ideas about 
the pairing of text-context but without employing 
ethnopoetics, is that of performance studies of 
narrative. As the name suggests, the central 
concept here is that of performance, defined 
within Bauman’s influential study of tales of dog-
trading in Texas (1986) as an assumption of 
responsibility on the part of the performer for the 
display of communicative skill and competence 
and an acceptance that such a display is going to 
be evaluated by the audience (cf. Goffman, 1981). 
In this sense, exactly like narrative organization in 
Hymes, performance is a culturally-shaped way of 
speaking, and ‘just as speaking itself as a cultural 
system (or as part of cultural systems defined in 
other terms) will vary from speech community to 
speech community, so too will the nature and 
extent of performance and verbal art’ (Bauman, 
1969: 13). As Bauman has repeatedly stressed, the 
devices that mark narrative tellings as perform-
ances are expected to vary cross-culturally and 
need to be discovered empirically. 
In contrast to earlier anthropological studies of 
verbal art, Bauman saw performance as a site 
where tradition (in the sense of adherence to 
performance norms) and innovation (in the sense 
of individual improvisation and situational contin-
gency) are interwoven. Narrative performance is 
thus the complex outcome of the interrelation-
ships between the narrative event (i.e. the here and 
now of a narrative telling), the narrated event (the 
reported world of events and characters), and the 
text (the actual language and stylistic choices for 
telling the story). 
Insights from the ethnography of communica-
tion and performance studies of narrative have 
found their way into a critical analysis of stories 
as a vehicle for power and ideologies in vari-
ous institutions ranging from interviews to 
assess asylum-seeking applications (Maryns and 
Blommaert, 2001) to courtroom cases (Trinch and 
Berk-Selingson).15 Such studies have seriously 
problematized the earlier optimism about narra-
tive as an empowering mode of lay experience and 
voices. Instead, they have shown that there are 
serious issues of narrative inequality to be found 
in, among others, the tellers’ access to ownership 
and control of the resources required for shaping 
their stories so as to be tellable and acceptable in 
the contexts in which they occur. They have also 
documented the ways in which institutionally 
powerful social actors can control storytelling by, 
for example, interrupting, reformulating it or 
pushing it in certain directions. 
Let us look at one particular study that illus-
trates some of the above foci more closely. Ehrlich 
(2001) has shown in her study of sexual assault 
trials in Canada how the version of events that 
may emerge in a trial can be determined by the 
type of questions the lawyers ask of witnesses; 
also, how these questions control the topic or 
selectively reformulate witnesses’ responses. 
Ehrlich’s study has thus provided further evidence 
for the ways in which ‘the institutionally sanc-
tioned, pre-allocated role of lawyer as questioner 
and witness as answerer has significant implica-
tions for the co-constructed nature of courtroom 
narratives’ (2007: 455). In her analysis of three 
trials on the same sexual assault case (2007),16 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
402
Ehrlich showed how the norms of cultural intelli-
gibility about gender in operation in each case 
were instrumental in the co-construction of 
versions of events between the complainant and 
the Crown Attorney. Specifically, in the trials that 
acquitted the accused, the complainant and the 
Crown Attorney co-constructed a narrative in 
which the sexual activity was presented as consen-
sual. In contrast, as Ehrlich shows, the same 
events and facts of the case ‘were interpreted by 
the Supreme Court in a way which was compati-
ble with the complainant’s version of events’ 
(2007: 472) and thus presented the sexual activity 
as coerced and not as consensual. A widespread 
strategy used to negotiate the interpretation of a 
narrative or parts of it was that of re-contextuali-
zation (cf. Bernstein, 1996), i.e. the creation of a 
new context of interpretation of aspects of the 
story that was being told.
In sum, the study of narrative in social practice 
has increasingly moved to densely contextualized 
approaches that call for attention to the particu-
larities and exigencies of specific data in specific 
contexts at the same time as shedding light on how 
wider social relations of power and control shape 
narrative tellings. Such situated analyses look at 
sociocultural phenomena close up, i.e. in the 
moment-to-moment unfolding of communication. 
As such, their analytic point of entry is specific 
interactional events in which stories occur. The 
focus has thus shifted from asking what is culture-
specific about narrative tellings to how cultural 
resources may be drawn upon and reconciled but 
also contested in the contingencies of situated 
activity. In addition, with the latest turn of narra-
tive analysis to identities within sociolinguistics, 
which we will discuss below, culture is no longer 
examined in isolation and as a distinguishable 
attribute that can be singled out and kept apart 
from other identity aspects, but in its interaction 
with other aspects of identity (e.g. gender, age, 
social class). Finally, the ethnographic perspective 
that these studies normally take currently presents 
a dramatic difference in scale: the exploration of 
the sociocultural roles of narrative in whole com-
munities has gradually given way to the study of 
shrunk-down and much more manageable groups 
of people and their micro cultures.17  
27.4  NARRATIVE AND IDENTITIES
As already suggested, outside sociolinguistics, 
narrative has served as a major methodological 
tool for researching people’s identities. It is 
important, however, to emphasize that only a par-
ticular type of narrative has mainly served as the 
object of this inquiry, namely that of a life story, 
and less frequently the so-called short-range 
stories of landmark events (e.g. stories of preg-
nancy, marriage, divorce, illness, etc.). The latter 
are reminiscent of Labov’s stories which were 
collected as a response to the question, ‘Were 
you ever in danger of dying?’. Common to both 
types of stories is that they are routinely elicited 
in research interviews. Also, both involve 
personal experience past events that the teller has 
sufficient distance from, and thus is able to reflect 
on. Such stories have been employed as heuristics 
for the inquiry into tellers’ representations of 
past events, and how the tellers make sense of 
themselves in the light of these past events. The 
guiding assumption here is that the telling of 
stories allows the teller to bring the coordinates 
of time, space and personhood into a unitary 
frame so that the sources ‘behind’ these represen-
tations can be made empirically visible for 
further analytical scrutiny in the form of ‘identity 
analysis’. 
In tune with this approach, there has been a 
long-standing tradition of investigating how 
pre-existent, socioculturally available, capital 
D-discourses (variously called ‘meta-narratives’, 
‘master-narratives’, ‘scenarios’, etc.) are drawn 
upon by tellers in order to make sense of them-
selves over time and of the defining events that 
happened to them (e.g. see Kerby, 1991). What 
these discourses are is decided by the analysts, 
sometimes before the actual data collection and 
analysis. Selves and identities are thus viewed as 
the product of such prevailing discourses. A con-
cept that has informed numerous studies of narra-
tive and identity with this focus is that of 
positioning. In Davies and Harré’s (1990) seminal 
paper, positioning was defined as ‘the discursive 
process whereby selves are located in conversa-
tions as observably and subjectively coherent 
participants in jointly produced story lines’ (p. 48). 
Following on from that study, which tellingly 
employed made-up examples of narratives, 
work on positioning tends to postulate culturally-
available subject positions a priori of specific data 
and subsequently ‘look’ for how they impact on 
specific narratives. This kind of work does not 
seem to be tuned into the emergence of position-
ing processes through details intrinsic to an 
interaction. and has shied away from an explora-
tion of the fleetingness and contingency of 
positionings in local contexts (for a critique see 
Bamberg, 1997b: 335–42; Lucius-Hoene and 
Depperman, 2000; Wortham, 2000: 164–166). 
Bamberg’s (1997b) attempt to re-define position-
ing so as to be suited to an interactional approach 
to narrative resulted in the postulation of three 
levels of analysis, which have often been employed 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
403
by analysts as heuristics for the ways in which 
tellers ‘do’ self in narrative tellings.18
It is fair to say that research on narrative and 
identity within biographical studies has privileged 
both a certain kind of subjectivity and certain 
kinds of identities. More specifically, there has 
been a focus on the project of ‘storying’ oneself as 
intrinsically-oriented towards coherence and 
authenticity. In this respect, the volume of studies 
has focused on how, even through a dynamic 
process, tellers gradually move to a unified and 
rather stable account of self that is interwoven into 
their life story (e.g. Brockmeier and Carbaugh, 
2001; Daiute and Lightfoot, 2004). Self and narra-
tive19 are thus typically brought together in ways 
that emphasize the ideas of autonomy, integration 
and coherence over those of a fragmented, 
relational self. Fragmented in this case would 
refer to being self-discursively constructed as 
different things on different occasions that can 
neither be automatically reduced to a singular and 
coherent entity, nor easily abstracted from local 
contexts. A relational self on the other hand would 
derive its capacity for self-perception and self-
definition through relations with others and in 
interactional negotiations with others. 
Both these ideas have met with resistance 
within biographical narrative analysis. In Roberts’ 
terms, there is a danger in the area that ‘narrative 
is used too restrictively to refer to a version of life 
given at a particular moment as expressing the 
given story as consistent and sequencing experi-
ence as lived, and even, if only momentarily either 
the self as a consistent surface expression or an 
inner constant entity’ (2004: 270). In this way, 
Roberts continues, linearity remains dominant 
even if implicit in the use of story and in turn ‘life 
as stories’ becomes itself a restrictive metaphor 
emphasizing consistency while overlooking the 
deficiencies and inconsistencies of speech (idem). 
In similar vein, Parker alerts us to the risk of 
prescribing a certain kind of subjectivity through 
the analysis of narrative. He notes that personal 
narrative seems to be presented as a model of how 
we should configure ourselves as selves striving 
for a purposeful and convincing whole (Parker, 
2003: 314). To many, this is a Western type of 
ideal encompassing neo-Cartesian individualist 
views of personhood and privileging unity and 
the integration of a singular and ‘authentic’ 
self through the piecing together of a well-
structured and orderly life story (e.g. see De Peuter, 
1998: 32–4). 
To sum up, narrative identity in the sense of the 
‘storied self’ is a well-established paradigm across 
a wide array of disciplines. This emphasis on the 
construction of self has meant that relational and 
dialogical processes of making sense of self have 
been under-represented.20 Furthermore, narrative 
and identity analysis in the social sciences has 
mainly relied on a specific type of narrative 
elicited in interviews. It has also been slow to 
move away from representational accounts of the 
self (i.e. accounts of the type of person that a life 
story presents its teller to be) that treat stories as 
more or less authentic, transparent and unmedi-
ated records (for a discussion see Atkinson and 
Delamore, 2006) to interactional views of identity 
construction and the ways in which narrators per-
form and locally occasion themselves through 
their stories. 
In contrast, such interactional approaches to 
identities have become increasingly mainstream 
within sociolinguistics. Research on the commu-
nicative how of identities in talk has been flourish-
ing and recently there has been a proliferation of 
sociolinguistic studies of narrative and identities 
(e.g. De Fina, 2003; chapters in De Fina, Schiffrin 
and Bamberg, 2006; Georgakopoulou, 2007).21 
Before this systematic turn to identities, one of the 
first domains to capture the sociolinguists’ atten-
tion was the ways in which tellers presented 
aspects of their self by making the most of the 
possibilities that the separation between the here 
and now of narrative telling and the there and then 
of the taleworld (cf. told, narrated events) afforded 
them. As Schiffrin’s oft-quoted study showed 
(1990), this separation allows tellers to manipulate 
different aspects of ‘self’, as defined by Goffman 
(1974). For example, tellers can appear both as 
narrators and as characters in the taleworld. Or, 
they can appear to be the animator (the aspect of 
self that physically produces the story) but not the 
author (i.e. the aspect of self responsible for the 
content of talk). They can do this with the use of 
various devices, such as quoting what characters 
in the taleworld said or thought. This play with 
who tells, who is responsible for the content of 
talk and who is committed to what is being said 
allows storytellers to control their self-presentation. 
They may diffuse their agency or responsibility in 
the social field, create a widened base of support 
for their views and beliefs, cast positive light on 
them, increase the validity of their claims and so 
on (cf. Hill, 1995). 
More recently, however, there has been a shift 
towards exploring ways of connecting narrative 
tellings with larger social identities (e.g. see 
Wagner and Wodak, 2006; Wodak and De Cillia, 
2007). This inquiry involves scrutinizing the 
genres that narrative tellings present, and their 
specific language and interactional choices for 
how they more or less subtly and indirectly point 
to (cf. index) aspects of the teller’s identities, such 
as ethnicity, gender, age, etc. For example, in 
De Fina’s study of the personal experience 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
404
narratives of border crossings of Mexican 
immigrants in the USA, identity construction in 
narrative is related to three levels (2003: 19): 
1 The tellers’ adherence to cultural ways of telling 
(e.g. involving specific linguistic and rhetorical 
resources) that identify them as members of 
specific communities.
2 The ‘enactment, reflection or negation’ (idem) 
of personal social roles and relationships in the 
actual story world.
3 The ‘expression, discussion and negotiation of 
membership into communities’ (idem) normally 
realized in the categorization of self and others 
(cf. Georgakopoulou, 2008).
This line of inquiry has come a long way in forg-
ing links that are by no means presented as deter-
ministic between narrative and identities through 
a focus on the action properties of language in 
narrative and away from the representational 
accounts of narrative studies in the social 
sciences. However, as I have argued elsewhere 
(Georgakopoulou, 2006a), there is much scope 
here for cross-fertilization with CA, and I have 
pointed to one strand that merits systematic atten-
tion – namely, the sequential management of 
stories as a point of entry into the teller’s as well 
as the other storytelling participant’s local roles. 
More specifically, I have drawn on Zimmerman’s 
(1998) study of how local participation roles or 
discourse identities, tied with the sequence of 
adjacency pairs such as questioner–answerer and 
speaker–recipient, provide a platform for larger, 
i.e. extra–situational or ‘portable’, social identities 
(e.g. spouse, parent, layperson, expert, etc.).22 
One question that tantalizes current sociolin-
guistic work on narrative and identities is how we 
can move from the locally-performed and on-the-
spot constructed identities that are marked by 
irreducible contingency, to being able to show 
some kind of continuity in these identities, 
i.e. aspects that would seem to hold above and 
beyond local contexts as part of a ‘rehearsed’ self. 
This question is, however, being posed in different 
methodological ways and with different data to 
those of biographical approaches. It is out of this 
problem space within narrative and identities-
interaction work that the small stories paradigm 
has grown, as I will explain below. 
The turn to small stories 
In recent work, we have proposed small stories 
(Bamberg, 2004; Georgakopoulou, 2006b, 2006c; 
2007; 2008; Bamberg and Georgakopoulou, 2008) 
as an alternative to canonical narrative studies, a 
‘new’ narrative turn that sets out to include certain 
under-represented activities in the focal concerns 
of narrative and identity analysis. The initial moti-
vation came from seeing how the assumptions of 
the biographical approaches to the analysis of nar-
ratives in combination with Labov’s model have 
filtered down to analytic work on conversational 
(cf. non-elicited) narratives. As a result, they have 
informed analysts’ definitions of what constitutes 
a tellable story and/or a story that can be used as a 
point of entry into identity analysis. Despite 
numerous studies of conversational storytelling 
that have, over the years, brought to the fore 
stories that depart from personal, past experience 
stories, as Ochs and Capps have rightly pointed 
out (2001), stories that depart from this narrative 
canon remain under-explored. Thus, our aims 
were: to document the forms and contexts of these 
atypical stories which we have collectively called 
‘small stories’; to put forth analytical tools that are 
appropriate for them; and last but not least, to 
argue for their importance in narrative and identity 
research.
‘Small stories’ is thus an umbrella term that 
captures a gamut of frequent and salient narrative 
activities in conversational contexts, such as 
tellings of ongoing events, future or hypothetical 
events, shared or known events, also allusions to 
previous tellings, deferrals of tellings, and refusals 
to tell. These tellings are typically small when 
compared to the pages and pages of transcripts of 
interview narratives. On a metaphorical level, the 
term locates a level and even an aesthetic for the 
identification and analysis of narrative: the small-
ness of talk, where fleeting moments of narrative 
orientation to the world (Hymes, 1996) can be 
easily missed out on by an analytical lens which 
only takes fully-fledged stories as the prototype 
from where the analytic vocabulary is supposed to 
emerge. Small stories can be about very recent 
(e.g. yesterday, this morning) or still unfolding 
events, thus immediately reworking slices of 
experience and arising out of a need to share what 
has just happened. For instance, as I have shown 
elsewhere (Georgakopoulou, 2007), it is common 
in email correspondence between friends for an 
event that has just happened to be communicated 
straight away (normally in the subject heading of 
the message) with a brief telling and the promise 
of a further update by email or for a fuller telling 
in a near-future face-to-face meeting between the 
friends. I have tried to capture the topicality of 
such stories’ events and the urgency with which 
they are communicated with the term ‘breaking 
news’. 
Small stories can also be quickly and ellipti-
cally told to back up or elaborate on an argumen-
tative point occurring in an ongoing conversation. 
Certain small stories may fulfil prototypical 
definitional criteria such as the temporal ordering 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
405
of events but others do not (for a detailed discus-
sion of the definition of small stories see 
Georgakopoulou, 2007: 31–40). In all cases, the 
identification of small stories does not rest exclu-
sively on prototypical textual criteria.23 Instead, 
small stories are seen as discourse engagements 
that integrally connect with what gets done on 
particular occasions and in particular settings. 
The claim is that recognizing ‘narrativity’ or a 
‘narrative orientation’ in certain activities shows 
regard for situated understandings.24 
Small stories research has begun to document 
how attention to everyday instances of storytell-
ing, however incomplete, can serve as a window 
into the micro-genetic processes of identities as 
‘in-the-making’ or ‘coming-into-being’. By con-
ceptualizing small stories as the sites of engage-
ment where identities are continuously practised 
and tested out, we have begun to show how these 
practices ‘compare to the tellers’ engagement in 
reflexive positions in life stories. that are typically 
elicited in clinical or research settings (Bamberg 
and Georgakopoulou, 2008). Such a line of inquiry 
into everyday, interactional stories shows that it is 
in the everyday narrative practices that identity 
work is primarily being conducted. Habitual 
engagement with certain identity positions articu-
lated through stories over time ends up becoming 
the source for a continuous sense of who we are 
– a sense of us as ‘same’ in spite of continuous 
change. Put differently, the actual identity work 
that is being conducted by individuals in interac-
tive engagement with stories so to speak, feeds 
into a sense of self – in the form of a continuous 
process within which this sense comes into exist-
ence (emerges). 
Exactly as in other current social interactional 
work on narrative and identities, small stories 
approach the topic of identity construction in nar-
ratives in a way that is crucially different to that of 
biographical approaches. They accept that ‘doing 
self’ is not all that storytellers do. They also do 
rhetorical work through storytelling: they put 
forth arguments, challenge their interlocutors’ 
views and generally attune their stories to various 
local, interpersonal purposes, sequentially orient-
ing them to prior and upcoming talk. It is in and 
through this type of relational activity that any 
representations in the form of content, i.e. what 
the story is about, should be seen. This suggests 
that the emphasis within narrative interview 
research on the representational aspects of stories 
(cf. Atkinson and Delamont, 2006) may be over-
stating their role in identity work as well as skew-
ing the ways in which they are intimately linked 
with the interview as talk-in-interaction. This sort 
of analysis takes us away from documenting self 
as a finished and static product. Instead, it urges us 
to scrutinize the inconsistencies, contradictions, 
moments of trouble and tension, and the tellers’ 
constant navigation and finessing between differ-
ent versions of selfhood in local contexts. 
Small stories research has also shown that iden-
tity work in stories among intimates draws irrevo-
cably on the participants’ lived and shared 
experience (Georgakopoulou, 2007). This has 
been obscured in interview narratives, where 
primacy is given to the single event and where 
the researcher tends to be a ‘stranger’.25
27.5 CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has selectively charted advances in 
the socially-minded linguistic analysis of narra-
tive by focusing on social interactional approaches 
that have precipitated a shift from narrative as text 
to narrative as social practice. We have seen that 
some of the hallmarks of this line of inquiry 
involve fine-grained analysis of narrative data, 
emphasis on the communicative how, and on both 
the local context of a story and the larger sociocul-
tural processes that shape and are shaped by it. 
Similarly, narrative tellings are examined for the 
ways in which they function as social practices 
and within other social practices. This necessitates 
a move from narrative as one undifferentiated 
and homogeneous mode towards the careful 
documentation of narrative genres, viewed as 
interconnections between social expectations 
about narrative form and emergence of meanings 
in concrete events. This opening up to variability 
in narrative has brought to the fore non-canonical 
narratives and narrative formats and genres that 
had traditionally been neglected in conventional 
narrative analysis. It has also advanced our under-
standing of the interactional features of such 
narratives and the contexts which engender or 
prohibit their telling. We have seen that small 
stories research is an important step in this direc-
tion: one of its primary aims has been to work 
through the implications for identity research of 
including non-canonical stories in the focal con-
cerns of narrative analysis. This sociolinguistic 
turn to narrative and identities is the single latest 
advance within social interactional approaches 
and it has been made with a view of identities as 
performed and discursively emergent.
Without wishing to box in social interactional 
work on narrative, we could nonetheless attempt 
an abstraction and summarize its main foci of 
interest in terms of three interrelated levels of 
analysis, which of course different analysts 
may prioritize differently. ‘As I have explained 
elsewhere (Georgakopoulou, 2007: 20–23), these 
three levels of analysis illustrate the constant 
navigation and multi-layered work involved in this 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
406
kind of work. They show how the analysts’ main 
effort is to capture the moment of synthesis of a 
single communicative event while at the same 
time not divorcing that moment from sociocul-
tural histories and operative timescales. In this 
way, narratives are studied not only in the here and 
now but also as texts that get transposed in time 
and space and that establish intertextual ties with 
other narratives and other genres. 
The analytical levels in question can thus be 
described as follows: ways of (story)telling cap-
ture socioculturally-shaped and conventionalized 
themes and styles of telling that are, in turn, seen 
as modes of acting, interacting, producing and 
dynamically receiving text, the revealing of a 
rhetorical stance and orientation to the world. 
Sites involve sociocultural spheres and spaces for 
semiotic activity in real time (cf. site of engage-
ment, Scollon and Scollon, 2004) that may be 
conventionally associated with specific kinds of 
storytelling, shaping their ways of telling, as well 
as becoming an integral part of the stories’ plot. 
Finally, tellers is a dynamically-conceived adapta-
tion of the lay term employed for social actors 
within storytelling activities seen as having a 
complex make-up: personal–autobiographical, 
social–relational and partaking in both a taleworld 
(as character with other characters) and in the here 
and now (as interlocutor). This level includes the 
interactional history of participants, where appli-
cable, the participant roles and relationships, and 
entitlement issues as well as systems of norms and 
expectations.
As already suggested, social interactional 
approaches to narrative tend to employ ethno-
graphic methods that allow for local, reflexive and 
situated understandings of narratives as more or 
less partial and valid accounts within systems of 
production and articulation. This results in an 
increased reflexivity on the researcher–researched 
relationships and a scepticism concerning the 
dominant view (within the narrative turn) of 
narrative as a primary and unique mode for 
making sense of self and the world. It is, instead, 
more interesting for social interactional approaches 
to explore how different situational and sociocul-
tural contexts interrelate with narrative genres, 
and also to employ narrative analysis as part of a 
multi-method, in which a particular problem-
space for the sociolinguist is explored with 
various kinds of data and various multi-layered 
analyses. 
NOTES
1 In some cases, the two terms ‘narrative’ 
and ‘story’ are not used interchangeably but, rather, 
‘narrative’ is seen as a super-ordinate term and 
‘story’ as an instance. It is also common that a piece 
of data may be characterized as a story but not 
as a narrative. In Kohler Riessman study of divorce 
narratives for example, accounts of events that 
happened repeatedly in the past, and not once, were 
classified as habitual stories but not narratives. 
Within ‘narratology’ (literary approaches to narra-
tive), a lot of ink has been spent on what is to be 
included in the category of narrative and what is to 
be excluded, resulting in, for example, the exclusion 
of ‘reports’ and ‘chronicles’ (for details, see Fludernik, 
1996). In this chapter, the two terms are used inter-
changeably. Furthermore, we will see how, in socio-
linguistics, there has been a gradual opening up of 
narrative analysis to data that depart from the narra-
tive canon of stories of personal, past experience and 
events.  
2 As Schegloff has noted, ‘It is striking to what 
degree features of the 1967 paper have remained 
characteristic of treatments of narrative’ (1997: 101). 
In a similar vein, Holmes has talked about not being 
able to move away from Labov’s model: ‘As I pro-
ceeded I found that in whichever direction I attempted 
to develop the analysis, I kept inescapably returning 
to the need to first establish the basic structure of 
narratives’ (1997: 95). 
3 Very briefly described, the abstract is a brief 
summary statement that encapsulates the point of 
the story; orientation identifies the time, place, situ-
ations and characters; the complicating action 
answers the repeated question, ’Then what 
happened?‘; resolution marks the end of the events 
of the complicating action; evaluation comprises the 
devices by which the narrator indicates the point of 
a narrative, i.e. why it is worth telling; finally, the 
coda closes a narrative off, normally by bringing it 
back to the moment of telling.
4 The quest for textually-defined and universally-
applied criteria for defining narrative and narrative 
structure is part of a long-standing line of inquiry 
that predates Labov. Propp’s (1968) study of folk-
tales and Lévi-Strauss’ (1955, 1966) study of myths 
are notable examples of such attempts. For alterna-
tive studies of (narrative) structure within linguistics, 
see Quasthoff (1980) and van Dijk (1980). A detailed 
discussion of this structuralist line of work is beyond 
the scope of this chapter (for details, see Johnstone, 
2001). 
5 While discussing Labov’s (2001) quest for truth 
in relation to stories told as part of the work of the 
South-African Truth and Reconciliation Commission 
(TRC), Slembrouck (2003) claims that the kind of 
‘forensic’ approach represented in his work is mainly 
aimed at inferring ‘responsibility claims’ and ‘what 
really happened’ from the study of ‘linguistic 
structure’ (p. 467). He goes on to contrast this 
approach to the ‘strand of narrative inquiry … in 
which subjective orientations yield an experiential 

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
407
truth-fragmented, 
identity-enabling, 
narrative, 
invested with point of view, subjectifying’ (idem). See 
also Anthonissen and Blommaert (2007) for analyses 
of the TRC; see also Verdoolaege (2008).
 6 As already suggested, the Journal of Narrative 
and Life History (1997), a retrospective of Labov and 
Waletzky 1967, makes reference to several of those. 
Polanyi (1985) is a notable case, inasmuch as it was 
one of the earlier studies to bring into sharp focus 
the context-specificity of the model, evaluation in 
particular. 
 7 For example, C. Goodwin (1984) takes on 
board the categories of complicating action and 
evaluation, but shows their negotiability and joint 
fashioning in conversational stories (see also 
M. H. Goodwin, 1997).
 8 This is an ongoing debate with more or less 
moderate positions as well as attempts to reconcile 
these concerns (e.g. see Myers, 2008) to which 
I cannot do justice here. 
 9 Polanyi first broke down Labov’s evaluative 
devices into a more detailed and elaborate list. She 
also addressed the question of how exactly we can 
identify a device as evaluative by claiming that we 
cannot do so a priori of the analysis. Instead, evalua-
tion is a scalar rather than a binary category that 
assigns various degrees of prominence and different 
weights to various textual elements (1985: 22), and 
so we can only identify something as evaluative 
within the environment of specific storytelling and on 
the basis of how salient it is in that environment. 
Finally, Polanyi abstracted from what was frequently 
evaluated in the stories that she analysed certain core 
cultural values which she identified as typical of 
‘American’ culture. 
10 In Tannen’s terms, involvement strategies 
comprise stylistic devices (e.g. repetition, sound pat-
terns, constructed dialogue, details, etc.) which 
convey the teller’s attitudes and feelings towards the 
events narrated and which shape the audience’s 
engagement in them. Tannen has explored the 
culture-sensitivity of involvement strategies (1989), 
claiming for instance that Greek storytelling is based 
on a high involvement style with the recurrent use of 
certain involvement strategies. 
11 In an earlier study of mine (Georgakopoulou, 
1997), I showed how it was not straightforward to 
attribute ‘functions’ to the two salient and sustained 
linguistic devices in Greek conversational storytell-
ing – namely, narrative present and instances of 
direct speech. Both had been classified as involve-
ment strategies by Tannen (1989) but their use in my 
data presented clear organizational purposes too: 
they demarcated narrative parts. At the same time, 
I did not have to look far to find these devices reced-
ing and other choices taking their place – namely, in 
stories addressed to children by adults and used for 
pragmatic socialization purposes. Context-specificity 
in this case involved what style of narration was 
deemed appropriate for which context and which 
purpose, and it thus militated against drawing 
sweeping generalizations about how ‘Greeks tell 
stories’. 
12 A similar perspective on narrative as embody-
ing modes of social knowledge and social organiza-
tion is an underlying theme in Scollon and Scollon’s 
(1981) ethnography of Athabaskan narrative. For 
these authors, Athabaskan narrative reflects its 
fundamental role as the main tool for the acquisition 
of knowledge in its poetic organization and interac-
tional structure. Scollon and Scollon argue that the 
presentation of action and commentary in narrative 
discourse also follows patterns characteristic of 
the culture.
13 The analysis is of a highly technical nature 
requiring skills in phonetics, grammar, syntax and 
discourse and has put off certain analysts (Blommaert 
2006: 3ff). In addition, ethnopoetics has often been 
criticized for the high level of subjectivity and poten-
tial circularity involved in the actual identification of 
narrative units.
14 In Michaels’ terms, this narrative style was 
described as topic-associating: it involved frequent 
shifts in spatio-temporal focus across segments 
to mark them out, and it valued implicitness in struc-
turing. By contrast, the topic-centred style, character-
istic of literate cultures and more specifically of 
middle-class children in the school that Michaels 
studied, worked with lexically- and grammatically-
explicit connections and a clear thematic and 
temporal progression. These contrastive styles were 
differentially valued at schools. Specifically, the 
oral-based or topic-associating style was not favoured 
by the literate schooled models, with the result of 
disadvantaging children from ethnic and socioeco-
nomic backgrounds that came to school with this 
culturally shaped ‘way of speaking’.
15 There is a volume of studies here that cannot 
be done justice to (for a detailed review, see De Fina 
and Georgakopoulou forthcoming, Ch. 5). The 
overall emphasis is on oral stories but there is also 
work on written stories, particularly in the media 
(e.g. see chapters in Mumby, 1993). Researchers 
operating within this tradition have done well to 
document storytelling in public discourse, and in the 
media as a crucial site for the construction of cultural 
hegemony and therefore also as a crucial area of 
investigation into power and inequality. Studies are 
somewhat polarized between those that opt for 
macro accounts and are lacking in close textual 
analysis, and those that focus on the textual organi-
zation of stories but fail to pay attention to local 
practices of meaning-making. 
16 The second trial by a Court of Appeal upheld 
the acquittal of the accused by the first trial, while 
the third trial at the Supreme Court of Canada 
dramatically overturned the acquittal and convicted 
the accused. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
408
17 We can see early and defining examples of 
this in the influential studies of the storytelling prac-
tices of female peer groups at school and in the 
playground, respectively, by Shuman (1986) and 
Goodwin (1990). 
18 The first level explores positioning in the 
taleworld: how the narrator as character is posi-
tioned vis-à-vis other characters. The second level 
looks at positioning as an interactional process, 
emerging from the ways in which the narrator as 
teller in the here and now positions himself vis-à-vis 
his interlocutors. Finally, the third level seeks to 
provide an answer to the question of ‘Who am I?’ – 
the teller’s self as a more or less stable entity holding 
above and beyond the current storytelling situation.
19 The issue of how storied self is partly 
personal/autobiographical and partly shaped by 
collective and culturally–shaped plots (variously called 
story-lines, master plots, master narratives, etc.) or 
equally resistant to them (as in counter-narratives) 
also forms a well-researched focus of inquiry 
(e.g. chapters in Brockmeier and Carbaugh, 2001) 
with still many unanswered and contentious ques-
tions: e.g. How do we know that something is 
a ‘master plot’ (see Kölbl, 2002)? That said, the 
interplay between the individual and the social in 
narrative meaning-making cannot be possibly 
negated and its exploration remains high on the 
agenda of narrative and identities research. 
20 
As De Peuter puts it, 
By reconceiving narratives as active dialogues, 
relationship is privileged over authorship; the 
multiple centres of organization of the self and 
their relations, pursuing on the boundaries of self 
and other, identity and difference, may be cele-
brated rather than silenced thus ensuring the 
dynamic tensions among opposing forces which in 
turn enable the dialogical self to be unfinalizable, 
emergent and ongoing. (1998: 40)
21 This turn to identities has been slow and the 
focal concerns of the area looked very different in 
1996, when Schiffrin made a plea for sociolinguistic 
studies of narrative and identities (in her terms, 
narratives act ‘self-portraits’). 
22 The study of discourse identities in the 
conversational stories of a group of female adoles-
cents showed that the participants differed in how 
(much) they contributed to different story compo-
nents, particularly plotline and evaluation, and 
in what ways. Furthermore, the participants differed 
in the degree to which their contributions were 
ratified and taken on board by others or, equally, 
challenged and delegitimated. I showed that such 
local telling roles made visible and were based on the 
participants‘ gendered identities and their relational 
identities as close friends who shared an interactional 
history.
23 In this respect, we are in tune with Ochs and 
Capps (2001), who, rather than identifying a set of 
distinctive features that always characterize narra-
tive, stipulate dimensions (e.g. tellability, tellership, 
linearity, moral stance, etc.) that are relevant to a 
narrative, even if not elaborately manifest. These 
pertain both to narrating as an activity and to narra-
tive as text. The point about these narrative dimen-
sions is that they make the definition of narrative not 
an all-or-nothing matter but a more-or-less matter. 
To be specific, each dimension establishes a range of 
possibilities which may or may not be realized in a 
particular narrative. For example, tellership allows for 
one main teller but also multiple co-tellers. Similarly, 
a story’s tellability may be high or low.
24 For example, Bamberg and Georgakopoulou’s 
(2008) analysis of a moderated discussion of 10-year-
old boys about girls follows closely one boy’s offer to 
tell a story which is immediately taken back, setting 
in motion a variety of interactional moves that result 
in the boy whispering the story to one of his friends 
and asking him to be the ‘animator’.
25 One-to-one interviews undoubtedly form the 
main pool of narrative (autobiographical) data in the 
social sciences, leaving focus groups lagging behind 
in that respect. Perhaps, as a result, the otherwise 
illuminating studies of focus group interviews 
(e.g. see Myers, 2004) as a communicative event 
have hardly touched upon storytelling and what 
the differences may be between stories elicited in 
interviews and stories told in focus groups.
REFERENCES
Antaki, C. and Widdicombe, S. (1998) ‘Identity as an achieve-
ment and as a tool’, in C. Antaki, and S. Widdicombe, 
(eds), Identities in Talk. London: Sage. 
Anthonissen, C. and Blommaert, J. (eds) (2007) Discourse and 
Human Rights Violations. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Atkinson, P. and Delamont, S. (2006) Rescuing narrative from 
qualitative research. Narrative Inquiry, 16: 173–81.
Bamberg, M. (1997b) ‘Positioning between structure and 
performance’, in M. Bamberg,  (ed.), ‘Oral versions of per-
sonal experience: three decades of narrative analysis’, 
Journal of Narrative and Life History 7: 335–42. 
Bamberg, M. (ed.) (1997a) ‘Oral versions of personal experi-
ence: three decades of narrative analysis’, Journal of 
Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4).
Bamberg, M. (2004) ‘Talk, small stories, and adolescent 
identities’, Human Development, 47: 331–53.
Bamberg, M. and Georgakopoulou, A. (2008) ‘Small stories as 
a new perspective in narrative and identity analysis’, in 
A. De Fina and A. Georgakopoulou (eds), Text and Talk, 
28. Special Issue. Narrative Analysis in the Shift from Texts 
to Practices. pp. 377–96.
Bauman, R. (1969) Verbal Art as Performance. Rowley, MA: 
Newbury House.

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
409
Bauman, R. (1986) Story, Performance and Event: Contextual 
Studies of Oral Narrative. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Bauman, R. (2004) A World of Others’ Words. Cross-Cultural 
Perspectives on Intertextuality. Oxford: Blackwell.
Bernstein, B. (1996) Pedagogy, Symbolic Control and Identity. 
London: Taylor & Francis. 
Blommaert, J. (2006) ‘Ethnopoetics as functional reconstruc-
tion: Dell Hymes’ narrative view of the world’, Working 
Papers in Urban Language and Literacies, 32. Available at: 
www.kcl.ac.uk/schools/sspp/education/research/groups/
llg/wpu
Blommaert, J. and Maryns, K. (2001) Stylistic and thematic 
shifting as a narrative resource: assessing asylum seekers‘ 
repertoires. Multilingua, 20: 161–184.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1997) Dinner Talk: Cultural Patterns of 
Sociability and Socialization in Family Discourse. Hillsdale, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Briggs, C. (1996) (ed.) Disorderly Discourse. Narrative, Conflict 
and Inequality. New York, Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Brockmeier, J. and Carbaugh, D. (2001) (eds) Narrative and 
Identity Studies: Autobiography, Self and Culture. 
Amsterdam,: Benjamins.
Bruner, J. (1997) ‘Labov and Waletzky thirty years on’, in 
M. Bamberg, (ed.), ‘Oral versions of personal experience: 
three decades of narrative analysis’, Journal of Narrative 
and Life History, 7(1–4): 61–8. 
Cedeborg, A. C. and Aronsson, K. (1994) ‘Co-narration and 
voice in family therapy: voicing, devoicing and orchestra-
tion’, Text, 14: 345–70.
Chafe, W. (1980) (ed.) The Pear Stories. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Davies, Bronwyn, and Rom Harre (1990) ‘Positioning’: The 
social construction of selves’, Journal for the Theory of 
Social Behaviour, 20, 43–63.
Daiute, C. and Lightfoot, C. (2004) (eds), Narrative Analysis: 
Studying the Development of Individuals in Society. London: 
Sage.
De Fina, A. (2003) Identity in Narrative: A Study of Immigrant 
Discourse. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
De Fina, A. and Georgakopoulou, A. (2008a) ‘Analysing nar-
ratives as practices’, Special Issue, Narrative methods. 
Journal of Qualitative Research, 8: 379–87.
De Fina, A. and Georgakopoulou, A. (2008b) (eds), ’Narrative 
analysis in the shift from texts to practices’, Special Issue. 
Text and Talk, 28.
De Fina, A. and Georgakopoulou, A. (forthcoming) Analysing 
Narrative: Sociolinguistic Approaches. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
De Fina, A. Schiffrin, D. and Bamberg, M. (2006) (eds), 
Discourse and Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
De Peuter, J. (1998) ‘The dialogics of narrative identity’, 
in M. M. Bell, and M. Gardiner, (eds), Bakhtin and 
the Human Sciences: No Last Words. London: Sage. 
pp. 30–48.
Edwards, D. (1997) ‘Structure and function in the analysis of 
everyday’, Journal of Narrative and Life History, 7: 
139–46.
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape. Language and Sexual 
Consent. London: Routledge.
Ehrlich, S. (2007) ‘Legal discourse and the cultural intelligibil-
ity of gendered meanings’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11: 
452–77.
Fludernik, M. (1996) Towards a Natural Narratology. New 
York: Routledge.
Gee, J. P. (1986) ’Units in the production of narrative dis-
course’, Discourse Processes, 9: 391–422.
Georgakopoulou, A. (1997) Narrative Performances. A study of 
Modern Greek Storytelling. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006a) ‘Small and large identities in 
narrative (inter)-action’, in A. De Fina,  D. Schiffrin, and 
M. Bamberg (eds), Discourse and Identity. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 83–102.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006b) ‘Thinking big with small stories 
in narrative and identity analysis’, Special Issue. Narrative – 
State of the Art. Narrative Inquiry, 16: 129–37. 
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006c) ‘The other side of the story: 
towards a narrative analysis of narratives-in-interaction’, 
Discourse Studies, 8: 265–87.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2007) Small Stories, Interaction and 
Identities. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
Georgakopoulou, A. (2008) 'On MSN with buff boys': Self- 
and other-identity claims in the context of small stories. 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12: 597–626.
Georgakopoulou, A. and Goutsos, D. (2000) ‘Revisiting 
discourse boundaries: The narrative and non-narrative 
modes’, Text, 20: 63–82.
Georgakopoulou, A. and Goutsos, D. (2004) Discourse 
Analysis. An Introduction. 2nd edn. Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame Analysis: An Essay on the 
Organization of Experience. New York: Harper and Row.
Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Goodwin, C. (1984). ‘Notes on story structure and the 
organization of participation’, in J. M. Atkinson, and 
J. Heritage, (eds), Structures of Social Action. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 225–46.
Goodwin, M.H. (1990) He-said-She-Said: Talk as Social 
Organization among Black Children. Bloomington: IN: 
Indiana University Press.
Goodwin, M. H. (1997) ‘By-play: negotiating evaluation in 
story-telling’, in G. R. Guy, C. Feagin,  D. Schiffrin, and 
J. Baugh,  (eds), Towards a Social Science of Language: 
Papers in Honor of William Labov. Vol. 2, Social 
Interaction and Discourse Structures. Amsterdam: 
Benjamins. pp. 77–102.
Hanks, W. F. (1996) Language and Communicative Practices. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hill, J. (1995) The Voices of Don Gabriel: Responsibility and 
Self in a Modern Mexicano Narrative. In D. Tedlock and 
B. Mannheim (eds), The Dialogic Emergence of Culture. 
Urbana: University of Illinois Press. 97–147.
Holmes, J. (1997) ‘Struggling beyond Labov and Waletzky’, in 
M. Bamberg, (ed.), ’Oral versions of personal experience: 
three decades of narrative analysis‘, Journal of Narrative 
and Life History, 7(1–4): 91–6.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
410
Hymes, D. (1981) ’In vain I tried to tell You‘: Essays in Native 
American Ethnopoetics. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Hymes, D. (1996) Ethnography, Linguistics, Narrative 
Inequality. Toward an Understanding of Voice. London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Jacquemet, M. (2005) ‘The registration interview. Restricting 
refugees’ narrative Performances’, in M. Baynham, and 
A. De Fina,  (eds), Dislocations/Relocations. Narratives of 
Displacement. Manchester: St. Jerome. pp. 194–216.
Jefferson, G. (1978) ‘Sequential aspects of storytelling 
in conversation’, in J. Schenkein (ed.), Studies in the 
Organisation of Conversational Interaction. New York: 
Academic Press. pp. 219–49.
Johnstone, B. (1990) Stories, Community, and Place. 
Bloomington: IN: Indiana University Press.
Johnstone, R. (2001) ‘Discourse analysis and narrative’, in 
D. Schiffrin, D. Tannen, and H.E. Hamilton, (eds), The 
Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
pp. 635–49.
Josselson, R. (2006) ‘Narrative research and the challenge of 
accumulating knowledge’, Narrative Inquiry, 16: 3–10. 
Kerby, A. (1991) Narrative and the Self. Bloomington: IN: 
Indiana University Press.
Kölbl, C. (2002) ‘Blame it on psychology!?’, Narrative Inquiry, 
12: 29–35.
Labov, W. (1972) Language in the Inner City. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Labov, W. (1997) ‘Some further steps in narrative analysis’, in 
M. Bamberg, (ed.), Oral versions of personal experience: 
three decades of narrative analysis, Special Issue. Journal of 
Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4): 395–415.
Labov, W. (2001) ‘Uncovering the event structure of 
narrative’, in D. Tannen and J. Alatis (eds), Georgetown 
University Round Table on Languages and Linguistics 
2001. Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
pp. 63–83.
Labov, W. and Waletzky, J. (1967) ‘Narrative analysis: Oral 
versions of personal Experience’, in J. Helm, (ed.), Essays 
on the Verbal and Visual Arts. Seattle; WA: University of 
Washington Press.
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1955) ‘The structural study of myth’, Journal 
of American Folklore, 68: 428–44.
Lévi-Strauss, C. (1964) Mythologiques: le cru et le cuit. Paris: 
Plon.
Linde, C. (1993) Life Stories: The Creation of Coherence. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lucius-Hoene, G. and Deppermann, A. (2000) ‘Narrative 
identity empiricized: a dialogical and positioning 
approach to autobiographical research interviews’, 
Special Issue: Narrative Identity. Narrative Inquiry, 10: 
199–222.
Markus, H. R. and Kitayama, S. (1991) ‘Culture and the self: 
implications for cognition, emotion and motivation’, 
Psychological Review, 98: 224–53.
Maryns, K. and Blommaert, J. (2001) ‘Stylistic and thematic 
shifting as a narrative resource: assessing asylum speakers’ 
repertories’, Multilingua, 20: 61–84.
Michaels, S. (1981) ’”Sharing time”: children’s narrative styles 
and differential access to literacy’, Language in Society, 
10(4): 423–42.
Mumby, D. (1993) (ed.) Narrative and Social Control. Newbury 
Park; CA: Sage.
Myers, G. (2004) Matters of Opinion: Talking about Public 
Issues. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Myers, G. (2008) ‘Analyzing interaction in broadcast debates’, 
in R. Wodak, and M. Krzyzanowski, (eds), Qualitative 
Discourse Analysis in the Social Sciences. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Ochs, E. and Capps, L. (2001) Living Narrative. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Parker, I. (2003) ‘Psychoanalytic narratives: writing the self 
into contemporary cultural phenomena’, Narrative Inquiry, 
13: 301–15.
Polanyi, L. 1985, Telling the American Story: A Structural and 
Cultural Analysis of Conversational Storytelling. Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex.
Potter, J. and Hepburn, A. (2005) ‘Qualitative interviews 
in psychology’, Qualitative Research in Psychology, 2: 
281–307.
Propp, V. (1968) Morphology of the Folktale. Tr. L. Scott. 
Austin; TX: University of Texas Press.
Quasthoff, U. (1980) Erzählen in Gesprächen. Tübingen: 
Narr.
Riessman Kohler, C. (2002) ‘Doing justice: positioning the 
interpreter in narrative work’, in W. Patterson (ed.), 
Strategic Narrative. New York: Lexington Books.
Roberts, B. (2004) ‘Poetics and the composition of life’, 
Narrative Inquiry, 14: 261–73.
Sacks, H. (1974) ‘An analysis of the course of a joke’s telling 
in conversation’, in R. Bauman, and J. F. Sherzer, (eds), 
Explorations in the Ethnography of Speaking. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 337–53. 
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. A. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organization of turn-taking for conver-
sation’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Schegloff, E. (1997) ‘Narrative analysis: thirty years later’, in 
M. Bamberg (ed.), ‘Oral versions of personal experience: 
three decades of narrative analysis’. Special Issue. Journal 
of Narrative and Life History, 7(1–4): 97–105.
Schegloff, E. (1998) ‘Reply to Wetherell’, Discourse and 
Society, 9: 413–16.
Schiffrin, D. (1990) ‘The management of a co-operative self 
during argument: the role of opinions and stories’, in 
A. D. Grimshaw, (ed.), Conflict Talk: Sociolinguistic 
Investigations of Arguments in Conversations. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 241–59. 
Schiffrin, D. (1996) ‘Language as self-portrait: sociolinguistic 
constructions of identity’, Language in Society, 25: 167–203.
Scollon, Ron, and Suzanne Scollon. 1981. Narrative, literacy 
and face in interethnic communication. Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex.
Scollon, R. & Scollon, S.W. (2004) Nexus analysis: Discourse 
and the emerging internet. London: Routledge.
Shuman, A. (1986) Storytelling Rights. The Uses of Oral and 
Written Texts by Urban Adolescents. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.

NARRATIVE ANALYSIS
411
Slembrouck, S. (2003) ‘What the map cuts up, the story cuts 
across’, Narrative Inquiry, 13: 459–67.
Tannen, D. (1978) ‘The effect of expectations on conversa-
tion’, Discourse Processes, 1: 203–9.
Tannen, D. (1989) Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue and 
Images in Conversational Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Toolan, M. (1988) Narrative: A Critical Linguistic Introduction. 
New York: Routledge.
Triandis, H. C. (1989) ‘The self and social behaviour in 
differing cultural contexts’, Psychological Review, 96: 
506–20.
Trinch, S. and Berk-Seligson, S. (2002) ‘Narrating in protective 
order interviews: a source of interactional trouble’, 
Language in Society, 31: 383–418.
van Dijk, T. (1980) Macrostructures: An Interdisciplinary Study 
of Global Structures in Discourse, Interaction and Cognition. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Verdoolaege, A. (2008) Reconciliation Discourse. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
Wagner, I. and Wodak, R. (2006) ‘Performing success: 
identifying strategies of self-presentation in women’s 
biographical narratives’, Discourse and Society, 17: 
385–411.
Wetherell, M. (1998) ‘Positioning and interpretative reper-
toires: conversation analysis and post-structuralism in dia-
logue’, Discourse and Society, 9: 387–412.
Wodak, R. and De Cillia (2007) ‘Commemorating the past: the 
discursive construction of official narratives about the 
‘Rebirth of the Second Austrian Republic’, Discourse and 
Communication, 1: 315–41.
Wortham, S. (2000) ‘Interactional positioning and narrative 
self-construction’, Narrative Inquiry, 10: 157–84.
Zimmerman, D. (1998) Identity, context and interaction. In 
C. Antaki & S. Widdicombe (eds) Identities in Talk. London: 
Sage. 87–106.

Gender and Interaction
T h e o d o s s i a - S o u l a  P a v l i d o u
28
28.1 INTRODUCTION 
Research on language and gender has now been 
carried out for almost 40 years, and has produced 
a huge body of literature, including some out-
standing introductions to the subject (e.g. Eckert 
and McConnell-Ginet, 2003), a handbook on this 
topic (Holmes and Meyerhoff, 2003) and even a 
journal (Gender and Language), launched in 
2007. Over time, several changes have taken place 
in the kinds of questions that have been raised, the 
methods that have been employed and the types 
of explanations that have been sought. Such a 
development is not unique to this particular field 
of inquiry; rather, it goes hand in hand with and 
reflects shifts in paradigms within linguistics 
and women’s/gender studies, as well as in the 
ways in which ‘gender’ and ‘interaction’ are 
conceptualized. 
‘Gender’ has been a familiar notion in the 
study of language – in contrast to other scientific 
fields – albeit with varying senses. Dating back to 
the fifth century BC, ‘grammatical gender’ in 
Indo-European languages has been associated 
with ‘natural gender’, i.e. the sex of animate 
beings denoted by those words. The contact of 
Europeans with languages and cultures in colo-
nized countries, from the seventeenth century 
onwards, as well as later ethnographic work, gave 
rise to reports about ‘women’s languages’: 
language varieties that diverged from the ‘norm’ 
(i.e. men’s speech) and which were used 
exclusively or preferentially by women (see, for 
example, Bodine, 1975; Glück, 1979). In modern 
linguistics, it was sociolinguistics – in its varia-
tionist version (e.g. Labov, 1972) – that introduced 
‘sex’ as an independent variable which, along with 
class, age and style, is correlated with the mani-
festation of specific linguistic variables to describe 
variation and explain change in language (see, for 
example, Wodak and Benke, 1997). 
However, it was not until the emergence of the 
women’s movement in the late 1960s that the 
notion of gender entered the field of linguistics 
from the point of view of sexism against women. 
At that time, the interest in gender was not con-
fined to academic contingencies, but was clearly 
motivated by the dissatisfaction with the social 
order and the need to explore how the study of 
language could contribute to social change. The 
linguistic publication that marked this transition, 
in an emblematic way, was Robin Lakoff’s article 
‘Language and Woman’s Place’ (1973). This 
article – and a couple of years later, the homony-
mous booklet (1975) – made the subject of 
linguistic sexism visible, and paved the way for 
the immense amount of research on language and 
gender. Since then, a central question – though at 
times downplayed or forgotten – has been how 
language and/or linguistic interaction helps 
produce, consolidate and reproduce unequal power 
relationships between women and men. Yet the 
balance gradually shifted from the more system-
oriented studies1 to empirical research on how 
gender relates to interaction, discourse, or 
communication.2 This is not to say that there have 
not been cross-overs all along, but it was around 
1990 that a major change in perspective took 
place, motivated by, among other things, an 
‘interactional turn’ in sociolinguistics and the 
performative turn in feminist theory. 
The phenomenon of interaction, though hardly 
irrelevant for language and linguistics at any 
time, has not always been called by that name: 
‘language use’, ‘interpersonal communication’, 
‘conversation’, ‘discourse’, etc., are some of 
the designations that have been deployed, with-
out necessarily providing explications on the 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
413
delineation of these terms. For example, as long as 
the use of linguistic signs was equated to the 
Saussurian ‘parole’ or the Chomskyan ‘perform-
ance’ (i.e. as lacking systematicity), there was no 
danger of confusing ‘language use’ with interac-
tion (as understood in, for example, ethnomethod-
ology). However, once the dimension of regularity 
in language use was established through sociolin-
guistic work, the two terms were no longer that 
distinct. The boundaries became even more blurred 
when, through speech act theory and the rise of 
linguistic pragmatics, language use (or, more 
generally, linguistic communication) was concep-
tualized as activity, thus encompassing intention-
ality and agency. The term ‘interaction’ itself 
became more visible in linguistics, when social 
linguistic approaches other than the variationist 
paradigm – for example, the ethnography of 
communication, interactional sociolinguistics 
and conversation analysis – gained prominence in 
the field. Such approaches were informed by lin-
guistic anthropology and/or ethnomethodology 
and, while retaining a view of interaction as an 
activity, they advanced the dyad as its minimal 
unit. They proposed kinds of analyses that were 
grounded in naturalistic data and intended to be 
compatible with the participants’ own views of 
what is going on in their interaction, thus under-
scoring interaction as the locus of the production 
of social meaning and emphasizing its constitutive 
character. However, it would be impossible to 
offer a formal definition of ‘interaction’ (or ‘con-
versation’, ‘talk-in-interaction’, ‘communication’, 
‘discourse’, for that matter) that would do justice 
to the analytic aims and epistemological commit-
ments of all these approaches at the same time.3 
To give an example, context is a crucial notion in 
any analysis of interaction, but ‘context’ can be 
understood in very different ways, ranging from 
the most immediate sequential surroundings of an 
utterance, in conversation analysis, to the broadest 
institutional, societal, cultural environment in inter-
actional sociolinguistics.
So talking about gender and interaction is 
weaving narrative threads relating to each of these 
topics as well as the broader areas they arose in, 
and telling a story that can be told in different 
ways, even if the same constituents are used and 
the same goals are pursued. My aim in this chapter 
is not to present an exhaustive account of the 
research on gender and interaction, but to 
highlight some of the work done against the back-
ground of tensions and debates that have shaped 
the field. Since the present volume includes 
separate chapters on sociolinguistic paradigms, 
I will not examine here the different approaches to 
interaction. Instead, I will start with a presentation 
of some major issues in feminist approaches to 
gender (Section 28.2); in particular, I will focus on 
those approaches which consider gender as an 
activity (practice, accomplishment, performance), 
because these mark a turning point also in 
language and gender research. I will then discuss 
findings on gender and interaction under three 
different headings that reflect different stances on 
how gender relates to interaction. Section 28.3 
(Gendering interaction) looks into constraints, 
linguistic as well as more broadly social, that 
gender the interactional scene before interactants 
even make their entrance. Section 28.4 (Gendered 
interaction) focuses on research which associates 
certain interactional features with specific gen-
ders. Section 28.5 (Constructing gender in inter-
action) turns to the making of gendered selves and 
gendered others in interaction – in other words, on 
how gender is actually ‘done’. Finally, Section 28.6 
discusses perspectives and challenges for the 
future.
28.2  FEMINIST APPROACHES 
TO GENDER
In many academic fields, the transition from a 
non-feminist perspective on gender to a feminist 
approach is echoed in the tension between the 
concepts of sex and gender. While the former is 
usually associated with the reproductive function 
and divides human beings into men and women, 
the latter – deriving from ideas articulated for the 
first time by Simone de Beauvoir (1949) – is 
regarded as the product of social and cultural 
factors. Although the focus of ‘gender’ changed 
considerably over time, the underlying assump-
tion has been that ‘gender’ encompasses two 
genders – men and women – which are built upon 
or presuppose the two sex categories. And, 
although the historicity of gender was indisputa-
ble, the two gender categories were treated as 
homogeneous and stable. As a consequence, the 
idea that the distinction between women and men 
is not biologically but socially and culturally 
motivated often degenerated into a simple change 
of jargon, i.e. substituting the word sex with the 
word gender. 
The above-mentioned assumptions were con-
tested from at least two perspectives (not always 
distinct in more recent years). The first is associ-
ated with the idea that gender cannot or should not 
be isolated from other aspects of one’s identity. 
‘Intersectionality’ was the term employed for 
conceptualizing ways in which ‘sociocultural 
hierarchies, power differentials and in/exclusions 
around discursively and institutionally constructed 
categories such as gender, ethnicity, race, class, 
sexuality, age/generation, nationality, etc. mutu-
ally co-construct each other’ (Lykke, 2006: 151). 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
414
Although it was first used in the context of Black 
feminist theory, intersectionality, according to 
Lykke, has always been at the heart of feminist 
theorizing. The second perspective comprises 
standpoints which oppose the very idea of gender 
as an attribute, a property of individuals, a stable 
and static aspect of identity. Two independently 
originating approaches in the late 1980s have been 
very influential in this context. The first, known as 
‘doing gender’, was proposed by West and 
Zimmerman and is, sociologically, more specifi-
cally ethnomethodologically informed.4 The 
second, labelled as ‘gender performativity’, is 
associated with the poststructuralist philosopher 
Judith Butler and draws on theatrical, anthropo-
logical and philosophical analyses.5 
The notion of ‘doing’ was not a novel concept 
in ethnomethodology, but the term ‘doing gender’ 
was coined by West and Zimmerman in a talk, in 
1977, that was published in 1987 (see West and 
Zimmerman, 2002). Their proposal was to under-
stand gender as the product of social doings, more 
specifically ‘as a routine, methodical, and recur-
ring accomplishment’ (West and Zimmerman, 
2002: 4) rather than as a set of traits, a variable, or 
a role (i.e. situated identity), as was the case up to 
that point. In particular, to do gender is to achieve 
being categorized as a member of the female or 
male sex and preserving that categorization. Based 
on Garfinkel, Kessler and McKenna, and also 
Sacks,6 West and Zimmerman argue that it is this 
categorization that counts and not the fulfillment 
of some ‘essential’ criteria for ‘maleness’ or 
‘femaleness’, because in everyday life, congru-
ence between the sex category a person is put 
into and this person’s sex is taken for granted. 
This is quite evident in cases where the ‘essential’ 
(biological, hormonal, chromosomal) criteria 
accepted by a social/cultural group at a given time 
are not fulfilled, as for example with the trans-
sexual ‘Agnes’ studied by Garfinkel. As West and 
Zimmerman emphasize, Agnes’ problem was 
exactly how to preserve her categorization as 
female, which goes far beyond applying blindly 
ready-made recipes for normative feminine bun-
dles of behaviour: it entails managing any occa-
sion in such a way that ‘whatever the particulars, 
the outcome is seen and is seeable in context as 
gender appropriate or, as the case may be, gender 
inappropriate – that is, accountable’ (West and 
Zimmerman, 2002: 12). 
Only shortly after West and Zimmerman’s 1987 
publication, Butler’s proposal on gender as per-
formance was articulated in a paper (1988), and 
further elaborated in the book that she became 
famous with, Gender Trouble (1990). In the 1988 
paper, Butler set out to examine the ways in which 
gender is constructed through specific corporeal 
acts and the possibilities that exist for its cultural 
transformation through such acts. She argued that 
gender identity is ‘instituted through a stylized 
repetition of acts’ and through ‘the stylization of 
the body’ (1988: 519). Butler considered such acts 
to be performative both in the sense of ‘dramatic’ 
and of ‘non-referential’. The dramaturgical aspect 
involves two key elements: (a) repetition (incorpo-
rating both re-enactment and re-experience at the 
same time) of a set of meanings that are already 
socially established; (b) the public nature of the 
act, which entails that gender cannot be a matter 
of merely individual choice, especially when this 
runs counter to the established binary and hetero-
sexual gender frame, but is subjected to social 
sanctions and taboos. Non-referentiality, on the 
other hand, relates directly, though without explicit 
reference at that time, to Austin’s (1962) original 
idea of performative utterances, i.e. utterances that 
do not describe or represent the world as opposed 
to constatives and, therefore, cannot be said to be 
true or false. Instead, performative utterances do 
something – e.g. marrying, promising, baptizing, 
etc. – and in this sense they constitute a ‘reality’. 
Analogously, gender attributes are not referential: 
they do not express or reveal an identity ‘behind’ 
the act itself, but constitute that very identity. 
Despite their different disciplinary backgrounds 
(and the different aims originating from these, i.e. 
Butler’s interest in deconstructing gender, West 
and Zimmerman’s emphasis on ‘doing’ gender), 
the two approaches address basically the same 
issues in ways that are not incompatible.7 Both 
argue against a pre-existing, essential nature of 
gender and conceptualize it as an activity, thus 
making the aspects of agency and intentionality 
salient, while stressing the non-voluntaristic 
dimension of gender. At the same time, both West 
and Zimmerman, and Butler, integrate in their 
framework the possibility of resistance and, hence, 
of change of the social order. Neither approach, 
however, explicates what is actually involved in 
constructing gender: what tools are employed, 
how this process of doing/performing gender is 
actually enacted and what kind of empirical data 
would be needed, in order to detect resistance to 
and change of the social order. It is exactly at this 
point that the study of language and gender, and in 
particular of interaction and gender, can make an 
important contribution to the analysis of gender 
construction.
However, where Butler goes further8 than West 
and Zimmerman is the idea that not only gender 
but also sex itself is a construction, i.e. that bodies 
are cultivated, through a series of acts which are 
reiterated, revised and consolidated over time into 
discrete sexes ‘with “natural” appearances and 
“natural” heterosexual dispositions’ (Butler, 1988: 
524). This is not to deny the materiality of bodies, 
as is explicated in her later work, but to argue that 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
415
corporeality has been framed and formed through 
normative conditions.9 In other words, there is no 
clear-cut way of ‘extracting’ sex from gender, 
because, as stressed by Fausto-Sterling (2000: 5), 
‘choosing which criteria to use in determining sex, 
and choosing to make the determination at all, are 
social decisions for which scientists can offer no 
absolute guidelines’. Consequently, the differen-
tiation between sex and gender (and the relation-
ship between the two) is not as evident as assumed 
in the first two decades of feminist discussions.10
In the same direction, though based on different 
grounds, another critique has been recently articu-
lated. Literature on gender has taken for granted 
that the distinction between ‘sex’ and ‘gender’ 
made in English is transferable also to other 
languages. This was a consequence not only of the 
hegemony of the English language in academic 
discourse, in general, but also of the formation 
and early institutionalization of women’s/gender 
studies in the Anglo-Saxon countries. It was not 
until the late 1990s that the issue of the transfera-
bility of key feminist terms and concepts was 
explicitly taken up within the European context,11 
leading to a series of publications in which the 
sex–gender terminology is examined in several 
languages.12 It was shown that some European 
languages do not provide different words for ‘sex’ 
and ‘gender’ (in the non-grammatical sense), for 
example, or that the semantic fields around those 
words are not equivalent to the English ones, and 
that all this is quite consequential for the ideo-
logical debates, including the naming of the field 
as women’s/gender, etc.13 
In what follows, I will continue to employ the 
term ‘gender’ since no discussion of these matters, 
either synchronically or diachronically, is possible 
in English without employing it, but we do have to 
keep in mind the different contextualizations of 
the term in the discussions and critiques of femi-
nist theorizing after the performative turn.
28.3 GENDERING INTERACTION 
By ‘gendering interaction’ I mean the linguistic 
and sociocultural constraints that inform interac-
tion and which are invested with dominant gender 
ideologies14 i.e. representations of reality that are 
the product of asymmetrical power relations 
between the genders and in which gender differ-
ences and heteronormativity are taken for granted.15 
Some of the constraints gendering interaction are 
structural: they result from broader social and 
institutional arrangements that create, maintain 
and reinforce gender differences.16 Structural con-
straints entail, among other things, differential 
access for men and women to positions, activities, 
spaces, etc., in society, and to the kind of dis-
courses associated with them, including talk and 
silence, speech genres/events/acts (see Eckert and 
McConnell-Ginet, 2003: 92ff). Moreover, the lin-
guistic tools that we have at our disposal encode 
gender stereotypes and ideologies, and restrict 
accordingly the choices in communication. At the 
same time, the groups we operate in have certain 
stereotypical conceptions about how men, women, 
gays, lesbians, etc., communicate and normative 
expectations about how they should communicate. 
In the following, I will look briefly at some lin-
guistic constraints and stereotypes/norms that set 
up the interactional game in a gendered way. 
28.3.1  Constraints of the linguistic 
system
Engaging in linguistic interaction involves the use 
of at least one language, and languages have vari-
ous ways for dividing humans into two mutually 
exclusive categories according to sex. The most 
common means for establishing such a dichotomy 
are lexical and grammatical gender. Since the 
present handbook contains a chapter on these 
topics (Hellinger, in this volume),17 I will confine 
myself to some interesting intertwinings of gram-
matical/lexical gender and sex of the person 
denoted, with consequences for interaction, using 
Modern Greek as an example. 
A recent study18 of all nouns (about 28,000) in 
a contemporary Modern Greek dictionary indi-
cated that there are almost twice as many feminine 
nouns as masculine ones (45.0% vs 23.8%). 
However, analysis of the literal meaning of these 
nouns showed that this ratio is reversed when they 
denote human beings; in other words, in Modern 
Greek there are almost twice as many masculine 
nouns denoting humans as feminine ones. 
Moreover, on the level of literal meaning, gram-
matical gender fits almost perfectly with lexical 
gender.19 The masculine gender is predominant 
also when denoting humans metaphorically. 
In addition, metaphors for men have as source 
OTHER HUMANS to a much greater extent 
(74.7%) than do metaphors for women (46.6%). 
This means that the extensive presence of femi-
nine gender does not ensure female visibility or 
imply female agency; rather, as has been argued 
(Pavlidou, 2006b), it enables a ‘feminization’ of 
the world in a not so innocent way – for example, 
by projecting stereotypical representations of 
women onto the inanimate world which, in turn, 
consolidate gender norms.
If, as McConnell-Ginet (2003: 91) observes, it 
is difficult for English speakers ‘to talk about a 
third person without attributing sex to them – and 
virtually impossible to do so over an extended 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
416
period’, because of the gendered third-person 
pronouns in English, one can imagine the impact 
of a gendered language like Greek on speakers’ 
choices. In this respect, Ochs’ statement (1992) 
that only a few items in a language are directly 
related to gender and that indexing of gender is 
accomplished indirectly, although accurate, fails 
to capture the extent to which languages with 
grammatical gender impose a gendered stance on 
their users. Even if one contests the view that such 
a dichotomy of humans into men and women is 
‘natural’, one is forced to invoke a categorization 
since the words used, carry a ‘presumption of 
sex attribution’ (McConnell-Ginet, 2003: 91).20 
Sexually-liminal communities (e.g. transsexuals 
or hermaphrodites) use, as research on language 
and sexuality has shown, ‘linguistic gender in 
ways both paradoxical and ironic, for the very 
system whose simple binary excludes them, is 
called into play to generate their own meanings 
and construct the communities’ own network of 
alliances’ (Livia, 1997: 365). However, practices 
like, for example, alternating between the mascu-
line and the feminine gender, while indeed 
expressing gender fluidity, also show the gram-
matical impasse in which one is entrapped (and 
which as a matter of fact would not be overcome 
by simply adding more ‘genders’).
The systemic constraints relating to gender 
(and the male bias of languages) may prove to 
have even further-reaching consequences, if 
thought is influenced by the way in which a 
language is structured (the linguistic relativity 
hypothesis). Recent experimental work21 by 
Boroditsky, Schmidt and Phillips (2003) suggests 
that grammatical gender has effects on people’s 
descriptions of objects, their assessments of 
picture similarities, etc. Therefore, the authors 
conclude: ‘it is striking that even a fluke of gram-
mar (the arbitrary designation of a noun as mascu-
line or feminine) can have an effect on how people 
think about things in the world’ (2003: 77).
28.3.2  Sociocultural constraints on 
interaction: gender stereotypes 
and norms 
Being categorized through lexical and/or gram-
matical gender as a ‘woman’ or a ‘man’ brings 
with it a whole range of stereotypical attributions 
that stem from dominant gender ideologies. 
Stereotyping can be seen as a particular kind of 
categorizing; i.e. a cognitive process through 
which schemata of classification are imposed on 
events, states of affairs, objects, people and so on, 
by ‘putting together diverse particulars into a 
single category – and relating the categories they 
create’ (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 2003: 228). 
In particular, according to Talbot (2003: 470), 
‘stereotyping involves simplification, reduction, 
and naturalization’ of some real or imagined dif-
ferences among social groups; these differences 
are taken as fixed and essential, dividing people 
into ‘normal’/‘acceptable’/‘Us’ and ‘abnormal’/
‘unacceptable’/‘Them’, depending on the constel-
lations of power in a society. In reproducing natu-
ralized gender differences, gender stereotypes 
function ‘to sustain hegemonic male dominance 
and female subordination’ (Talbot, 2003: 472). 
Some gender stereotypes refer explicitly to the 
linguistic behaviour of women and men; the 
extent to which they correspond to real behaviour 
has become the object of several studies in 
research on gender and interaction.
Despite the cultural diversity in the representa-
tion and evaluation of the speech attributed to 
different genders, there is a recurring stereotype 
across languages and cultures as reflected in 
proverbs, ‘great men’s’ sayings jokes, shows, etc., 
concerning women’s volubility. Yet, experimental 
findings on the amount of speech produced by 
adults – also before the topic gained the attention 
of feminist linguists – did not provide evidence to 
support it;22 on the contrary, it indicated that the 
opposite was sometimes the case. Other studies on 
mixed-sex interactions between adult middle-
class English-speaking Americans, drawing on 
both experimental and naturalistic data, converge 
on the whole in a direction that does not align 
with the stereotypical representation of women as 
verbose.23 
Another popular stereotype that concerns the 
linguistic behaviour of men and women elaborates 
on the non-significance (and unreliability) of 
women’s speech: women are claimed to ‘gossip’, 
i.e. to engage in casual and superficial talk, 
including talking negatively about non-present 
parties, particularly when among themselves; they 
‘chit-chat’, ‘chatter’, ‘jabber’, and so on, while a 
‘man’ seems to be almost semantically incompat-
ible with this type of talk. As Johnson and Finlay 
(1997: 131) argue, gossip is not sex-exclusive; 
yet, when men engage in it, it is not named as 
such. Their analysis of a TV programme on foot-
ball indicates that men ‘gossip in order to create 
solidarity within their own gender group’, using 
discursive strategies that are very similar to those 
of women, when they do ‘identity work’ (p. 142). 
Similarly, Cameron (1997) shows that the men, in 
an all-male informal conversation she analysed, 
engage in talk that bears all the features of 
‘gossip’; the ‘identity work’ these men do, con-
sists in the display of a masculinity that is based 
on heterosexual orientation. 
Along with the ‘de-gendering’ of gossip, 
research has elaborated on its positive functions – 
for example, establishing and maintaining social 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
417
relationships, reaffirming and strengthening of 
friendship (Coates, 1988: 98) – thus changing the 
grounds for its assessment.24 This re-evaluation of 
features held typical of ‘women’s language’ seems 
to have taken place, also on a societal level, in the 
course of the last 30 years, as Cameron (2003) 
argues, due to the changing nature both of work in 
the global economy and of personal life in late 
modern societies: women have been upgraded 
from inadequate language users to models for 
communication skills. However, this does not 
entail that the stereotypes themselves have 
changed; despite the fact that linguistic research 
has produced evidence to the contrary, and that 
more and more people challenge such stereotypes 
both individually and collectively, the dominant 
stereotypical beliefs about men’s/women’s 
linguistic behaviour have proved to be very 
persistent. 
The durability of certain stereotypes is undoubt-
edly related to the prescriptive power they exer-
cise on the members of a community, both with 
respect to the way linguistic behaviour is shaped 
and the way it is perceived. People talk like 
‘women’ or ‘men’ because they comply with a 
model of feminine or masculine speech prescribed 
by a stereotype (thus rendering stereotypical 
expectations self-fulfilling prophecies). For exam-
ple, the fact that a pre-pubertal child’s voice is 
recognizable as ‘female’ or ‘male’, before ana-
tomical differentiation of the vocal tract has taken 
place (Sachs, 1975), indicates that children have 
adjusted their speech production to a gendered 
model.25 On the other hand, linguists themselves 
are held responsible for the vitality of certain 
stereotypes. Freed (2003), for example, argues 
that linguists have not paid enough attention to 
public stereotypical views on women’s and men’s 
talk.26 In particular, they have neglected to 
communicate to a broader public how the results 
of their research run counter to the stereotypical 
beliefs of society or to address the discrepancy 
between actual language use and perceptions of it, 
as well as expectations about language use, as an 
object of research. Moreover, it has been claimed 
that even when they intend to refute such stereo-
types, linguists sometimes contribute to their 
reproduction.27 The very approach to gender and 
interaction that looks for differences in the 
linguistic behaviour of men and women (see next 
section) is held to be reinforcing the stereotype 
that men and women are different.
28.4 GENDERED INTERACTION
Research on gendered interaction was a direct 
follow-up to Lakoff’s (1975) observations on the 
characteristics of women’s linguistic behaviour, as 
contrasted to men’s, and culminated in Tannen’s 
(1990) publication on the roots of miscommunica-
tion between women and men. An impressive 
number of studies, mainly with respect to the 
English language and Anglo-Saxon society, 
have been carried out with considerable diversity 
in the kind of linguistic items investigated, the 
contexts and settings in which the use of these 
items is examined, the types of speech events and/
or genres that have been analysed, and sometimes 
even in the findings. Some of these studies are 
quantitative, others qualitative, or employ com-
bined methods; on the whole, however, there is 
over time a recess of experimental (and/or quanti-
tative) methodology and a growing preference for 
naturalistic data and qualitative approaches. 
Given this diversity, in presenting some of the 
research I will orient myself towards what 
Janet Holmes’ (1998: 462) suggests as possible 
‘sociolinguistic universal tendencies’. Holmes’ 
exploratory, as she emphasizes, generalizations 
are formulated along four dimensions of analysis, 
regarding the (primary) function of interaction 
and the indexing of solidarity, power and status 
through speech. The first generalization that 
Holmes draws from the available empirical 
research is that women tend ‘to focus on the affec-
tive functions of interaction’ (1998: 463), i.e. that 
women are more strongly orientated towards 
establishing connections, negotiating relation-
ships, etc., in interaction, rather than to reporting 
facts, imparting information, and so on. Tannen 
(1990: 74–85) coined the terms ‘rapport-talk’ and 
‘report-talk’ for this difference in orientation and 
associated it with ‘private speaking’ and ‘public 
speaking’, respectively – an association that also 
underscores the differences in the kinds of topics 
raised in each type of talk. Besides conversations 
among friends or partners, findings from a number 
of settings and genres provide supporting evi-
dence. For example, Wodak (1981) in her study of 
a therapeutic group of potential suicide candidates 
found that women and men employ different types 
of text to talk about their problems (women relate, 
men report). Further, with respect to storytelling, 
Johnstone (1993) argued that in women’s narra-
tives the protagonists manage disturbing events 
‘in concert with others’ (1993: 76), while in men’s 
it is through the individual characteristics of the 
protagonist that disturbances in the usual flow of 
events are overcome; also Georgakopoulou (2006) 
observed differences in the kinds of events that 
women and men tell stories about: men’s stories 
revolve around activities, while those of women 
are about events that caused negative feelings. 
Finally, 
in 
classroom 
interaction, 
girls’ 
‘non-compliant turns’ to the teacher (disagreeing, 
arguing, complaining, etc.) were found to be 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
418
mainly about the management of classroom mat-
ters, turn-taking, etc., while boys’ turns of the 
same type focused on the content of the lesson 
(e.g. Pavlidou, 2003). 
The most prominent instantiation of the first 
generalization, however, is to be found in ‘the 
work women do’ to keep interaction going 
(Fishman, 1983): asking questions, employing 
devices to attract the attention of other interact-
ants, using minimal responses to encourage a 
speaker to continue. It is this strategy that spans 
over to the second generalization: namely, that 
women tend ‘to use linguistic devices that stress 
solidarity’ more often than men do (Holmes, 
1998: 468). Along with supportive feedback and 
facilitative tags, i.e. tags that invite the addressee 
to contribute to the conversation (see Holmes, 
1995: 55–59 and 79–86), women have been found 
to employ further linguistic items that signal 
closeness and solidarity. Compliments, for exam-
ple, are a case in point: across a range of cultures 
women tend to pay (but also to receive) more 
compliments than men (see Holmes, 1995: 
115–38, for New Zealand English and for further 
references; Sifianou, 2001, for Modern Greek). In 
a broader framework, all these features in women’s 
behaviour are considered to be tokens of positive 
politeness, and make up the conversational style, 
variously described as ‘cooperative’ or ‘affiliative’ 
(see, for example, Makri-Tsilipakou, 1991; Coates, 
1996), that has been attributed to women.
Men, on the other hand, ‘tend to interact in 
ways which will maintain and increase their 
power and status’, especially in formal contexts, 
(Holmes, 1998: 472). This generalization is based 
on evidence from research on two phenomena that 
have been mainly associated with dominance 
in interaction – namely, the amount of talk, 
discussed in Section 28.3.2, and interruptions. In 
contrast to the amount of talk, which is relatively 
straightforward to define, the definition of ‘inter-
ruption’ (emic vs etic criteria) and its functions 
(supportive/cooperative vs disruptive/competitive) 
have been much debated (see, for example, James 
and Drakich, 1993; Tannen, 1994). As Holmes 
(1998: 469) emphasizes, it is important to distin-
guish ‘a mistimed unintended overlap, or an 
overenthusiastic supportive comment with no 
‘take-over-the floor’ intention […] from a delib-
erative disruptive interruption’. It is the latter kind 
that men have been found to exercise more 
frequently than women (who in turn are more 
frequently disruptively interrupted by men than 
vice versa).
Tying in closely to the sociolinguistic tradition 
in the Labovian paradigm is Holmes’ generaliza-
tion with respect to the indexing of status: ‘women 
use more standard forms than men from the 
same social group in the same social context’ 
(Holmes, 1998: 473). Supporting evidence is pro-
vided not only by classical social dialect research 
studying language variation across different social 
groups in a given society (e.g. Labov, 1972) but 
also by subsequent approaches focusing on varia-
tion within one social group.28 Holmes explains 
the apparent contradiction between the third 
generalization (i.e. that men interact in such ways 
that their status is maintained and increased) and 
the fourth with the additional generalization that 
women are ‘stylistically more flexible than men’ 
(1998: 475). 
The presentation above has deliberately glossed 
over a number of complexities,29 because what is 
at issue here is less the observational adequacy of 
such generalizations and more the kinds of expla-
nations that have been invoked to account for the 
findings. In other words, assuming that these gen-
eralizations are adequate on a descriptive level, 
how are the observed differences to be explained? 
Until the early 1990s, two kinds of explanations, 
known as the dominance and the difference 
models, prevailed.
The first concerns differences in the linguistic 
behaviour of men and women as a consequence of 
their differential power in society: the dominance–
subordination relation between men and women 
in society is carried over to interaction (see, for 
example, Thorne and Henley, 1975). Men develop 
interactional patterns, like interrupting others or 
unduly holding the floor, congruent with their 
dominant position in society; women, on the other 
hand, as the subordinate group, cannot afford to 
be inconsiderate about, for instance, their inter-
locutors’ feelings and needs. Moreover, as is the 
case with the social division of labour between 
men and women, ‘there is an unequal distribution 
of work in conversation’ (Fishman, 1983: 98), 
with women doing routinely interactional work 
without, however, profiting themselves (e.g. being 
successful in having discussed the topics they 
raise). While there have been many studies align-
ing with this type of explanation of gender differ-
ences in interaction, the ‘dominance’ approach 
has never been spelled out in a systematic way, so 
that it could explain coherently all observed 
differences in the linguistic behaviour of men and 
women.
In contrast to the dominance model that sees 
difference as an outcome of social inequality 
between men and women, in the second type of 
explanation interactional differences are associ-
ated – on a meta-linguistic level – with equality: 
men and women have different, but equally good, 
conversational styles. In the language and gender 
research, the second model was originally 
put forward by Maltz and Borker (1982) but 
gained prominence (and popularity) through 
Tannen’s (1990) elaboration. Maltz and Borker, 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
419
in attempting to explain how miscommunication 
between the genders arises, suggested that the 
same linguistic features may carry different mean-
ings for men and women – this being a result of 
their socialization in same-sex groups during 
critical stages in the acquisition of communication 
skills. This difference in ‘subcultures’ may lead to 
different interpretations, for example, concerning 
the appearance and placing of minimal responses, 
and hence to misunderstandings in communica-
tion, as is the case when people from different 
ethnic backgrounds communicate with each other. 
While these approaches take context more seri-
ously into account, talking of difference, without 
considering explicitly the power matrix that nur-
tures it, has severe implications, not only for the 
resolution of ‘misunderstandings’ but also for 
social change. The fact that linguists (or sociolo-
gists, anthropologists, etc.) recognize the two 
different styles or linguistic behaviours as equal 
does not in itself grant them equal currency in the 
interactional market, and may disguise social 
conflicts as ‘misunderstandings’, as Cameron 
(1998) argues. 
Although the two models have often been dis-
cussed in a polarized manner (the first as being 
political, the second as apolitical), it would not in 
principle be difficult to reconcile them. This, how-
ever, would not resolve a major weakness inherent 
in both: namely, accounting for similarities 
between women and men. In other words, how 
would the ‘dominance’ model explain those cases 
in interaction in which women and men behave in 
the same ways? Alternatively, how would the 
‘difference’ model interpret ‘smooth’ communica-
tion: i.e. when no ‘misunderstandings’ between 
men and women take place? Neither model can 
provide an answer because underlying both there 
seems to lurk a fundamental assumption – namely, 
that men and women are different. This assump-
tion, however, is problematical in several respects. 
For one, it does not acknowledge the fact that 
differentiation in the linguistic behaviour of men 
and women is enmeshed with a whole range of 
similarities. For another, it fails to recognize how 
difference has been historically invoked to justify 
dominance. Finally, it bears upon an implicit 
understanding of gender as a stable social binary 
that presupposes a biological binary, thus, essen-
tializing ‘woman’ and ‘man’ and homogenizing 
‘all women’ (and ‘all men’); but as we saw in 
Section 28.2, it is exactly this relationship that 
has been called into question by Butler. So, look-
ing for differences without articulating explicitly 
and/or critiquing related assumptions and implica-
tions may be a trap into which researchers 
themselves fall, serving the enhancement of 
stereotypes rather than social change in a feminist 
understanding.
28.5  CONSTRUCTING GENDER IN 
INTERACTION
In the previous section, it was indicated that 
research on gendered interaction reached a dead-
lock partly because of the research question itself 
(looking for differences between women and 
men) and its presumptions (taking ‘gender’ for 
granted). However, with the performative turn in 
feminist theorizing (see Section 28.2), older 
notions of gender as a kind of superstructure on 
sex eventually came under scrutiny, while ‘gender’ 
as doing or performance pointed to interaction as 
the crucial locus for the conceptualization of 
gender. Within research on language and gender 
itself, the spotlight on interaction was necessitated 
also by quandaries about diverging or conflicting 
findings. To overcome such problems, functional 
and strategic considerations had increasingly to be 
taken into account.30 Acknowledging, however, 
the different functions of tag questions or inter-
ruptions, for example, and accounting for choices 
among different options called for detailed exami-
nation of the interactional conditions under which 
the linguistic behaviour of women and men comes 
about. This development allowed anthropologi-
cally and sociologically informed approaches, for 
which interaction was of primordial importance, 
to move from the periphery of language and 
gender research (and, more generally, of main-
stream sociolinguistics) to its centre and paved the 
way for a paradigm shift in the early 1990s that 
entailed: 
• a social constructionist view of gender (or other 
aspects of identity) whereby gender is not a 
constant, a pre-given to interaction, but a prod-
uct of it in which language plays a constitutive 
role
• a pragmatic (or non-deterministic) perspective 
on language use – speakers are rational beings 
that make strategic use of language in order to 
achieve certain goals
• explicit delineations of context, ranging from 
the very practical activity in which utterances 
are embedded up to broader cultural and social 
formations.
This change of paradigm was anticipated in 
Goodwin and Goodwin’s (1987: 241) conclusion 
of their paper on children’s arguing: 
If we are to describe accurately the organization of 
male and female language, we shall have to go 
beyond global generalizations that contrast all 
men with all women in all situations and instead 
describe in detail the organization of talk within 
specific activity systems. Such an approach permits 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
420
study of the similarities as well as differences in 
female and male language usage and relates spe-
cific utterance forms to both ongoing practical 
activities and the cultures that underlie them’. 
Moreover, Goodwin’s (1990) examination of how 
aspects of gender are manifested in a range of 
speech activities showed that articulation of 
gender and talk by the same individual will vary 
across different activities so that ‘social personae 
appropriate to the events of the moment’ can be 
constructed (1990: 9). The ethnographic study of 
activity, as the basic unit of analysis, has been 
undertaken in social formations like the peer 
group (Goodwin, 1990), the dyad of caregiving 
mother and infant (Ochs, 1992), the family at the 
dinner table (Ochs and Taylor, 1995), etc. Such 
groupings of people are not only much smaller 
and more local than ‘social class’ in the Labovian 
paradigm, but also they make visible the iterative 
and ritual character of particular activities that 
turns them into practices. 
The notion of practice as a collaborative and 
socially regulated achievement comes into full 
play in the ground-breaking paper by Eckert and 
McConnell-Ginet (1992), in which much of the 
methodological and epistemological differentia-
tion – entailed in the research just cited – from 
classical sociolinguistic work is articulated explic-
itly, and an alternative approach based on the 
concept of a community of practice is proposed. 
‘Community of practice’, a notion stemming from 
Lave and Wenger’s (1991) social theory of learn-
ing, was introduced by Eckert and McConnell-
Ginet (1992: 464) as ‘an aggregate of people who 
come together around mutual engagement in an 
endeavor. Ways of doing things, ways of talking, 
beliefs, values, power relations – in short, prac-
tices – emerge in the course of this mutual 
endeavor’. Obviously, this construct offers a more 
general and abstract conceptualization of particu-
lar groupings of people (peer group, family, etc.) 
than previously examined;31 but at the same time 
it goes further, as it aims to articulate local social 
practice with individual place and ‘with larger 
social configurations’ (Eckert and McConnell-
Ginet, 2007: 28), thus building an intermediate 
link between a single interaction and social struc-
tures. Gender as well as other aspects of identity, 
all intertwined, are seen as part of a meaning-
making process (producing, reproducing, negoti-
ating meaning) which is a function of one’s 
participation in different communities of practice 
and of the differential modes of participation in 
those communities. This leads, inevitably, to a 
diversity of gender categories whose homogeneity 
(or heterogeneity, for that matter) cannot be a 
priori postulated but has to be proven through 
detailed analyses of the ‘local’ practices and their 
relationship to the ‘global’ contexts in which they 
are embedded. 
Language – more accurately, language use – 
features in this context in two important ways. 
The first has to do with the question of how 
language can signify gender. As mentioned in 
Section 28.3.1, all languages provide in their 
system for lexical gender, and many, additionally, 
for grammatical gender. Ochs (1992), drawing 
on Silverstein,32 argues that this ‘direct’ or 
‘referential’ indexing of gender and, more gener-
ally, of social meaning (i.e. social conditions, 
social context, social identities), is only part of the 
story, because gender is also indexed ‘non-
referentially’: namely, by means of two mediating 
components between linguistic forms and gender. 
The first component consists of social constructs 
which are interactant-related (for example, stances, 
speech activities, etc.) and which are directly sig-
nified by particular linguistic forms; the second 
comprises society-related constructs (e.g. norms, 
preferences, and expectations with respect to 
social identities, including gender) which are 
operant in a particular community and which 
relate particular distributions of stances, activities, 
etc., with preferred images of men and women, (in 
other words, they count as gendered). Thus, ‘the 
relation of language to gender is constituted and 
mediated by the relation of language to stances, 
social acts, social activities, and other social con-
structs’ (Ochs, 1992: 337). A second way in which 
language use is involved in producing ‘gender’ is 
stylistic differentiation. According to Eckert 
(2008), following Irvine and Gal,33 style involves 
distinguishing oneself through clothing, articula-
tion, ways of speaking, etc., from a given social 
landscape. Eckert understands a stylistic move as 
a kind of bricolage whereby ‘linguistic resources 
come to be associated with particular salient 
social meanings, to be combined with other mean-
ings – or exaggerated and tweaked to slightly 
modify these meanings’ (2008: 15), leading to 
social reproduction or social change. Consequently, 
it is through such practices that gender hierarchies 
develop in interaction and through which the 
gender order is maintained or challenged. 
Clearly, these approaches to gender and inter-
action open arrays of research questions that move 
away from the search for differences between 
women and men on the presumption of disjunc-
tiveness of these two genders/sexes. For example, 
Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (1995), using data 
from Eckert’s ethnographic study of a Detroit high 
school, showed how gender, class and power rela-
tions are mutually constructed within a particular 
institution and, more specifically, how the social 
categories ‘jocks’ and ‘burnouts’ are established in 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
421
communities of practice, whereby the central 
practices for claiming membership in these cate-
gories are different for girls and boys (popularity 
vs coolness for jocks and burnout girls, respec-
tively; sports vs toughness for jocks and burnout 
boys, respectively). Furthermore, they showed 
how labelling and pronunciation of certain vowels 
– two different aspects of language use – are 
involved in constructing selves in class–gender–
power constellations. Social labelling, in the form 
of gendered ‘person formulation’ or ‘membership 
categorization’ terms like ‘girl’ and ‘boy’, is also 
investigated by Goodwin (forthcoming) in three 
pre-adolescent peer groups. More specifically, 
Goodwin indicates various ways in which chil-
dren in these peer groups orient themselves to 
gender in their spontaneous talk, and what they 
accomplish by invoking gendered identity catego-
ries (e.g. ‘girl’ functions as carrier of stance, dis-
playing heightened affiliation or derision).
Since the late 1990s, there has been growing 
interest in communities of practice that develop in 
institutional and workplace settings,34 because in 
such settings both the discrepancy between lip-
service to equality and the gendered distribution 
of positions of power as well as the double-bind of 
women in positions of power are evident in most 
acute forms (see Holmes, 2007). The work of 
Holmes and her collaborators has shown that in 
order to ‘do leadership’ effectively, women lead-
ers exploit various kinds of strategies (which 
comply to varying degrees with normative expec-
tations of ‘feminine’ or ‘masculine’ behaviour), 
depending on the situational and workplace 
context (type of workplace and workplace 
culture). Some women managers also ‘effectively 
switch between normatively gendered styles of 
discourse, or strategically integrate aspects of 
normatively feminine discourse styles into their 
workplace talk, skillfully meshing transactional 
and relational discourse features’ (Holmes, 
2007: 58). Similarly, Wodak (2003), in her 
investigation of a very particular elite workplace, 
has argued that female EU parliamentarians, in 
order to be successful in ‘doing politics’, develop 
practices that construct them as ‘assertive 
activists’, ‘experts’, ‘being different in a positive 
way (special bird)’, or combinations of these habi-
tus, and that these types of female gender role 
constructions of successful women are quite 
different from those found in other institutional 
or workplace settings.
Along with the study of diverse ‘femininities’ 
(and ‘masculinities’) in relation to interaction, 
increasing attention has been paid, since the late 
1990s, to gender as dissociated from sex, and to 
sexuality (see, for example, Livia and Hall, 1997; 
McIlvenny, 2002; Cameron and Kulick, 2003). 
This turn to sexual orientation, rather than ‘sex’, 
and to the construction of sexual identitities in 
interaction is another consequence of the feminist 
theorists’ contesting of the body as the anchor 
point of gender and their disclosing of heterosexu-
ality as the normative condition for sexing the 
body (see Section 28.2). For example, Livia 
argues, based on work on the gender perform-
ances of sexually-liminal communities, that 
‘gender is not an essential identity derived from 
the body of the speaker but constructed from 
codifiable rules recognized by society as a whole’ 
(1997: 363). However, according to Kulick (2003), 
sexuality is not tantamount to sexual identity, and 
a theory of language and sexuality cannot do with-
out central aspects of sexuality, like desire and 
fantasy, which are essentially not intentional. 
Since the community of practice approach does 
not only offer a social constructionist perspective 
on gender and language but also encapsulates 
important insights of feminist theorizing that 
make it congruent with a post-structuralist view of 
gender, it can well accommodate all these strands 
of inquiry. However, as already mentioned in 
Section 28.2, the specific contribution that lin-
guistics can make to the study of gender ‘doing’ or 
‘performing’ is through the analysis of language 
use. Such an analysis has to be warranted by 
methodological principles that make it intersub-
jectively reliable – both with respect to the par-
ticipants’ own interpretations and to those of other 
analysts. The most explicit and elegant proposal in 
this respect comes from conversation analysis 
(CA). See, for example, Schegloff (2007). Despite 
heated debates on the efficacy and legitimacy of 
applying CA to feminist work on gender and lan-
guage, an increasing number of scholars, espe-
cially from discursive psychology, have employed 
conversation analytic perspectives in their study 
of gender and interaction (see, for example, 
McIlvenny, 2002; Speer, 2005). In particular, 
Kitzinger (2002) has made an excellent case for 
CA, arguing that it is not only compatible with 
social constructionist, postmodern and queer 
theories (though not with essentialist feminism) 
but also offers to these theories a method for 
studying gender and sexuality as accomplish-
ments. In a series of publications, Kitzinger 
(for example, 2002; 2006) has illustrated how 
CA can be deployed to uncover conversationalists’ 
resources for sustaining or resisting the taken-
for-granted world of ‘women’ and ‘men’, ‘hetero-
sexuals’ and ‘homosexuals’, etc; she has also 
demonstrated (Kitzinger, 2007) that the use of 
terms like ‘woman’, ‘man’, etc., in conversation is 
neither a necessary nor a sufficient condition for 
establishing that conversationalists are relevantly 
oriented to gender.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
422
28.6  CONCLUSION: PERSPECTIVES 
AND CHALLENGES
This chapter was aimed at highlighting work on 
gender and interaction from a perspective that 
both reflects the historicity of the research agen-
das and points to three interrelated dimensions 
that have to be taken into account: gendering 
interaction gendered interaction and constructing 
gender in interaction. 
The first dimension implies that we have to 
scrutinize the language(s) used in interaction in 
order to be aware of the limits and possibilities 
available for talking of (referring to, signifying, 
indexing, etc.) gender and categorizing people 
into gendered classes – both as analysts and as 
participants in an interaction. Such limits are not 
rigid, as has been variously shown, and can be 
successfully contested, but changing the available 
possibilities in language is usually a long-term 
process contingent on the power distribution in 
interaction and society. Moreover, shifting the 
boundaries between categories or changing the 
categories does not affect categorization itself as a 
necessary process for the organization of people’s 
lives; in other words, even if the number of gender 
categories for humans were to be substantially 
increased in a language, that would not principally 
alter the gendering of interaction, unless we, as 
analysts, would do away with ‘gender’ itself, 
although that would hardly make gender disap-
pear from language and society. As many have 
argued, from Butler (1988) to Holmes (2007), for 
example, it is one enterprise to deconstruct a 
gendered term like ‘woman’ and quite another to 
use it strategically in order to change the gender 
order. On the other hand, the extent to which 
gender or gendered terms are significant for 
participants in interaction has to be warranted, not 
presumed, by the analysis we provide. So one 
challenge is the meta-language used for describ-
ing gendered languages and societies, and its 
relation to the people who use those languages 
and inhabit those societies.
Gendering interaction also necessitates an anal-
ysis of normative expectations and stereotypical 
beliefs related to gendered categories. Such analy-
ses usually rely on etiquette manuals for appropri-
ate behaviour, proverbs, ‘great men’s’ sayings, 
literary works, etc. However, to my knowledge, 
there is no systematic reflection on how we estab-
lish the existence of stereotypes for gendered 
behaviour in a certain community and how these 
stereotypes relate to the beliefs and stances 
of those people whose behaviour is actually 
analysed. This is particularly important in connec-
tion to the ‘non-referential’ indexing of gender 
(see Section 28.5). The route from linguistic 
forms to stances, activities, etc., and then to 
gendered behaviour (via norms and expectations 
that relate stances, activities, etc., to preferred 
images of men and women), as suggested by Ochs 
(1992), rests on the tacit assumption that the latter 
link involves no language. In addition to being 
hardly self-evident, this assumption would make 
the question of accessing such norms and expecta-
tions even more pertinent. 
Gendered interaction, the second dimension, is 
a direct consequence of complying with or orient-
ing oneself to norms and expectations concerning 
preferred gender behaviour, and of course of 
accepting being categorized in a certain gender 
class in the first place on the basis of opposition to 
and exclusion of the other gender classes. The 
issue here is how we ensure that our research on 
linguistic behaviour, on divergences and conver-
gences (among men and women, homosexual and 
heterosexual women, etc.), exclusions and inclu-
sions, and so forth, does not fall victim to the 
same gender stereotypes that our everyday socio-
linguistic lives are susceptible to. Awareness and 
reflexivity on the part of language and gender 
scholars ‘about the cultural resources that have 
shaped their own understandings, as well the 
understandings of the people whose language 
use they study’ (Cameron, 2003: 465) is certainly 
well-advised, but better than good intentions is an 
analytical method that justifies our talk of 
‘women’, ‘men’, ‘gays’, ‘lesbians’, etc., and 
warrants the ‘discovery’ of gendered interaction 
(differences and similarities). 
Constructing gender in interaction, the third 
dimension, involves the strategic employment of 
language (and other semiotic means) by partici-
pants in interaction in order to position themselves 
in relation to available gender categories and to do 
or perform gender – exclusively, fluidly, crossing-
over, ‘with anxiety and pleasure’ (Butler, 1988: 
531), and so on. The issue here is how this posi-
tioning (and, doing gender accordingly) relates to 
and informs those categories themselves: in other 
words, how we move from the here–and–now of a 
single interaction to social categories (‘woman’, 
‘gender’, etc.) and social structures (e.g. the 
gender order) – and this theoretical link is cur-
rently missing.35 Eckert and McConnell-Ginet 
have variously underlined that analysis of 
interactional practices within one community of 
practice has to be augmented with: (1) analyses 
of interactions within similar communities of 
practice in order to allow for generalizations of, 
for example, how gender is constructed in this 
kind of community of practice, and (2) analyses 
of the interactions through which the members 
of the original community of practice partici-
pate in other communities and relate to broader 
social formatives and orders (Eckert and 

GENDER AND INTERACTION
423
McConnell-Ginet, 2007). As already emphasized, 
a fundamental prerequisite for attaining empiri-
cally sound generalizations, both within one 
community of practice as well as over similar 
communities (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet’s 
‘comparative direction’), is the quality of the 
analysis of one single interaction, in the first 
place. CA was mentioned in this respect as offer-
ing a most promising perspective. A prerequisite 
for the second (Eckert and McConnell-Ginet’s 
‘relational direction’) would be an explicit theory 
about the societal and institutional context in 
which a community of practice is situated, as for 
example critical discourse analysis (CDA; see, for 
example, Fairclough 1989: 1992).36 After all, 
CDA did set out to investigate the dialectics 
between discourse, i.e. the use of language as a 
social practice, and social structures, and the 
mechanisms that sustain or resist the social order. 
Moreover, the two theories, being both ‘social’, 
would have to be compatible with one another, 
and while CDA can readily encompass CA, the 
opposite would run counter to CA’s principles.
In conclusion, then, four decades of research on 
gender and language have led to significant 
insights for gender and interaction, though not to 
a coherent theory or to clear evidence for the 
impossibility of such an enterprise. The most 
important gain has probably been the process of 
learning to ask better questions, whereas the 
greatest challenge remains the theoretical articula-
tion and analytic implementation of the link 
between the ‘here and now’ of a single interaction 
to social categories (‘woman’, ‘gender’, etc.) and 
social structures (e.g. the gender order).
NOTES
1 For relevant references, see for example, the 
annotated bibliography in Thorne and Henley 
(1975a). By the end of the 1970s the topic of sexism 
in language enters non-Anglo-Saxon academic com-
munities as well, and languages other than English 
start to get analysed from this point of view; see, for 
example, Ryen’s (1978) overview of the research in 
Scandinavian countries, Yaguello (1978) for French, 
Brouwer et al. (1979) for Dutch and Pusch and 
Trömel-Plötz (1980) for German, Pavlidou (1984) for 
Greek.
2 See, for example, Baron and Kotthoff (2001), 
Kotthoff and Wodak (1997a), Wodak (1997a), and 
Speer (2005).
3 For an overview of the different traditions in 
the study of discourse and interaction and the 
embedding of linguistic research on gender in those 
paradigms see Bucholtz (2003). See also Kotthoff 
and Wodak (1997).
 4 For a discussion of the ethnomethodological 
approach to doing gender, see also, for example, 
Kotthoff (2002).
 5 For a discussion of gender performativity, see 
for example, Livia and Hall (1997).
 6 See references in West and Zimmerman 
(2002).
 7 This is why I deliberately referred to the early 
publications of West and Zimmerman, and also 
Butler (and not to the much more familiar book 
where her 1988 paper is basically included). For a 
further elaboration of convergences and divergences 
between the two approaches, based also on their 
later work, see Maloney and Fenstermaker (2002). 
Given the chronological proximity of the two publica-
tions (with West and Zimmerman’s article preceding 
Butler’s publication) and the affinity of their views, it 
is quite remarkable that they do not appear to take 
notice of each other, even in later publications. This 
lack of dialogue may seem normal in the usual 
academic praxis of monodisciplinary institutional 
traditions; it is, however, a paradox in the context of 
women/gender studies, since interdisciplinarity has 
been one of the cornerstones of this field right from 
the beginning.
 8 Don Kulick emphasizes that ‘performativity 
theory, as Butler has elaborated it, is inseparable 
from psychoanalytic assumptions about the relation-
ship between desire, sexuality, and sex’ and that if 
psychoanalysis is removed ‘what remains is simply a 
kind of performance theory à la Goffman –the kind 
of theory that inattentive readers mistakenly accused 
Butler of promoting in Gender Trouble’ (Kulick, 
2003: 127). 
 9 See, for example, Butler (1993: 17).
10 See also for example, Cameron (1997a); and 
Wodak (1997).
11 In particular, it was within ATHENA, the 
Advanced Thematic Network in European Women’s 
Studies, that efforts have been made ‘to investigate 
critically the uses and abuses of cultural dominant 
terminologies’ and to approach translation as an 
epistemological stance (Braidotti, 2002: 301, 302). 
12 For an overview of the problem, see Braidotti 
(2002a). 
13 See also Hellinger, in this volume.
14 Ideologies are understood here as represen-
tations of reality which are culturally-informed and 
which are the product of asymmetrical power 
relations in that culture. For the main definitional 
features of ideologies as well as the complexities 
involved in defining the term, see Eagleton (1991), 
Fairclough (1992); and van Dijk (1998).
15 Gender differences are regarded as natural, 
i.e. deriving directly from biology (see, for example, 
Andermahr et al., 2000: 127). Dominant gender 
ideologies reproduce naturalized gender differences 
and sustain hegemonic male dominance and female 
subordination (Talbot, 2003: 472).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
424
16 See Goffman’s (1977) ‘institutional reflexiv-
ity’ and Connell’s (2002: 53–66) ‘four structures of 
gender relations’ (power, production, emotional and 
symbolic relations).
17 See also Hellinger and Bussmann (2001–03).
18 See Pavlidou et al., (2004); and Pavlidou 
(2006b).
19 The exceptions are of the order of 0.1% for 
masculine nouns and 0.2% for the feminine ones. 
Conversely, male and female human beings are 
denoted by the masculine or feminine gender respec-
tively; only a very small number of nouns denoting 
humans are of neuter gender.
20 Resisting or subverting the dichotomy 
imposed by grammatical gender is not as simple as 
some measures against linguistic sexism seem to 
suggest (for a discussion of this point, see Pavlidou 
2006a).
21 Research on the influence of grammatical 
gender on perception and other cognitive processes 
goes back to the 1980s (see Mills, 1986; see also 
Topsakal, 1995, who partly reproduced Mills’ experi-
ments for Modern Greek), but is still quite scarce.
22 See the annotated bibliography in Thorne 
and Henley (1975a: 257–263).
23 See James and Drakich’s (1993a) critical 
review of the research.
24 However, as Aebischer (1979) has argued, in 
her analysis of interviews with 60 women, gossip 
or chit-chat is perceived differently – be it positively 
or negatively – according to those women’s 
representation of what it meant for them to be a 
‘woman’.
25 But it is also the case that linguistic behaviour 
may be perceived differently depending on whether 
it is attributed to ‘men’ or ‘women’ as, for example, 
Cutler and Scott’s study (1990) on the perceived 
apportionment of talk demonstrates.
26 In a similar vein, Cameron (2007) warns 
against the danger of re-marginalization of feminist 
linguistic scholarship if people working on language 
and gender refrain from engaging in discourses on 
this topic produced in academic fields other than 
linguistics.
27 The much discussed notion of women’s 
language, as attributed to Lakoff (1975), has been 
held to be one such stereotype (Cameron, 1985: 34). 
However, as later acknowledged (see for example, 
Cameron, 1997a: 28; Talbot, 2003: 474), even by 
some of her critics, Lakoff’s interest did not lie in 
giving an empirical account of what was going on in 
reality, but in describing the symbolic ideal which 
shapes the cultural expectations about appropriate 
linguistic behaviour of women/men, thus influenc-
ing, in extension, the way they actually talk in 
particular situations.
28 For useful summaries and discussion see, for 
example, Meyerhoff (2006: 200–222); and Wodak 
and Benke (1997).
29 Among other things, I did not consider 
research on the linguistic behaviour within same-sex 
groups; see, for example, Coates (1996); Wodak and 
Schulz (1986). 
30 See, for example, Holmes (1995) on the mul-
tifunctionality of linguistic items and Tannen (1994) 
on the relativity of linguistic strategies. 
31 On the issue of what differentiates a com-
munity of practice from any grouping of people, see 
Eckert and McConnell-Ginet (1995: 504, 2007: 28).
32 Reference in Ochs (1992).
33 Reference in Eckert (2008).
34 See for example, Holmes (2006); and Lazar 
(2005, (Part I)).
35 See, however, Pavlidou (2008) for an attempt 
to conceptualize such a link, exploiting the specifici-
ties of a particular language.
36 See also Fairclough (2003); van Dijk (2008); 
Wodak and Meyer (2009).
REFERENCES
Aebischer, V. (1979) ‘Chit-chat: women in interaction’, 
Osnabrücker Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie, 9: 96–108.
Andermahr, S., Lovell, T. and Wolkowitz, C. (2000) A Glossary 
of Feminist Theory. London: Arnold. 
—— (1962) How to Do Things with Words. Ed. J. O. Urmson. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Baron, B. and Kotthoff, H. (eds) (2001) Gender in Interaction: 
Perspectives on Femininity and Masculinity in Ethnography 
and Discourse. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bodine, A. (1975) ‘Sex differentiation in language’, in 
B. Thorne and N. Henley (eds), Language and Sex: 
Difference and Dominance. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
pp. 130–51.
Boroditsky, L., Schmidt, L. A. and Phillips, W. (2003) ‘Sex, 
syntax, and semantics’, in D. Gentner, S. Goldin-Meadow 
and S. Goldin (eds), Language in Mind: Advances in the 
Study of Language and Thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. pp. 61–79.
Braidotti, R. (2002) ‘The uses and abuses of the sex/gender 
distinction in European feminist practices’, in G. Griffin and 
R. Braidotti (eds), Thinking Differently: A Reader in European 
Women’s Studies. London: Zed Books. pp. 285–307.
Brouwer, D., Gerritsen, M., de Haan, D. and van der Post, A. 
(1979) ‘Eine Übersicht zum Thema ‘Sprache und Geschlecht’ 
in den Niederlanden’, Osnabrücker Beiträge zur 
Sprachtheorie 9 (Sprache und Geschlecht II) : 150–62.
Bucholtz, M. (2003) ‘Theories of discourse as theories 
of gender’, in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhof (eds), The 
Handbook of Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. 
pp. 43–68.
Butler, J. (1988) ‘Performative acts and gender constitution: 
an essay in phenomenology and feminist theory’, Theatre 
Journal, 40(4): 519–31. 
Butler, J. (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion 
of Identity. London: Routledge.

GENDER AND INTERACTION
425
Butler, J. (1993) Bodies that Matter: On the Discursive Limits 
of ’Sex ‘. London: Routledge.
Cameron, D. (1985) Feminism and Linguistic Theory. 
Basingstoke: Macmillan.
Cameron, D. (1997) ‘Performing gender identity: young men’s 
talk and the construction of heterosexual masculinity’, in 
S. Johnson and U. H. Meinhof (eds), Language and 
Masculinity. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 47–64.
Cameron, D. (1997a) ‘Theoretical debates in feminist 
linguistics: questions of sex and gender’, in R. Wodak 
(ed.), Discourse and Gender. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
pp. 21–36.
Cameron, D. (1998) ‘Is there any ketchup, Vera?’ Discourse 
and Society, 9(4): 437–55.
Cameron, D. (2003) ‘Gender and language ideologies’, in 
J. Holmes and M. Meyerhof (eds), The Handbook of 
Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 447–67.
Cameron, D. and Kulick, D. (2003) Language and Sexuality. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coates, J. (1988) ‘Gossip revisited: language in all-female 
groups’, in J. Coates and D. Cameron (eds), Women in their 
Speech Communities: New Perspectives on Language and 
Sex. London: Longman. pp. 94–122.
Coates, J. (1996) Women Talk: Conversation between Women 
Friends. Oxford: Blackwell.
Connell, R. W. (2002) Gender. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Cutler, A. and Scott, D. R. (1990) ‘Speaker sex and perceived 
apportionment of talk’, Applied Psycholinguistics, 11: 
253–72.
De Beauvoir, S.  (1949) Le deuxième sexe. Paris: Gallimard.
Eagleton, T. (1991) Ideology: An Introduction. London: Verso. 
Eckert, P. (2008) ‘Style matters’, Studies in Greek Linguistics, 
28: 13–29.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1992) ‘Think practically 
and look locally: language and gender as community-based 
practice’, Annual Review of Anthropology, 21: 461–90.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1995) ‘Constructing 
meaning, constructing selves: snapshots of language, 
gender, and class from Belten High’, in K. Hall and 
M. Bucholtz (eds), Gender Articulated: Language and the 
Constructed Self. New York: Routledge. pp. 469–507.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003) Language and 
gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2007) ‘Putting communi-
ties of practice in their place’, Gender and Language, 
1(1): 27–37.
Fairclough, N. (1989) Language and Power. London: 
Longman.
Fairclough, N. (1992) Discourse and Social Change. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Fairclough, N. (2003) Analysing Discourse: Textual Analysis for 
Social Research. London: Routledge. 
Fausto-Sterling, A. (2000) Sexing the Body: Gender 
Politics and the Construction of Sexuality. New York: Basic 
Books.
Fishman, P. (1983) ‘Interaction: the work women do’, in 
B. Thorne, C. Kramarae and N. Henley (eds), Language, 
Gender and Society. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
pp. 89–102.
Freed, A. F. (2003) ‘Epilogue: reflections on language and 
gender research’, in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhof (eds), 
The Handbook of Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. 
pp. 697–721.
Georgakopoulou, A. (2006) ‘Conversational storytelling with 
(and about) gender’ [in Greek: ‘Συνοµιλιακές αφηγήσεις 
µε (και για) φύλο’], in T.-S. Pavlidou (ed.), Γλώσσα-Γένος-
Φύλο [Language – (grammatical) gender – (social) gender]. 
2nd edn. Thessaloniki: Institute of Modern Greek Studies. 
pp. 65–80. (1st edn, 2002.)
Glück, H. (1979) ‘Der Mythos von den Frauensprachen’ 
Osnabrücker Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie, 9: 60–95.
Goffman, E. (1977) ‘The arrangement between the sexes’, 
Theory and Society, 4(3): 301–31.
Goodwin, M. H. (1990) He-Said-She-Said: Talk as Social 
Organization Among Black Children. Bloomington, IN: 
Indiana University Press.
Goodwin, M. H. (forthcoming) ‘Engendering children’s play: 
person reference in children’s conflictual interaction’, in 
S. S. Speer and E. H. Stokoe (eds), Conversation and 
Gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Goodwin, M. H. and Goodwin, C. (1987) ‘Children’s arguing’, 
in S. U. Philips, S. Steele and C. Tanz (eds), Language, 
Gender and Sex in Comparative Perspective. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 200–48.
Hellinger, M. and Bussmann, H. (eds) (2001–03) Gender 
Across Languages: The Linguistic Representation of Women 
and Men. 3 volumes. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Holmes, J. (1995) Women, Men and Politeness. London: 
Longman.
Holmes, J. (1998) ‘Women’s talk: the question of sociolinguis-
tic universals’, in J. Coates (ed.), Language and Gender: A 
Reader. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 461–83. (1st edn, 1993.)
Holmes, J. (2006) Gendered Talk at Work. Oxford: Blackwell.
Holmes, J. (2007) ‘Social constructionism, postmodernism and 
feminist linguistics’, Gender and Language, 1(1): 51–65.
Holmes, J. and Meyerhoff, M. (eds) (2003) The Handbook of 
Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell.
James, D. and Drakich, J. (1993) ‘Women, men, and interrup-
tions: a critical review’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and 
Conversational Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
pp. 231–80.
James, D. and Drakich, J. (1993a) ‘Understanding gender 
differences in amount of talk: a critical review of research’, 
in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and Conversational Interaction. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 281–312.
Johnson, S. and Finlay, F. (1997) ‘Do men gossip? An 
analysis of football talk on television’, in S. Johnson and 
U. H. Meinhof (eds), Language and Masculinity. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 130–43.
Johnstone, B. (1993) ‘Community and contest: Midwestern 
men and women creating their worlds in conversational 
storytelling’, in D. Tannen (ed.), Gender and Conversational 
Interaction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 62–80.
Kitzinger, C. (2002) ‘Doing feminist Conversation Analysis’ in 
P. Mcilvenny (ed.), Talking Gender and Sexuality. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 49–77. (1st edn, 2000.)
Kitzinger, C. (2006) ‘“Speaking as a heterosexual”: 
(how) does sexuality matter for talk-in-interaction?’, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
426
in D. Cameron and D. Kulick (eds), The Language and 
Sexuality Reader. London: Routledge. pp. 169–88. (1st 
edn, 2005.)
Kitzinger, C. (2007) ‘Is "woman" always relevantly gendered?’, 
Gender and Language, 1(1): 39–49.
Kotthoff, H. (2002) ‘Was heisst eigentlich doing gender?’ 
Wiener Slawistischer Almanach, Sonderband 55: 1–29.
Kotthoff, H. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Preface’, in H. Kotthoff 
and R. Wodak (eds), Communicating Gender in Context. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. vii–xxv.
Kotthoff, H. and Wodak, R. (eds) (1997a) Communicating 
Gender in Context. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Kulick, D. (2003) ‘Language and desire’, in J. Holmes and 
M. Meyerhof (eds), The Handbook of Language and 
Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 119–41.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Lakoff, R. (1973) ‘Language and woman’s place’, Language in 
Society, 2: 45–80.
Lakoff, R. (1975) Language and Woman’s Place. New York: 
Harper and Row.
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated Learning: Legitimate 
Peripheral Participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Lazar, M. M. (ed.) (2005) Feminist Critical Discourse Analysis: 
Gender, Power and Ideology in Discourse. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Livia, A. (1997) ‘Disloyal to masculinity: linguistic gender and 
liminal identity in French’, in A. Livia and K. Hall (eds), 
Queerly Phrased: Language, Gender, and Sexuality. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 349–68.
Livia, A. and Hall, K. (1997) ‘It’s a girl!: bringing performativity 
back to linguistics’, in A. Livia and K. Hall (eds), Queerly 
Phrased Language, Gender, and Sexuality. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. pp. 3–18.
Lykke, N. (2006) ‘Intersectionality – a useful concept?’, in 
T.-S. Pavlidou (ed.), Gender Studies: Trends/Tensions in 
Greece and other European Countries. Thessaloniki: Zitis. 
pp. 151–60.
McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003) ‘“What’s in a name?” Social 
labeling and gender practices’, in J. Holmes and 
M. Meyerhof (eds), The Handbook of Language and 
Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 69–97.
McIlvenny, P. (ed.) (2002) Talking Gender and Sexuality. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Makri-Tsilipakou, M. (1991) ‘Agreement/disagreement: 
affiliative vs. disaffiliative display in cross-sex conversa-
tions’. PhD thesis, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki.
Maloney, M. and Fenstermaker, S. (2002) ‘Performance as an 
accomplishment: reconciling feminist conceptions of 
gender’, in S. Fenstermaker and C. West (eds), Doing 
Gender, Doing Difference: Inequality, Power, and 
Institutional Change. London: Routledge. pp. 189–204.
Maltz, D. N. and Borker, R. A. (1982) ‘A cultural approach to 
male–female miscommunication’, in J. J. Gumperz (ed.), 
Language and Social Identity. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 196–216.
Meyerhoff, M. (2006) Introducing Sociolinguistics. London: 
Routledge.
Mills, A. E. (1986) The Acquisition of Gender: A Study of 
English and German. Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Ochs, E. (1992) ‘Indexing gender’, in A. Duranti and 
C. Goodwin (eds), Rethinking Context: Language as an 
Interactive Phenomenon. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 335–58.
Ochs, E. and Taylor, C. (1995) ‘The “father knows best” 
dynamic in dinnertime narratives’, in K. Hall and M. Bucholtz 
(eds), Gender Articulated: Language and the Socially 
Constructed Self. New York: Routledge. pp. 97–120.
Pavlidou, T.-S. (1984) ‘Language-linguistics-sexism’ [in Greek: 
‘Γλώσσα-γλωσσολογία−σεξισµός’], Synchrona Themata, 
21: 69–79.
Pavlidou, T.-S. (2003) ‘Patterns of participation in classroom 
interaction: girls’ and boys’ non-compliance in a Greek 
high school’, Linguistics and Education, 14(1): 123–41.
Pavlidou, T.-S. (2006a) ‘Language-(grammatical) gender-
(social) gender: problems, inquiries/queries, and the 
Greek language’ [in Greek: ‘Γλώσσα-γένος-φύλο: 
προβλήματα, αναζητήσεις και ελληνική γλώσσα’], in 
T.-S. Pavlidou (ed.), Γλώσσα-Γένος-Φύλο [Language – 
(grammatical) gender – (social) gender]. 2nd edn. 
Thessaloniki: Institute of Modern Greek Studies. 
pp. 15–64. (1st edn, 2002.)
Pavlidou, T.-S. (2006b) ‘On the lexical representation of 
women and men in Modern Greek’, talk presented at the 
4th International Gender and Language Conference 
(igala4), Valencia.
Pavlidou, T.-S. (2008) ‘We and the construction of (gendered) 
collectivities’ [in Greek: ‘Εμείς και η συγκρότηση 
(έμφυλων) συλλογικοτήτων’], in M. Theodoropoulou (ed.), 
Light and Warmth: In Memory of A.-Ph. Christidis.  
Thessaloniki: Center for the Greek Language. pp. 437–53.
Pavlidou, T.-S., Alavanoudi, A. and Karafoti, E. (2004), 
‘Grammatical gender and semantic content: preliminary 
remarks on the lexical representation of social gender’ [in 
Greek: ‘Γραμματικό γένος και σημασιακό περιεχόμενο: 
προκαταρκτικές παρατηρήσεις για τη λεξιλογική 
αναπαράσταση των φύλων’], Studies in Greek Linguistics, 
24: 543–53.
Pusch, L. and Trömel-Plötz, S. (eds) (1980) Sprache, Geschlecht 
und Macht I (Special issue of Linguistische Berichte 69).
Ryen, E. (1978) ‘Über Forschung und Diskussion zum Thema 
‘Sprache und Geschlecht’ in Skandinavien’. Osnabrücker 
Beiträge zur Sprachtheorie 8 (Sprache und Geschlecht I). 
pp. 105–18.
Sachs, J. (1975) ‘Cues to the identification of sex in children’s 
speech’, in B. Thorne and N. Henley (eds), Language and 
Sex: Difference and Dominance. Rowley, MA: Newburg 
House. pp. 152–71.
Schegloff, E. A. (2007) Sequence Organization in Interaction: 
A Primer in Conversation Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Sifianou, M. (2001) ‘“Oh! How appropriate!” Compliments 
and politeness’, in A. Bayraktarglou and M. Sifianou (eds), 
Linguistic Politeness: The Case of Greece and Turkey. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 391–430.
Speer, S. (2005) Gender Talk: Feminism, Discourse, and 
Conversation Analysis. London: Routledge.

GENDER AND INTERACTION
427
Talbot, M. (2003) ‘Gender stereotypes: reproduction and 
challenge’, in J. Holmes and M. Meyerhof (eds), The 
Handbook of Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. 
pp. 468–86.
Tannen, D. (1990) You Just Don’t Understand: Women and 
Men in Conversation. New York: William Morrow.
Tannen, D. (ed.) (1994) Gender and Discourse. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Thorne, B. and Henley, N. (1975) ‘Difference and dominance: 
an overview of language, gender, and society’, in B. Thorne 
and N. Henley (eds), Language and Sex: Difference and 
Dominance. Rowley, MA: Newburg House. pp. 5–42.
Thorne, B. and Henley, N. (eds) (1975a) Language and Sex: 
Difference and Dominance. Rowley, MA: Newburg House.
Topsakal, M. (1995) ‘The influence of grammatical gender on 
the perception of sex in Modern Greek’. MA thesis, 
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki.
van Dijk, T. A. (1998) Ideology: A Multidisciplinary Approach. 
London: Sage.
van Dijk, T. A. (2008) Discourse and Power. Houndsmills: 
Palgrave MacMillan.
West, C. and Zimmerman, D. (2002) ‘Doing gender’, in 
S. Fenstermaker and C. West (eds), Doing Gender, Doing 
Difference: Inequality, Power, and Institutional Change. 
London: Routledge. pp. 3–23.
Wodak, R. (1981) ‘Women relate, men report: sex differences 
in language behaviour in a therapeutic group’, Journal of 
Pragmatics, 5: 261–85.
Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Introduction: some important issues in the 
research of gender and discourse’, in R. Wodak (ed.), 
Gender and Discourse. London: Sage. pp. 1–20.
Wodak, R. (ed.) (1997a) Gender and Discourse. London: 
Sage.
Wodak, R. (2003) ‘Multiple identities: the roles of female 
parliamentarians in the EU parliament’, in J. Holmes and 
M. Meyerhof (eds), The Handbook of Language and 
Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 671–98.
Wodak, R. and Benke, G. (1997) ‘Gender as a sociolinguistic 
variable’, in F. Coulmas (ed.), The Handbook of 
Sociolinguistics. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 127–50.
Wodak, R. and Meyer, M. (2009) ‘Critical Discourse 
Analysis: history, agenda, theory, and methodology’, in 
R. Wodak and M. Meyer (eds), Methods of 
Critical Discourse Analysis. 2nd rev. edn. London: Sage. 
pp. 1–33.
Wodak, R. and Schulz, M. (1986) The Language of Love and 
Guilt: Mother–Daughter Relationships from a Cross-
Cultural Perspective. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Yaguello, M. (1978) Les mots et les femmes: essay d’ approche 
socio-linguistique de la condition féminine. Paris: Payot.

29
29.1 INTRODUCTION
Present media developments are described as 
rapid and fundamental changes with deep impacts 
on our daily lives. Topics raised in media dis-
course and political discourse about the media 
concern issues related to media production as well 
as to individual media habits in everyday life. The 
categorization of media into distinct sectors such 
as print, film, radio and television becomes 
increasingly blurred as media companies adopt a 
multimedia orientation, and a multiplicity of new 
receiving devices (computers, mobile phones) 
allow access to a wide range of media products 
almost everywhere and at any time. The tradi-
tional distinction between different genres such as 
news, entertainment, documentary, fiction, etc., 
cannot be maintained. New – often interactive and 
hybrid – formats emerge regularly with constantly 
changing labels and definitions such as infotain-
ment, reality soaps, private news blogs, etc. These 
formats make the identification of sources, the 
differentiation between fact and fiction, and the 
awareness of transitions between real and virtual 
worlds increasingly difficult (Busch, 2004: 29ff). 
Equally, the distinction between (public) mass 
media communication, characterized as a one-to-
many process, and (private) interpersonal medi-
ated communication, characterized as a one-to-one 
process, is being called into question, for instance 
by new forms of Internet communication, charac-
terized as network communication. The notion of 
a dominant national public sphere which was con-
ceived – through multiple exclusions on the basis 
of gender, race, class and language – as homoge-
neous and monolingual is being challenged by a 
fragmentation1 into a complex configuration of 
sometimes overlapping and sometimes mutually 
exclusive spaces of communication with their 
particular policies of representation (Wodak and 
Koller, 2008). The dominance of media industries 
in a globalized market and the commodification of 
media communication create new exclusions in 
terms of access and representations which are 
subsumed under the notion of the ‘digital divide’. 
Such developments also represent a challenge for 
research into the interconnections between lin-
guistic practices and the media. This chapter 
gives, in its first part (Section 29.2), an overview 
of approaches to media communication, media 
texts and the connection between language and 
the media within linguistics. In its second part 
(Section 29.3) it introduces the reader to a frame-
work for the analysis of media communication 
that combines elements from sociolinguistics, 
discourse analysis and media studies.
29.2  APPROACHES TO THE MEDIA
IN LINGUISTICS
Within media studies, linguistics, and more par-
ticularly sociolinguistics, there has been a variety 
of scientific approaches to the interconnections 
between language and the media.
Language policy, language planning 
and the media
In language policy and language planning re-
search, the media were for a long time neglected 
Interaction and the Media
B r i g i t t a  B u s c h  a n d  P e t r a  P f i s t e r e r

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
429
as a factor. Joshua Fishman even warned in his 
early sociolinguistic work against overemphasis 
on the media in the context of language policy and 
language planning, and against media fetishism in 
language policy (Fishman, 1991: 374). Under the 
more traditional paradigm in the field, which saw 
language policy mainly as a top-down strategy, 
the potential role of the media was by definition 
limited as they had been, to a large extent, 
exempted from direct state control ever since the 
Declaration of Human Rights in the course of the 
French Revolution. Nevertheless, state authorities 
have always exercised a certain amount of control 
and intervention in this domain via media laws, 
licensing procedures, frequency and paper alloca-
tions, subsidies, etc. (Busch, 2006). Also, after 
World War II, in most Western European coun-
tries, public service audio and audio-visual media 
– for which direct regulating measures are possi-
ble – were protected by state monopolies that 
persisted for almost 50 years. National laws and 
regulations outline the confines of media produc-
tion and also intervene on the level of language 
use in the media. An example of this kind of inter-
vention is the French legislation on the limitation 
of anglicisms in the public domain, which was 
copied by a number of Eastern European countries 
in the 1990s (Busch, 2004: 151). The role of the 
media in the formation and implementation of 
standard and national languages has been a con-
cern of substantial research (Anderson, 1983; 
Innis, 1951, 1997).
Since the beginning of the twenty-first century 
a new interest in language policy can be noted. In 
these approaches, language policy is seen rather as 
a process of negotiation between top-down mea-
sures enacted by macro-level institutional agents 
and bottom-up initiatives and practices by com-
munities and speakers (Ricento, 2006; Shohamy, 
2006). The focus on social, economic and political 
effects of language contact which sees linguistic 
practices as social practices allows a new take on 
the media in the field. Under the condition of 
present media developments, language policy is 
challenged from a double perspective: from the 
macro perspective of globalized markets and 
supranational regulatory bodies as well as from 
the micro perspective of changing individual 
Lebenswelten (lifeworlds) in which multilingual-
ism has become a salient feature of everyday life. 
On the macro level the debate about the influence 
of the media on the spread of languages and espe-
cially on the dominance of English has been a 
concern (Crystal, 2001). It has been observed that 
language plays an important part in the process of 
reconfiguration of media spaces, in regrouping 
larger regional areas beyond nation-state bounda-
ries as well as in linking dispersed diasporas 
(Robins, 1997). Thussu (2000: 197 ff.) explains 
the example of a TV channel that picked up the 
urban jargon Hinglish2 for news programmes to 
develop markets beyond the Hindi-speaking area 
on the Indian subcontinent and in the British 
diaspora.
In the debate on minority media three main 
approaches can be distinguished (Busch, 1999): 
a minority or human rights approach in which the 
 •
question of access and participation of linguistic/
ethnic minorities (in a national public sphere) 
dominates;
an approach that is more oriented towards 
 •
questions of language loss and language revi-
talization;
and finally a more recent paradigm that takes 
 •
a speaker-centred approach and focuses on 
questions of constructions of (multiple, hybrid) 
identities.
Early research in the field was often initiated and 
commissioned by international and European 
institutions to inform their language policies 
(Franchon and Vargaftig, 1995; Husband, 1994; 
the publications of the European Bureau for 
Lesser Used Languages in the Mercator Media 
series). The European instruments to implement 
linguistic rights in the media field also to some 
extent mirror this change of paradigms: whereas 
the European Charter for Regional or Minority 
Languages (1992) (Article 11) is still mainly con-
cerned with access of (autochthonous) minorities 
to the media and to information, the Framework 
Convention for the Protection of National 
Minorities (1995) refrains from a definition of 
minorities and declares an obligation to foster 
intercultural dialogue in the media (Articles 6 
and 19). The European Union (EU) increasingly 
includes questions of language and the media in 
its language policy action plans (European 
Commission, 2005).
Multilingualism and the media
There is also an extensive literature mapping the 
multiple intersections of minority media and 
their impact upon ethnic identities. In comple-
mentarity to literature on the representation of 
minorities in majority news media and the misrep-
resentation of minorities in majority entertain-
ment (for an overview of research in the EU 
member states see ter Wal, 2002), a body of works 
exists that combines media studies and linguistics 
and addresses the significance of minority control 
and ownership of the media to guarantee self-
representation and participation in a heterogene-
ous and diverse public sphere (see, for example, 
Busch, 1999, 2004; Cormack, 1998, 2004; 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
430
Husband, 2000). Cormack (2004: 4) suggests five 
types of minority media impact: (1) a symbolic 
role (signalling the full functionality of the com-
munity/language and referring to its connected-
ness to modernity); (2) an economic role (job 
creation, career prospects); (3) developing a public 
sphere within a community that can carry a dis-
tinct news agenda; (4) allowing the community to 
be represented within and towards the outside; 
and (5) acting as a key conveyor of culture and as 
a producer of cultural products. Moring and 
Husband (2007: 78) add two other aspects: the 
media’s role in providing an opportunity for 
(minority) language use (as a reader or listener), 
and the role of the media in the reconstruction of 
language as well as in the development and diffu-
sion of language innovation and of new vocabu-
lary. The issue of ethnolinguistic vitality remains 
a topic in research on minority and indigenous 
media (Moring and Husband, 2007), mainly taking 
an approach based on the concept developed by 
Giles (1977) which offers a conceptual tool to 
analyse sociostructural variables that shape the 
strength of an ethnocultural community for lan-
guage retention.
Beginning with the 1980s and 1990s, research 
into media and migration became a central issue 
on the research agenda. Studies examining media 
policies and language policies directed at migrant 
communities found a striking correlation between 
media and migration policies. Whereas in the 
early days of labour migration into Western 
Europe, when a rapid rotation principle was the 
norm, media products for migrants (especially 
programmes in public service radio and TV) were 
predominantly in the language of migrant com-
munities, when policy orientations shifted towards 
assimilation or integration, media products 
directed at migrant communities tended to be in 
the dominant languages of the respective coun-
tries (Busch, 2004; Cottle, 2000; Franchon and 
Vargaftig, 1995; Kosnick, 2007). The refocusing 
of national language policies in some Western 
European countries on state languages opened the 
way for arguing that diaspora media, broadcast via 
satellite in the languages of migration, were a 
hindrance on the way to successful integration in 
the so-called host countries. Extensive reception 
studies, as in the work by Hargreaves (2001), 
showed that media habits among migrants in 
Western Europe were far more diversified and 
satellite programmes from the so-called countries 
of origin were usually only one element among 
others. Under the current diversity policy para-
digm that is being implemented to some extent in 
North American and European metropolises, dif-
ferences and diversity are seen as a possible asset, 
and languages of migration are (at least theoreti-
cally) seen as a potential resource. In migration 
research, diasporas are no longer primarily seen as 
homogeneous groups depending on a motherland 
but as a socially-differentiated nexus of persons 
living in a variety of complex lifeworlds. Recent 
approaches to the media and migration are more 
concerned with questions of construction of iden-
tities and with modes of representation (see Style 
and stylization subsection in this chapter) and tend 
to focus on media texts rather than on modes of 
production and reception. In media studies the 
concept of media reception as a distinct activity is 
being gradually replaced by an approach that fore-
grounds everyday practices in which media are 
present.
Concern with the effects of globalization on 
bilingual or multilingual communities and with 
the commodification and referential use of lan-
guage is found in the work of Monica Heller 
(e.g. 2000). Together with Normand Labrie
(2003: 16),  Heller describes three types of dis-
courses of affirmative heteroglossia linked to par-
ticular imaginations of society that are 
simultaneously present: the traditionalist, the 
modernizing and the globalizing. Homogenization 
in language use is much more difficult to imple-
ment today under the condition of globalized 
communication and media flows. Using regional 
vernaculars or local dialects is no longer necessar-
ily indexical of a traditionalist orientation, but can 
also represent a rejection of national categoriza-
tions, especially when communication flows 
develop a translocal dimension that transgresses 
state borders. This change in connotation is linked 
to the fact that language has become a tradable 
commodity, on the local level in the form of com-
mercialization of authenticity (Heller, 2003). 
Languages are used strategically in order to refer-
ence identities and attract audiences. This is valid 
for mass media and advertising as well as for 
minority media. Kelly-Holmes (2005) speaks 
moreover of minimal or token bilingualism in 
advertising that assumes limited competence of 
the audience and exploits the symbolic rather than 
the referential function of communication/
language.
In media studies the concept of the reconfigura-
tion of media spaces has been influential through-
out the past two decades (Appadurai, 1998; 
Morley and Robins, 1996). Spatial approaches in 
linguistics and cultural studies also foreground a 
topological perspective which has mainly been 
applied in research on multilingualism in urban 
contexts. Referring to Goffman’s (1974) interac-
tion analysis and Halliday’s (1978) social semiotic 
approach to language, Scollon and Scollon (2003) 
drafted an instrument based on multimodality and 
discourse analysis to examine the way in which 
language is located in physical space. Blommaert, 
Collins and Slembrouck (2005) draw on a spatial 

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
431
analysis for the understanding of multilingual 
interactions, power relations and hierarchizations 
between languages. Based on research in a multi-
lingual neighbourhood, they examine how differ-
ent localities (shops, healthcare institutions, 
schools, cafés, etc.) develop specific language 
regimes. Languages in the public space and in the 
media are part of such language regimes. Scollon 
and Scollon (2004) conceive those intersections of 
different interaction practices as a ‘nexus of prac-
tice’, in which a multitude of discursive strands 
and semiotic reference systems create meaning. 
Jacquemet (2005: 265) coins the term ‘transidio-
matic practices’ for the overlapping multilingual 
interaction regimes that crystallize in particular 
localities when multilingual talk (exercised by de/
reterritorialized speakers) and electronic media 
are co-present. In the past few years a small body 
of research literature has been published under the 
label of ‘linguistic landscape’ (Shohamy and 
Gorter (eds), 2009), examining manifestations of 
multilingualism – mainly of signage – in public 
spaces.
According to the regular Eurobarometer sur-
veys (European Commission, 2006), listening to 
the radio, watching films or TV, reading books 
and newspapers or browsing the Internet account 
for the most important occasions in which 
European citizens use their foreign languages. 
The media, other than educational media, seem to 
play an important role in lifelong learning and the 
maintenance of competences in foreign languages. 
Only a few studies have dealt so far with this 
aspect of multilingualism, media and language 
learning (Meinhof, 1998). Dubbing and subtitling 
in television are a topic connected with language 
learning (Koolstra and Beentjes, 1999), especially 
as a study commissioned by the European 
Commission (2002) revealed that in countries 
with subtitling practice citizens estimated that 
their language competences in foreign languages 
were better.
A growing body of research inspired by socio-
linguistics and discourse analysis aims at explor-
ing the social and contextual diversity of language 
use in computer-mediated communication 
(CMC). There has been a shift of focus from 
medium- to user-related patterns of language use, 
and an increasing emphasis on the varying instan-
tiations of online genres in their particular social 
contexts (see Androutsopoulos, 2007b: 281; Danet 
and Herring, 2007; Wright, 2006). Androutsopoulos 
sees the Web as a social space in which like-
minded individuals use the resources of the 
medium, such as interactivity, multimodality and 
easy access to media production, to construct 
identity and community (2007b: 282). He follows 
Castells in the definition of virtual community: a 
virtual community ‘is generally understood as a 
self-defined electronic network of interactive 
communication organized around a shared interest 
or purpose, although sometimes communication 
becomes a goal in itself’ (Castells, 2000: 386).
A focus on the media text
In recent approaches to media texts, the ‘text’ as 
such has been somewhat ‘decentralized’ and the 
focus of interest has shifted to the (social, cultural, 
political) context and to the ‘localization’ of 
meaning. A similar change of paradigm in 
approaches to texts has been occurring in linguis-
tics. The present trend in approaches to media 
texts can be characterized by turning away from 
‘text-internal readings, where readers are theo-
rized as decoders of fixed meanings, to more 
dynamic models, where meanings are negotiated 
by actively participating readers’ (Meinhof, 1994: 
212). Some of the works that have influenced the 
change of paradigms in media studies have been 
equally influential in critical linguistic approaches, 
such as aspects of the work of the Bakhtin Circle 
by the early twentieth-century Russian semioti-
cians, Halliday’s (1978) work on social semiotics 
and pragmatics, Hall’s (2000) model of encoding/
decoding, the Foucauldian notion of discourse, 
argumentation theories and van Dijk’s sociocogni-
tive approach (1988, 1991). All these approaches 
endorse an interactive model of communication 
which is far more complex than the traditional 
linear sender–receiver models in mass communi-
cation. Media texts are perceived as dialogic 
(Bakhtin, 1981), and the readings depend on the 
receivers and on the settings. Researchers pre-
sume, therefore, that readers/listeners or viewers 
interact with media (not only by writing letters to 
the editor but also by interpreting and understand-
ing media in specific subjective ways). Media 
texts also depend on intertextual relations with 
many other genres, diachronically or synchroni-
cally. Texts relate to other texts through quotes or 
indirect references, thus already adding particular 
meanings or decontextualizing and recontextual-
izing meanings. Media thus produce and repro-
duce social meanings.
Also, Barthes (1994/1966) focuses on the 
aspect of negotiation and, in his essay Introduction 
to the structural analysis of narrative, differenti-
ates between the work and the text. Work refers to 
the artefact, to the fixed pattern of signifiers on 
pages, whereas text refers to the process of 
meaning-making, of reading. Fiske takes up 
Barthes’s differentiation to distinguish between a 
programme (on television) and a text:
Programmes are produced, distributed, and 
defined by the industry: texts are the product of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
432
their readers. So a programme becomes a text 
at the moment of reading, that is, when its 
interaction with one of its many audiences acti-
vates some of the meanings/pleasures that it is 
capable of provoking. (1989: 14)
Adopting this stance means to conceive media 
communication as a process of textual transforma-
tions in which the analysis of reception and 
production requires specific attention because the 
text as an artefact constitutes only a moment 
within a chain of recontextualizations (see also 
Section 29.3 of this chapter).
Media linguistics
At the intersection of communication studies and 
linguistics, media linguistics (Burger, 2005; 
Perrin, 2006; Schmitz, 2004) deals with language 
in the media mainly from the angles of text lin-
guistics, discourse analysis or conversation analy-
sis. In a synchronic, often comparative perspective 
as well as in a diachronic perspective it focuses on 
language use in specific media; among others, the 
language of news media (Bell, 1991), the lan-
guage of advertising, the language of computer-
mediated communication or particular forms of 
communication such as Internet chats, talk shows, 
news interviews (Clayman and Heritage, 2002) 
are studied. Burger (2005: 64) summarizes under 
the term ‘Medienlinguistik’ the analysis of all 
texts proposed by mass media. From the dia-
chronic perspective, language variation (standard, 
vernacular, dialect) is a main field of interest. 
Burger for instance refers to a whole range of 
studies on language change in German language 
media in Austria, Germany and Switzerland. For 
the whole German-speaking area he summarizes 
that tolerance for ‘regional coloring’ is increas-
ingly replacing the former ideal of ‘Bühnendeutsch’ 
(received pronunciation) (2005: 365). Whereas 
text categories and genres in media practices used 
to be relatively stable and coherent, the current 
rapid media developments render classification 
increasingly difficult; new genre classifications, 
like infotainment, edutainment, reality soap, intro-
duced by the media industries, illustrate the 
dilemma (Burger, 2000: 614). At present the main 
corpus of works in media linguistics concentrates 
on language in new media whereby the relation-
ship between written and oral language is a 
focus.
Critical linguistics
Particularly productive in the analysis of media 
texts was work that can be subsumed under the 
label of critical linguistics, as developed in the 
1970s and 1980s. Drawing mainly on functional 
linguistics (Halliday, 1978) and social semiotics 
(Hodge and Kress, 1988), critical linguistics 
focused on media texts with the aim of isolating 
the production of ideology and of showing the 
intimate link between detailed linguistic choices 
and the production of ideologies. Thereby a dia-
lectical relationship is assumed: words function as 
a kind of mental grid through which we perceive 
reality and they in turn influence/construct social 
realities. The linguistic and discursive choices are 
not made at will but are dependent on power 
dimensions. Analytical tools from critical linguis-
tics aim to identify and interpret lexical choices 
such as transitivity, nominalization, passivization, 
lexical structure, syntactic forms of clauses, 
modality and speech acts to make ideological 
positions visible. There was a clear focus on news 
(as in Fowler, 1991). The Glasgow University 
Media Group (1976, 1980) and the Birmingham 
Centre for Contemporary Cultural Studies elabo-
rated an alternative picture of news, viewing it as 
socially constructed; news is conceived of as a 
social practice, a discourse.
Critical discourse analysis (CDA)
Critical discourse analysis (CDA) represents a 
methodological advance towards an interdiscipli-
nary study of the media (among others, Fairclough, 
1995; van Dijk, 1988, 1991; Wodak and Meyer, 
2009). The roots of CDA lie in classical rhetoric, 
text linguistics and sociolinguistics as well as in 
applied linguistics and pragmatics. The notions of 
ideology, power, hierarchy and gender, together 
with sociological variables, are all seen as relevant 
for an interpretation or explanation of text. The 
term ‘CDA’ is used nowadays to refer more spe-
cifically to the critical linguistic approach of 
scholars who find the larger discursive unit of text 
to be the basic unit of communication. CDA is 
concerned with ‘language as social practice’ and 
considers the context of language use to be crucial 
(Fairclough and Wodak, 1997: 258):
CDA sees discourse – language use in speech and 
writing – as a form of social practice. Describing 
discourse as social practice implies a dialectical 
relationship between a particular discursive event 
and the situation(s), institution(s) and social 
structure(s), which frame it: the discursive event is 
shaped by them, but it also shapes them.
In CDA, discourse is seen as a form of knowledge 
and memory, whereas text illustrates concrete oral 
utterances or written documents (Reisigl and 
Wodak, 2001). The aim is to illuminate the way 
texts represent social reality and discursive 
constructions of identities. A key concept in CDA 

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
433
is intertextuality – the ways in which a particular 
text draws on different texts and is situated with 
respect to the ‘order of discourse’ (Fairclough, 
1998: 45). Fairclough, referring to Foucault, 
understands orders of discourse as ‘a structured 
configuration of genres and discourses ... associ-
ated with a given social domain’. Dealing with 
media texts, discourse scholars underline the 
importance of analysing not only the text but also 
practices of production, distribution and reception 
(Fairclough, 1995; Scollon, 1998). However, 
Fairclough acknowledges that he has virtually 
excluded reception and to some extent also pro-
duction from his own analyses, but focused on the 
artefact text (1995: 62). The analysis of media 
texts has been a central focus within CDA; 
research agendas focus on such diverse issues as 
racism and xenophobia, social exclusion, hate 
speech and war, and the constructedness of gender 
roles and of ethnic or national identities (van Dijk, 
2009; Wodak, 2009 ; Wodak and Busch, 2004).
Conversation analysis
Conversation analysis (CA) emerged in the 1960s 
(Drew and Heritage, 2006). It is based on eth-
nomethodology (Garfinkel, 1967; Sacks, Schegloff 
and Jefferson, 1974) as an interpretative approach 
to sociology, which focuses mainly on the organi-
zation of everyday life and represents a generic 
approach to the study of social interaction. CA 
describes the formal structure of conversations 
(openings, turn-takings, closings, topic control, 
interruptions, etc.) and analyses how they operate 
under the institutional constraints of the media. 
The strength of CA is based in detailed linguistic 
description, focusing on the organization of inter-
action, without considering the context. Context is 
defined within the text, dependent on the explicit 
mentioning of relevant factors by the speakers.
Much of the media text research in this field 
focuses on relevant aspects of broadcast news 
interviews (Clayman and Heritage, 2002; 
Greatbach, 1986), talk radio (Hutchby, 1991) and 
talk shows (Drew and Heritage (eds), 2006; 
Kotthoff, 2004). Thornborrow (2006) gives an 
overview of current foci in media research within 
CA. At the core were, among others, issues of 
agenda setting, agenda shifting and neutrality in 
news interviews; as interview styles have been 
changing, also other kinds of interviews are being 
analysed, such as adversarial interviewing and 
debate interviews. Another focus are phone-in 
programmes (Hutchby, 2006) in which listeners 
have to be maintained as ratified participants in the 
talk event, for instance by moving from the par-
ticular to the general. The design of talk for the 
overhearing audience has been one of the central 
concepts in CA. Scholars who see themselves as 
conversation analysts work on media discourse 
from a situational perspective (Greatbach, 1998; 
Scannel, 1991). Media talk is considered as insti-
tutional talk. CA shows that there are specific 
constraints and options that determine, for exam-
ple, the situation of the production of interviews in 
public service broadcasting. Heritage (1985) 
shows that the usual pattern of question–answer–
receipt feedback is replaced by a question–
answer–question pattern as the broadcasts are 
produced for an overhearing audience and as the 
journalist seeks to demonstrate neutrality by avoid-
ing the evaluation of the answer with a receipt. 
Attention is focused on the dynamics of inter-
views, comparing turn-taking practices in the 
media to turn-taking in ‘ordinary’ conversations.
Style and stylization
In sociolinguistics the question of how linguistic 
practices in the media relate to everyday linguistic 
practices is a matter of concern. At present there 
seems to be a large consensus among different 
approaches in linguistics that media texts cannot 
be assumed to reflect the language regimes of 
linguistic reality. The question is not only how the 
distribution and configuration of variation in 
broadcasting reflects the parameters of linguistic 
everyday reality but also whether it impacts on 
this linguistic reality (Burger, 2005: 369).
Citing the work of Labov, who claimed that 
language change is not systematically affected by 
mass media but primarily by face-to-face interac-
tion with peers, Coupland (2007b: 184) observes 
that variationist sociolinguistics has been consist-
ently hostile to the idea that mass media are a 
regular or important factor in triggering linguistic 
change. He challenges this stance, concluding his 
study on style in which he draws on numerous 
examples from media texts that ‘mass media do 
generate some new sociolinguistic resources and 
these are sometimes used and developed in 
everyday practice, however short-lived the phe-
nomena might be’. Recent research into interac-
tion among adolescents (Rampton, 2006) has 
shown how media-derived expressions, such as 
radio jingles or lines from popular music, enter 
into everyday sociolinguistic practices. Similarly, 
Deppermann in his analysis of interactional prac-
tices in a group of young males identified how 
stylized Kanak Sprak, as produced on comedy 
programmes on German TV, impacts on their 
interactions. His study shows how linguistic 
resources distributed by the media are integrated 
into everyday experience:
Media sources provide speakers with linguistic 
blueprints they can use for interactional work on 
social categorization, stereotyping and coping 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
434
with real-world experiences as well as a resource 
for interactional self-positioning, display of fandom 
and self-entertainment as the business of conver-
sation. (2007: 351)
The relationship between linguistic practices in 
the media and everyday linguistic practices can 
also be approached by referring to Bourdieu’s 
concept of field. In this sense, by using language 
as one of the semiotic modes in media communi-
cation, the media contribute to shape language 
practices as they provide linguistic resources. Or, 
as Bourdieu develops, speaking more generally 
about the literary field, they ‘produce means of 
production’, ‘word and thought associations’ and, 
moreover, all of the forms of discourse that are 
seen as ‘authoritative’, and that can be cited as 
examples of ‘correct language use’ (1982: 35). 
Also the media are engaged in metalinguistic dis-
courses and in contributing to shape language 
ideologies (often even in specific language pro-
grammes and columns). Language criticism in the 
media can, for instance, contribute to the creation 
of an environment for policing language use and 
for the spread of language purism, through coin-
ing what ‘correct’ language is and stigmatizing 
‘wrong’ language use as deviant.
In communication studies, Goffman’s work on 
‘forms of talk’ (1981) and on ‘frame analysis’ 
(1974) has been very influential in developing a 
differentiated approach to analysing media com-
munication, challenging the speaker–hearer model 
of communication, and in understanding media 
talk as institutional talk. Goffman coined the term 
of ‘mutually ratified participants’ in a communi-
cative interaction and also analysed the role of the 
speaker, which can be decomposed to reveal a 
range of participating frameworks: the role of the 
author (the agent who puts together, composes 
and scripts the lines uttered), the role of the ani-
mator (the sounding box from which the announce-
ment comes) and the role of the principal (the 
party to whose position, stand and belief the utter-
ance attests). These three possibilities constitute 
the participation framework. Fresh talk normally 
presents congruence between the three; this is less 
the case in institutional talk and, consequently, 
also in media talk. The analysis of participant 
roles and turn-taking position allows identifying, 
for example, the influence of an institutional con-
text on a communicative event in the media (such 
as talk shows, interviews, etc.). Goffman’s notion 
of ‘footing’ describes the notion of the speaker to 
his utterance. In this sense radio and TV talk are 
not addressed to ‘a massed but visible grouping 
off the stage, but to imagined recipients; in fact 
broadcasters are under pressure to style their talk 
as though it were addressed to a single listener’ 
(Goffman, 1981: 138).
Dealing with the question of authenticity in 
broadcasting talk, Montgomery (2001) – follow-
ing Goffman (1981: 401) – argues that a conversa-
tional tone, sometimes adopted in broadcasting, 
may be more scripted than it seems, and may be 
simulated, although it is currently designed to 
approximate as much as possible to ‘naturally 
occurring’ talk. Although broadcasting means 
communication to many, broadcasters have 
evolved or borrowed techniques associated with 
small-scale interaction. Montgomery distinguishes 
between three different (overlapping) types of 
authenticity: ‘(1) talk that projects itself as noth-
ing more or less than talk itself; (2) talk that is true 
to the event/experience; (3) talk that is true to the 
self/person’ (2001: 404). In post-variationist 
approaches there is a shift from authenticity to 
processes of authentication and from linguistic 
features representing social stratifications to the 
impact of style and stylized features on the nego-
tiation of social positions (Coupland, 2001).
In connection with media communication, 
research that engages with the concept of style 
and stylization is presently very influential. 
Variationist linguistics treated style as an interest-
ing but relatively marginal dimension of language 
variation. Coupland (2007b) distinguishes between 
three waves of style research. The idea of stylistic 
variation was first used in sociolinguistics by 
Labov (1972) to refer to intra-individual speech 
variation, variation within the speech of a single 
person (Coupland, 2007b: 7). Other parts of 
sociolinguistics, in particular the ethnography of 
speaking (Gumperz and Hymes, 1972; Hymes, 
1962) were already, from the very beginning, 
interested in contextualization processes and 
social styles. Coupland (2007a: 219) identifies a 
second wave in style research which was con-
cerned with the search for patterns of style shift 
(for example the shift of pronunciation towards 
prestige variants in more formal situations such as 
interviews). Influential with regards to media 
communication are Giles' accommodation theory 
(1973) and Bell’s audience design (1999) – the 
idea of converging to non-present audiences in 
initiative style shift. Both approaches posit a more 
social basis of style shift (accommodating a 
listener, designing one’s speech for an audience). 
A move away from Labov’s linear concept of 
contextual style, from styles as objects, represents 
also the conceptualization of social styles and 
stylization as processes (Hinnenkamp and Selting, 
1989).
Whereas, according to Coupland (2007b), in 
the first and second wave of sociolinguistic 
research into style the emphasis was on style shift, 
studying linguistic deviation from a presumed 
norm, the focus is now on how style creates mean-
ing in discursive operations. Stylistic operations 

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
435
are possible because of the socially-structured 
indexicalities that link ways of speaking to social 
groups or specific situations, and to ideological 
conditions that define these at particular times and 
places. Style becomes similar to lifestyle, 
described by Bourdieu (1979) as the surface cor-
relate of habitus. Style is more than saying the 
same things in other ways; what can be said and 
what cannot be said is an integral part of commu-
nicative style (Auer, 2007: 12). ‘The basic unit of 
analysis for a sociolinguistics of style is a single 
semiotic unit, and the analytical demand is to 
explain how its activation contributes to speakers’ 
negotiation of social meaning in a discourse’ 
(Coupland, 2007a: 220). According to Coupland, 
style is also social practice as its meaning 
potential is realized in the construction of social 
identities and relations:
Styling is part of the construction and deployment 
of a speaker’s and others’ social identities, which 
might be to invoke and to consolidate the values 
and attributes associated with a ‘speech commu-
nity’. … On the other hand it might involve estab-
lishing a particular stance vis-à-vis those community 
norms, where ownership becomes more or less 
clear  – e.g. a class position one wants to subvert. 
(2007a: 221)
The concept of style was applied in a produc-
tive way in connection with media, among others 
by Bell’s relationally-oriented audience design 
framework and, recently, Ben Rampton’s work on 
sociolinguistic crossing and stylistic creativity in 
relation to ethnicity and social class, followed by 
other works usually linked theoretically to the 
work of Mikhail Bakhtin and Erving Goffman. 
Recent media-related research that draws on 
concepts of style and stylization focuses on a vari-
ety of topics such as youth culture and the media 
(e.g. Deppermann, 2007), media and migration 
(e.g. Böse and Busch, 2007; Morley, 2000), 
advertising (e.g. Kelly-Holmes, 2005), computer 
mediated communication (e.g. Androutsopoulos, 
2007a, 2007b; Sebba, 2007), presentation of self 
in diaspora media (e.g. Coupland, 2007a), and 
gender (Cameron, 2006).
29.3  A FRAMEWORK FOR THE ANALYSIS 
OF MEDIA COMMUNICATION
When analysing language in media interaction it 
is necessary to take into consideration the specific 
conditions under which media communication 
takes place. As in any other type of communica-
tive interaction, media communication has a dia-
logic nature and cannot be conceived simply 
within a sender–receiver model. Furthermore, 
again as in any other type of communication, 
media communication is multimodal and multi-
functional, i.e. every act of media communication 
encompasses a propositional, a social and a per-
sonal dimension: drawing on several semiotic 
modes it provides content and is involved in proc-
esses of meaning-making, it structures social 
relationships and it results in the production and 
reproduction of subject positions. Media commu-
nication mediates between the public and the pri-
vate sphere: it can be seen as a form of 
organizational communication framed by institu-
tional contexts. Media products are publicly avail-
able and media are, in their self-understanding, 
constitutive elements of the public sphere(s). 
Whereas their distribution is public, their recep-
tion takes mostly place in private surroundings. As 
discussed earlier in this chapter, present develop-
ments in media make traditional categorizations 
according to sectors, genres, etc., increasingly dif-
ficult. The following subsections of this contribu-
tion presents elements for an open and flexible 
framework for the analysis of language and the 
media. The framework shown in Figure 29.1 was 
first developed for and applied to the analysis 
of language policies in the context of media in 
multilingual environments (Busch, 2004).
Recontextualization and intertextuality
Media communication can be understood and 
analysed as a chain of recontextualizations. These 
transformations occur at any stage of the commu-
nication process, linking the sphere of production 
to the situations of everyday practices in which 
media are present. From the perspective of media 
studies, linear models of communication that dis-
sociate meaning from its contextualization during 
production and reception were replaced by models 
that see communication as a circular process, 
comprising the totality of the means employed to 
collect, exploit, store, transmit and impart infor-
mation (Mattelart, 2003: 51 referring to Wiener’s 
cybernetics approach). From the perspective of 
linguistics the process of media communication 
can best be captured by the notion of inter-
textuality, as developed by Julia Kristeva (1980), 
drawing on Mikhail Bakthin’s concepts. In this 
concept every text is part of a tissue of texts and 
intertextual relationships; it is (not necessarily 
consciously) linked to previous texts to which it 
refers and becomes, in turn, a resource for future 
texts. Intertextuality becomes apparent on the 
level of the meaning potential as well as on the 
level of the linguistic practices visible in the text.
Media production encompasses the collection 
and selection of ‘raw material’. At each stage in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
436
media production, earlier versions of the text are 
transformed and recontextualized in ways that 
correspond to the priorities and goals of the cur-
rent stage. Recontextualization can involve sup-
pression and filtering of meaning potentials, but it 
can also result in expanding meaning potentials by 
adding or elaborating upon an earlier version of 
the text (Chouliaraki and Fairclough, 1999). 
Media production is regulated by institutional 
routines, media reception by everyday practices 
and arrangements, both depending on available 
resources. Journalists can revert to different kinds 
of source material: such as speeches, interviews, 
press releases, photos and graphs provided by 
news agencies, archive material, other media 
texts, personal communications, amateur videos, 
rumours and assumptions. Current transforma-
tions in media production can be characterized on 
the one hand by an increasing specialization of 
journalists on narrower fields of reporting, and on 
the other hand by a decreasing division of labour 
between technical and journalistic parts of pro-
duction. In print for instance, the journalist is not 
only responsible for the text but also for the layout 
and the selection of images, and thereby becomes 
the designer of a multimodal text. At the same 
time, due to the economic imperative of reducing 
the fixed costs in media enterprises, the amount of 
genuine journalistic investigation decreases in 
favour of ‘ready made products’ such as news 
agency material, pre-produced elements and 
formats. This process is encouraged by an 
oligopolistic owner structure and practices of 
cross-referencing between different media.
On the level of discourse and linguistic prac-
tices, van Leeuwen and Wodak (1999: 96) suggest 
that transformations due to recontextualization 
can include deletion, rearrangement (e.g. changing 
the order of propositions, altering of emphasis), 
substitution (through linguistic means such as 
nominalization, metaphor, metonymy, synecdoche, 
personalization) and addition (adding new ele-
ments to the representation of social practices). 
Kress and van Leeuwen mention, in the context of 
transformations, the ‘import’ of signs from other 
contexts (another era, another social group or cul-
tural environment) ‘to signify ideas and values 
which are associated with that other context from 
which we import the sign’ (2001: 10). Bell (1997: 
248) subsumes a similar idea under the notion of 
‘referee design’. Referees are, for Bell, third per-
sons or groups ‘who are so salient for a speaker 
that they influence style even in their absence’.
Media are linked to processes of mediation and 
to mediators that control the process of transmis-
sion, obeying to institutional hierarchies and 
power relations, depending on and creating rules 
of belonging and ways of doing (Debray, 2004). 
In this sense, social power relations, institutional 
hierarchies and economic constraints impact on 
how transformation within the intertextual chain 
takes place – on the discursive level as well as on 
the level of the linguistic (and other semiotic) 
means employed. On a macro-sociolinguistic 
level, media contributed under the nation-state 
paradigm to linguistic homogenization and to the 
rise of standard languages; under the present con-
ditions of globalization they can equally contrib-
ute to the de-centring of unified standards and to 
reconfiguring linguistic spaces and language 
regimes (Busch, 2004).
Modalities and meanings
Media communication is inherently multimodal 
communication: this means that language in writ-
ten and spoken form is only one of several modes 
How media are built into
social practices of
everyday life
Inter-
textuality
Media and
everyday
practices
Imagining
the
audience
Multi-
modality
The process of picking up,
transforming and providing
resources
The interplay of different
modes of communication
Different ways of conceiving
the producer-audience
relationship
+
+
+
+
Figure 29.1 Analytical layers for the study of media communication with respect to
language.

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
437
available for expressing a potential of meanings. 
For instance, in print media, layout and image are 
available in addition to the written word; in radio, 
language is present in its spoken form, alongside 
music and various sounds; in television, all the 
aforementioned modes can be drawn upon in a 
context in which the moving image holds a central 
position. Similarly, in CMC a wide range of 
modes is available. Kress states:
A multimodal approach assumes that the message 
is ‘spread across’ all the modes of communication. 
If this is so, then each mode is a partial bearer of 
the overall meaning of the message. All modes, 
speech and writing included, are then seen as 
always partial bearers of meaning only. This is a 
fundamental challenge to hitherto current notions 
of ‘language’ as a full means of making meaning 
(2002: 6)
Walter Benjamin’s writings, especially on ‘The 
Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction’ 
(Benjamin, 1938), were extremely influential in 
media studies. Taking the example of a painting 
being transformed into a photograph, he shows 
that the media content of the original work is still 
present, but is structured in a new way that reflects 
interdependency between the medium and new 
meanings. Harold Innis underlined in the 1950s 
(1997) the importance of technical developments 
in communication, of ways of transmission of 
information and of means of transport for cultural 
developments. Marshall McLuhan (1964) devel-
oped this idea further by coining the aphorism ‘the 
medium is the message’. Cultural studies caution 
against a technical determinism that postulates a 
simple causal relationship between the technical 
and the social (Mattelart, 2003). How different 
modes interact in the communication process is, 
from this point of view, not only a question of 
technical availability but also a question of social 
appropriation and convention, as Kress and van 
Leeuwen (2001) point out in their multimodal 
social semiotic theory.
The interplay between the different modes has 
undergone substantial changes in media history. 
Writing was considered in many cultural environ-
ments as the central mode for the transfer of 
canonical knowledge and authoritative discourse. 
This practice, of the predominance of the written 
text, influenced radio production so that practi-
cally all radio texts in the early days of the 
medium were produced first in written form and 
then read in the radio broadcast. Even in television 
for some time news broadcasts were read without 
a transmission of the image of the speaker as it 
was considered that the moving image could dis-
tract attention. Gradually the image has moved 
into a central position. The ‘conversationalization’ 
of (political) discourse in the media gained in 
momentum with the image and with television 
(Fairclough, 1995: 9ff.). The so-called new media 
can contribute through their interactive practices 
to a further de-centring of standard languages and 
favour practices that draw on multiple stylistic and 
linguistic resources. Such practices in turn are 
taken up by traditional mass media and incorpo-
rated into their journalistic routines.
Imagining the audience
Present approaches exploring the relationship 
between language and the media generally draw 
on Mikhail Bakhtin’s dialogic principle (1981) 
which assumes that in any utterance an interlocu-
tor is present. Unlike in direct communication, in 
media communication, due to its specific spatially 
and temporally shifted conditions of reception, the 
interlocutor becomes an imagined, ideal counter-
part. Bakhtin’s work inspired Bell to develop his 
model of audience design. Observing a radio 
speaker who read the news bulletin on different 
radio stations, he noticed a style shift on the micro 
level of pronunciation and concluded: ‘style shift 
occurs primarily in response to the speaker’s audi-
ence’ (Bell, 1997: 242). The audience design 
model differentiates between the ‘addressees’ who 
are directly addressed, the ‘auditors’ who are 
assumed to be the target audience of a particular 
media, the ‘overhearers’ who might be present but 
do not form part of the target audience, and the 
‘eavesdroppers’ who the speaker does not think of 
(1997: 241ff.). Bell’s model, initially conceived 
for radio broadcasting, can be applied to other 
forms of media communication.
The notion of the target audience, which 
encompasses a spatial (local, regional, national, 
global) and/or a social (social status, income, age, 
gender) dimension is based on rigid and reified 
audience categories. Research on media coverage 
and definitions of target audiences are instruments 
of marketing research and correspond to criteria 
established by the advertising industry. Ang (1991) 
demonstrates that this approach is based on a dis-
cursive construct of audience that is unable to 
grasp the actual relationship between media and 
audiences or to conceive communication proc-
esses. She distinguishes between two main orien-
tations: audience-as-public and audience-as-
market. The first configuration of audience is 
generally associated with the public service media 
sector in which the addressee is seen as a citizen 
(of a state), and the relationship with the audience 
is paternal and aims at transmitting values, habits 
and tastes. It is linked to the so-called transmis-
sion model of communication, in which the 
transmission of a message and the ordered transfer 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
438
of meaning is the intended consequence of the 
communication process.
The second configuration of audience is associ-
ated with the private commercial media sector. 
Audiences are addressed as consumers in a double 
sense: as consumers of the media product and as 
potential consumers of the products advertised in 
the programmes. In the attention model of com-
munication (McQuail, 1987), communication is 
considered successful as soon as attention is actu-
ally raised in audiences. The transfer of meaning 
plays a secondary role. The scoop, the extraordi-
nary and the scandal gain in importance as means 
of awakening attention.
In the alternative media sector the conception 
of the audience is determined by the idea of an 
active public that participates in social action and 
media production. The aim is to overcome the 
division between producers and audiences, and to 
move closer to a situation in which ‘the Other’ is 
able to represent itself, and in which the heteroge-
neity of ‘authentic informants’ is not reduced. 
Alternative or third-sector media are consequently 
closer to the ideal of representing the multi-
voicedness of society in all three dimensions 
which Bakhtin described: heterology (raznorecˇie), 
i.e. the diversity of discourses; heteroglossia 
(raznojazycˇnie), i.e. the diversity of language(s);  
and heterophony (raznoglossie), i.e. the diversity 
of individual voices (Todorov, 1984: 56).
These different basic orientations in conceiving 
the producer–audience relationship result in-
preferences for particular media formats 
(e.g. authoritative information-centred pro-
grammes, infotainment programmes, dialogic 
forms as phone-in programmes), and in a choice 
of particular linguistic practices. They also deter-
mine the way in which discourses are being 
shaped, reproduced and transformed.
Media and everyday practices
The question of how language and discourse in 
media communication relate to everyday linguis-
tic and discursive practices is a matter of concern 
in the exploration of sociolinguistic interactions. 
As discussed above, recent work in style and 
stylization shows that the traditional scepticism 
concerning the impact of media on individual 
linguistic practices and on language shift is being 
challenged by empirical work investigating com-
munication in style communities.
Reception studies within the traditional quanti-
tative media studies approaches, often setting out 
from a sender-receiver model of communication 
without taking into account the actual environ-
ment and conditions of media reception, are not 
suitable for a processual analysis of media and 
their role in everyday life. Whereas within the 
traditional paradigm it was somehow possible to 
differentiate between different media sectors (as 
print, TV, radio) and to measure their impact in 
individual reception habits in terms of time and 
intensity of contact, with present media develop-
ments and the diversification of receiving devices 
this seems virtually impossible. Under the condi-
tions of a changing media landscape, the catego-
ries of producers and audiences blur as well as the 
demarcations between private mediated commu-
nication and public media communication. There 
is a claim for a new approach to the notion of 
audiences and everyday media practices which 
rejects models of passive media consumption 
(Gauntlett, 2007).
The multiplication of the possibilities of media 
contact and of media–recipient interfaces has 
increased with recent technical developments. 
Print media such as daily newspapers can for 
instance not only be read in their paper version but 
also in a modified form as (interactive) online ver-
sions or adapted for mobile phones. This means 
that the ways in which media are being appropri-
ated in daily life are subjected to permanent 
change. New time–space articulations become 
salient. Whereas some two decades ago relatively 
stable reception habits could be assumed as bring-
ing together audiences into national, ethnic or 
other social communities (Morley and Robins, 
1996), present media reception is more character-
ized by individual practices, which become more 
ephemeral and deterritorialized. As in linguistics, 
in media studies and in media anthropology, eve-
ryday media practices, style and style communi-
ties have become an important focus (Kosnick, 
2007). Such practices can also be understood as 
technologies of the self in a Foucauldian sense, as 
spaces for the production and reproduction of situ-
ated subject positions (Reckwitz, 2006).
In everyday life people participate in a range of 
different media spaces: besides the traditional 
national sphere, globalized spaces as well as 
localized media gain in importance, regional 
spaces beyond state borders emerge as broadcast-
ing spaces, and transnational and translocal media 
link geographically-dispersed groups. Within 
these spaces, particular language regimes and lin-
guistic practices develop. The development of 
such regimes and practices as well as the way in 
which they are related to other everyday language 
practices opens up a vast field of research.
NOTES
1 For the question of public sphere and its frag-
mentations see the discussions of Habermas’ model 

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
439
which was developed in the 1960s and which was 
based on the assumption of a single unified (national) 
public sphere (Habermas, 1990). Critiques of 
Habermas’ model were formulated by feminist stud-
ies (e.g. Benhabib, 1992; Fraser, 1992) and also later 
by scholars accenting questions of ethnicity, race and 
language as factors of exclusion (e.g. Husband, 
2000; Morley, 2000). Habermas concedes, in a revi-
sion of his model, that he neglected the existence of 
counter publics and counter discourses (Habermas, 
1990).
2 Hinglish (a combination of the words Hindi 
and English) designates a blend of Hindi and English 
vernaculars in the urban areas of the states of India 
where Hindi is spoken.
REFERENCES
Anderson, B. (1983) Imagined Communities: Reflections on 
the Origins and Spread of Nationalism. London: Verso.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2007a) ‘Bilingualism in the mass media 
and on the Internet’, in M. Heller (ed.), Bilingualism: 
a Social Approach. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
pp. 207–30
Androutsopoulos, J. (2007b) ‘Style online: doing hip-hop on 
the German speaking web’, in P. Auer (ed.), Style and 
Social Identities. Alternative Approaches to Linguistic 
Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 279–321.
Ang, I. (1991) Desperately Seeking the Audience. London: 
Routledge.
Appadurai, A. (1998) ‘Globale ethnische Räume. Bemerkungen 
und Fragen zur Entwicklung einer transnationalen 
Anthropologie’, in U. Beck (ed.), Perspektiven der 
Weltgesellschaft. Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. pp. 11–41.
Auer, P. (2007) ‘Introduction’, in P. Auer (ed.), Style and 
Social Identities. Alternative Approaches to Linguistic 
Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 1–21.
Bakhtin, M. (1981) The Dialogic Imagination. Ed. M. Holquist. 
Austin, TX: University of Texas Press.
Barthes, R. (1994/1966) ‘Introduction à l’analyse structurale 
des récits’ [‘Introduction to the structural analysis of narra-
tive’], in E. Marty (ed.), Roland Barthes. Oeuvres complètes. 
Tome II. 1966–1973. Édition établie et présentée par Éric 
Marty. Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Bell, A. (1991) The Language of News Media. London: 
Blackwell.
Bell, A. (1997) ‘Language style as audience design’, in 
N. Coupland and A. Jaworski (eds), Sociolinguistics. 
A Reader and Coursebook. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
pp. 240–50.
Bell, A. (1999) ‘Styling the other to define the self: a study in 
New Zealand identity making’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
3(4): 523–41.
Benhabib, S. (1992) ‘Models of public space: Hannah Arendt, 
the Liberal tradition, and Jürgen Habermas’ in C. Calhoun 
(ed.), Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. pp. 73–99.
Benjamin, W. (1938) ‘Das Kunstwerk im Zeitalter seiner 
technischen Reproduzierbarkeit‘ [‘The Work of art in the 
age of mechanical reproduction‘], in R. Tiedermann and 
H. Schweppenhäuser (eds) (1980), Walter Benjamin: 
Gesammelte Schriften I, 2. (Werkausgabe Band 2). 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. pp. 471–508.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005) ‘Spaces of 
multilingualism‘, Language and Communication, 25(3): 
197–216.
Böse, M. and Busch, B. (2007) ‘The political potential of 
multi-accentuality in the exhibition title ‘‘gastarbajteri’’ ’, 
Journal of Language and Politics, 6(3): 437–57.
Bourdieu, P. (1979) La distinction: critique sociale du 
jugement. Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit.
Bourdieu, P. (1982) Ce que parler veut dire. L’économie des 
échanges linguistiques. Paris: Fayard.
Burger, H. (2000) ‘Textsorten in Massenmedien’, in K. Brinker, 
G. Antos, W. Heinemann and S. Sager (eds), Text-und 
Gesprächslinguistik. Ein internationales Handbuch 
zeitgenössischer Forschung. 1. Halbband. Berlin: de 
Gruyter. pp. 614–28.
Burger, H. (2005) Mediensprache. 3rd edn. Berlin: de 
Gruyter.
Busch, B. (1999) Der virtuelle Dorfplatz. Minderheitenmedien, 
Globalisierung und kulturelle Identität. Klagenfurt, Celovec: 
Drava.
Busch, B. (2004) Sprachen im Disput. Medien und Öffentlichkeit 
in multilingualen Gesellschaften. Klagenfurt: Drava.
Busch, B. (2006) ‘Media, politics and discourse: interactions’ 
in K. Brown (ed.), Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics. 
2nd edn. Oxford: Elsevier. pp. 609–16.
Cameron, D. (2006) ‘Theorizing the female voice in public 
contexts’, in J. Baxter (ed.), Speaking Out: The Female 
Voice in Public Contexts. Houndmills: Palgrave. pp. 3–20.
Castells, M. (2000) The Rise of the Network Society. 2nd edn. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Chouliaraki, L. and Fairclough, N. (1999) Discourse in Late 
Modernity: Rethinking Critical Discourse Analysis. 
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Clayman, S. and Heritage, J. (2002) The News Interview: 
Journalists and Public Figures on the Air. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Cormack, M. (1998) ‘Minority language media in Western 
Europe. Preliminary considerations’, European Journal of 
Communication, 13(1): 33–52.
Cormack, M. (2004) ‘Developing minority media studies’, 
Mercator Media Forum, 7(1): 3–12.
Cottle, S. (ed.) (2000) Ethnic Minorities and the Media. 
Buckingham, Open University Press.
Coupland, N. (2001) ‘Dialect stylization in radio talk’, 
Language in Society, 30: 345–75.
Coupland, N. (2007a) ‘Aneurin Bevan, class wars and the 
styling of political antagonism’, in P. Auer (ed.), Style and 
Social Identities. Alternative Approaches to Linguistic 
Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 213–47.
Coupland, N. (2007b) Style. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Crystal, D. (2001) Language and the Internet. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
440
Danet, B. and Herring, S. C. (eds) (2007) The Multilingual 
Internet. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Debray, R. (2004) Transmitting Culture. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Deppermann, A. (2007) ‘Playing with the voice of the 
other: stylized Kanaksprak in conversations’, in P. Auer 
(ed.), Style and Social Identities. Alternative Approaches 
to Linguistic Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
pp. 325–61.
Drew, P. and Heritage, J. (eds) (2006) Conversation Analysis. 
4 vols. London: Sage.
European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (1992). 
European Treaty Series, 148. Strasbourg: Council of Europe 
Publishing.
European Commission (2002) ‘Dubbed or subtitles? Le cinéma 
européen vu comme une opportunité de pratiquer les 
langues étrangères dans le cadre de l’AEL 2001’, Note de 
la Commission. Bruxelles: Directorate General for Education 
and Culture.
European Commission (2005) A New Framework Strategy for 
Multilingualism. http://ec.europa.eu/education/languages/
archive/doc/com596_en.pdf (COM (2005) 596 final).
European Commission (2006) Special Eurobarometer. 
Europeans and their Languages. Bruxelles: European 
Commission.
Fairclough, N. (1995) Media Discourse. London: Arnold.
Fairclough, N. (1998) ‘Political discourse in the media: an ana-
lytical framework’, in A. Bell and P. Garrett (eds), Approaches 
to Media Discourse. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 142–62.
Fairclough, N. and Wodak, R. (1997) ‘Critical discourse analy-
sis’, in T. van Dijk (ed.), Introduction to Discourse Analysis. 
London: Sage. pp. 258–84.
Fishman, J. (1991) Reversing Language Shift. Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters.
Fiske, J. (1987, 1989) Television Culture. London: Routledge.
Fowler, R. (1991) Language in the News: Discourse and 
Ideology in the Press. London: Routledge.
Framework Convention for the Protection of National 
Minorities (1995). European Treaty Series, 157. Strasbourg: 
Council of Europe.
Franchon, C. and Vargaftig, M. (eds) (1995) European 
Television: Immigration and Ethnic Minorities. London: 
Libbey.
Fraser, N. (1992) ‘Rethinking the public sphere: a contribution 
to the critique of actually existing democracy’ in C. Calhoun 
(ed.), Habermas and the Public Sphere. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. pp. 109–142.
Garfinkel, H. (1967) Studies in Ethnomethodology. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gauntlett, D. (2007) Creative Explorations: New Approaches 
to Identities and Audiences. London: Routledge.
Giles, H. (1973) ‘Accent mobility: a model and some data’, 
Anthropological Linguistics, 15: 87–105.
Giles, H. (ed.) (1977) Language, Ethnicity and Intergroup 
Relations. London: Academic Press.
Glasgow University Media Group (1976) Bad News. London: 
Routledge.
Glasgow University Media Group (1980) More Bad News. 
London: Routledge.
Goffman, E. (1974) Frame Analysis. New York: Harper and 
Row.
Goffman, E. (1981) Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Greatbach, D. (1986) ‘Aspects of topical organisation in news 
interviews: the use of agenda-shifting procedures by news 
interviewees’, Media, Culture and Society, 8(4): 441–55.
Greatbach, D. (1998) ‘Conversation analysis’, in A. Bell and 
P. Garrett (eds), Approaches to Media Discourse. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 163–85.
Gumperz, J. and Hymes, D. (eds) (1972) Directions in 
Sociolinguistics: The Ethnography of Communication. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Habermas, J. (1990) Strukturwandel der Öffentlichkeit. 
Frankfurt am Main: Suhrkamp. (1st edn, 1962.) (English 
translation (1989): Structural Transformation of the Public 
Sphere. Cambridge: Polity Press.)
Hall, S. (2000) ‘Encoding/decoding’, in P. Marris and 
S. Thornham (eds), Media Studies. New York: New York 
University Press. pp. 51–61.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978) Language as Social Semiotics. The 
Social Interpretation of Language and Meaning. London: 
Edward Arnold.
Hargreaves, A. (2001) ‘Kein monokulturelles Menü: 
Medienrezeption in Frankreich und Deutschland’, in 
B. Busch, B. Hipfl and K. Robins (eds), Bewegte Identitäten. 
Medien in transkulturellen Kontexten. Klagenfurt: Drava. 
pp. 128–45.
Heller, M. (2000) ‘Bilingualism and identity in the post-
modern world’, Estudios de Sociolingüística, 1(2): 9–24.
Heller, M. (2003) ‘Globalization, the new economy, and the 
commodification of language and identity’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 7(4): 473–92.
Heller, M. and Labrie, N. (2003) ‘Langage, pouvoir et 
identité: une étude de cas, une approche théorique, une 
méthodologie’, in M. Heller and N. Labrie (eds), Discours 
et identité. La francité canadienne entre modernité et 
mondialisation. Cortil-Wodon: Editions Modulaires 
Européennes (E. M. E.). pp. 9–41.
Heritage, J. (1985) ‘Analysing news interviews: aspects of the 
production of talk for an «overhearing» audience’, in T. van 
Dijk (ed.), Handbook of Discourse Analysis. Discourse and 
Dialogue. Vol. 3. London: Academic Press. pp. 95–117.
Hinnenkamp, V. and Selting, M. (eds) (1989) Stil und 
Stilisierung. Arbeiten zur interpretativen Soziolinguistik. 
Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Hodge, R. and Kress, G. (1988) Social Semiotics. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Husband, C. (1994) A Richer Vision: The Development of 
Ethnic Minority Media in Western Europe. London: Libbey.
Husband, C. (2000) ‘Media and the public sphere in multieth-
nic societies’, in S. Cottle (ed.), Ethnic Minorities and the 
Media. Buckingham: Open University Press. pp. 199–214.
Hutchby, I. (1991) The organisation of Talk on radio, in 
P. Scannell (ed.), Broadcast Talk. London, Sage. 
pp. 119–37.
Hutchby, I. (2006) Media Talk: Conversation Analysis and the 
Study of Broadcasting. Maidenhead: Open University 
Press.

INTERACTION AND THE MEDIA
441
Hymes, D. (1962) ‘The ethnography of speaking’, in 
T. Gladwin and W. Sturtevant (eds), Anthropology and 
Human Behavior. Washington, DC: Anthropological Society 
of Washington. pp. 13–53.
Innis, H. A. (1951) The bias of communication. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Innis, H. A. (1997) Kreuzwege der Kommunikation. 
Ausgewählte Texte. Ed. K. Back. New York: Springer.
Jacquemet, M. (2005) ‘Transidiomatic practices: language and 
power in the age of globalization’, Language and 
Communication, 25: 257–77.
Kelly-Holmes, H. (2005) Advertising as Multilingual 
Communication. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koolstra, C. M. and Beentjes, J. W. J. (1999) ‘Children’s 
vocabulary acquisition in a foreign language through 
watching subtitled TV programmes at home’, Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 47: 51–60.
Kosnick, K. (2007) Migrant Media: Turkish Broadcasting and 
Multicultural Politics in Berlin. Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press.
Kotthoff, H. (2004) ‘Overdoing culture? Sketch-Komik, 
Typenstilisierung und Identitätskonstruktionen bei Kaya 
Yanar’, in J. Reuter (ed.), Doing Culture. Bielefeld: Transcript 
Verlag. pp. 184–201.
Kress, G. (2002) ‘The multimodal landscape of communica-
tion’, in Medien Journal, 4(2002): 4–19.
Kress, G. and van Leeuwen, T. (2001) Multimodal Discourse. 
The Modes and Media of Contemporary Communication. 
London: Arnold.
Kristeva, J. (1980) Desire in Language. A Semiotic Approach 
to Literature and Art. New York: Columbia University Press.
Labov, W. (1972) Sociolinguistic Patterns. Oxford: Blackwell.
McLuhan, M. (1964) Understanding Media: The Extensions of 
Man. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McQuail, D. (1987) Mass Communication Theory: An 
Introduction. London: Sage.
Mattelart, A. (2003) The Information Society: An Introduction. 
Tr. S. G. Taponier. London: Sage.
Meinhof, U. (1994) ‘Double talk in news broadcasts’, in 
D. Graddol and O. Boyd-Barrett (eds), Media Texts: 
Authors and Readers. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
pp. 212–23.
Meinhof, U. (1998) Language Learning in the Age of Satellite 
Television. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mercator Media (ed.) (2000) Proceedings of the Mercator 
Conference on Audiovisual Translation and Minority 
Languages. Aberystwyth, University of Wales. (3–4 April 
2000). Aberystwyth: Mercator Media.
Montgomery, M. (2001) ‘Defining ’’authenticity talk’’ ’, 
Discourse Studies, 3(4): 397–405.
Moring, T. and Husband, C. (2007) ‘The contribution of 
Swedish language media in Finland to linguistic vitality’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 
187/188: 75–101.
Morley, D. (2000) Home Territories: Media, Mobility and 
Identity. London: Routledge.
Morley, D. and Robins, K. (1996) Spaces of Identity. Global 
Media, Electronic Landscapes and Cultural boundaries. 
London: Routledge.
Perrin, D. (2006) Medienlinguistik. Konstanz: utb.
Rampton, B. (2006) Language in Late Modernity: Interaction 
in an Urban School. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Reckwitz, A. (2006) Das hybride Subjekt. Eine Theorie der 
Subjektkulturen von der bürgerlichen Moderne zur 
Postmoderne. Weilerswist: Velbrück Wissenschaft.
Reisigl, M. and Wodak, R. (2001) Discourse and Discrimination. 
London: Routledge.
Ricento, T. (2006) 'Theoretical perspectives in language 
policy: an overview‘, in T. Ricento (ed.), Language Policy: 
Theory and Practice – an Introduction. London: Blackwell. 
pp. 10–24.
Robins, K. (1997) Programming for People. From Cultural 
Rights to Cultural Responsibilities. New York: United 
Nations World Television Forum.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. and Jefferson, G. (1974) ‘A simplest 
systematics for the organisation of turn-taking in conversa-
tion’, Language, 50: 696–735.
Scannel, P. (ed.) (1991) Broadcast Talk. London: Sage.
Schmitz, U. (2004) Sprache in modernen Medien. Einführung 
in Tatsachen und Theorien, Themen und Thesen. Berlin: 
Schmidt Erich Verlag.
Scollon, R. (1998) Mediated Discourse as Social Interaction:
An Ethnographic Study of News Discourse. London: 
Longman.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, S. W. (2003) Discourses in Place. 
Language in the Material World. London: Routledge.
Scollon, R. and Scollon, W. S. (2004) Nexus Analysis. 
Discourse and the Emerging Internet. London: Routledge.
Sebba, M. (2007) ‘Identity and language construction in an 
on-line community: the case of ‘‘Ali G.’’ ‘, in P. Auer 
(ed.), Style and Social Identities. Alternative Approaches to 
Linguistic Heterogeneity. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. 
pp. 361–93.
Shohamy, E. (2006) Language Policy. Hidden Agendas and 
New Approaches. London: Routledge.
Shohamy, E. and Gorter, D. (eds) (2009) Linguistic Landscape. 
Expanding the Scenery. New York: Routledge.
ter Wal, J. (ed.) (2002) Racism and Cultural Diversity in the 
Mass Media. An Overview of Research and Examples of 
Good Practice in the EU Member States, 1995–2002. 
Vienna: ERCOMER.
Thornborrow, J. (2006) ‘Media: analysis and methods’, in 
K. Brown, (ed.), Elsevier Encyclopedia of Language and 
Linguistics. 2nd edn. Oxford: Elsevier.
Thussu, D. K. (2000) International Communication. Continuity 
and Change. London: Arnold.
Todorov, T. (1984) Mikhail Bakhtin. The Dialogic Principle. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press.
van Dijk, T. (1988) News as Discourse. London: Routledge.
van Dijk, T. (1991) Racism and the Press. London: Routledge.
van Dijk, T. (2009) Society and Discourse: How Social Contexts 
Influence Text and Talk. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
van Leeuwen, T. and Wodak, R. (1999) ‘Legitimizing immigra-
tion control: a discourse-historical analysis’, Discourse 
Studies, 1(1): 83-118.
Wodak, R. (2009) The Discourse of Politics in Action: Politics 
as Usual. Basingstoke: Palgrave.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
442
Wodak, R. and Busch, B. (2004) ‘Approaches to media texts’, 
in J. Dowing, D. McQuail, P. Schlesinger and E. Wartella 
(eds), The Handbook of Media Studies. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. pp. 105–22.
Wodak, R. and Koller, V. (eds) (2008) Handbook of 
Communication in the Public Sphere. Handbooks of Applied 
Linguistics 4. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Wodak, R. and Meyer, M. (eds) (2009) Methods of Critical 
Discourse Analysis. Introducing Qualitative Methods. 2nd 
edn. Los Angeles: Sage.
Wright, S. (ed.) (2006) ‘Languages of the internet’, 
Special Issue of the Journal of Language and Politics, 
5: 2. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.

PART 5
Multilingualism and 
Contact


30
30.1 INTRODUCTION
‘Societal bilingualism’ is a broad term used to 
refer to any kind of bilingualism or multilingual-
ism at a level of social organization beyond the 
individual or nuclear family. By this definition, 
almost every country and region of the world has 
some degree of ‘societal bilingualism’. Societal 
bilingualism by no means implies that every indi-
vidual in the society in question is bilingual, or 
even that a majority are. Rather, there are many 
different ways in which social groupings, from 
extended families all the way up to federal nation-
states, can be said to have the property of ‘societal 
bilingualism’. As Romaine points out (2005: 385), 
‘bilingual individuals may belong to communities 
of various sizes and types, and they interact in 
many kinds of networks within communities, not 
all of which may function bilingually’.
One way of studying societal bilingualism 
would be to recognize two broad categories: 
‘state’ and ‘community’. The study of societal 
bilingualism at the state level would focus on 
officially bilingual states and substates (regions, 
provinces, municipalities, etc.), the precise nature 
of their bilingualism, and the institutions and legal 
frameworks which exist to regulate and reproduce 
it. The study of societal bilingualism at the com-
munity level would focus on those groups (of 
whatever size) which practiced bilingualism 
among themselves, and would concern itself with 
their bilingual practices, including trends over 
time such as language shift (see below). Cutting 
across this division is the study of bilingual educa-
tion, the provision of education in a bilingual 
medium and/or for a community of bilingual 
speakers, which is a major topic in its own right 
(see Cummins and Hornberger, 2008; Helot and 
De Mejia, 2008 for overviews and recent research). 
At both the state and community levels, as 
Romaine has indicated, monolingualism may 
actually be the norm to varying degrees. Thus 
officially bilingual states may be collections of 
largely monolingual units, whereas bilingual com-
munities may be made up of a mixture of mono-
lingual and bilingual individuals. A community 
considered as a whole may be ‘bilingual’, but 
individuals within the community may range from 
completely monolingual to fully fluent in, and 
using, both languages, with the possibility of 
having different levels of active (productive) and 
passive (receptive) knowledge of the same lan-
guage. Within individual households, different 
generations may have different language prefer-
ences and patterns of language use.
By way of illustration, let us look at some 
examples of bilingualism at the state and commu-
nity levels from around the world.
1 Belgium as a nation has French and Dutch as offi-
cial languages (with German also official in one 
region), but is in effect two largely autonomous, 
largely monolingual entities, Flanders (Flemish/
Dutch) and Wallonia (French) together with the 
capital, Brussels, under a federal government. 
Only in Brussels are both languages official side 
by side (in other regions public signage, for 
example, is monolingual). Individual bilingual-
ism in the two official languages is surprisingly 
uncommon. Each region has its own minority 
linguistic groups: Dutch in Wallonia, French in 
Flanders, but also speakers of other languages 
Societal Bilingualism
M a r k  S e b b a

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
446
(such as Arabic or Kinyarwanda (Gafaranga, 
2007)) many of whom would know one or both 
of the official languages as well.
2 Luxemburg, Belgium’s neighbour, is officially 
trilingual at the national level, but in a very dif-
ferent way. The first language and vernacular of 
the majority of the population is Lëtzebuergesch, 
a Germanic dialect, which is now one of the three 
official languages. Although Lëtzebuergesch is 
used as a written language, High German is used 
for most written publications, while French is the 
language of administration and government. All 
locally-educated adult Luxemburgers know all 
three of these languages and the appropriate 
contexts for their use. Unlike Belgium, where 
a majority of people can live their lives mono-
lingually, in Luxemburg it would be difficult to 
participate fully without knowing how to speak 
the vernacular, Lëtzebuergesch, and read both 
German and French. The picture is even more 
complex, however, for Luxemburg has a high pro-
portion of immigrants from Southern Europe, and 
around 16% of the population are of Portuguese 
nationality (Statec, 2008). Thus, Portuguese is a 
significant minority language in Luxemburg, and 
spoken by a local community most of whom also 
know at least one of the official languages.
3 Canada is officially bilingual at the federal level, 
in English and French. Services offered by the 
Federal government have to be available in both 
these languages, and Canadians can expect to 
receive communications and services from the 
government in whichever of these languages 
they prefer. But immediately below the federal 
level, we find that, of the 10 provinces and three 
territories, nearly all are monolingual in practice, 
though under the Canadian constitution they are 
required to provide some services for speakers of 
the other official language. New Brunswick is the 
only officially bilingual province, while Quebec is 
officially French only, and the rest English. The 
extent of individual bilingualism in the two offi-
cial languages varies from region to region, with 
some areas, for example parts of Ontario and the 
Maritime Provinces, having a high percentage 
of individuals who are bilingual in English and 
French. Although paradoxically composed largely 
of officially monolingual political units, Canada is 
actually rich in bilingualism – involving not just 
the main official languages but many others – at 
the community level. There are minority aborigi-
nal communities, mostly in rural areas, who use 
their traditional languages as well as English or 
French, while in the cities – whether English or 
French predominates – there are numerous immi-
grant communities from Europe, Asia and else-
where who use, to varying extents, their heritage 
languages alongside the official language(s) of 
the place where they live.
4 Finland is officially a bilingual country, with 
both Finnish and Swedish as official languages. 
However, in practice, bilingualism is geographi-
cally limited: though Finnish-speaking and 
Swedish-speaking Finns study each other’s lan-
guages as school subjects, those who use both 
languages regularly in everyday life would mainly 
be found in certain areas of the country, in the 
west and south. Swedish speakers make up about 
5 per cent of the total population. Municipalities 
are monolingual Swedish, monolingual Finnish, 
or officially bilingual, depending on the propor-
tions of speakers of the two languages. At a com-
munity level, we find bilingualism in Finnish and 
other minority languages apart from Swedish: for 
example, the indigenous Sami languages of the 
north, and immigrant languages such as Somali 
in the urban areas.
5 Singapore is a unitary city-state with an eth-
nically-diverse population. Four languages are 
recognized officially: English, Chinese (which 
for official purposes means Mandarin Chinese), 
Malay and Tamil. English (known as the ‘first 
language’) is regarded as the ethnically-neutral 
language of the nation as a whole, and is a 
compulsory school subject and the language of 
administration. However, the other languages 
also receive official support – they are compul-
sory school subjects for children from the ethnic 
groups which speak them. Thus, in theory all 
Singaporeans know English and one other lan-
guage, the language of what is deemed to be 
their own ethnic group. In practice, things are 
much more complicated. Singaporeans from the 
main ethnic groups may learn ethnic languages 
other than their own, and may in any case not 
have their designated ethnic ‘mother tongue’ as 
a home language. Thus for school purposes, the 
only recognized form of Chinese is Mandarin, 
but Singaporean Chinese actually use some other 
forms of Chinese – Teochew, Hakka Hokkien or 
Cantonese for example – at home. This means 
that ethnic Chinese Singaporeans may well be 
trilingual. Apart from Standard English, which 
for most Singaporeans is not a home language, 
a local vernacular variety of English, Singlish, is 
widely spoken, although stigmatized.
The multilingual complexity demonstrated by the 
examples above can be accounted for by a number 
of factors – federation, colonization, urbanization, 
transnational migration, marriage – some of which 
can equally well be found in some officially 
‘monolingual’ states, whether geographically 
large (like the USA or Brazil) or small (like 
England or New Zealand). A framework for stud-
ying societal bilingualism therefore needs to be 
able to keep in focus both large-scale issues (for 
example, which languages are official and have 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
447
power and authority at national or regional level) 
and fine details (the nuances of language choice in 
an encounter between family members of differ-
ent generations).
Martin-Jones (1992: 15) points out that research 
into bilingual societies has been dominated by 
three major research paradigms: the structural-
functional, the micro-interactionist and the 
critical linguistic. The earliest of the these 
approaches, the structural-functional, was devel-
oped by scholars like Weinreich (1953), Ferguson 
(1959) and Fishman (1967, 1972), who were pre-
occupied with accounting for the functional divi-
sion between language varieties in bilingual 
communities and making comparisons, with a 
view to achieving a general understanding of the 
patterns of language use among bilinguals. The 
key concept within this approach to bilingualism 
is the notion of ‘diglossia’, which is discussed in 
detail below. The structural-functional perspective 
tended to be deterministic, to look at large social 
groupings such as whole nation-states, and to 
view bilingual societies as relatively static and 
homogeneous. In contrast to this, the interactionist 
perspective developed by Gumperz and others 
(e.g. Gumperz, 1982) focused on communication 
between individuals as the key to understanding 
societal bilingualism. It was within their 
day-to-day interactions that individual speakers 
would define and reproduce the symbolic 
values of the language within the community’s 
own repertoire of languages (Martin-Jones, 1992: 
16). Studies within this framework therefore 
generally focused on communicative events like 
interviews (Gumperz, 1982), service encounters, 
classroom talk, or everyday conversation (Auer, 
1984), using detailed analysis of the interaction
to reveal the actual practices, choices and 
patterns of language use within a bilingual 
community.
Neither of these research paradigms was par-
ticularly concerned with power relations, econom-
ics or the historical origins of the contemporary 
situations they studied, leading to criticisms that 
important aspects of the emergence and mainte-
nance of bilingual communities were being over-
looked. At this stage, a more critical paradigm, 
which treats power relations and history as central 
to understanding language behaviour, began to 
emerge within sociolinguistics, and a number of 
studies within the area of bilingualism exemplify 
this approach: for example, the work of Heller 
(e.g. 1999, 2002), Blommaert (e.g. 2005), 
Rampton (2004) and Jaffe (1999). Many of these 
studies drew of course on concepts and method-
ologies developed in the other research paradigms. 
Some recent studies (e.g. Codò, 2008) have com-
bined interactionist methods with critical dis-
course analysis to provide critiques of public 
policy. Research on societal bilingualism can thus 
be said to have developed from the mainly descrip-
tive (though by no means apolitical) to the critical 
and socially/politically engaged; however it would 
be true to say that at the present time, studies 
within all three paradigms (as well as combina-
tions of these, and no doubt others not covered by 
this typology) are being carried out in different 
bilingual societies.
30.2  BILINGUALISM, BILITERACY AND 
MULTILINGUAL LITERACIES
Research into societal bilingualism has tended to 
focus on spoken language rather than written lan-
guage, leading to an imbalance in the amount of 
attention paid to the spoken and literate modes in 
studies of societal bilingualism. Although literate 
practices are clearly of importance within many 
bilingual communities, early studies of bilingual 
literacy tended to treat it from a language acquisi-
tion or educational perspective, often in relation to 
learning a majority or official language. There 
were few studies of bilingual societies where lit-
eracy and literate practices were treated on a par 
with spoken bilingualism, for example, by explor-
ing the role of literacies in different languages 
within the daily life of a community. The advent 
of the New Literacy Studies (Street, 1984; Barton, 
2007) brought a new understanding of the role of 
literacies in everyday life, coupled with new 
qualitative research methods, such as ethnogra-
phy, for studying them. Within this framework, 
there have been more studies of societal bilingual-
ism which have either foregrounded literacy or 
have treated it as being on an equal footing with 
spoken language: see, for example, the studies in 
Martin-Jones and Jones (2000) and Hornberger 
(2003).
30.3  ORIGINS OF SOCIETAL 
BILINGUALISM
Contemporary societal bilingualism has complex 
and multiple origins. Frequently, one of two kinds 
of movement is involved – movement of people, 
or movement of national boundaries. These are 
discussed in more detail below. However, these 
certainly do not account for the origins of all bilin-
gual societies. For example, Sorenson (1967) 
describes a large region in the Northwest 
Amazon where almost every individual is polylin-
gual, knowing ‘three, four, or more languages 
well’. The area is ‘culturally homogeneous’ 
but linguistically diverse, for a very specific 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
448
reason – exogamous marriage is the norm in the 
region, and a ‘tribe’ is defined linguistically: thus, 
no one may marry an individual who has the same 
mother tongue as him/herself.
While this situation is certainly interesting, 
societal bilingualism, in most societies where it is 
currently found, has come about in some other 
way. Many of today’s bilingual societies have 
come about through expansion or conquest, which 
has resulted in an indigenous population having 
to add a new language to their repertoire –
frequently, though not always, through imposition 
from a more powerful group. Thus, for example, 
in the British Isles, speakers of Welsh, Scottish 
Gaelic, Irish Gaelic, Manx and Cornish have at 
different times become bilingual under pressure 
from English, as the speakers of English have 
expanded into and/or taken political power over 
their territories. Similar things have happened 
with indigenous minorities all over the world: they 
have been incorporated into centralized states and 
left with no option but to learn the national 
language. So, in many countries, we find bilingual 
linguistic minorities who have moved little or 
not at all from their traditional homelands. In 
other cases, territorial expansion has involved 
colonization, often resulting in the existence of a 
bilingual élite in the (former) colony who speak 
both the colonizer’s language and their own indig-
enous language. Less frequently, colonization 
results in widespread bilingualism at all levels 
of society (Malta and Gibraltar provide examples 
of this).
A different kind of movement – the movement 
of national boundaries – may also produce bilin-
gual linguistic minorities. This does not necessar-
ily involve national expansion, but sometimes 
simply a division of territories, which may result 
in some people who are members of a linguistic 
majority on one side of the border becoming a 
minority on the other side of the border. This is a 
common situation in Europe, where political 
boundaries have often been redrawn following 
wars. Thus, for example, Alsace is a part of France 
where the vernacular language is a Germanic dia-
lect (Alsatian). The boundary between ‘French’ 
and ‘German’ territories in this region has been 
redrawn many times over the last few centuries. 
Currently the people of Alsace find themselves 
within the French state and subject to the French 
education system, where French predominates, so 
those for whom Alsatian German is a home lan-
guage are necessarily bilingual (Gardner-Chloros, 
1991). Similarly the people of Corsica (Jaffe,  
1999), whose ancestral language (Corsu) is closer 
to Italian than to French, live within the French 
state (which incorporated Corsica in the 18th cen-
tury). While some minorities are able to maintain 
their community languages under such circum-
stances, ‘language shift’ (see below) is a very 
common consequence of the minoritization of the 
incorporated language, as it is in the cases just 
mentioned.
Movement of people is the other main source of 
societal bilingualism, but it can take many differ-
ent forms. Some bilingual communities have 
resulted from forced displacement due to war, 
political instability or slavery, but most minority 
language communities today are probably the 
result of migration for economic reasons – whether 
this can be called ‘voluntary’ or not is a matter of 
interpretation. This migration may be internal – 
for example, from rural to urban areas – or across 
national boundaries. It may be on a very small 
scale, at least at first, but may gather momentum 
as time goes on, resulting in local linguistic 
minority communities which are sufficiently large 
to be self-sustaining and self-perpetuating. 
However, what happens in any specific case is 
dependent on complex sociohistorical factors that 
are subject to change, sometimes quite sudden 
change. For example, in the period from 2004, 
after Poland entered the European Union, there 
was a large influx of Polish speakers into both the 
United Kingdom and Ireland. In some parts of 
Britain there already existed Polish minority com-
munities which had been established for some 
generations, although the individuals born in the 
last few decades were less likely to speak Polish, 
and might well be English-speaking monolin-
guals. The arrival of new Polish-speaking migrants 
has raised the profile of Polish culture in parts of 
Britain, bringing specialized Polish shops and 
even English–Polish bilingual road signs in some 
places. Meanwhile, although there is an increase 
in the number of Polish speakers, these new arriv-
als have mostly learnt some English at school in 
Poland and are likely to face fewer language bar-
riers than the previous ‘first generation’. What this 
illustrates is that in Britain, as in many countries, 
there is a constantly changing constellation of 
minority groups with differing linguistic reper-
toires and needs, which impact in various ways on 
the existing balance of languages within a multi-
lingual state.
30.4  MEASURING SOCIETAL 
BILINGUALISM
It is important to consider how information about 
societal bilingualism is collected and documented, 
whether through official censuses and surveys 
or academic research. While pure intellectual 
curiosity and the desire to explain or predict 
patterns of change may be good enough reasons 
for studying bilingual communities, much of the 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
449
information which is gathered is actually linked to 
the planning and allocation of resources in 
services such as education, health and welfare. 
Necessarily, there is an ideological aspect to all 
such information gathering. Decisions about 
what information to collect are rarely neutral. 
According to Haug (2003), there is a ‘close 
relationship between a country’s policy on ethnic, 
religious and language minorities and the 
availability of official statistical data, especially 
census data’.
In trying to judge the extent and nature of bilin-
gualism within any one society, therefore, it is 
necessary to tread warily. Problems are typically 
of two kinds: (i) those related to the complexity of 
language itself, and (ii) those related to the atti-
tudes of speakers and other social actors such as 
governments.
In the first category, we find issues such as a 
lack of clarity over language names and bounda-
ries. Is ‘Scots’ just a dialect of English? Are 
people from Sylhet in Bengal speakers of Sylheti 
(a low-status variety of language) or Bengali 
(a relatively high-status language)? What of people 
who do not habitually speak one named codified 
language, but use several on a daily basis in a 
code-switching or language-mixing mode? Are 
creolized language varieties like Jamaican Creole 
or Mauritian Creole to be treated as distinct from 
their lexifier languages (English and French, 
respectively)? How ‘well’ must one speak a lan-
guage to be able to claim to speak it? How much 
must one use it for it to be considered one’s main 
language of communication?
Issues in the second category are often bound 
up with the first. Will speakers of Scots or Sylheti 
be disinclined to call themselves thus (because of 
the low status of these languages), and if they do 
so, will the collectors of language statistics account 
for them under those headings or simply put them 
down as speakers of English or Bengali? 
Authorities may find it convenient to overlook 
some languages, to ‘pretend they do not exist’ 
(an example of what Irvine and Gal (2000) call 
‘erasure’) and to enhance others.
Allocation of resources in practice often means 
competition for resources. Under these circum-
stances, lack of information may be an advantage 
for some. In Belgium, which was constituted as a 
state in 1830, language information was collected 
in censuses from 1846 to 1947. After this, 
‘Belgium suppressed questions on language in the 
census in 1961/62 after the territorial boundaries 
of the language communities were defined’ (Haug, 
2003). It is now possible to know how many 
people live in the Walloon (French) and Flemish 
regions, but not what languages they speak. Thus 
the administrative status quo can be maintained, 
even if population movements change the 
majority language in a particular locality. In 
England, there are no language questions on the 
national census at all, but in Wales a question is 
asked about knowledge of Welsh. In the United 
States, the census asks whether the respondent 
speaks a language other than English at home, and 
only in the case that the answer is ‘yes’, does it 
ask how well they speak English (US Census 2000 
questionnaire long form, Question 11). The 
implication is that proficiency in the home 
language is not of interest, but proficiency in 
English is.
In Canada, despite the sensitivity of language 
issues, the census collects a lot of information 
about language. According to Statistics Canada, 
‘the long questionnaire contains questions on the 
first language learned in childhood, languages 
understood and spoken at home, as well as 
knowledge of official and non-official languages 
in the various regions of Canada’ which will be 
‘used to establish programs to protect the 
rights of Canadians under the Canadian Charter 
of Rights and Freedoms’ (Statistics Canada, 
2001).
From the above selection of examples, it can be 
seen that official language surveys can serve a 
variety of purposes, some but not all of them 
benevolent. Surveys carried out by the academic 
research community, for example community and 
school-based surveys of linguistic minorities (e.g. 
Linguistic Minorities Project, 1985), are equally 
subject to practical, theoretical and methodologi-
cal problems (see, for example, the critical account 
of the work of the Linguistic Minorities Project in 
Britain by Marilyn Martin-Jones (1991)). A poten-
tial problem with all types of survey is a tendency 
to essentialism (for example, treating ethnicity as 
a fixed, inherited attribute which also largely 
determines language) and reification of languages, 
i.e. starting from the viewpoint that languages are 
objects with relatively clear boundaries, which 
individuals select and use. In a critique of this 
view, Le Page (1994: 111) argues that it is more 
productive to ‘start instead from the individual 
and examine in detail the linguistic behaviour of 
individuals toward each other in networks of rela-
tionship’. The outcome of this may be an under-
standing of a bi- or multilingual society which is 
at odds with any attempt to classify individuals as 
speakers of prespecified languages or members of 
particular ‘speech communities’. As Freeland 
(2003: 243) puts it in her study of one ‘plurilin-
gual and interethnic’ region, the Caribbean Coast 
of Nicaragua, individuals in this kind of complex 
situation are best described in terms of ‘hybrid, 
dynamic identities, expressed multilingually’. 
This is just the sort of complicated relationship 
between language and individuals which is diffi-
cult to translate into statistics.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
450
30.5 DIGLOSSIA
One of the key theoretical concepts in the study of 
societal bilingualism is ‘diglossia’. This term was 
introduced into linguistics by Charles Ferguson 
(1959). Ferguson’s original description of diglos-
sia referred to a very specific type of bilingualism 
or bidialectalism, where a particular speech com-
munity used two related language varieties for 
different purposes. One variety would be used for 
formal and prestigious language activities, while 
the other would be associated with informal, eve-
ryday and low-prestige ones. Thus while the 
speakers would regard both varieties as in some 
sense ‘the same language’, the two would in prac-
tice be sharply differentiated in terms of their 
prestige and their functions.
Ferguson described four languages as what he 
called ‘defining cases’ of diglossia: Arabic 
(Classical Arabic and vernacular Arabic); French 
in Haiti (Standard French and Haitian Creole); 
Greek (Katharevousa and Dimotiki)1 and German 
in Switzerland (High German and Swiss German). 
In each of these cases, there is a prestigious vari-
ety (which Ferguson called H, for ‘high’) which is 
associated with education, administration, literary 
works and formal speech situations. Equally, there 
is an L (‘low’) variety which is used in informal 
everyday speech and possibly a small number of 
other contexts. H and L have disjoint functions: 
where H is appropriate, L is inappropriate and 
vice versa. Furthermore, in a speech community 
where there is substantial social stratification, not 
everyone would necessarily have equal knowl-
edge of both varieties. In particular, those with 
least opportunity for formal education would be 
likely to have little or no command of H, which 
would further disadvantage them and limit the 
activities in which they could engage.
Beyond this important similarity, all four 
speech communities have significant differences 
in the historical relationship between H and L, the 
contexts where they are used and the extent to 
which L is codified, standardized, appreciated or 
even acknowledged to exist. So, for example, 
whereas in Haiti Haitian Creole might, at least at 
one time, have been seen as stigmatized and a 
source of shame for its speakers, Swiss German 
has never been viewed as shameful, merely as a 
localized form which strongly symbolizes local 
identity but which is inappropriate for formal 
functions. Likewise, while L varieties are typi-
cally regarded as ‘spoken’ languages which are 
unsuited to writing, there is always the potential to 
develop an orthography for L, and this has in fact 
happened, to varying extents, in all four of 
Ferguson’s defining cases. This has happened 
informally and unofficially in the case of some 
vernacular forms of Arabic, such as Egyptian, 
which have entered the written domain through 
the Internet and some printed media (Warschauer, 
El-Said and Zohry, 2002). It has happened for-
mally and officially in the case of Haitian Creole, 
which, although still less prestigious than French, 
has been provided with an official orthography 
which has enabled it to encroach on French in 
written and public domains (Schieffelin and 
Doucet, 1994). The situation with Greek has 
changed radically alongside political changes in 
Greece (Horrocks, 1997), while Swiss German 
has also found a space on the Internet (Siebenhaar, 
2006).
30.6  FISHMAN’S EXTENDED
CONCEPT OF DIGLOSSIA
The essential characteristic of a diglossic relation-
ship in Ferguson’s terms is the existence of a clear 
distinction between H and L as regards the func-
tions which they serve. Building on this, Joshua 
Fishman (1967) introduced an extended notion of 
diglossia, one where H and L need not be related 
varieties of one language but could be two dis-
similar languages, as long as they were used for 
non-overlapping sets of functions. In fact, Fishman 
considered any community diglossic if there 
existed at least two functionally-differentiated 
stylistic registers, dialects, or languages (1972: 92). 
Many more speech communities could be 
described as ‘diglossic’ according to this model, 
including many former colonies of European 
countries where the former colonizer’s language 
remained official and the indigenous languages 
were relatively underdeveloped for educational 
and administrative purposes.
Fishman also introduced the concept of diglos-
sia with or without bilingualism, and bilingual-
ism with or without diglossia. Some societies, 
such as Paraguay, could be said to be bilingual at 
all levels of society (in the case of Paraguay, in 
Spanish (H) and Guaraní (L)), but the languages 
are still kept apart in terms of prestige and func-
tion. This would be a case of bilingualism with 
diglossia (see Choi, 2005 for a more recent over-
view of bilingualism in Paraguay). Other diglossic 
communities might, nevertheless, have relatively 
little individual bilingualism, on the basis of ‘one 
language for the rich, another for the poor’. In a 
true case of diglossia without bilingualism, the 
H variety would be mainly restricted to the élite, 
who would be the only ones with access to educa-
tion. They would have to communicate with the 
rest of the population through intermediaries 
(such as semi-educated clerks or junior officials). 
While examples were common in the period of 
conquest and colonialism up to the mid-twentieth 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
451
century, they are less common today. A more 
common situation – often a legacy of colonial 
language and education policies – is one where 
bilingualism is restricted to the élite (see, e.g. 
Pennycook, 1998; Blommaert, 1999). Though 
some members of the élite might not even be 
familiar with L, the majority would have some 
knowledge of L, which they would use in informal 
situations and to communicate with people from 
lower social classes. The bilinguals in this situa-
tion would therefore be the upper social classes, 
with the monolinguals being the most disadvan-
taged group in the society. The former Belgian 
central African colony of Rwanda, where the élite 
are bilingual in French and Kinyarwanda, and the 
rest of the population monolingual in Kinyarwanda, 
would be an example (Gafaranga, 2007). For fur-
ther discussion of élite bilingualism, see De Mejia 
(2002) and also contributions to Ricento (2000).
A rather small number of speech communities 
could be said to be neither bilingual nor diglossic 
by Fishman’s definition: the implication of this is 
that there is only one language in use, and that it 
has no differentiation between varieties in terms 
of prestige. There are currently very few if any 
independent nation-states that fulfil these criteria, 
although within individual speech communities, it 
may be true of those which have only one lan-
guage and where there is little social stratification. 
The case of bilingualism without diglossia is 
also relatively rare: it implies a society where two 
languages are in regular use but without signifi-
cant status differences between them. In practice, 
this means two high-status or prestige languages 
(since a community with a low-status language 
invariably has an H superimposed upon it even 
though few people have access to it). For exam-
ples, we need to look to societies where two devel-
oped and standardized languages are widely used 
in all areas of everyday life, with neither being 
considered superior overall to the other (it is pos-
sible of course, that one is considered more suit-
able than the other for some purposes). Canada as 
a federal state recognizing French and English as 
co-official languages is an example.
Fishman’s model of diglossia can be applied 
not just at the level of nation-states but also at 
other levels of social and political organization. 
For example, within the Spanish state, historically 
diglossic relationships exist in several autono-
mous regions between Castilian (Spanish) and a 
regional language: Basque, Catalan and Galician. 
Language planning over the last three decades has 
been aimed at changing the diglossic relationship 
into one of equal status where either language can 
be used for any function: bilingualism without 
diglossia. Similarly, language planning in Wales, 
now a semi-autonomous region of the United 
Kingdom, has sought to raise the status of Welsh 
so that it can coexist on a basis of equality with the 
former H language, English. Equally, in indige-
nous and migrant minority communities there 
may be a diglossic relationship between the com-
munity language (low status, used in the home/
informal situations) and the majority language 
(high status, used for prestigious functions). In 
fact the situation of Welsh could also have been 
described in this way, as Welsh is an indigenous 
minority language, spoken by about 20 per cent of 
the population of Wales, virtually all of whom 
also speak English. In migrant minority communi-
ties, especially in the second and subsequent 
generation, the community language (or ‘heritage 
language’) may become restricted to informal and 
in-group interactions, with the majority language 
taking on the role of H. Whether the community 
language in such circumstances could truly be 
said to lack prestige (i.e. to be a ‘low’ language) 
would be a matter for exploration in each indi-
vidual case: for example, in some Welsh-medium 
secondary schools in Wales, Welsh has the tradi-
tional ‘high’ role (language of the classroom) 
while English is the language of the playground, 
the L language (Khleif, 1976).
30.7 DIGLOSSIA AND DOMAINS
The concept of ‘domain’ is central to the diglossic 
view of bilingualism. Each language is associated 
with characteristic (and non-overlapping) settings, 
known as domains, in which it is used either 
exclusively or predominantly: for example, the 
home, the school, religious institutions, media, 
etc. In this respect, diglossia theory can be seen as 
quite deterministic, with individual behaviour 
being determined by community norms for lan-
guage use in each domain. This emphasis on 
domains as a key explanatory category led histori-
cally to research focusing on Fishman’s question: 
‘Who speaks what language to Whom and when?’ 
(1965). Early studies of societal bilingualism 
often tried to model language choice by means of 
decision trees, where the language used would be 
determined by such factors as domain, interlocu-
tor, generation and formality. However, as Martin-
Jones puts it (1991: 50), ‘as the empirical work in 
bilingual communities has developed, it has 
become clear that the languages within the com-
municative repertoire of bilingual minority groups 
do not necessarily fall into a neat pattern of com-
plementary distribution across domains’. In some 
bilingual societies, more than one language might 
typically be used in a particular domain, either 
for distinct functions or in a code-switching 
(q.v. Chapter 31) mode. Different generations of 
speakers may have different language competences 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
452
and therefore behave differently in the same 
domain. Phenomena such as ‘crossing’ (using a 
language normally considered to ‘belong’ to a dif-
ferent ethnic group from that of the speaker) may 
occur in certain contexts, especially among ado-
lescents (Rampton, 2004). Furthermore, domains 
themselves may be inventions of the researcher; 
members of the language community may not feel 
that their lives are neatly divided up in this way, 
and may behave accordingly, making an analysis 
in terms of domains very difficult. Nevertheless, 
the concept of domain has remained an important 
one in the study of societal bilingualism, and par-
ticularly in the understanding of language shift 
and maintenance (see Section 30.12).
30.8 THE STABILITY OF DIGLOSSIA
The concepts of bilingualism and diglossia 
together can be used to describe a wide range of 
types of monolingual and bilingual communities. 
But how stable are the situations that these labels 
apply to?
According to Ferguson (1959: 338), diglossia 
is a stable condition which may last for hundreds 
of years, although it may die out as a result of 
certain social changes over a long period, in par-
ticular an increase in literacy, better communica-
tions and social mobility and the emergence of a 
nationalistic movement with the vernacular as a 
unifying symbol. Yet within a decade of the publi-
cation of Ferguson’s paper, the diglossic situation 
in Greece had altered, as Demotic (Dimotiki), the 
L language in terms of Ferguson’s classic descrip-
tion, was made official and thus became accepta-
ble in formal and prestigious functions. 
Katharevousa, the H, began to be restricted to a 
smaller and smaller range of domains. To under-
stand how this came about it is necessary to under-
stand the long history of the language question in 
Greece and the ideology and politics associated 
with the two varieties of Greek (see Horrocks, 
1997 for an account of this). The important point 
is that diglossic relationships between languages 
or language varieties are indeed subject to change, 
possibly even rapid change when this is driven by 
historical forces. Fishman (1972: 105) regards 
communities which have bilingualism without 
diglossia as extremely unstable or transitional, the 
result of ‘leaky’ diglossia where one language 
‘leaks’ into the functions associated with the other. 
Such situations can be taken as further evidence 
that any model of diglossic relationships between 
languages must be dynamic, allowing for changes 
in the nature of bilingualism in the community 
and the status of the language varieties concerned. 
In the particular case of bilingualism without 
diglossia, a stable state of bilingualism with two 
high-status languages is the desired outcome of 
language policy in a number of places around the 
world where there has previously been a diglossic 
relationship between the languages in question 
(see above).
30.9  FURTHER ELABORATIONS OF
THE DIGLOSSIA CONCEPT
With an extended model of diglossia where diglos-
sic relationships between languages can hold not 
only at a national but also at a regional and com-
munity level, it is possible to identify a number of 
elaborations and variations of Fishman’s original 
model. For example, in Tanzania, Abdulaziz 
Mkilifi (1978) identified a form of ‘triglossia’. At 
a national level, two languages, English and 
Kiswahili, had official status and were fairly 
widely spoken. However, of these two, English – 
the former language of colonial administration – 
was used for more prestigious functions and was 
associated with higher levels of education. 
Kiswahili, an indigenous lingua franca, had, in 
practice, lower status. However, at a local level, 
Kiswahili is the language of administration and 
first schooling and fulfils the functions of H with 
respect to the many indigenous vernacular lan-
guages, all of which are more localized, less 
developed and less prestigious than Kiswahili. 
According to Abdulaziz Mkilifi (1978: 134), the 
situation is the product of an ‘intersection between 
two developing diglossic situations, one involving 
Swahili and some vernacular and the other involv-
ing Swahili and English’, thus pointing again to 
the need for a dynamic model which takes into 
account the possibility of change.
Fasold (1984: 45) describes the Tanzanian situ-
ation as ‘double-overlapping diglossia’ and goes 
on to provide two further examples of elaborated 
forms of diglossia. The first of these he calls 
‘double-nested diglossia’ and is exemplified by 
Khalapur, a rural village in India described by 
Gumperz (1964). In Khalapur, the H language is 
Hindi (one of the national languages of India), and 
the L is the local Khalapur vernacular, which is in 
fact a dialect of Hindi. The situation gains added 
complexity through the fact that both Hindi and 
the local Khalapur dialect themselves have ‘high’ 
and ‘low’ varieties distinguished on the usual cri-
teria of prestige and suitability for formal or infor-
mal encounters. Thus the overall H–L distinction 
between Hindi and Khalapur dialect provides a 
matrix within which there is a continuum from the 
‘high high’ of refined Hindi to the ‘low low’ of the 
informal variety of Khalapur dialect. An even 
more complex situation is the ‘linear polyglossia’ 
of English-educated Chinese communities in 
Malaysia, described by Fasold (1984: 48), on the 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
453
basis of a description by Platt (1977). This may 
best be described as a language hierarchy in which 
formal Malaysian English lies at the top, followed 
by the standard form of the national language, 
Bahasa Malaysia (Malay), and then Mandarin 
Chinese. Below this comes the colloquial form of 
Malaysian English and other forms of Chinese. 
Lowest of all is Bazaar Malay, a lingua franca. 
Unlike the case of Khalapur, where there are 
‘nested’ H and L versions of the same language, in 
the Malaysian case the formal or standard varie-
ties of the languages, although ranked among 
themselves, are all at the top of the hierarchy, with 
the informal or low-prestige varieties of the same 
languages near the bottom.
30.10  BEYOND DIGLOSSIA: CRITIQUES 
OF DIGLOSSIA THEORY
Ferguson’s initial description of diglossia, which 
limits it to situations where two varieties of a 
single language (as defined by the speech com-
munity) function as H and L, can be seen as apply-
ing to a specific, identifiable set of languages 
where the L but not the H is used as a home lan-
guage, while the H language is acquired outside 
the home, through a process such as secular or 
religious education or enrolment in a priestly 
class. In most of Ferguson’s classic cases, H and 
L are not sociolects differentiated by class; rather, 
as in German-speaking Switzerland, both H and L 
are used throughout the society, but in different 
situations. Although some people may not acquire 
H, due to lack of access to education, everyone 
who knows H will also know L, and when to use 
each variety. H and L are variant registers, not 
dialects (Hudson, 2002: 3, citing Ferguson, 1991: 
222). By this account, diglossia is a sociolinguis-
tic phenomenon which is not directly related to 
bilingualism at all, but it may be a unitary phe-
nomenon with similar origins in different societies 
(Hudson, 2002: 15).
Fishman’s extended model of diglossia is sub-
stantially different, as it allows for a wide range of 
bilingual situations to be called ‘diglossic’. In 
doing so it proposes that the crucial distinction is 
essentially binary, and that practices (uses and 
values) are homogeneous throughout the society 
in question. Furthermore, it allows stylistic regis-
ters and dialects as well as languages to play a role 
in diglossia, suggesting that the functional differ-
ences between H and L may be a form of sociolec-
tal variation. At this point, it could be argued, 
diglossia becomes a proxy for phenomena of 
social stratification and categorization which 
might be more insightfully accounted for by a less 
deterministic and more flexible framework, which 
takes into consideration, inter alia, the economic 
status of different groups, power relations within 
the society, access to literacy and education, as 
well as communicative practices generally.
The lack of an account of power in either 
Ferguson’s or Fishman’s versions of the diglossia 
theory has been a major point of criticism. 
Early critiques came from a group of linguists 
working on minority languages within Europe. 
They developed what became known as the ‘con-
flict tradition’ in diglossia studies as a response to 
the way that the original definition of diglossia 
failed to take into account the ‘origins of diglossia 
in social relations of inequality’ (Martin-Jones, 
1992: 15). These researchers were concerned with 
‘the ways in which divisions between linguistic 
groups are related to class divisions and to politi-
cal and economic relations within the framework 
of the state’, ‘the processes involved in the 
imposition of power and the reproduction of 
power relations’ and ‘the nature of conflicts and 
social struggles generated by relations of power’ 
(Martin-Jones, 1989: 118). Initially, this approach 
was applied to Catalan and Occitan (e.g. Aracil, 
1965; Eckert, 1980; Woolard, 1989); later it was 
taken up by scholars working on Celtic languages 
(e.g. Williams, 1987 for Welsh; MacKinnon, 1984 
for Scottish Gaelic). A characteristic of the con-
flict tradition is that it adopts the perspective of 
the dominated language; the researchers them-
selves are frequently native speakers of the lan-
guages concerned and involved in language 
campaigning at a grassroots level (Martin-Jones, 
1989: 119). Linguists in this tradition coined the 
term ‘normalization’ for the reversal of the his-
toric power imbalances (Aracil, 1965). The con-
flict tradition can be said to have had considerable 
influence on subsequent research, providing a 
basis for the emergence of a critical paradigm in 
research on societal bilingualism and informing 
debates surrounding minority and endangered 
languages (see, for example, many of the contri-
butions to Duchêne and Heller, 2008).
Other elaborations of the diglossia concept 
have also tried to redress the omission of power 
relations: for example, Devonish’s (2003) notion 
of ‘Conquest Diglossia’ – the type of diglossia 
found in former colonies of European countries 
(for example, in Jamaica) – where diglossia was a 
direct result of conquest by an external power 
rather than the result of differences in prestige 
among indigenous language varieties.
30.11  SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM AND
THE ECONOMIC METAPHOR
By contrast, power relations are at the heart of the 
theories of language developed by the French 
anthropologist/sociologist 
Pierre 
Bourdieu. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
454
Bourdieu refers to language as ‘symbolic capital’ 
which is unequally distributed among language 
users. Individuals can, and must, spend their lin-
guistic capital in the symbolic marketplace, where 
‘the value of an utterance depends on the capacity 
of the various agents involved in the exchange to 
impose the criteria of appreciation most favoura-
ble to their own products’ (1991: 67). Thus, the 
value of a particular language or language variety 
in a linguistic market depends on legitimation by 
the dominant group and dominant institutions, 
which can exercise ‘symbolic domination’ over 
the rest by means of language. In each linguistic 
market, a particular symbolic order is imposed, 
with certain varieties of language being delegiti-
mized and others valorized: this is understood by 
all participants. As Bourdieu puts it, ‘the whole 
social structure is present in each interaction’(1991: 
67). Through institutions such as education and 
the mass media, the dominant group will repro-
duce the symbolic order. Heller (2005: 6) describes 
symbolic domination as ‘masking and legitimiz-
ing relations of power’: a symbolically dominated 
group will accept the marginalization of its own 
language and the valorization of that of the domi-
nant group – the group which has power to 
‘impose the criteria of appreciation’.
Bourdieu’s treatment of language as symbolic 
capital permits a nuanced view of bilingualism, 
with the value of language varieties depending on 
the symbolic order of the specific marketplace. 
For example, Heller’s study (1999) of a French-
language high school in the predominantly English 
Canadian province of Ontario showed that, in 
spite of French being the official language of the 
school, Canadian bilingual students massively 
flouted the French-only rule, preferring to use 
English outside class. Immigrant Francophones 
from former colonies tended to share the linguistic 
ideologies of the school and spoke the variety of 
French legitimated by the school – Standard 
French – but were marginalized among the stu-
dent body because of their lack of English. At the 
same time, bilinguals who were speakers of 
English and French Canadian Vernacular were 
marginalized, because their French was of a stig-
matized variety (1999: 27).
The economic metaphor helps to explain how, 
as the monetary economy globalizes, language, 
and bilingualism in particular, can become ‘com-
modified’, i.e. treated as tradable goods undiffer-
entiated by quality. Sometimes this commodified 
bilingualism can offer unexpected opportunities. 
Thus, women migrants from countries with strong 
traditions of English as a second language, such as 
the Philippines and some African countries like 
Kenya (see Verra, 2008), may find themselves 
with language skills which are in demand from 
European families who want English-speaking 
carers for their children. The commodification of 
French–English bilingual language skills in 
Canada has been studied by Heller and associates 
(Heller, 2002), who found that the existence of 
large numbers of French–English bilinguals in 
particular areas was attractive to businesses, in 
particular call centres which needed bilingual 
operators. However, bilingualism was now less 
likely to be valued as a skill to be paid for and 
instead treated as a ‘talent to be prized (as one 
might prize punctuality and neatness) but not to be 
recognized or remunerated’ (Heller 2005: 6).
30.12  LANGUAGE SHIFT AND
LANGUAGE MAINTENANCE
Language shift and maintenance have been a 
major focus of research in the area of societal 
bilingualism. Where language shift affects the 
entire community of speakers of a language, it 
becomes a case of language endangerment or lan-
guage death (as documented, for example, in 
Dorian’s study of language attrition in a Scottish 
Gaelic-speaking area in Scotland (1981). However, 
language shift may also affect only some speakers 
of a language, in particular those who form a 
minority within a larger entity where another lan-
guage is dominant: typically, migrant minority 
communities. Thus, while a language like 
Cantonese, with around 55 million speakers 
according to Ethnologue (Lewis 2009), cannot 
reasonably be described as ‘endangered’ even if 
there are some pressures on it, it is quite possible 
that Cantonese will cease to be used in some 
countries where it is a minority language (for 
example, Britain) as its speakers shift to the 
majority language.
An early important study of language shift was 
Gal’s (1979) study of Oberwart, a German/
Hungarian-speaking town in Austria. From being 
predominantly Hungarian-speaking at the time of 
the breakup of the Austro-Hungarian empire, 
Oberwart had become predominantly German-
speaking 50 years later. Gal approached the ques-
tion of language shift in Oberwart through an 
ethnographic study, observing the language in 
which actual interactions took place and collect-
ing information about the social networks of her 
participants. Her research showed that there was 
some predictability regarding which language a 
bilingual would use in a given interaction: the 
main determinant was the social identity of the 
interlocutor. Older interlocutors, and those who 
were regarded as more ‘peasant’ and less ‘urban-
ized’, were more likely to be addressed in 
Hungarian. The more peasants in a person’s social 
network, the more they were likely to use Hungarian. 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
455
Thus, Gal established that social networks had an 
important role in determining language shift and 
maintenance.
Li Wei’s (1994) study of the Chinese commu-
nity of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, England, also 
showed the importance of social networks in lan-
guage shift. Li Wei’s study was based on research 
carried out within family homes. Older women, 
who were recent immigrants, were most likely to 
use Chinese, while the youngest generation of 
British-born children were most likely to be 
dominant in, and have a preference for, English. 
Beyond this broad generalization about language 
shift in progress, however, a more detailed picture 
could be discerned by looking at social networks. 
Individuals who had most interaction with English 
speakers were those who developed most profi-
ciency in English, which enabled them to interact 
better with English speakers. Individuals who 
interacted least with the majority community had 
least opportunity to learn English, which in turn 
prevented them from becoming more proficient. 
Furthermore, the strength of Chinese-based net-
works had an important effect on the extent of 
maintenance of Chinese; for example, one net-
work within the community had ties to the same 
place of origin and attended the same church and 
used Chinese more and with a wider range of 
interlocutors.
Language shift invariably involves an interme-
diate stage of bilingualism, which may be rela-
tively short – a generation or two for some migrant 
communities – or endure for centuries. Even in the 
latter case, the decisive change, from a bilingual 
majority to a monolingual majority, may happen 
rapidly (as in the case of Irish Gaelic, supplanted 
by English), in the course of one or two genera-
tions. It is tempting to treat the economic meta-
phor of Bourdieu rather literally and say that the 
major cause of language shift is the overwhelming 
marketplace value of certain languages when 
compared with others, but the truth is that it is not 
necessary to give up a language in order to 
acquire a new one, a fact demonstrated clearly by 
the existence of societies which remain stably 
bilingual over long periods. Therefore, while there 
is no doubt that economic factors are very impor-
tant in language shift, any approach to this topic 
needs to be more nuanced, taking into account the 
exact mechanisms whereby communities, families 
and individuals gradually become first bilingual 
and then monolingual. So, for example, Gal found 
that the preference for German in Oberwart was 
connected with an increasingly positive view of 
the social identity of ‘industrial worker’, associ-
ated with German, as opposed to the identity of 
‘peasant farmer’, associated with Hungarian. But 
this preference translated itself into language shift 
in very specific ways; for example, as male 
Hungarian-speaking peasant farmers could not 
find wives in their own community they were 
forced to marry German-speaking women from 
the surrounding area, because women from 
Hungarian-speaking peasant backgrounds pre-
ferred a German-speaking, urbanized lifestyle. 
With German established as the ‘mother tongue’ 
of the peasant family, it was less likely that 
Hungarian would be passed on to the next genera-
tion (Gal, 1978).
In a very different setting, Kulick (1992) stud-
ied language shift in Gapun, a village in Papua 
New Guinea. The traditional language of the vil-
lage, Taiap, had largely been abandoned by its 
speakers in favour of Tok Pisin (New Guinea 
Pidgin, an official language and nationwide lingua 
franca). Although the village had grown, the 
number of Taiap speakers had dwindled, with 
boys being least competent in Taiap. Kulick found 
that each language had been associated with a dif-
ferent set of attributes within the traditional cul-
ture of the village: Taiap with hed, the 
individualistic, selfish, irascible and proud aspect 
of personality; and Tok Pisin with save, ‘knowl-
edge’, the sociable, cooperative side of a person. 
Whereas once these traditional concepts had been 
articulated through the medium of Taiap, now
‘ … what was once a dual concept of personhood 
subsumed under one language has become a 
duality split along linguistic lines. Hed has become 
linked to the vernacular, which in turn has associa-
tions with women, the ancestors, and the past. 
Save, on the other hand, has come to be expressed 
through and by Tok Pisin, which in turn is strongly 
associated with men, the Catholic church, and 
modernity’
(Kulick, 1992: 20). 
Since hed is regarded as childish, maturation is 
seen as involving a movement from hed to save; 
hence Tok Pisin is strongly foregrounded in 
speech directed at children, particularly boys. This 
preference for using Tok Pisin, the vehicle of save, 
in interaction with children was the key to under-
standing language shift in Gapun.
From the perspective of social psychology, 
Giles, Bourhis and Taylor (1977) developed the 
concept of ‘ethnolinguistic vitality’, which can be 
applied to situations of language maintenance and 
shift. Three sets of factors are involved in deter-
mining the ethnolinguistic vitality of a language 
community:
status
 •
 (including access to political power, social 
status, history and status of the community 
language)
demography
 •
 (size of the group, how densely 
or sparsely its members are distributed over the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
456
area where they live, birth rate and patterns of 
migration, etc.)
institutional support 
 •
(support within mass 
media, education and other social institutions). 
All of these factors, according to Giles et al., 
could be hypothesized to impact on the vitality of 
the group and hence on its language. 
‘Ethnolinguistic vitality’ attempts to provide a 
framework for using external, and relatively meas-
urable, factors, to assess the likelihood of lan-
guage maintenance or shift. Bourhis et al. (1981) 
further introduced the idea of subjective ethnolin-
guistic vitality, reflecting the fact that group mem-
bers’ perceptions of their own ethnolinguistic 
vitality are often very different from an assess-
ment based on the ‘objective’ factors set out by 
Giles et al. The concept of ethnolinguistic vitality 
has been further developed and widely applied to 
different situations, but also criticized: for exam-
ple, for failing to take into account the issues of 
power and ideology which underlie notions like 
‘status’ (Williams, 1992, Chapter 8) and for its 
oversimplification of complex and problematic 
concepts like ‘identity’ (Atkinson, 2000) and ‘eth-
nicity’, and the relations between these (see 
Pavlenko and Blackledge, 2004: 4–8 for a more 
detailed critique). A new research approach, 
‘Multilingual Landscapes’, has developed since 
1997 from within this framework (see Section 
30.13). (A range of other frameworks for lan-
guage vitality is discussed by Sallabank (in this 
volume.)
To conclude, research indicates that social net-
works are important for understanding language 
shift and maintenance. However, they do not nec-
essarily provide the whole story; language ideolo-
gies and ‘the relationship between language and 
identity’ are also potentially important as ‘com-
plementary sources of explanation for language 
choice and language maintenance’ (Lanza and 
Svendsen, 2007) among multilingual communi-
ties, and any research approach to language shift 
needs to be sufficiently nuanced to capture this 
complexity.
30.13  NEW DIRECTIONS IN 
BILINGUALISM RESEARCH
In this section I will look at some recent develop-
ments in the research on societal bilingualism.
Linguistic ethnography
The emerging mainly British research approach of 
‘linguistic ethnography’ holds that ‘language and 
social life are mutually shaping, and that close 
analysis of situated language use can provide both 
fundamental and distinctive insights into the 
mechanisms and dynamics of social and cultural 
production in everyday activity’ (Rampton et al., 
2004: 2). Linguistic ethnography is described by 
Rampton (2007: 585 ) not as a paradigm, but ‘a 
site of encounter where a number of established 
lines of research interact’ under an ‘overarching 
intellectual warrant’. It owes much to an earlier 
American tradition of linguistic anthropology, 
which has no British counterpart. The lines of 
research mentioned by Rampton include several 
which have already contributed significantly to 
research in the field of societal bilingualism: 
interactional sociolinguistics (Gumperz, 1982), 
the new literacy studies, and critical discourse 
analysis (the others mentioned are neo-Vygotskian 
research on language and cognitive development, 
and interpretive applied linguistics for language 
teaching). A number of the studies mentioned 
above might be said to be either within this frame-
work or in sympathy with it (e.g. Heller, 1999; 
Jaffe, 1999;  Rampton, 2004; Codò, 2008;) and it 
is likely to continue to make important contribu-
tions to research in societal bilingualism.
Bilingualism on the Internet and in 
other digital media
The growth of communication via new media 
has enabled not only more multilingual communi-
cation but also new types of multilingualism, 
of which research has only scratched the surface. 
Web pages, newsgroups, chat rooms, instant
messaging, text messaging, blogs and social 
networking sites are all potential sites for bilin-
gual interactions; in some cases this is because of 
the involvement of global languages like English 
and French as Internet lingua francas, but often 
the participants concerned are reflecting local 
(or diasporic) practices of societal bilingualism 
(see Lam and Rosario-Ramos, 2009). Whether 
these multilingual Internet communications 
should be described as ‘societal bilingualism’ is a 
moot point; certainly, multilingual ‘communities 
of practice’ are quite common on the Internet, 
though there is relatively little research to 
date: see Barton and Lee, (this volume); 
Androutsopoulos (2007) and Danet and Herring 
(2007) for overviews.
Urban bilingualism studies
In the early period of research into societal bilin-
gualism, attention tended to focus either on entire 
states or regions (a ‘macro’ approach), or on 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
457
individual communities (a ‘micro’ approach). The 
latter were typically indigenous or migrant ethnic 
minority communities and would be investigated 
in detail, but without much reference to other 
minorities who might live alongside them. More 
recently, there has been a move towards focusing 
on urban communities in a different sense – the 
sense of ‘neighbourhoods’ – and the histories, 
narratives, practices and networks which construct 
them as distinctive multilingual linguistic spaces. 
Examples of this approach are McCormick (2002) 
and Blommaert et al. (2005). A different approach, 
which follows young multilinguals through their 
different activities in a city, capturing their 
language practices in different sites, is taken by 
Patricia Lamarre's project (2006–10) Montréal 
multilingue: an ethnographic study of the 
language practices of young multilinguals in a 
city redefined (see Lamarre and Lamarre 2009). 
This interest in the multilingual city is also 
reflected in the Linguistic Landscapes approach 
(see below).
Linguistic landscapes
Further evidence of the interest in cities as multi-
lingual spaces is the development of a new 
research tradition exploring multilingual linguis-
tic landscapes. According to Landry and Bourhis 
(1997: 25), the linguistic landscape consists of 
‘the language of public road signs, advertising 
billboards, street names, place names, commercial 
shop signs, and public signs on government build-
ings’. The significance of the landscape is that 
‘the presence or absence of the in-group language 
in the linguistic landscape is related to how much 
speakers use their in-group language with family 
members, friends, neighbors and store clerks; in 
social gatherings; in cultural activities; and as 
consumers of in-group language […] media’ 
(Landry and Bourhis, 1997: 45). This approach 
developed originally within the framework of 
‘ethnolinguistic vitality’, but has its limitations: in 
spite of what Landry and Bourhis say in the quote 
above, it is clear that the extent of use of lan-
guages in general cannot be directly related to the 
presence of those languages in fixed signage, 
partly because not all written languages have 
equal access to written spaces, and partly because 
some languages are not written at all. Furthermore, 
the visual impact of languages in the environment 
is not limited to fixed signage (Stroud 2009, 
Sebba 2010) and is subject to manipulation and 
management to meet ideological and policy objec-
tives (Leeman and Modan 2009). However, the 
idea of ‘multilingual landscapes’ could also 
be taken as an invitation to carry out visual eth-
nographies of textually mediated cityscapes, using 
photography as a principal fieldwork method, 
and to recognise these visual environments as 
linguistic resources for identity construction 
(Curtin 2009). A number of studies have been 
published so far, including two collections 
(Gorter 2006, Shohamy and Gorter 2008) and a 
book (Backhaus 2007), with a third to appear 
(Jaworski and Thurlow, 2010).
NOTE
1 It is important to realize that Ferguson was 
discussing the situation of Greece at the time he was 
writing. Since the 1970s, Dimotiki has become the 
official as well as the everyday form of Greek, with 
Katharevousa being restricted increasingly to a 
narrow range of contexts.
REFERENCES
Abdulaziz Mkilifi, M. H. (1978) ‘Triglossia and Swahili–English 
bilingualism in Tanzania’, in J. Fishman. (ed.), Advances in 
the Study of Societal Multilingualism, The Hague: Mouton. 
pp. 129–52.
Androutsopoulos, J. (2007) ‘Bilingualism in the mass 
media and on the Internet’, in M. Heller, (ed.), Bilingualism: 
a Social Approach. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
pp. 207–30.
Aracil, L.V. (1965) Conflit linguistique et normalisation 
linguistique dans l’Europe nouvelle. Nancy: Centre 
Européen Universitaire.
Atkinson, D. (2000) ‘Minoritisation, identity and ethnolinguis-
tic Vitality in Catalonia’, Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development 21(3): 185–97.
Auer, J. C. P. (1984) Bilingual Conversation. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Backhaus, P. (2007) Linguistic Landscapes: A Comparative 
Study of Urban Multilingualism in Tokyo. Clevedon,
UK: Multilingual Matters.
Barton, D. (2007) Literacy: An Introduction to the Ecology of 
Written Language. 2nd edn. Oxford: Blackwell.
Blommaert, J. (1999) State Ideology and Language in 
Tanzania. Cologne: Rudiger Koeppe.
Blommaert, J. (2005) ‘Situating linguistic rights: English and 
Swahili in Tanzania revisited’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
9(3): 390–417.
Blommaert, J., Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2005) 
‘Polycentricity and interactional regimes in ‘‘global neigh-
borhoods’’ ‘, Ethnography, 6(2): 205–35.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Bourhis, R., Giles, H. and Rosenthal, D. (1981) ‘Notes on 
the construction of a ‘‘subjective vitality questionnaire’‘ 
for ethnolinguistic groups’, Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development, 2(2): 145–55.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
458
Choi, J. K. (2005) ‘Bilingualism in Paraguay: forty years after 
Rubin’s study’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development, 26(3): 233–48.
Codò, Eva (2008) Immigration and Bureaucratic Control: 
Language Practices in Public Administration. Berlin: Mouton 
de Gruyter.
Cummins, J. and Hornberger, N. H. (eds) (2008) Encyclopedia 
of Language and Education. 2nd edn. Vol. 5, Bilingual 
education. New York: Springer.
Curtin, Melissa L. (2008) ‘‘Languages on display: indexical 
signs, identities, and the linguistic landscape of Taipei‘‘. 
In Shohamy and Gorter, 221–237.
Danet, B. and Herring, S. C.  (eds) (2007) The Multilingual 
Internet: Language, Culture and Communication Online. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
De Mejia, A.-M. (2002) Power, Prestige and Bilingualism: 
International Perspectives on Elite Bilingual Education. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Devonish, H. (2003) ‘Language advocacy and ‘‘conquest’‘ 
diglossia in the ‘‘Anglophone‘’ Caribbean, in C. Mair,  (ed.), 
The Politics of English as a World Language: New Horizons 
in Postcolonial Cultural Studies. New York: Rodopi. 
pp. 257–77.
Dorian, N. (1981) Language Death: The Life Cycle of a Scottish 
Gaelic Dialect. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania 
Press.
Duchêne, A. and Heller, M. (eds) (2008) Discourses of 
Endangerment: Ideology and Interest in the Defence of 
Languages. London: Continuum.
Eckert, P. (1980) ‘Diglossia: separate and unequal’, Linguistics, 
18: 1053–64.
Fasold, R. (1984) The Sociolinguistics of Society. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Ferguson, C. (1959) ‘Diglossia’, Word, 15: 325–340.
Ferguson, C. (1991) ‘Diglossia revisited’, Southwest Journal of 
Linguistics, 10(1): 214–234.
Fishman, J. (1965) ‘“Who speaks what language to whom 
and when?”’, La Linguistique, 2: 67–88. Reprinted in 
Li Wei (ed.) (2006) The Bilingualism Reader. London: 
Routledge. pp. 55–74.
Fishman, J. (1967) ‘Bilingualism with and without diglossia; 
diglossia with and without bilingualism’, Journal of Social 
Issues, 32(2): 29–38.
Fishman, J. (1972) ‘Societal bilingualism: stable and 
transitional’, in A. S. Dil (ed.), Language in Sociocultural 
Change. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
pp. 135–52.
Freeland, J. (2003) ‘Intercultural-bilingual education for an 
interethnic-plurilingual society? The case of Nicaragua’, 
Comparative Education, 39(2): 239–60.
Gafaranga, J. (2007) Talk in Two Languages. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan.
Gal, S. (1978) ‘Peasant men can’t get wives: language change 
and sex roles in a bilingual community’, Language in 
Society, 7: 1–16.
Gal, S. (1979) Language Shift: Social Determinants of Linguistic 
Change in Bilingual Austria. New York: Academic Press.
Gardner-Chloros, P. (1991) Language Selection and Switching 
in Strasbourg. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Giles, H., Bourhis, R. Y. and Taylor, D. M. (1977) ‘Towards a 
theory of language in ethnic group relations’, in H. Giles 
(ed.), Language, Ethnicity, and Intergroup Relations. 
New York: Academic Press. pp. 307–48.
Gorter, D. (ed.) (2006) Linguistic Landscape: A New Approach 
to Multilingualism. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Gumperz, J. J. (1964), ‘Linguistic and social interaction in two 
communities’, American Antropologist, 66:2, 137–53.
Gumperz, J. (1982) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Haug, W. (2003) ‘Ethnic, religious and language groups: 
towards a set of rules for data collection and statistical 
analysis’, Eumap Online Journal. Accessed 9 December 
2008 at: http://www.eumap.org/journal/features/2003/
april/ethrellangroups.
Heller, M. (1999) Linguistic Minorities and Modernity: 
A Sociolinguistic Ethnography. London: Longman.
Heller, M. (2002) ‘Globalization and the commodification of 
bilingualism in Canada’, in D. Block and D. Cameron (eds), 
Globalization and Language Teaching. London: Routledge. 
pp. 47–64.
Heller, M. (2005) ‘Language, skill and authenticity in the glo-
balized new economy’, Noves SL. Revista de Sociolingüística, 
Winter 2005. Accessed 18 December 2008 at: http://www.
gencat.cat/llengua/noves.
Helot, C. and De Mejia, A.-M. (eds) (2008). Forging Multilingual 
Spaces Integrating Perspectives on Majority and Minority 
Bilingual Education. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Hornberger, N. H. (ed.) (2003) Continua of Biliteracy: An 
Ecological Framework for Educational Policy, Research, and 
Practice in Multilingual Settings. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Horrocks, G. C. (1997) Greek: A History of the Language and 
its Speakers. London: Longman.
Hudson, A. (2002) ‘ “Outline of a theory of diglossia” ’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 157: 
1–48.
Hvenekilde, A. and Nortier, J. (eds) (2001) Meetings at the 
Crossroads. Studies of Multilingualism and Multiculturalism 
in Oslo and Utrecht. Oslo: Novus.
Irvine, J. T. and Gal, S. (2000) ‘Language ideology and linguis-
tic differentiation’, in P. V. Kroskrity (ed.), Regimes of 
Language: Ideologies, Polities and Identities. Oxford, 
James Currey. pp. 35–83.
Jaffe, A. (1999) Ideologies in Action: Language Politics on 
Corsica. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Jaworski, A. and C. Thurlow (eds.) (forthcoming) Semiotic 
Landscapes: Text, Space, Globalization. London: 
Continuum.
Khleif, B. B. (1976) ‘Cultural regeneration and the school: an 
anthropological study of Welsh-medium schools in 
Wales, International Review of Education, 22(2): 177–92.
Kulick, D. (1992) Language Shift and Cultural Reproduction: 
Socialization, Self, and Syncretism in a Papua New Guinean 
Village. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lamarre, P. and Lamarre, S. (2009): Montréal “on the move”: 
pour une approche ethnographique non-statique de l'étude 
des pratiques langagières de jeunes multilingue. In T. Bulot 
(dir.) with collaboration of A. Lounici, Formes & normes 

SOCIETAL BILINGUALISM
459
sociolinguistiques (Ségrégations et discriminations 
urbaines). Paris, L'Harmattan.
Leeman, J. and Modan, G. (2009) ‘Commodified language in 
Chinatown: a contextualized approach to linguistic land-
scape’. Journal of Sociolinguistics, 13/3, 2009: 332–362.
Lewis, M. P. (ed.), (2009) Ethnologue: Languages of the 
World, Sixteenth edition. Dallas, Tex.: SIL International. 
Online version: www.ethnologue.com/.
Lam, W. S. E. and Rosario-Ramos, E. (2009) ‘Multilingual 
literacies in transnational digitally-mediated contexts: an 
exploratory study of immigrant teens in the U.S.’, Language 
and Education, 23(2): 171–190.
Landry, R. and Bourhis, R. Y. (1997) ‘Linguistic landscape and 
ethnolinguistic vitality: an empirical study’, Journal of 
Language and Social Psychology, 16: 23–49.
Lanza, E. and Svendsen, B. A. (2007) ‘Tell me who your friends 
are and I might be able to tell you what language(s) you 
speak: Social network analysis and multilingualism’, 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 11(3): 275–300.
Le Page, R. B. (1994) ‘The notion of “linguistic system” revis-
ited’, International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 
109: 109–120.
Li, W. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family: 
Language Choice and Shift in a Chinese Community in 
Britain. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Linguistic Minorities Project (1985) ‘Adult language use: 
preparing a survey’, in The Other Languages of England. 
London: Routledge. pp. 134–79.
McCormick, K. (2002) Language in Cape Town’s District Six. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacKinnon, K. (1984) ‘Power at the periphery: the language 
dimension and the case of Gaelic Scotland’, Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 5(6): 
491–511.
Martin-Jones, M. (1989) ‘Language, power and linguistic 
minorities; the need for an alternative approach to 
bilingualism, language maintenance and shift’, in R. Grillo, 
(ed.), Social Anthropology and the Politics of Language. 
London: Routledge. pp. 106–25.
Martin-Jones M. (1991) ‘Sociolinguistic surveys as a source of 
evidence in the study of bilingualism: a critical assessment 
of survey work conducted among linguistic minorities in 
three British cities’, in K. de Bot and W. Fase (eds), Migrant 
languages in Western Europe. International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language. Vol. 90.
Martin-Jones, M. (1992) ‘Minorities and Sociolinguistics’, in 
W. Bright, (ed.), International Encyclopedia of Linguistics 4. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 15–18.
Martin-Jones, M. and Jones K. (eds) (2000) Multilingual 
Literacies: Reading and Writing Different Worlds. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Pavlenko, A. and Blackledge, A. (eds) (2004) Negotiation 
of Identities in Multilingual Contexts. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.
Pennycook, A. (1998) English and the Discourses of 
Colonialism. London: Routledge.
Platt, J. T. (1977) ‘A model for Polyglossia and Multilingualism’ 
(with Special Reference to Singapore and Malaysia), 
Language in Society, 6, 3, 361–78.
Rampton, B. (2004) Crossing: Language and Ethnicity 
Among Adolescents. 2nd edn. Manchester: St. Jerome 
Publishing.
Rampton, B. (2007) ‘Neo-Hymesian linguistic ethnography in 
the United Kingdom’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 11(5) 
2007: 584–607.
Rampton, B., Tusting, K., Maybin, J. et al. (2004) UK linguistic 
ethnography: a discussion paper. Unpublished discussion 
paper. Accessed 23 December 08 at: http://www.ling-
ethnog.org.uk/documents/discussion_paper_jan_05.pdf.
Ricento, T. (ed.) (2000) Ideology, Politics and Language 
Policies: Focus on English. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Romaine, S. (2005) ‘The bilingual and multilingual commu-
nity’, in T. K. Bhatia and W.C. Ritchie (eds), Handbook of 
Bilingualism. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 385–405.
Schieffelin, B. B. and Doucet, R. C. (1994) ‘The “real” Haitian 
Creole: ideology, metalingusitics and orthographic choice’, 
American Ethnologist, 21: 176–200.
Sebba, M. (2010) ‘Discourses in Transit’, in Jaworski and 
Thurlow (eds).
Shohamy, E. and Gorter, D. (eds) (2008). Linguistic Landscape: 
Expanding the Scenery. London: Routledge.
Siebenhaar, B. (2006) ‘Code choice and code-switching in 
Swiss–German Internet Relay Chat rooms’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 10(4): 481–506.
Sorenson, A.P., Jr. (1967) ‘Multilingualism in the Northwest 
Amazon’, American Anthropologist, 69: 670–84.
Statec (Statistical portal of Luxemburg) (2008): Etat de la 
population. Accessed 9 December 2008 at: http://www.
statistiques.public.lu/stat/TableViewer/tableViewHTML.
aspx?ReportId=463&IF_Language=fra&MainTheme=
2&FldrName=1.
Statistics Canada/Statistique Canada (2001) Content of 
the 2001 Census questionnaires. Accessed 9 December 
2008 at: http://www12.statcan.ca/english/census01/Info/
content.cfm#questions .
Street, B. (1984) Literacy in Theory and Practice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
US Census 2000 questionnaire, long form. Accessed 
9 December 2008 at: http://www.census.gov/dmd/www/
pdf/d02p.pdf .
Verra, M. (2008) ‘One community, two countries, many
languages: the Kenyan community in Greece’. Unpublished 
PhD thesis, Lancaster University.
Warschauer, M., El-Said, G. and Zohry, A. (2002) ‘Language 
choice online: globalization and identity in Egypt’, Journal 
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 7(4).
Weinreich, U. (1953) Languages in Contact: Findings and 
Problems. The Hague: Mouton.
Williams, G. (1987) ‘Bilingualism, class dialect and social 
reproduction’, International Journal of Sociology of 
Language, 66: 85–98.
Williams, G. (1992) Sociolinguistics: a Sociological Critique. 
London: Routledge.
Woolard, K. (1989) Double Talk: Bilingualism and the Politics 
of Ethnicity in Catalonia. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press.

1
Code-switching/mixing
P e t e r  A u e r
31
31.1  TERMINOLOGICAL AND OTHER PRELIMINARIES
Whereas humans have doubtlessly been switching codes for as long as there have been bilinguals, the 
phenomenon of code-switching has only received attention in linguistics, from the mid-1950s onwards – 
Alvarez Cáccamo (1998) traces the first mention of the term back to Vogt (1954) – and large-scale 
research on code-switching did not start before the late 1970s. Of course it had not escaped previous 
research on language contact that speakers switch between languages (cf. Paul’s chapter on ‘language 
mixture’, 1898: 365–77); however, this was considered an externally-induced mishap due entirely to 
psychological or social factors (incompetence, laziness, lack of education) which did not merit linguistic 
investigation and was, in any case, temporary (‘man wird von der Zweisprachigkeit wieder zur 
Einsprachigkeit gelangen’ [one will arrive at monolingualism from bilingualism in the end], Paul, 1898: 366). 
In the light of this neglect, we can doubtlessly discover a monolingual bias which was characteristic of 
linguistics for a long time: the beginnings of the discipline (in the early nineteenth century) coincided – 
not by chance – with the triumph of the nation-state with its ideology of ‘one nation–one language’. In 
this ideology, multilingual language use had no place (Auer, 2007a; Heller, 2007; Pujolar, 2007), even 
though forms of language contact (borrowing in particular, but also pidgin and creole formation) did. The 
enormous interest code-switching and related practices have found in linguistics over the last three dec-
ades is at least in part (i.e. in addition to internal developments in linguistics) due to the demise of the 
monolingual national language ideologies which have become more and more unrealistic in the age of 
globalization, transnationalism and migration. Today, multilingual practices are an undisputed everyday 
phenomenon, even in the European nation-states which hitherto considered themselves to be monolingual 
(see Stroud, 2007 for a view beyond Europe).
Despite three decades of intensive research, the field is still lacking an accepted terminology, and there 
are serious disputes about issues that are partly terminological in nature. It is therefore necessary to start 
by clarifying the terminology used here before discussing the subject matter itself.
There is general agreement that a distinction needs to be made between bilingualism as the mental 
ability to speak two languages, and the practice of doing so. Even though it is rare (and usually the result 
of an oppressive, nationalistic language policy), it can happen that a bilingual speaker exclusively per-
forms (and passes) as a monolingual. Far more common is ‘bilingual talk’, particularly when two or more 
participants are bilingual in the same languages. In bilingual talk, the two languages in the speaker’s mind 
are put to use in such a way that his or her bilingualism becomes a visible interactional and social fact. 
In the concatenation of linguistic elements for a larger unit, if elements of both language A and language 
B occur in juxtaposition, we speak of ‘code-switching/mixing’ (see Section 31.3, for a definition of these 
two terms). ‘Concatenation’ can refer to any syntagmatic combination, such as the sequencing of conver-
sational turns within an interactional episode, the sequencing of turn constructional units within a turn at 
talk, or the linking of words within an independent syntactic unit (‘sentence’) or morphemes within a 
word. There are other features of bilingual talk which are usually not included under the heading 
code-switching/mixing, such as interferences; for instance, a phonetic or a prosodic feature of language 
B may be used in a word from language A, or in a sequence of words from language A. In sum, 

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
461
code-switching/mixing implies the use of elements from more than one language in the formulation 
process, where these elements are at the level of the morpheme or higher (lower threshold), and occur 
within a unit that must not be larger than the interactional episode (upper threshold). 
Obviously, both the upper and the lower thresholds are somewhat fuzzy. Restricting code-switching/
mixing to practices within an interactional episode excludes language choice for an episode (in the sense 
of an ‘encounter’; see Goffmann, 1963 for the complexities involved in determining the boundaries of 
such units). The lower level is debatable, too. For instance, some researchers have argued that – contrary 
to borrowing – code-switching/mixing is not possible word-internally (Poplack’s free morpheme con-
straint (1980); see also the discussion below), while others have argued against this restriction (e.g. 
Berruto, 2005). On the other hand, there are cases where one might argue that a shift of prosody or the 
ad hoc use of a foreign sound (such as a ‘French’ uvular fricative /R/ in the coda by a speaker of Italian 
which usually has apical /r/) may indeed show all the functional qualities of code-switching (Alvarez 
Cáccamo, 1998). However, such a wide notion of code-switching has not seen general use in linguistics.
Another problem is the meaning of ‘code’ in code-switching. In the preceding paragraph, we started 
from the presupposition that the codes of code-switching/mixing are what are usually called languages 
(‘English’, ‘Swahili’, ‘Basque’, …). Given the notorious difficulties in distinguishing languages from 
other varieties, such as dialects, and the danger of equating languages with standard languages, it is more 
fitting to think of codes in terms of varieties. (In Section 31.3 it is argued that this definition is not entirely 
adequate either.) There is no a priori linguistic reason to treat code-switching/mixing between, say, 
Catalan and Castilian (generally considered to be languages) differently from code-switching/mixing 
between Bavarian (generally considered to be a dialect of German) and Standard German – the structural 
difference is roughly the same, and comparatively small. However, different forms of switching/mixing 
may occur between closely-related varieties. They are linked to another problem that to be kept in mind: 
the orthodox way of dealing with code-switching/mixing implies that the transition from language A into 
language B is abrupt. There is a precisely defined point in speech at which a set of co-occurring linguistic 
features (variety A) is exchanged for another set of features (variety B).
Orthodox switching/mixing:
Time         ----------------------------→
Variety A  
Variety B
In reality, this often doesn’t hold. First of all, it may be the case that while speaking one variety (A), a 
speaker may happen to use (or strategically employ) linguistic structures of A that are similar to/or the 
same as those in B (such as cognates or homophones). Clyne (1980, 2003: 162ff.) discusses many exam-
ples of this phenomenon under the heading of ‘triggering’ (1980) or ‘facilitation’ (2003). For instance, a 
Dutch/English bilingual speaker may say:
 (1)  (Clyne 200 3: 171; second-generation immigrant in Australia)
Ik  hebt een kop of tea or something
I  have-1SG a cup of  tea or something
‘I’ll have a cup of tea or something’
Dutch kop is a (near) homophone of English cup. Having produced kop brings the two languages closer 
to each other and may facilitate transition into English. In contrast to the figure above for orthodox code-
switching/mixing, the transition is not abrupt but goes through an ambiguous zone:
Facilitated code-switching/mixing:
Time         ------------------------------→
Variety A
Variety B

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
462
The problem of deciding where variety B starts may be aggravated when the facilitating structure is 
a loanword from variety B. In dialect/standard contact, there are even cases of gradual ‘code-gliding’, 
in which it is impossible to identify when the transition into the other code starts and when the new 
variety is reached (an example is given in Auer, 1986).
Time          -----------------------------------→
Variety A
Variety B
The point is that the more closely varieties are related structurally, the more the speakers’ repertoires may 
be organized in a non-dichotomic way, allowing for numerous compromise forms in which ambiguous 
elements of A and B combine. 
A ubiquitous instance of convergence, which is particularly hard to distinguish from code-switching/
mixing, is borrowing. There can be no doubt that established borrowings (often called loanwords) – those 
which can be found in dictionaries and are used and/or known by monolingual speakers as well – do not 
constitute switching/mixing. However, there is considerable disagreement whether single, ad hoc inser-
tions of lexical material from language B into a language A frame should be considered so (for a summary 
of arguments against this, see Poplack, 2004). It is obvious that ad hoc (or nonce) borrowings may 
become established borrowings in the long run if they are used repeatedly and eventually passed on from 
the bilinguals to A-monolinguals. Since this process can only be gradual, it is impossible to decide 
whether each individual borrowed token is ad hoc or established. Semantic criteria – above all the ques-
tion of whether there is a corresponding non-borrowed word with approximately the same meaning avail-
able in variety A, or whether the borrowing fills a lexical gap – may influence whether a word becomes 
an established loan, but they cannot indicate on which point of the integration scale the word is at a given 
moment. Structural integration of the borrowed element into the matrix language seems like a good cri-
terion, but upon closer examination it leads to inclusive results as well. Phonetic integration is in itself 
gradual, and morphological integration is often absent since ad hoc borrowings into morphologically-rich 
varieties often do not receive morphological marking (bare forms; cf. Budhzak-Jones and Poplack, 1997). 
It is therefore difficult/impossible to define an exact break-off point between loanwords and borrowed 
words. The only way out of this dilemma is definitional, not empirical. To give an example: Adalar and 
Tagliamonte (1998) found in a corpus of Turkish/English data, collected among ex-London migrants in 
Cyprus, that most English words inserted into Turkish utterances received the morphological marking 
required by Turkish morphology. For instance:
(2) from Adalar and Tagliamonte (1998: 152)1
Ehh ingiltere+nin SHOP+lar+ı+nı     özle+r
Ehh England-GEN shop-PL-POSS-AKK miss-3SG.AOR
‘ehh she misses England’s shops’
The authors argue that since shop is fully integrated morphologically and syntactically, it should be 
considered a borrowing, not a code-switch, while the (unlikely, and non-attested) version:
(2)’ [fabricated]
Ehh ingiltere’nin SHOPS özler
would be considered a case of switching/mixing. The counter-argument is that in both versions the gram-
matical systems of Turkish and English are activated and therefore no categorical distinction is necessary, 
but both alternatives can be handled within one model (Myers-Scotton 2002: 154–7). In the end, the 
controversy amounts to a terminological decision.
A final question to be dealt with in this introductory section may come as a surprise: Do code-
switchers have to be bilinguals? The answer obviously depends on what is meant by bilingualism. But 
it is clear that code-switching is still possible with very little bilingual ability. Speakers can signal 
affiliation with a bilingual group by using token elements from a language of which they have only 
minimal proficiency (Reershemius, 2001, etc.), and in certain forms of ‘crossing’ speakers may mimic 
or imitate bilingual speakers by using what they think is typical of them (see Auer, 2006 for further 
references), without being bilingual themselves. These forms of code-switching have only moved 
into the focus of sociolinguistic research quite recently, but they are powerful interactional strategies. 

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
463
In all these cases, the switching speakers are not usually called bilinguals, even in a very liberal 
sense of the word, and, surely in the case of crossing, they would not even consider themselves to be 
bilingual.
The upshot of this preliminary section is that even to say what code-switching is not a difficult task. 
In Sections 31.3 and 31.4, we will try to identify certain forms of switching and mixing which can be 
given a more precise structural and functional analysis. However, it is not only the linguistic side of 
switching/mixing which is hard to define but also the social side is complex. Before we move into more 
detailed accounts of how switching and mixing can occur, in Section 31.2 we look into the social struc-
tures which it indexes and in which it is embedded.
31.2  THE SOCIAL MEANING OF CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
Although forms of bilingual talk such as code-switching and mixing are widespread, they do not occur in 
all bilingual speakers or communities. For instance, although almost all Luxemburgers with Lëtzebuergesch 
as their first language are also fluent in French, (frequent) code-switching between these varieties is 
rare. Using Lëtzebuergesch is the unmarked way of signalling one’s belonging to the non-immigrant 
part of Luxemburg society, and French is used in public and in many institutions; the alternating use 
of these languages, however, would constitute a marked occurrence. Quite in contrast, code-switching/
mixing is the unmarked way of speaking among many second- and third-generation Turkish/German 
bilinguals among themselves, while speaking monolingual Turkish is marked. Different language ideolo-
gies are involved here, which regiment the ways in which linguistic behaviour becomes meaningful 
and even normative in the constitution of social groups and their boundaries. This also applies to the 
evaluation of bilingual talk. While it is true that in many contexts bilingual talk is evaluated negatively 
against the background of a monolingual language ideology, it is easy to find counter-examples as 
soon as one looks outside the modern European nation-states. Both in societies predating these nation-
states, and in those outside the reach of the Herderian idea of (monolingual standard) language reflecting 
and justifying nationhood, code-switching may be typical for the social and educational élites. For 
instance, code-switching between Latin and a vernacular language was widespread among intellectuals 
in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (cf. Stolt, 1965; McLelland, 2004), code-switching between 
Russian and French was held in high esteem in the nineteenth century Russian upper classes 
(Timm, 1978) and English/Kiswahili switching is evaluated positively by the East African élites 
(cf. Blommaert, 1992 on Tanzania). In these cases of élite code-switching, it is doubtlessly the prestige 
of the bilingual talkers which lends prestige to their language; in all cases, certain linguistic resources 
(such as knowledge of ‘good’ Latin, French and English) are scarce and access to them is restricted 
by the educational system. A local élite in these cases combines an internationally prestigious variety 
with a local vernacular, thereby excluding both those who have no access to the international prestige 
variety and those who are not familiar with the local vernacular (Myers-Scotton, 1993b). By contrast, 
code-switching in the lower classes (e.g. immigrant labour) and at the peripheries of society is lacking in 
prestige because their speakers lack prestige (and their ‘other’ language has no value on the linguistic 
market). 
Code-swiching/mixing receives its social function and meaning from a complex of interacting dimen-
sions, among them the prestige and value of the varieties involved on the linguistic market, the social 
powers that regulate this market, the specific constellations of majority/ minorities (or centre/periphery) 
within a society that relate to these forms of power, the accessibility of language resources, and the ide-
ologies around the languages and their (bilingual or monolingual) use. The evaluation and social interpre-
tation of code-switching/mixing is thus dependent on a specific ‘political economy of code choice’ (Gal, 
1988; Heller, 1992). Three examples illustrate this point. 
The first case (Example 3) takes place in a small shop for household articles in Chis¸ina˘u, the capital of 
Moldova (the former Moldovan Republic of the Soviet Union). Since 1991, the official language of the 
Republic of Moldova has been Moldovan-Romanian. (This variety was closely related to Romanian, the 
state language of the neighbouring Republic of Romania, but diverged from it while the area was under 
Russian control in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries; the exact nature and degree of divergence and 
the influence of Russian is disputed.) Despite the official status of Romanian, a large group of the popula-
tion of Moldova mainly or exclusively speaks Russian, particularly Russians who immigrated to the area 
during the Soviet period. In Chis¸ina˘u, the position of Moldovan-Romanian is strong when compared to 
the countryside and smaller towns, due to the support it receives from the state institutions which require 
all officials to be fluent in the official language. However, public life is still largely dominated by Russian.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
464
In Example 3, a salesperson (B) and a client in the shop (A) are talking in Romanian, when another client 
(C) enters:
 (3)  (from Cechirlan, 2008) (A, C = clients, B = salesperson)
A: 
buna˘ ziua,
 
hello
 B: 
 spuneti va˘  rog, avet¸i pampersuri numa˘  raul cinci?
 
do you have pampers number five?
A: 
da (-)
 
yes
B: 
în mare packet
 
in large packages
A: 
da (-)
B: 
dat¸i-mi, unul mare;
 
give them to me, a large one;
A: 
unul mare?
 
a large one?
B: 
mare da (-)
 
a large one yes
→C: 
женщина, у вас случайно лампочек нет?
 
listen, do you happen to have bulbs?
→B: 
<<laughing> есть случайно;>
 
we happen to have them;
C: 
<<happily> да: :>
 
yeah::!
B: 
три лея (--) вам на что,
 
three Lei (--) what do you need them for
C: 
мне на сто ватт;
 
I need 100W
→A: 
da în ce prêt¸ îs ele,
 
 how much are they? (referring to the pampers)
→B: 
doua˘  sute patruzecis¸ ipatru noua˘ zeci;
 
two hundred forty four and ninety.
The three participants do not know each other. The salesperson, obviously a Russian/Moldovan bilingual, 
speaks Romanian with the first client but easily switches to Russian in the first arrowed line, after the second 
client has asked her a question in that language. The reason is not simple accommodation to the language 
of the customer. Rather, there is a general rule of preference according to which language choice is organ-
ized in Moldova. This rule of preference implies that Russian is spoken as soon as one participant wishes to 
do so. This means that in public, and particularly among strangers, the use of Russian is still more frequent 
than the use of Romanian. The pattern reflects the pre-1989 dominance of Russian, and of course the power 
and prestige of the Russian part of the population. It has survived the collapse of the Soviet Union due in 
part to the monolingualism of the Russian part of the population which is only slowly giving way to Russian/
Romanian bilingualism in the younger generations. More importantly, it is also the result of the continuing 
differences in the evaluation of these languages on the linguistic market where (Moldovan) Romanian only 
starts to supplant the prestige of Russian. The customer’s use of Russian and the salesperson’s switch into 
this language choice are not necessarily motivated politically, nor do they necessarily index the customer’s 
Russian monolingualism. They just comply with the general preference for Russian in public.
Compare to this the following example (Example 4) from Estonia. Russian is in contact with the 
national language of Estonia, i.e. Estonian. The following utterance is from a Russian-dominant (Russian) 
saleswoman who offers cranberries at a market in which many customers are ethnically Estonian, and 
linguistically bilingual in Russian and Estonian:
(4) (from Verschik (2005), Estonian underlined) 
Oчень хорошие,    värske            u    väg  
magus     
Very good-NOM.PL fresh-NOM.SG. and very 
sweet-NOM.SG
The speaker uses a Russian grammatical pattern (set by the initial-turn constructional unit, oчень хорошие, 
a modified adjective with the appropriate plural nominative ending, referring to the cranberries). Into this 

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
465
pattern, she inserts Estonian words in the second turn constructional unit of her utterance: namely, the 
adjective värske ‘fresh’ and the modified adjective väg magus ‘very sweet’, conjoined by the Russian 
conjunction u ‘and’. These Estonian adjectives receive no morphological marking for plural, although 
Russian and Estonian both require case and number marking in adjectives; they are inserted as bare forms 
into Russian. Verschik (2005) argues that mixtures of Russian and uninflected Estonian, as in Example 4, 
are systematically used by Russian-dominant speakers in order to accommodate linguistically the poten-
tial Estonian buyers. This is a compromise strategy used by Russians who know little Estonian. As in the 
first case, the salesperson converges towards the language preferences of her costumers, but the structure 
in which the two languages are juxtaposed is different (sentence-internal mixture). Even more important, 
the social interpretation the mixing receives reflects different ways in which the two languages are evalu-
ated on the linguistic market, and they therefore index a different constellation of power. Pre-1989, the 
social value of Estonian and Russian was similar to that of Moldavian-Romanian and Russian in 
Moldavia. But due to the political, social and economic developments in Estonia, the ‘Moldavian’ rule of 
preference – switch to Russian as soon as your co-participant wishes to – no longer holds; Estonian as the 
national language is in a more powerful position than Moldavian-Romanian today, and although a large 
part of the Russian population in Estonia still knows very little Estonian, the pressure to acquire this 
language is high. The market woman in the example is likely to have lived most of her life in an environ-
ment in which knowledge of Estonian was not necessary at all, and she will have had few opportunities 
offered by the institutions to learn Estonian after 1989. But she has had to change her old patterns of 
monolingual Russian language behaviour. Note that most of the potential buyers know Russian, i.e. 
mixing is not a matter of how to transmit information efficiently here; monolingual Russian just does not 
‘sell’ any longer. And since the market woman’s knowledge of Estonian is not sufficient to switch into 
this language altogether, she resorts to a compromise strategy which makes her mixing of Estonian and 
Russian acceptable to Estonians as a sign of good will and of her submission to the new norms and ide-
ologies of public language use. 
The third example (Example 5) is again from a different context. Three adolescent girls are gossiping 
during group work time in the Danish/German school (Dyborg skolen) in Flensburg, Germany (where 
Danish is an official minority language). We find a mixture of these two languages, which neither for-
mally nor functionally equals either of the previous examples.
(5) (from: Kühl, 2008: 202, Danish/German in South Schleswig, Germany, German underlined):
L: 
vi skal arbejde nu
 
we have to work now
A: 
((laughs)) halløjsa
 
 
hallo hallo
→L: 
gleich kommt lonepigebarn.
 
soon comes lone-girl
→ 
så er det slut med lustig.
 
then it’s done-with-fun
 
æh vi skal nu lige arbejde lidt ((…))
 
uhm we have to work now a bit
The interaction starts in Danish, but L switches into German in the first arrowed line. Lonepigebarn is an 
ad hoc compound made up of a proper name (Lone, the name of the girls’ teacher) and the Danish com-
pound pigebarn (‘girl+child’, which is unusual, as the usual word for ‘girl’ is pige). It is used as a nick-
name for the teacher here (presumably because she calls the girls pigebarn in class). More interesting is 
the following line (second arrow), where slut med lustig is modelled word for word on the German idiom 
schluss mit lustig which does not exist in Danish. The last word (the adjective lustig in the slot of a noun 
after the preposition med) is German, which turns the formulation into a double interfered calque. This 
calque doesn’t just happen – it is produced on the spot for interactional purposes. The speaker plays with 
the two languages and intermediate forms in an act of performance (see the discussion of similar cases in 
Fabian, 1990; Woolard, 1989; Hinnenkamp, 2005). What is the social meaning of this artificially (and 
artfully) produced hybrid? First, we need to take into consideration that the interaction takes place in a 
school which is dominated by a ‘speak Danish’ ideology. The Danish minority in the north of Germany 
(Südschleswig) is not based on descent or linguistic knowledge but on membership by self-declaration. 
Most of its members grow up with German and only learn Danish in kindergarten or later. In everyday 
life, German is by far dominant. Danish is considered a symbol (and proof) of belonging to the Danish 
minority, but it is legitimate to acquire (instead of possess) Danish competence. The Danish traditionally 
spoken in the area diverges in many aspects from the old Copenhagen-based standard language which is 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
466
taught at the Danish school in Flensburg (a standard not even popular among Copenhagen adolescents 
today). School Danish (the variety of Danish enforced by the institution) therefore offers little in terms of 
identity and affiliation. The adolescent girls in the example interact in the context of an institution which 
explicitly fosters the use of standard Danish and in which monolingual German, ‘bad’ Danish and bilin-
gual talk are all disfavoured.2 Playing around with the languages (instead of trying to speak ‘good 
Danish’) is for them an act of rebellion against, and subversion of, the linguistic norms of the school.3 
In all three examples (Examples 3–5), two languages are combined in some way or other, but in each 
case, code-switching/mixing has very different social meanings. There have been attempts to develop an 
overarching theory of language and society which claim to predict the meaningfulness of code-switches 
and mixings across social embeddings, and we can now try to apply them to the three examples in order 
to find out how useful they are. The first influential theory is based on John Gumperz’ distinction between 
we-code and they-code (Blom and Gumperz, 1972). The simple but persuasive idea is that in a bilingual 
group of speakers, one of the codes is associated with the larger, monolingual society and the other is 
associated with the minority to which the speakers themselves belong. By choosing the latter, the speaker 
positions him- or herself as being part of the ‘local team’. Of course, this model is only applicable in 
socio linguistic contexts in which there is a clear difference between a majority and a minority group, and 
a corresponding majority and minority language.
It is crucial to develop a methodology by which the we-code and they-code can be identified. 
Researchers usually refer to domains of usage in this context. In other words, one often finds that code A 
is used in more formal situations in which co-participants do not know each other, and in certain institu-
tional settings, particularly those which imply an asymmetrical relationship, while code B is used in 
informal situations among equals such as friends, family members and the like. However, in the three 
examples (Examples 3–5) discussed, it is difficult to identify these domains, just as it is difficult to say 
who the ‘local team’ is and how this relates to the ‘minority language’. For instance, in Example 5, German 
seems to be the students’ ‘we-code’, but Danish, if anything, is the minority language in Flensburg (or 
Germany). 
Elsewhere (Auer, 1984a), I have called approaches like the we/they-code model semantic because they 
build on the presupposition that the codes have a meaning which is independent of the local context in 
which they are used. This meaning is then channelled into the interaction and becomes relevant in it. In 
the unmarked case, i.e. where the situation ‘fits’ the language, no further inference is required. In the 
marked case, i.e. when language choice and the type of situation diverge, meanings are created on the 
basis of situation-specific inferencing (Blom and Gumperz, 1972 speak of ‘metaphorical’ code-switching 
here). The same idea underlies Myers-Scotton’s model of rational choice, in which the semantics of the 
codes are called ‘rights-and-obligation sets’ (e.g. 1988, 1993a). The theory is more flexible than a simple 
we/they-code model, but faces the same problem: in many cases of code-switching/mixing, the rights and 
obligations of the two codes are not easy to establish, since they are not trans-situationally stable and 
the association of languages and their situational usage domains is ambiguous and open to negotiation 
(see Meeuwis and Blommaert, 1994 for a critique). As in Gumperz’ model, in which the situationally 
unexpected use of another language is said to receive a metaphorical meaning (the speaker behaves as if 
the situation was such as to require the use of the new language), the interpretation and social meaning of 
‘marked code-switching’ in Myers-Scotton’s model is calculated against the background of a markedness 
matrix (‘the speaker is attempting to treat the rights and obligations in effect in the current exchange as if 
they were the same as in an exchange where the marked choice is unmarked’  Myers-Scotton 1998 [2000: 
1267]). Such an approach is of some value for the interpretation of our Moldovan/Russian example (an 
unmarked switch into Russian), but of no help in the interpretation of the Estonian/Russian and the 
Danish/German examples. This is not only because the rights-and-obligation sets attached to the codes in 
play are not uncontested in the community, and in constant flux. The main reason is that although the 
code-switching/mixing speakers make rational (intentional, though not necessarily conscious) choices, and 
although these choices are reflexively related to the values attached to them, their interactional effect 
depends essentially on their situational and sequential embedding. 
Mixed and hybrid utterances (such as those in  Examples 4 and 5 above) are sometimes explained by 
a model of code-switching which starts from the assumption that, in bilingual talk, speakers wish to co-
activate two identities at the same time, or remain ambiguous between the two (see, for instance, Myers-
Scotton, 1988 or Pfaff, 2003). Although it is true that code-switching can be used to display identities (cf. 
Bailey, 2007; de Fina, 2007), and that it can create ambiguity (of language choice and of the definition of 
the situation, cf. Heller, 1988b), it does not in and of itself index ambiguous identities. Code-switchers do 
not have their souls torn in two parts; they are what they are (Moldavians, Estonians of Russian ethnicity, 
Germans who self-select to be part of the Danish minority), and this may in some contexts be best and 
most naturally expressed by bilingual talk.

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
467
I have chosen three examples in which it is difficult to identify one bilingual speech community to 
which all co-participants belong. For instance, it may be asked whether there is one Moldavian/Estonian 
speech community (or do the Estonians/Moldavians belong to one community, and the Russians to 
another?). Most research on code-switching presupposes a bilingual speech community, which is located 
in one territory; typically, this is the case of an old (autochthonous) linguistic minority (even though this 
may downplay internal differences). It is increasingly understood, however, that the bilingual speech com-
munity is at best a working construct for starting field work, but that its boundaries are constructed, and 
that membership is gradual (Rampton, 2000). 
31.3  CODE-SWITCHING AS A CONVERSATIONAL ACTIVITY
So far I have used the terms code-switching and mixing without defining them. In the literature, the latter 
term is often used to refer to sentence-internal switching, while code-switching is reserved for cases of 
language alternation between independent syntactic units. I have proposed (e.g. in Auer, 1999) a different 
definition which captures a more fundamental and less superficial distinction. The term code-switching 
will be reserved for cases in which the juxtaposition of two codes (languages) is perceived and interpreted 
as a locally meaningful event by participants. The term mixing, on the other hand, will be used for those 
cases of language juxtaposition in which the use of two languages is only meaningful (to participants) as 
a recurrent pattern, but not in each individual case. The fact that code-switching is more common between 
full syntactic units falls out naturally in this approach (see below, (e)). Frequent code-switching may be 
the first step towards a mixed speaking style (as argued by Myers-Scotton, 1988/2000 and Auer, 1999). 
Under this approach, code-switching may be described as follows:
(a) It occurs in a sociolinguistic context in which speakers orient towards a preference for one language at a 
time; i.e. it is usually possible to identify the language-of-interaction which is valid at a given moment, and 
when the switch itself occurs.
(b) By departing from this established language-of-interaction, code-switching signals ‘otherness’ of the 
upcoming contextual frame and thereby achieves a change of ‘footing’. The precise interpretation of this 
new footing needs to be ‘filled in’ in each individual case, a process in which previous experiences may be 
brought to bear on the interpretation of the case at hand.
(c) Nonetheless, the mechanisms by which code-switching generates meaning can be described in a general 
way. Contexts are innumerable, as are the interactional meanings of code-switching; however, the ways in 
which these meanings are constructed remain constant from one community to the next.
(d) Code-switching may be a personal or group style. As a group style, its use may be subject to normative 
constraints valid within a speech community; however, it is not a variety in its own right.
(e) Most code-switches occur at major syntactic and prosodic boundaries (at the clause or sentence level).4 
Since switching is activity-related, the utterance units affected by the switch must be large enough to consti-
tute such an activity. For this reason, code-switching provides little interesting data for syntactic research.
(f) Although code-switching bilinguals may be highly proficient in both languages, balanced proficiency is by 
no means a prerequisite. Indeed, code-switching is possible with a very limited knowledge of the ‘other’ 
language.
Before looking into some forms and functions of code-switching, we have to return to the notion of a 
‘code’. Code-switching means that a set of co-occurring linguistic features is exchanged for another 
set of co-occurring features more or less at the same point in time, which is perceived as such by the 
co-participants. The co-occurring features may be those of a language or a dialect, but it is obvious that 
the definition is wide enough to include many other sets of features as well. Apart from instances that are 
not usually thought to belong to the field of bilingualism (such as the code-switch between two different 
sets of prosodic features), the most noteworthy type of code-switching in bilingual talk apart from code-
switching between varieties is code-switching between a monolingual and a mixed style, or between two 
mixed styles5 (for examples, see Meeuwis and Blommaert, 1998; Gafaranga, 2000). Meeuwis and 
Blommaert speak of ‘layered code-switching’, because code-switching seems to occur within code-
switching. In the terminology proposed here, it is language mixing that occurs within code-switching. 
Frequently, this kind of second-order bilingual talk occurs in migration contexts among speakers who at 
home used to mix a colonial and a local language. In Example 6, the participants are exiled speakers from 
Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of Congo) recorded in the 1990s in Belgium. One of the speakers 
(A) usually speaks a French/Lingala mixed style, others (B, C) a mixed style of French and Swahili. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
468
All are proficient in both mixed codes. In Belgian exile, Lingala/French is unmarked with respect to 
Swahili/French.
(6) (from Meeuwis and Blommaert, 1998: 89–90)
(simple italics = Lingala, underlined = French, small capitals = Swahili)
A: 
 ezalaki mokolo ya bonne année tokutan-aki na Matonge.
 
 it was on New Year’s day, we met in Matonge [a Zairian neighbourhood in Brussels]
B: 
na ndako?
 
at home?
A: 
na Namur wana
 
at Namur [=Porte de Namur, a well-known traffic junction in Brussels]
B: 
awa na Bruxelles?
 
here in Brussels?
A: 
ee
 
Yes
→ B→C: NIKUPATIE coca?
 
shall I get you a Coke?
C: 
HAPANA SAA HII.
 
not now
B: 
NANI- ILE SOKO IKO fatigue.
 
what- that market is exhausting.
→A: 
hein?6
 
sorry?
B: 
zando wana eza fatigue.
 
that market is exhausting.
A: 
ah. Heureusement qu’okei lelo dimanche! Mm!
    you’re lucky you went on Sunday. I say!
 
((walks into the kitchen))
→B: 
UKO UNASEMA MUTU ATEMBEE APITE, UKO UNAONA (SAA) VILE BIKO BINARUDISHA =TU NYUMA=.
 
you say someone is walking and moving forward, but you have the impression as if they’re just 
 
moving back
→A: 
((returns into the living room)) =dimanche bato-=
 
 
 
on Sundays people-
C: 
dimanche bato bazalaka mingi hein?
 
on Sundays it’s always crowded, isn’t it?
The two codes juxtaposed in the beginning of this interactional exchange between three participants are 
Lingala/French mixing and Swahili/French mixing, which B switches into in the first arrowed line when 
he addresses C (the unmarked code between the two of them). The switch organizes the conversation: 
it marks a change of participant constellation, which is narrowed down from A/B/C to B/C for a 
side-sequence, in which B asks C whether he wants a drink. Accordingly, C’s answer, still within the 
side-sequence and therefore the narrower constellation, is also in Swahili.7 The next utterance is revealing. 
B returns to the larger constellation and to the topic preceding the side-sequence (the market at the Porte 
de Namur). But unexpectedly, she still uses the language of the side-sequence, i.e. Swahili with inserted 
French. To this, A responds with a repair marker (second arrow): he does not accept the previous utterance 
as it stands and invites its revision. B immediately corrects her language choice and makes the same state-
ment again in Lingala/French (the inserted French noun fatigue remains the same). We therefore have 
clear evidence that B’s original language choice is seen by participants as having departed from an 
established and ‘morally’ sanctioned language-of-interaction. (In contrast, the insertion of French into 
either Lingala or Swahili sentences would never be subject to other-initiated repair.) After this ‘mistake’ 
has been remedied, the interaction continues in the agreed-upon language of the A/B/C-constellation until 
A, the Lingala speaker, leaves the room for a minute, which immediately engenders B’s switching into 
the Swahili/French mixed code (third arrow), which is again given up upon A’s return (fourth arrow). In 
sum, the example includes a high number of concatenations of elements from two languages within one 
stretch of talk (i.e. it is highly multilingual), but the juxtapositions are clearly different in the case of 
Lingala/French and Swahili/French mixing (in these cases, the individual juxtapositions have no dis-
course-related function or meaning), and in the case of the second-order juxtaposition of a Lingala/French 
mixed code and a Swahili/French mixed code (here, the individual cases are meaningful, and we speak of 
switching). As shown, the conversational effect of switching here is to mark different interactional frames/

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
469
footings, such as main sequence/topic vs aside, or varying constellations of participants. The participants 
jointly re-contextualize the interaction (if only temporarily). In one case, the switch signals a temporary 
lack of congruence between the interactional frame/footing at hand and language choice, i.e. a repair of 
an ‘inadequate’ language choice is triggered. 
Conversational code-switching serving this or similar functions (discourse-related code-switching in 
Auer, 1995) has been attested widely in many bilingual groups of speakers. The data all show that code-
switching is a cue by which speakers contextualize their utterances, rendering them meaningful in their 
conversational context (cf., among many; Alfonzetti, 1998; Auer, 1984b; Bani-Shoraka, 2005: Chs. 8 and 
9; Gafaranga, 2007; Guerini, 2006; Gumperz, 1982; Jonsson, 2005: Ch. 6; Li Wei, 1994, 2002; Sebba and 
Wootton, 1998;). Several sub-types suggest themselves, such as:
The distinction between switches that are closely linked to the ‘machinery’ of conversational exchanges, 
• 
such as turn-taking, repair work, sequence organization, preference organization or participant constella-
tion, beginning or ending a story, and switches that may be called stylistic, such as the contextualization 
of a different modality (joking/serious, fake/true, fantasy/reality) and of interpersonal intimacy vs distance, 
expressivity vs neutrality, etc. 
The distinction between turn-external and turn-internal switching. Turns may be composed of various 
• 
units which represent different (minor or major) linguistic acts. Speakers may use code-switching to create 
turn-internal structure, for instance to set off reported speech from their own voice, statements from evalu-
ations/assessments, topic from comment, turn-initial responsive elements (see Karrebaek, 2003: 431–3 for 
examples), etc. 
The distinction between alternational and insertional code-switching. Alternational switching (as in Example 
• 
6) always questions the established language of interaction, if only for a temporary side-activity. It seems to 
be much more frequent than insertional code-switching of single or complex units of B talk into undisputed 
A talk; still, the latter also occurs and can serve discourse-related functions, such as establishing coherence 
across utterances or turns (Angermeyer, 2002; Guerini, 2006: 203–16; also cf. Example (8) below).
The distinction between structural contrast and interpersonal divergence. Code-switching capitalizes on the 
• 
contrast between A talk and B talk. This contrast may be of a purely structural nature, or it may express a 
divergence between the speakers involved, i.e. their opinions, stances, or attitudes. This may happen, for 
instance, when a speaker diverges from an established language-of-interaction in order to express disagree-
ment. Example 7 – a recording of members of the Chinese population in the UK – is a case in point:
(7) (from Li Wei, 1994: 166) (Cantonese in simple italics, English underlined)
(Two young women are looking at new dresses.)
A: 
nau, ni goh.
 
this one.
B: 
ho leng a.
 
very pretty
A: 
leng me? (1.5)
 
pretty?
    →very expensive.
B: 
guai m gaui a?
 
expensive or not?
A: 
hao guai.
 
very expensive.
The only departure from the established language-of-interaction (Cantonese) is A’s English evaluative 
term very expensive in the arrowed line.B does not pick up on it; she continues to speak Cantonese. The 
language-of-interaction seems for a short moment to be in danger of dissolving. It is easy to see why this 
is so – and what conversational effect is achieved by it – if the sequential context is taken into considera-
tion. Just prior to the switch, B had given an assessment of a dress identified by A in her first utterance. 
The assessment is positive. A first replies by a question repetition, which functions as an other-repair 
initiator. B, however, does not step back from her opinion (cf. the pause of 1.5 sec); at this point, A explic-
itly disagrees with B, at the same time abandoning the language-of-interaction. The disagreeing, negative 
assessment is given in the other language. 
A comprehensive analysis of ‘what people do by code-switching’ has yet to be written. At this point, 
it should be noted that the conversational analysis of code-switching cannot be reduced to a semantic 
analysis of codes in question, but needs to take into account the conversational embedding of the 
switch.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
470
While discourse-related code-switching has received a lot of attention, and many conversational func-
tions have been described, it must not be overlooked that there are other forms of bilingual talk that qualify 
as code-switching according to the definition given above. Often, they tell us less about the structure of 
the interaction than about the identities of the participants; in this sense, they are participant-related. 
Nevertheless, their sequential position is decisive for their interpretation. An important part of such 
participant-related code-switching is part of language negotiation sequences in which co-participants 
negotiate the language for the conversation which is just about to begin, or renegotiate this language after 
situational shifts (see the examples in Guerini, 2006: 106–20). Such preference-related switches can, 
additionally, have a discourse-related meaning. As argued above in the discussion of Example 7, every 
code-switch can endanger the established language-of-interaction; initiating and maintaining a language 
negotiation sequence can therefore be disaffiliative, while ‘giving in’ in such a sequence can also be 
affiliative (see the example discussed in Auer, 2007b). Code-switching may also display a speaker’s 
(relative and temporary) incompetence in one language over the other or ascribe such (relative and tem-
porary) incompetence to the conversational partner (competence-related code-switching). It is often for-
gotten that bilingual participants in interaction are seldom bilingual to the same degree; rather, they 
constantly display to each other their relative competence in one code vis-à-vis the other and thereby turn 
bilingual competence into a visible matter. This is partly done through code-switching, which is then 
strongly linked to face-work: it can be either condescending or helpful to switch into the stronger lan-
guage of one’s partner. On the part of the speaker, a switch into one’s stronger language can simply be a 
request for help from the co-participant or a way of gaining time to look for the right word, as in the fol-
lowing example:
(8) (from Auer and Rönfeldt, 2002) 
(F, a second-generation Italian/German bilingual immigrant girl in Germany; B, a bilingual, non-immigrant, 
German-dominant adult woman; German underlined. Topic: the visit of a TV team in the family’s home. 
Capitals represent stress.)
F: 
siamo: andati n cuGIna,=
 
we went into the kitchen
B: 
nhn,=
F: 
=volvavano (loro) vedere: äh:: i MMUri; (-) 
 
they wanted to see the walls;
→ 
perche sono tutti NE:ri e un po FEUCHT,
 
 because they are all black and a little humid
B: 
ahha,=
F: 
=un po UMmido:, (-)
 
a little humid
B: 
hn[hn,
 B: 
      [e: hanne intervissatto, oppure Ie dovevo: (.) stare in cuCIna: a fare qualcossa.
 
 and they interviewed (us), or I had to stay in the kitchen and do something
The speaker F inserts a German word (feucht) into the arrowed utterance without any hedging (often, 
competence-related insertional switches as in this example are introduced by hesitation markers). 
However, and despite the fact that her recipient B signals understanding, she retrospectively self-repairs 
feucht and replaces it with the Italian counterpart umido. The self-repair first of all displays competence 
in the two languages, but at the same time German is displayed as the language which comes to her mind 
first and is therefore dominant (cf. Auer, 1997). By self-repairing the German word in an Italian utterance, 
the speaker makes it clear that she orients her linguistic behaviour towards a rule of ‘one language at a 
time’, in this case Italian (a language she clearly struggles with, cf. the numerous dialectal interferences 
as well as the derailment in volvavano for standard Italian volevano). This also makes it possible to see 
the insertion of feucht as a competence-related switch, not as an unmarked case of mixing.
31.4 BILINGUAL MIXING
Both mixing and switching are part of what can be called bilingual styles, but while switching is primarily 
a stylistic-rhetorical practice to be analysed in pragmatic and, above all, conversation analytic terms, the 
analysis of mixing usually requires grammatical investigation since mixing tends to occur within self-
contained syntactic units. Contrary to switching, it requires an advanced bilingual competence and is not 

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
471
frequent in bilinguals with very imbalanced competences (apart from some types of single word inser-
tions). As in the case of code-switching, it is necessary to distinguish between alternational and inser-
tional mixing (Stolt, 1965 speaks of Umschaltung vs Einschaltung).8 The first is clearly a matter of 
language production, while insertional mixing occurs at a deeper level of linguistic processing.
Alternational mixing (Muysken, 2000: 96–121) in its most prototypical sense means that a sentence 
begins in one language and ends in another, without a clear sense of whether the entire sentence is in 
language A or B. Both parts of the sentence are of some complexity. (The following examples are from 
Luther’s Dinner Conversations, i.e. Latin/Early New High German [ENHG] mixing; Latin underlined; cf. 
Stolt, 1965.)
(9) (Stolt, 1965: 83)
Sicut statim              post      nostrum             saeculum       wirds     anderst                   werden
Thus immediately     after     our                     age               will-it     different                 become
‘so it will immediately become different after our time’
(10) (Stolt, 1965: 91)
Unser    Herr    Gott  ist    mirabiliter   negligens  in  descriptione        suarum              rerum         
Our      Lord    God  is     admirably   negligent  in  description           his-GEN.PL     things-GEN.PL
‘God our Lord is admirably negligent in the description of his affairs’
In the Example 9, the alternation occurs after three adverbials in Latin; in Example 10, after the subject 
and the copula in ENHG.9 Note that the chunks in both languages are grammatical according to the gram-
mar of the respective languages. There seem to be restrictions which dictate this: i.e. alternational mixing 
occurs preferentially at points where the two grammars produce a homologous structure (equivalence 
constraint: Poplack, 1980; Sankoff, 1998; Sankoff and Poplack, 1981). At points in the production of a 
sentence in which the rules of word order and constituency of one language differ from those of the other, 
transition from one language into the other is less likely. For instance, if language A is strictly post-
modifying and language B strictly pre-modifying, mixing is predicted to be blocked between a noun and 
its attributes. 
Often, the two chunks of talk are relatively self-contained, i.e. there is a major syntactic boundary 
between the two parts, as in the following examples: 
(11) (Stolt. 1965: 109)
prima  tabula  
decalogi,      
 
die ist  
gar      des               Teuffels
first     table    
decalogue-GEN.SG                 it   is        PART   the-GEN.SG   devil-GEN.SG
‘The first table of the Decalogue, this is surely the devil’s’
(12) (Stolt 1965: 194)
si ego  omnia        crederem, 
wollt  
          ich  
kein  
pfarrherr  ansehen
if  I    all-ACC.PL. believe-COND2.1SG can-COND2.1SG 
I 
no    
priest       look-at
‘If I believed everything, I would not be able to look any priest in the eye’
In Example 11, the Latin part of the sentence is a left-dislocated noun phrase; in Example 12, the Latin 
part is a subordinated conditional sentence. Both are followed by an ENHG main clause.
Of course, mixing also frequently occurs between self-contained units which make up one larger 
speaking turn. They may be semantically coherent, and may contain cohesion markers such as adverbials 
or ellipses, but are both independent sentences:
(13) (Stolt, 1965: 219)
Die hat Ökolampadius nit konnen ertragen, er hatts mussen sterben, Zinglius quoque non.
‘Okolampadius wasn’t able to endure them, he had to die of it, Zinglius not either.’
(14) (Stolt, 1965: 236)
Haustus aquae et cervisiae est remedium sitis , ein stuckh prott vertreibt den hunger, Christus est remedium 
mortis.
‘A drink of water and beer is a remedy of thirst, a piece of bread drives away hunger, Christ is the remedy 
of death.’

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
472
In Example 13, the Latin part is elliptical, with a strong grammatical link to the first sentence in the 
German part of the utterance (ENHG: … nit konnen ertragen). The latter makes use of the previous 
German structure and could be reconstructed as Zinglius quoque non hat konnen ertragen. In Example 14, 
the three-part list with its grammatical parallelism renders the three components, two of which are in 
Latin, one in German, cohesive. Here, of course, transition into turn-internal code-switching for rhetorical 
purposes is fluid.10
As Muysken (2000) argues, there are good reasons to include further mixing structure under the head-
ing of alternation, although the term may be less obvious in these cases. For instance, longer stretches of 
language A talk may occur in a relatively self-contained, grammatically independent way within language 
B talk (nested code-mixing), as in:
(15) (Stolt, 1965: 183)
Ist denn das war, so lass uns dran sezen, quidquid habemus , und druber leyden, quidquid possumus
‘If this is true, then let us bet on it whatever we have , and suffer from whatever we can.’
The important criterion for distinguishing this type of nested alternation from insertions is the structural 
independence of the A parts to the left and right of the B section. (In the example, … so lass uns dran 
sezen is syntactically linked to its complement, quidquid habemus, but so lass uns dran sezen is relatively 
independent from und druber leyden, which is an elliptical continuation of the lass clause, similar to the 
one in Example 13.) Equally, Muysken (2000: 97–9) suggests that peripheral elements of the sentence 
which are only weakly integrated should be considered alternational mixing. This applies to discourse 
markers, particles, certain adverbials (such as sentence adverbials) and conjunctions, such as et tamen and 
quia in the following example:
(16) (Stolt, 1965: 151)
Et tamen haben wir ein forteyl fur der welt, quia das ampt ist unser.
And still do we have an advantage over the world, because the office is ours.
Note that single word mixing is usually considered to be insertional (see below). Muysken’s (2000) 
approach is more fine-grained here and distinguishes between the insertion of an A-language noun or verb 
into a B-language matrix, and alternational mixing on discourse markers, etc. Some evidence for this 
distinction may be found in the fact that sentence-initial conjunctions often go with the language of the 
preceding superordinated clause, a frequent pattern in Luther’s code-mixing:
(17) (Stolt, 1965: 222)
Ora pro me, quia du bist seer fromm
Pray for me, because you are very pious
While alternational mixing is frequent in some data sets (such as Luther’s dinner table conversations, 
where it occurs side by side with insertional mixing), other data sets are dominated by the insertional type. 
The most elaborate theory of this type of mixing was developed by Myers-Scotton (e.g. 2002) on the basis 
of East African data, and has subsequently been applied to many other bilingual situations as well (cf. 
Amuzu, 2005; Finlayson et al., 1998; Owens, 2005; Türker, 2000; on a more critical note; Boumans, 1998;  
Muhamedowa, 2006; Ziamari, 2003). In insertional mixing, the largest syntactic units (complementizer 
phrases in Myers-Scotton’s model) are always dominated by one and only one language: the matrix lan-
guage. Into this matrix, elements of the embedded language can be inserted. In this process, the rules of 
the matrix language must be obeyed, i.e.:
the morpheme order must be that of the matrix language
• 
certain system morphemes must come from the matrix language.
• 
In the most recent version of the model (Myers-Satton, 2002: 73–6), these morphemes are so-called 
late system morphemes whose selection depends on information from outside their immediate maximal 
projection (such as agreement markers or case). The embedded language may provide content mor-
phemes, so-called early system morphemes (such as plural markers or determiners) whose form depends 
on the heads of their maximal projection but need no information from outside it, and so-called bridge 
system morphemes (morphemes linking content morphemes without needing information from their 
head; examples are genitive morphemes and suppletive morphemes). The most straightforward examples 
of insertional mixing are single content morpheme insertions such as the following:

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
473
(18) (Türker, 2000: 70, Turkish/Norwegian in Oslo, Turkish underlined)
geç-en  sene  
serie-de-ydi-k
past      year  
league-LOC-PAST-1PL
‘last year we were in the league’
(19) (Myers-Scotton, 2002: 89, Swahili/English in Nairobi, English underlined)
ile            
m-geni 
 
hata     si-ku-comment
DEM/CL9   
CH/S-visitor 
even    1SG.NEG.-PST.NEG-comment
‘that visitor, I did not even comment’
In the Example 18, it is the Norwegian word serie which is embedded into a Turkish frame, while in the 
Example 19, it is the English verb (stem) comment. Both are treated as if they were words of the matrix 
language.11 An example of a bridge morpheme which is inserted into a Turkish matrix is the German 
preposition mit in the N mit N-construction:
(20) (Treffers-Daller, 1995: 254, German/Turkish, German underlined)
Pilav          
mit     
pirinç              
yap-ıl-ır
boiled-rice  
with  
unboiled-rice  
make-PASS-AOR.
‘Boiled rice is made with unboiled rice’
The special status of early system morphemes is responsible for the double marking of the same gram-
matical category both with the morphemes of the embedded and the matrix language, as in: 
(21) (Backus, 1992: 90, Turkish/Dutch in the Netherlands, Dutch underlined)
Pol-en-lar-a       
 
Holanda-ca   
        ders ver-di
pole-PL-PL-DAT  
 
Dutch-SUFF                     ders give-PASS
‘he taught Dutch to Poles’
In Example 21, the plural is marked both by the Dutch suffix –en and the Turkish suffix –lar (the matrix 
language suffix must be more peripheral than the embedded language suffix). The opposite also occurs, 
however, i.e. inserted words may appear as bare forms, with no morphological/grammatical marking at 
all. In Example 22, the inserted Dutch noun bibliotheek in a Moroccan Arabic matrix clause should 
receive both a prepositional clitic /l/ and a definite prefix /l-/; however, it is inserted with neither of them. 
Note that the Dutch preposition is also lacking. According to Boumans (1998: 218), omission is particularly 
frequent after verbs of motion, where the role of the object can easily be reconstructed from the semantics 
of the verb and the object noun:
(22) (Boumans, 1998: 218; Moroccan Arabic in the Netherlands)
gadi-n    
ne-mši-w   
[] [] bibliotheek
FUT-PL   
l-go-PL       
library
‘We’ll go to the library’
Argues that bare forms are used when the structures of the two languages are not compatible (2002: 
119–27; also cf. Nortier, 1990; Muysken, 2000: 83). In the same way, Myers-Scotton accounts for another 
way in which the dominance of the matrix language over the embedded language can be avoided, i.e. the 
insertion of internally complex ‘islands’ which follow the grammar of the embedded language instead of 
the matrix language. These islands may be inflected words in the embedded language, as in:
(23) (Stolt, 1964: 69; Latin/Early New High German)
omnes gentes, quae non habent religionem,  mussen    superstitio-nem   haben (371)
 
 
 
 
        must-3PL  superstition-ACC.SG.  have-INF
‘all people who don’t have a religion, must have a superstition’
Islands can also be larger units, such as a noun phrase in the following example:
(24) (Stolt, 1964:81; Latin/Early New High German) 
human-um                    
cor                             
kann      es  
nicht  
fassen
human-NEUTR.NOM.SG  
heart-NEUTR.NOM.SG   
can-3SG it    
not    
seize-INF
‘the human heart cannot grasp it’

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
474
The model is able to deal with a large amount of insertional mixing data. However, there are also numerous 
cases in which the neat division between matrix and embedded language is not maintained. The deviations 
may go into either direction. For instance, it is possible that the embedded language influences the structure 
of the matrix language. In the following example, this is the case: Early New High German, the matrix lan-
guage, converges toward the embedded language – Latin (more examples in Auer and Muhamedova 2005):
(25) (Stolt 1964: 71 Latin/ENHG)
obschon [] peccator-es  
izt    
sind...
although    sinner-PL     
now  
be-PRES.3PL
‘although they are now sinners…’
ENHG, like modern German, needs an overt subject and is therefore not a pro-drop language. In Latin, 
information about the subject is fully encoded in the finite verb, and no overt subject pronoun is necessary. 
German:  
obschon sie Sünder sind
Latin: 
 
quamquam [] peccatores sunt
In the Example 25, the transference of the embedded language structure to the matrix language leads to 
the omission of the subject pronoun.
More frequently, we find cases in which the structure of a complex embedded language island does not 
follow the grammar of the embedded language completely but converges towards the matrix language 
(Myers-Scotton, 2002: 102–5). For instance, there is strong evidence that in Kazakh/Russian code-mixing 
in Almaty (Muhamedowa, 2006; Muhamedova and Auer, 2005), Russian loses the gender category (as 
well as number), although this grammatical category is preserved in monolingual Russian discourse pro-
duced by the same speakers. The loss of gender in code-mixing is without doubt a consequence of the 
lack of this grammatical category in the matrix language Kazakh:
(26) (Muhamedova and Auer, 2005, Russian/Kazahk in Almaty)
Уже      anau  
 
стар-ый  площадь-tï    
ne-ler-di         
žönde-di
already  this    
 
old-?        square-?-ACC  
thing-PL-ACC  
renovate-PAST
‘there the old square and so on were alreadyrenovated’
Apart from the initial particle, the sentence is Kazakh, which is clearly the matrix language. The crucial 
issue is the inserted Russian island which fails to comply with the grammar of monolingual Russian since 
there is no gender agreement: площадь is a feminine noun, and the adjective modifying it should agree 
with it:старaя. The use of the masculine form regardless of the gender of the nominal head in a large 
number of cases suggests that on the basis of Kazakh (which has no gender), the Russian used as an 
embedded language structurally converges towards the matrix language.12
Examples of mutual convergence in Hungarian/German code-mixing in the German minorities in 
Hungary are discussed in Szabó (2008). In this old bilingual community, we find utterances such as the 
following:
(27) (Szabó, 2007–8: 313, Hungarian/German dialect; Hungarian underlined)
do  
de  
ötlet war gut  
de mama  ihre.
PART 
DET  
idea was good 
DET mum  hers
‘mum’s idea was good’
den                     fogad  
immer    el
that-ACC.MASC  take-?  
always   PARTICLE
‘they always accept it.’
The second line is remarkable for various reasons. First, German dialect seems to underlie the sentence, 
since the use of a separable verb prefix (fogad … el from the verb el-fogad ‘to accept’) does not conform 
to Hungarian grammar.13 Rather, it seems to be modelled after the German pattern of separable verb 
particles (as in nehmen … an from the verb an-nehmen). It is difficult, however, to call fogad … el an 
island, since its two elements are discontinuous and do not follow Hungarian morphology: the verb fogad 
receives no person and number marking as would be required in Hungarian (and German), i.e. it is a 
bare form. On the other hand, Hungarian has an impact on the sentence beyond that of providing lexical 
material which is inserted into a German sentence pattern. As in Example 25, the subject pronoun is 

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
475
deleted, which is possible in Hungarian but not in German. Both languages seem to have converged and 
neither of them is used in a monolingual way, but it is difficult to say which one is the matrix language 
and which one the embedded language. 
In sum, there is ample evidence that code-mixing creates specific forms of convergence which may not 
be present in the monolingual speech of the same speakers. These cases do not seem to be restricted to 
sociolinguistic situations of language attrition and shift, as Myers-Scotton (2002: 105) claims for ‘com-
posite codeswitching’, in which ‘the abstract morphosyntactic frame derive[s] from more than one source 
language’ and in which it is therefore impossible to identify a single matrix language.
34.5 OPEN QUESTIONS
There are still considerable lacunae in research on bilingual talk. One is the question of whether and how 
mixing can sediment into grammatical patterns which are of mixed language origin but no longer offer a choice 
to their speakers and have therefore become part of the grammatical system (fused lects, see Auer, 1999). 
Another is psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic research on the real-time processing of bilingual talk (for 
recent overviews, see Basnight-Brown and Altarriba, 2007; and Gullberg, Indefrey and Muysken, 2009).
NOTES
 1 Morphological gloss adapted.
 2 See Musk (2006) for Welsh schools in Wales as another example.
 3 Many examples of this are given by Kühl (2008, Ch. 8); see Jaspers (2005) for a similar example.
 4 Exceptions are insertional code-switches (misleadingly called transfers in Auer, 1984b) in which a single 
word is inserted into an other-language frame to achieve a conversational effect; see Auer (1998a: 6–7) for the 
discussion of an example.
 5 Gafaranga and Torras (2001) use the term ‘medium switch’ to refer to this aspect of code-switching.
 6 Hein? is a neutral repair initiator which has been borrowed from French both into Lingala and (Congo) 
Swahili.
 7 This shows that there is no emic difference between Swahili/French and Swahili (or for that matter, 
between Lingala/French and Lingala). Mixing is a form of speaking Swahili or Lingala. In contrast, the opposition 
between Swahili(/French) and Lingala (/French) is emic (as would the switch of either of them and French).
 8 See the elaborate discussion of this distinction in Muysken (2000). In his model, there is a third type of 
mixing which he calls ‘congruent lexicalization’; in this case, the grammatical structure of the two languages in 
contact is partly or completely identical (through convergence or genetic closeness), and mixing only refers to 
the filling in of lexical nodes in one language or the other.
 9 Of course it is possible to posit theories which assign the total sentence in Examples 9 and 10 to one 
language. For instance, one could argue that by definition, the finite verb determines the language of the whole 
sentence. Then Examples 9 and 10 would be ENHG sentences with inserted material from Latin. See Auer 
(2000) for further discussion.
 10 For instance, in list-like utterances such as Example 14, Luther always uses Latin in the third and most 
important list-element. This points to a rhetorical usage of the transition into Latin, which brings these examples 
close to code-switching.
 11 This is the reason some researchers do not speak of insertional mixing, but of borrowing here.
12 A similar case of gender neutralization is reported for Malinche Mexicano/Spanish mixing by Hill and Hill 
(1986: 266ff.).
13 While the separation of particle and verb in German is exclusively determined by the syntactic pattern 
of the sentence (in which the verb provides the left bracket, i.e. second position, the particle the right bracket, 
i.e. final position), Hungarian separable verb prefixes are used to mark focus. In the present context, no separa-
tion is possible.
REFERENCES
Adalar, N. and Tagliamonte, S. (1998) ‘Borrowed nouns – bilingual people: the case of ‘Londralı’ in North Cyprus’, International 
Journal of Bilingualism, 2: 139–59.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
476
Alfonzetti, G. (1998) ‘The conversational dimension in code-switching between Italian and dialect in Sicily’, in P. Auer, (ed.), Code-
Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and Identity. London/New York: Routledge. pp. 180–214.
Alvarez Cáccamo, C. (1998) ‘From ‘switching code’ to ‘code-switching’: towards a reconceptualisation of communicative codes’, in 
P. Auer, (ed.), Code-Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and Identity. London/New York: Routledge. pp. 29–50.
Amuzu, E. K. (2005) ‘Revisiting the classic codeswitching and composite codeswitching distinction: a case study of nonverbal 
codeswitching’, Australian Journal of Linguistics, 25(1): 127–51.
Angermeyer, P. (2002) ‘Lexical cohesion in multilingual conversation’, International Journal of Bilingualism,6(4): 361–93.
Auer, P. (1984a) ‘On the meaning of conversational code-switching’, in P. Auer and di Lucio, Aldo (eds), Interpretive Sociolinguistics: 
Migrants – Children – Migrant Children.Tübingen. pp. 87–112.
Auer, P. (1984b) Bilingual Conversation. Vol. 8, Pragmatics and Beyond. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Auer, P. (1986) ‘Konversationelle Standard / Dialekt-Kontinua (Code-Shifting)’, Deutsche Sprache, 2: 97–124.
Auer, P. (1995) ‘The pragmatics of code-switching:A sequential approach’, in L. Milroy and P. Muysken (eds), One Speaker, Two 
Languages. Cambridge: University Press. pp.115–35. Reprinted in W. Li (ed.) (2007) The Bilingualism Reader. 2nd edn. Milton 
Park: Routledge. pp.123–38.
Auer, P. (1997) ‘Members’ assessments and ascriptions of (in-)competence in bilingual conversation’, in J. R. Dow and M. Wolff 
(eds), Languages and lives. Festschrift for W. Enninger. New York: Peter Lang. pp. 121–36.
Auer, P. (1998a) ‘‘Bilingual conversation’’ revisited’, in P. Auer (ed.), Code-Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and 
Identity. London/New York: Routledge. pp.1–24. 
Auer, P. (ed) (1998b) Code-Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and Identity. London/New York: Routledge.
Auer, P. (1999) ‘From code-switching via language mixing to fused lects: toward a dynamic typology of bilingual speech’, 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 3(4): 309–32.
Auer, P. (2000) ‘Why should we and how can we determine the ‘base language’ of a bilingual conver sation?’, Estudios de 
Sociolingüística, 1(1): 129–44.
Auer, P. (2006) ‘Sociolinguistic crossing’, in: K. Brown (ed.) Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics, 11. 2nd edn. Oxford: 
Elsevier. pp. 40–2.
Auer, P. (2007a) ‘The monolingual bias in bilingualism research or: shy bilingual talk is (still) a challenge for linguistics’, in M. Heller 
(ed.), Bilingualism – A Social Approach. Houndmills: Palgrave. pp. 319–39.
Auer, P. (2007b) ‘Code-switching in conversation’, in N. Coupland and A. Jaworski (eds), The New Sociolinguistics Reader. 
Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. pp. 490–511.
Auer, P. and Rönfeldt, B. (2002) ‘Erinnern und Vergessen. Erschwerte Wortfindung als soziales und interaktives Problem’, in 
M. Schecker (ed.), Wortfindung und Wortfindungsstörungen. Tübingen: Narr.  pp. 77–108.
Backus Ad (1992) Patterns of language mixing. A study in Turkish-Dutch bilingualism. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz
Bailey, B. (2007) ‘Language alternation as a resource for identity negotiations among Dominican American bilinguals’, in P. Auer 
(ed.), Style and Social Identities. Berlin: Mouton. pp. 29–56.
Bani-Shoraka, H. (2005) ‘Language choice and code-switching in the Azerbaijani community in Teheran‘, Acta Universitatis 
Upsaliensis/ Studia Iranica, No. 9.
Berruto, G. (2005) ‘Dialect/standard convergence, mixing, and models of language contact: the case of Italy’, in P. Auer, 
F. Hinskens and P. Kerswill (eds), Dialect Change: Convergence and Divergence in European Languages. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 81–95.
Basnight-Brown, D. M. and Altarriba, J. (2007) ‘Code-switching and code-mixing in bilinguals: cognitive, developmental and 
empirical approaches’, in A. Ardila and E. Ramos (eds), Speech and Language Discorders in Bilinguals. Hauppauge, NY: Nova 
Science. pp. 69–89.
Blom, J. P. and Gumperz, J. (1972) ‘Social meaning in linguistic structures: code-switching in Norway’, in J. Gumperz and D. Hymes 
(eds), Directions in Sociolinguistics. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston. pp. 407–34.
Blommaert, J. (1992) ‘Codeswitching and the exclusivity of social identities: some data from Campus Kiswahili’, Journal of 
Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 13: 57–70.
Boumans, L. (1998) ‘The syntax of codeswitching. Analysing Moroccan Arabic/Dutch conversation’, Studies in Multilingualism. 
Vol. 12. Tilburg University Press.
Budzhak-Jones, S. and Poplack, S. (1997) ‘Two generations, two strategies: the fate of bare English-origin nouns in Ukrainian’, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 1: 225–58.
Cechirlan, N. (2008) 'Code-switching zwischen Rumänisch und Russisch in Moldawien – eine pragmatische Analyse’. Master 
thesis, University of Freiburg.
Clyne, M. (1980) ‘Triggering and language processing’, Canadian Journal of Psychology, 34: 400–6.
Clyne, M. (2003) Dynamics of Language Contact. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
de Fina, A. (2007) ‘Style and stylization in the construction of identities in a card-playing club’, in P. Auer (ed.), Style and Social 
Identities. Berlin: Mouton. pp. 57–84.
Fabian, J. (1990) Power and Performance. Ethnographic Explorations through Proverbial Wisdom and Theater in Shaba, Zaire. 
Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.
Finlayson, R., Calteaux, K. and Myers-Scotton, C. (1998) ‘Orderly mixing and accommodation in South African codeswitching’, 
Journal of  Sociolinguistics, 2(3): 395–420.

CODE-SWITCHING/MIXING
477
Gafaranga, J. (2000) ‘Language separateness: a normative framework in studies of language alternation‘, Estudios de 
Sociolingüística, 1: 65–84.
Gafaranga J. (2007) ‘Code-switching as conversational strategy’, in P. Auer, and W. Li (eds), Handbook of Multilingualism and 
Multilingual Communication. Berlin: de Gruyter. pp. 279–313.
Gafaranga J. and Torras, M.-C. (2001) ‘Language vs. medium in the study of bilingual conversation’, International Journal of 
Bilingualism, 5: 195–219.
Gal, S. (1988) ‘The political economy of code choice’, in M. Heller, (ed.), Codeswitching. Anthropological and sociolinguistic 
Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 245–64.
Goffman, E. (1963) Behavior in Public Places. Toronto: The Free Press of Glencoe.
Guerini, F. (2006) Language Alternation Strategies in Multilingual Settings. Bern: Lang.
Gullberg, M., Indefrey, P. and Muysken, P. (2009) ‘Research techniques for the study of code-switching’, in B. E. Bullock and 
A. J. Toribio (eds), The Cambridge Handbook on Linguistic Code-Switching, (pp. 21–39). Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gumperz, John (1982) Discourse Strategies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heller, M. (ed.) (1988a) Codeswitching. Anthropological and Sociolinguistic Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Heller, M. (1988b) ‘Strategic ambiguity: code-switching in the management of conflict’, in M. Heller (ed.), Codeswitching. 
Athropological and Sociolinguistic Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton de Grayter. pp. 77–96.
Heller, M. (1992) ‘The politics of codeswitching and language choice’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 
13(1, 2): 123–42.
Heller, M. (2007) ‘Bilingualism as ideology and practice’, in M. Heller (ed.), Bilingualism – A Social Approach. Houndmills: Palgrave. 
pp. 1–22.
Hill, J. and Hill, K. (1986) Speaking Mexicano. Tucson, AZ: University of Arizona Press.
Hinnenkamp, V. (2005) ‘ ‘‘Zwei zu bir miydi?‘’ – Mischsprachliche Varietäten von Migrantenjugendlichen im Hybriditätsdiskurs’, in 
V. Hinnekamp and K. Meng (eds), Sprachgrenzen überspringen. Sprachliche Hybridität und polykulturelles Selbstverständnis. 
Tübingen: Narr. pp. 51–103.
Jaspers, J. (2005) ‘Linguistic sabotage in a context of monolingualism and standardization’, in ‘Multilingualism and diasporic 
populations: spatializing practices, institutional processes, and social hierarchies’, Journal of Language and Communication 
(Special Issue), 25(3): 279–97. 
Jonsson, C. (2005) Code-Switching in Chicano Theater. University of Umeå, Institutionen för moderna språk, Skrifter No. 17.
Karrebaek, M. S. (2003) ‘Iconicity and structure in code switching’, International Journal of Bilingualism,7(4): 407–41.
Kühl, K. H. (2008) ‘Bilingualer Sprachgebrauch von Jugendlichen im deutsch-dänischen Grenzgebiet – eine strukturelle und 
pragmatische Analyse’. PhD thesis, University of Flensburg.
Li, W. (1994) Three Generations, Two Languages, One Family. Language Choice and Language Shift in a Chinese Community in 
Britain. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Li, W. (2002) ‘‘What do you want me to say?’’ On the conversation analysis approach to bilingual interaction’, Language and 
Society, 31: 159–80.
McLelland, N. (2004) ‘A historical study of codeswitching in writing: ‘‘German and Latin in Schottelius‘’ “Ausführliche Arbeit von 
der Teutschen HaubtSprache” (1663)’, International Journal of Bilingualism, 8(4): 499–523.
Meeuwis, M. and Blommaert, J. (1994) ‘The ‘‘Markedness Model’‘ and the absence of society: remarks on codeswitching’, 
Multilingua, 14(4): 387–423.
Meeuwis, M. and Blommaert, J. (1998) ‘A monolectal view of code-switching: layered code-switching among Zairians in 
Belgium’, in P. Auer, (ed.), Code-Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and Identity. London/New York: Routledge. 
pp. 76–100.
Muhamedowa, R. (2006)Untersuchungen zum kasachisch-russischen Code-mixing (mit Ausblicken auf den uigurisch-russischen 
Sprachkontakt). München: Lincom.
Muhamedova, R. and Auer, P. (2005) ‘ ‘‘Embedded language’‘ and ‘‘Matrix language‘’ in insertional language mixing: some 
problematic cases’, Italian Journal of Linguistics / Rivista di linguistica, 17(1) (Special Issue ‘Commutazione di codice e teoria 
linguistica’, edited by Gaetano Berruto): 35–54.
Musk, N. (2006) ‘Performing bilingualism in Wales with the spotlight on Welsh‘. Linköping Studies in Arts and Science, 375.
Muysken, P. (2000) Bilingual Speech: A Typology of Code-Mixing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1988) ‘Code switching as indexical of social negotiations’, in M. Heller, (ed.), Codeswitching. Antropological 
and sociological perspectives. pp. 151–86. (Reprinted in Li, W. (ed.) (2000) The Bilingualism Reader. London, UK: Routledge. 
pp. 137–165, and in Li, W. (ed.) (2007) The Bilingualism Reader. 2nd edn. Milton Park, UK: Routledge. pp. 97–122.) 
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993a) Social Motivations for Code switching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Myers-Scotton, C. (1993b) ‘Elite closure as a powerful language strategy: the African case’, International Journal of Sociology and 
Language, 103: 149–63.
Myers-Scotton, C. (2002) Contact Linguistics. Bilingual Encounters and Grammatical Outcomes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nortier, Jacomine (1990) Dutch-Moroccan Arabic Code Switching Among Moroccans in the Netherlands. Dordrecht, Holland: Foris 
Publications.
Owens, J. (2005) ‘Hierachicalized matrices: codeswitching among urban Nigerian Arabs’, Linguistics, 43(5): 957–93.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
478
Paul, H. (1898) Prinzipien der Sprachgeschichte. Halle: Niemeyer.
Pfaff, C. (2003) ‘Ideological and political framing of bilingual development: reflections on studies of Turkish/German in Berlin’, in 
K. Fraurud and K. Hyltenstam (eds), Multilingualism in Global and Local Perspectives. Stockholm: Center for Research on 
Bilingualism. pp. 191–220.
Poplack, S. (1980) ‘ ‘‘Sometimes I’ll start a sentence in Spanish Y TERMINO EN ESPAÑOL’‘: toward a typology of code-switching’, 
Linguistics, 18: 581–618.
Poplack, S. (2004) ‘Code-switching’, in U. Ammon, N. Dittmar, K. J. Mattheier and P. Trudgill (eds), Soziolinguistik, An International 
Handbook. 2nd edn. Berlin: de Gruyter. pp. 589–96.
Pujolar, J. (2007) ‘Bilingualism and the nation-state in the post-national era’, in M. Heller (ed.), Bilingualism – A Social Approach. 
Houndmills: Palgrave. pp. 71–110.
Rampton, B. (2000) ‘Speech community’, in J. Verschueren, J. -O., Östman, J. Blommaert and C. Bulcaen (eds), Handbook of 
Pragmatics. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 1–34.
Reershemius, G. (2001) ' ‘‘Token codeswitching‘’ and language alternation in narrative discourse: a functional-pragmatic 
approach’, International Journal of Bilingualism, 5(2): 175–94.
Sankoff, D. (1998) ‘A formal production-based explanation of the facts of code-switching’, Bilingualism – Language and Cognition, 
1: 39–50.
Sankoff, D. and Poplack, S. (1981) ‘A formal grammar for code-switching’, Papers in Linguistics, 14: 3–45.
Sebba, M. and Wootton, T. (1998) ‘We, they and identity: sequential versus identity-related explanation in code-switching’, in 
P. Auer, (ed.), Code-Switching in Conversation. Language, Interaction and Identity. London/New York: Routledge. pp. 
262–89.
Stolt, B. (1964) Die Sprachmischung in Luthers Tischreden. Studien zum Problem der Zweisprachigkeit. Stockholm: Almqvist and 
Wiksell.
Stroud, C. (2007) ‘Multilingualism in ex-colonial countries’, in P. Auer and W. Li, (eds), Handbook of Multilingualism and 
Multilingual Communication. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 509–38.
Szabó, C. (2007–08) ‘Language shift und code-mixing: Deutsch-ungarisch-rumänische Mehrsprachigkeit in einer dörflichen 
Gemeinde in Nordwestrumänien’. PhD thesis, University of Freiburg.
Timm, L. A. (1978) ‘Code-switching in ‘‘War and Peace’’ ', in M. Paradis, (ed.), Aspects of Bilingualism. Columbia, SC: Hornbeam 
Press. pp. 236–49.
Türker, E. (2000) Turkish–Norwegian Codeswitching. University of Oslo, Faculty of Arts, Dissertation Series No. 83.
Verschik, A. (2005) ‘Russian–Estonian contacts, linguistic creativity, and convergence: new rules in the making’, Multilingua, 24(4): 
413–29.
Vogt, H. (1954) ‘Language contact’, Word, 10(2, 3): 365–74.
Woolard, K. A. (1989) Double Talk. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Ziamari, K. (2003)‘Le Code switching intra-phrastique dans les conversations des étudiants marocains de l’ENSAM: approche 
linguistique du duel entre l’árabe marocain et le français’. Thèse de doctorat, INALCO-Fès.

32
32.1 INTRODUCTION
The notion of ‘language policy’ is vast. It includes 
any form of intervention (and indeed non-inter-
vention – i.e. laissez-faire) by a political authority 
to direct and regulate the use, by the administra-
tion and/or the population, of one or more lan-
guages in a given political area. Language policy 
comprises, and rests on, ideological choices and 
their underlying principles determining the selec-
tion of various goals. These may concern the 
status, use, domains of use and geographical range 
of a language or of multiple linguistic varieties 
that are in competition. Thus, the linguistic frame-
work put in place in Switzerland during the nine-
teenth and twentieth centuries notably focused on 
the introduction of a principle of territoriality and 
the regulation of the proportionality of linguistic 
groups at the heart of the federal administration 
(Widmer et al., 2004).
Language policies can be direct and open. In 
these cases, the political authority intervenes 
openly, for example by modifying the direction of 
social forces in favour of one language or another, 
often (but certainly not always) by repressive 
measures, the key to this being ‘language legisla-
tion’ – i.e. the culmination of juridical norms 
(laws,1 regulations, decrees) which state the lin-
guistic rights and obligations regarding the use of 
languages in diverse areas of social life at the 
heart of the political unit. However, we should not 
confuse the notions of language policy and lan-
guage legislation, as is often the case in modern 
usage. If we do not make the distinction, we 
should restrict our understanding of ‘language 
policy’ to cases of explicit language policy, 
concerning the promotion of languages (in, for 
example, their roles as ‘national’ languages, as is 
the case in the Swiss linguistic framework) or the 
tolerance of languages (as with minority and 
regional languages according to the terms of the 
European Charter for Regional or Minority 
Languages). And yet, language policy can also be 
indirect or covert. As such, enacting (or not enact-
ing) economic development measures in favour of 
regions in which linguistic minorities live consti-
tutes an indirect political measure, as does leaving 
social forces to develop ‘freely’ – for example, 
when an authority does not impose the language 
of power on a certain people, but instead offers it 
as a tool for social betterment, to access cultural 
materials, education, knowledge and political 
power (Mackey, 1976). Put differently, all politi-
cal entities endorse linguistic policy, even in the 
absence of official intervention in the use of a 
language or of languages within the relevant geo-
political space. 
The notion of language policy incorporates 
‘language planning’. When this term appeared, in 
a seminal text by Einar Haugen in 1959, it denoted 
‘the activity of preparing a normative orthography, 
grammar, and dictionary for the guidance of writ-
ers and speakers in a non-homogeneous speech 
community’, citing the Norwegian example. Since 
the end of the 1960s, this notion has been widened 
to include any type of intervention which addresses 
sociolinguistic problems.2 Since then, language 
planning has been considered as the enactment of 
(explicit) linguistic policy by way of a ‘road map’. 
Planning implies not only decisions at the political 
level but also all choices relative to the domains 
and modes of intervention. These choices presup-
pose sociolinguistic knowledge of both the situa-
tion on the ground and the desired situation, as 
Language Policy and Planning
A n n e - C l a u d e  B e r t h o u d 
a n d  G e o r g e s  L ü d i

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
480
well as the enactment of a strategy (certain 
choices lead to a specific law; others will be 
simply formulated in a rather ad hoc manner, 
within various legal acts or regulations which 
themselves do not address linguistic usage, but 
which will indeed have repercussions in this area) 
and the evaluation of a strategy’s impact. Such 
interventions may seek to influence the direction 
and the manner in which languages compete, or 
else to shape the language itself (see Maurais et 
al., 1987). Haugen’s model (1983: 275), which 
has been revised by Kaplan and Baldauf (1997: 
29), outlines the domains of language planning as 
in Table 32.1
However, useful as this Table 32.1 may be, it 
explains only part of the language planning proc-
ess in context. Thus, we would list the principal 
factors which language planning must account for 
as follows:
• Who (which agents, e.g. formal élites, 
influentials, counter-elites, non-elite policy 
implementers)5
• plans what (which behaviours are to be 
influenced, e.g. structural (linguistic) properties 
of planned behaviour6 [= corpus planning]; pur-
poses/functions for which planned behaviour is 
to be used; desired level of adoption, e.g. aware-
ness, evaluation, proficiency, usage [= status 
planning])
• for whom (type of target, e.g. individuals vs. 
organizations; opportunity of target to learn 
planned behaviour; incentives of target to learn/
use or reject planned behaviour)
• for what ends (overt, e.g. language-
related behaviours or latent – that is, non-
language-related – behaviours)
• for the benefit of whom (reproduction of 
the power of a dominant group, promotion of 
language minorities, satisfaction of commercial 
interests, symbolic benefits)
• under what conditions7 (in what context, 
e.g. types of communicative events, transient 
or permanent conditions; structural-political, 
economic, or social/demographic/ecological;8 
cultural; environmental, e.g. influences from out-
side the system; informational, e.g. data required 
to make good decisions)
• how (by what means, e.g. authority, force, 
promotion, persuasion; through what decision-
making process, e.g. by what kind of legislation; 
and with what effect).
As has been shown, one of the principal goals of 
linguistic management policies and plans con-
cerns the selection and the development of one – 
and only one – ‘national’ language. The ideological 
background to this process goes back a long way. 
It is founded on the received wisdom that mono-
lingualism represents an original state, intended 
by God and/or politically legitimized by human 
beings. To an extent, this stereotype can be seen in 
the Bible – that is to say, in the belief that multi-
lingualism, resulting from ‘confusion’, has encum-
bered people like a divine curse ever since the 
construction of the Tower of Babel (Genesis 11, 
6–7). It is again found in Greek philosophy, start-
ing with Aristotle; the Renaissance, in turn, 
acquired it from medieval scholasticism. Between 
the French Revolution (Barère, 1794; Grégoire, 
1794) and World War I, nationalist sentiments 
began to be linked with religious belief, as well as 
coming under the influence of Romantic ideas 
(Herder, 1794; Fichte, 1808; etc.); they are dis-
cussed with metaphors borrowed from religious 
history, and build up the myth of the ‘nation’ as 
reflected in a common language. 
Within this framework, individual bilingualism 
is perceived as dangerous, in many ways. It is seen 
as a threat to people’s command of the language 
of the nation, as well as a menace to the unitary 
culture attached to that language. In summary, 
bilinguals, particularly childhood bilinguals, will 
have their cognitive and social identity threatened. 
Similarly, language contact is mistrusted, particu-
larly in regions known for their bilingualism. 
Languages spoken by non-dominant groups of the 
population are either ignored or even repressed. 
Modern examples of this philosophy can be found 
in many countries.9
Table 32.1 Language planning
Form (policy planning)
Function (language cultivation)
Society (status planning)
1. Selection3 (decision procedures)
(a) problem identification
(b) allocation of norms
3. Implementation4 (educational spread)
(a) corrective procedures
(b) evaluation
Language (corpus planning)
2. Codification (standardization 
procedures)
(a) graphization
(b) grammatiction
(c) lexication
4. Elaboration (functional development)
(a) terminological modernization
(b) stylistic development 
(c) internationalization

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
481
And yet, this attitude is changing, within the 
framework of transnational political connections 
and under the impact of globalization. For instance, 
specialists (e.g. Tutzinger Thesen, 1999; Beacco, 
2004) and decision-makers are beginning to argue 
that Europe’s identity is fundamentally linked to 
linguistic diversity. As the European Commissioner 
responsible for multilingualism formulated it in 
October 2008: 
‘Europe today is a bastion of diversity. And lan-
guage is a fundamental part of this. Through 
it, we construct our identity. Diversity has some-
times been seen as an obstacle to European 
unity. Today, on the contrary, it seems a beneficial 
right. It is one of the ties that bind our union’ 
(Orban, 2008). 
Other continents such as Africa are following 
this path (cf. for example the Accra Declaration 
of 1996 (Alexander, 2006), or priority area four in 
the ‘Plan of action’ discussed at the Second 
Extraordinary Meeting of the Conference of 
Ministers of Education of the African Union, 4–7 
September 2006). International conventions insist 
upon the rights of linguistic minorities (cf. 
Duchêne, 2008) and often impact upon national 
planning frameworks. 
However, diversity management is not limited 
to geopolitical territories. More and more often, 
institutions (such as the European Commission or 
higher education institutions) or businesses (in 
particular, those which operate according to an 
‘international framework’) have cause to regulate 
the use of the languages which they use. In order 
to distinguish these developmental endeavours 
from those which are political, the term ‘linguistic 
strategies’ (or, better, ‘language management’) 
can be introduced. This term refers to all forms of 
intervention of an institution or company or its 
agents, respectively, in its members’ and/or 
employees’ linguistic repertoires, their representa-
tions of language and multilingualism, and their 
language behaviour in internal and external com-
munication. Forms of interventions could be, for 
example, a company’s linguistic landscaping,10 its 
recruitment policy, guidelines for on-the-job train-
ing, choice of language for the internal magazine, 
policies for oral exchanges between apprentices 
and employees from different language regions, 
choice of languages for vertical communication 
between management and employees (contracts, 
general information, salary sheets, etc.), choice of 
language for job adverts, and so on. Some of these 
interventions are overt, i.e. explicitly communi-
cated in official documents (e.g. on a company’s 
webpage).11 However, these sets of interventions 
– which are far from monolithic – are frequently 
covert and must be deduced from traces in the 
data, as we will see later on.
It can be added that language policies, planning 
and strategies have always existed. And yet, the 
growth of population mobility, the reorganization 
of political frontiers and the creation of new trans-
national political spaces (such as the European 
Union) have increased the respective challenges 
for decision-makers at all levels. Increasingly, new 
situations and dynamics regarding multilingualism 
and languages in contact require interventions 
which guarantee the coexistence of languages 
which are, at the same time, effective and fair, with 
respect to different speaker groups within a given 
geopolitical space (or one to be created), in order to 
prevent one linguistic group dominating the socio-
economic landscape, or to maintain that which 
is often termed linguistic peace or social cohesion 
(Lüdi et al., 2008). It is true that laissez-faire 
policies, for example regarding the increasing 
importance of English, can also be frequently 
observed.
32.2  BETWEEN ANALYSIS AND 
INTERVENTION: THE DYLAN 
PROJECT
Linguists and other social scientists can be 
employed with a variety of briefs in the processes 
of language policies and planning or linguistic 
strategy-making, be it in preparing the ground 
with sociolinguistic studies, in intervening in 
these processes in their capacity as experts, or in 
describing and explaining the processes. We shall 
illustrate this in the following with the example of 
the European DYLAN Research Project.12 The 
aim was to track ‘language dynamics’ in order to 
contribute in an innovative way to the discovery of 
optimal manners in which to develop diversity 
management: the challenge being to formulate 
research questions which were likely to be rele-
vant both to the immediate demands of practition-
ers as well as to the researchers’ interests. This 
implies the reconciliation of two ‘cultures’ which 
are generally unaccustomed to negotiation – the 
culture of the researcher and the culture of those 
in whom political power is vested.
The overarching thrust was to show the condi-
tions under which the linguistic diversity preva-
lent in Europe is potentially an asset rather than an 
obstacle. Against this background, three main 
objectives were formulated (summarized here 
from Berthoud, 2008a):
(a) to develop a fine-grained understanding of the 
ways in which multilingual repertoires are devel-
oped and used in various situations;
(b) to identify the conditions that need to be 
met in order for the development and use of 
multilingual repertoires, which are part of the 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
482
European heritage and ethos, to be prioritized 
so that they might contribute to the develop-
ment of a knowledge-based society, and lead to 
broader conceptual, argumentative and strategic 
opportunities; 
(c) to help formulate policy recommendations for 
the effective, cost-effective and democratic man-
agement of linguistic diversity in Europe by 
investigating the ways in which different modes 
of thinking and different forms of behaviour, 
carried by different languages, can promote 
the creation, transfer and application of knowl-
edge, and contribute a genuinely valuable 
input in the sharing and transfer of informa-
tion, problem solving, and operations control 
(strategic asset).
This is done by assessing and comparing compet-
ing communication scenarios in various profes-
sional and institutional settings, in order to identify 
their respective advantages and drawbacks, as 
well as their relative efficiency and fairness. 
Advantages and drawbacks should be understood 
in a broad sense, including social and cultural 
dimensions as well as financial ones. Research 
results intend to serve as a benchmark for a better 
understanding of complex processes in which key 
aspects of language learning and communica-
tional practices are combined. 
Four dimensions constitute the project’s con-
ceptual cornerstones: (1) actual language prac-
tices; 
(2) 
representations 
(‘images’) 
of 
multilingualism and linguistic diversity, which 
will be captured through discourse; (3) the lan-
guage policies of states or other public bodies 
(local, regional or national authorities, as well as 
supranational organizations) and the language 
strategies of management of private-sector com-
panies; and (4) the linguistic context, or ‘language 
environment’ in which agents operate. These four 
dimensions are related in a number of ways, 
and these interrelationships were to be studied in 
three settings: namely, private-sector companies, 
EU institutions and institutions of higher 
education.
In this chapter, the idea is not to present the 
project’s results as a whole. Instead, we will go 
into more depth within two subprojects particu-
larly related to language policy and planning. The 
first one deals with the analysis of the manner in 
which companies form linguistic strategies, and 
includes the measurement of the impact of these 
strategies; it confronts these with actual practices 
within these same companies. The second one 
deals with the question of how deep changes in the 
context can bring institutions of higher education 
to reconsider their policies and strategies related 
to languages, by observing multilingual learning 
practices in universities.
32.3  THE MANAGEMENT OF 
MULTILINGUALISM BY COMPANIES 
AND COMPANIES’ IMPACT ON 
LINGUISTIC PRACTICE
In the following section, we will attempt to show 
that there is an area of tension between the 
declared and implicit language policies and man-
agement measures of companies on the one hand, 
and recurrent behavioural patterns emerging in 
linguistic practices on the other. We will do so, at 
first, by way of examples from the business 
world.
An example of a transactional 
interaction
Example 1
Employee 
Gueten obe (2)((the client hands 
over the ticket)) merci. Was hän si 
für e Wunsch ? Good evening … 
what can I do for you?
Customer 
ehm if you mind if I speak English ?
Employee 
No problem.
Customer 
Thank you. I am wondering if 
there’s any specials available yet on 
the TGV from Lausanne to Paris
Employee 
Mhm. When do you travel?
Customer 
The 30th of (2) december.
Employee 
Oh that’s too early.
Customer 
Too early, [okey]
Employee    [You can book it], you can book it 
eh (..) three months in advance.
Example 1 was recorded at the ticket booths at 
Basel station in 2007 (Barth, 2008). As is the case 
in Basel, within the diglossic framework involving 
Standard German (distance language, predomi-
nant in writing) and Swiss German (proximity 
language, predominant in speaking), the employee 
addresses the new customer in Swiss German. The 
customer asks if she may speak English. The 
employee consents, the customer formulates her 
question in English and the employee follows her 
choice in the response to the question. The remain-
der of the conversation takes place in English. 
In Example 1, the employee approaches the 
customer according to a social rule (in German-
speaking Switzerland, the reference language is 
Swiss German) and changes languages according 
to an incongruence of repertoires (the customer 
prefers to speak or can only speak English). Lukas 
Barth (2008), who has analysed some 60 hours of 
interactions at these booths, with different employ-
ees and numerous customers, has shown that these 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
483
two choice phenomena are recurrent in his corpus 
and so correspond well to a fixed schema in this 
type of script (buying/selling interactions and/or 
advice at a booth). However, it is a form of behav-
iour which can be found in a variety of other 
contexts of workplace communication. Thus, 
questions arise concerning whether – and if yes, to 
what extent – these behavioural patterns are freely 
chosen by interlocutors, whether the social rules 
correspond to collective and non-codified knowl-
edge, or whether these behavioural patterns are 
founded on recommendations/prescriptions/laws 
formulated by state authorities and/or the relevant 
company, which may in turn be influenced by 
observed behaviours.
Language management in 
Public Service B
These recordings are part of the fieldwork under-
taken as part of the DYLAN Project. The 
University of Basel team’s research task was to 
analyse the ways in which companies draw up 
their language management plans, to measure the 
impact of the latter, and to compare them with 
actual practices in these companies.13 These meas-
ures, of which we have seen a hint at the end of 
Section 32.1, are to be distinguished from the 
‘linguistic policies’ of the state or region in which 
the company is based, which are part of the con-
text which will determine the manner in which it 
deals with languages.14 
Let us present here some preliminary findings: 
1 Ethnographic inquiry has revealed an important 
stratification of language management in numer-
ous companies, with rules being established at 
very different hierarchical levels. A company is thus 
not a unique social agent, as handbooks dealing 
with integrated business communication suggest 
(see, for example, Bruhn, 2003). These rules are 
quite consistent when a common strategic vision 
is implemented by the lower echelons (‘A business 
such as ours is, at its core, multilingual’, explains 
the head of Diversity Management of Public 
Service B (the company discussed here) when 
responding to the question of multilingualism in 
that company, and continues: ‘Customers as well 
as colleagues expect us to be able to communicate 
perfectly in the most important languages’ [quo-
tations of the ‘Werkzeugkasten zur Förderung der 
Sprachenvielfalt im Unternehmen’]).15 However, 
significant fractures may appear where language 
management is influenced by contradictory fac-
tors: corporate identity vs local legislation (as 
in the GEMS case); the tendency to choose a 
single language of business vs the diversity of the 
employees’ repertoires (as is true in the case of 
Pharmaceutical Company A which recommends 
English as the business language, but where 
one employee told us ‘ich habe schon x-Mal 
Englischkurs angefangen, und nachher jedes Mal 
habe ich ein Wutanfall gekriegt, muss ich diese 
Scheisse lernen, ich will das nicht und so, und 
dann früher oder später brech ich ab [Mara S.]’);16 
upward accommodation (‘we speak the boss’s 
language’) vs downward accommodation (the 
boss speaks the employees’ language)17, and so 
forth.
2 The distinction between ‘management measures’ 
and ‘practices’ becomes less distinct if one under-
stands by ‘linguistic practices’ not only multilevel 
oral interaction and all forms of written usage 
but also publicity, language selection in Internet 
pages and the company’s semiotic landscape, 
linguistic competence verification practices at the 
hiring stage, and so on. As such, Public Service 
B’s administrative committee’s strategy (‘Our 
business is multilingual’) leads, as we will see 
below, to a series of operational-level practices 
regarding company management (such as the 
elaboration of a ‘linguistic guide’ and of instruc-
tions pertaining to the drafting of publicity within 
an integrated communication plan framework); 
but these ‘practices’ in turn represent a new – 
more direct – form of intervention in employees’ 
behaviour. Personnel management measures, in 
recruitment or higher-level training, as well as 
publicity campaigns, can be considered as practi-
cal output of a company’s linguistic strategy, and 
at the same time perceived by the individuals 
concerned as new forms of intervention, and so 
on. A multimethodological approach guaranteed 
the coherence of our case study – in particular 
when it comes to different forms of interventions 
and practices at different levels – and allowed for 
comparisons between different companies.
What are the impacts of different 
forms of intervention and how 
can they be measured?
In Public Service B, a company from which a 
sample of interactions at the ticket booth has been 
recorded, corporate identity, such as can be observed 
from analyses of official texts, Internet pages and 
discussions with directors, can be summarized as 
‘we are a multilingual company’. Unlike other 
companies, which seek to impose a single language 
of work on their employees, Public Service B 
draws its language management ethos according to 
the template of a multilingual Switzerland. 
National languages are prioritized in internal 
communications;18 to these, English must be added 
when considering external communication with 
foreign customers. This strategic vision has led to 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
484
a series of language management measures. In the 
following, we concentrate on the potential ‘impact’ 
of some of these measures.19 Initially, this term 
designates concrete results, quantifiable outputs 
which implement the respective ‘philosophies’ of 
companies. In the case of Public Service B, these 
are: allocation of necessary resources for the trans-
lation of different texts and web pages (including 
an internal translation service); specification of 
required multilingual skills in job advertisements; 
language classes offered as part of advanced train-
ing programmes; creation of exchange programmes 
between different linguistic regions; creation of 
‘mixed groups’; distribution of languages on the 
site map; and so on. 
Amongst these outputs is a document of par-
ticular importance. A communications firm was 
commissioned to produce a ‘linguistic guide’ for 
the employees, which contains numerous recom-
mendations regarding oral and written usage, 
with, amongst other things, directives concerning 
choice of language at ticket booths, on the tele-
phone, and so forth. This guide is consistent with 
the corporate identity in that it insists on two 
forms of multilingualism.
(a) The institutional multilingualism of the 
company:
• <Le Service public B> communique en trois 
langues. [<Public Service B> communicates in 
three languages]
• Nous communiquons par écrit en français, en 
allemand, en italien et en anglais. [Our written 
communication is in French, German, Italian 
and English]
Ethnographic analysis confirms this: the logo is 
trilingual; the Intranet is trilingual German–
French–Italian; employees are free to choose 
which of the three national languages they prefer 
to use to communicate with the management; as 
such, they receive all internal documents in the 
selected language, from contracts to regulations to 
the internal magazine; most brochures exist in 
three languages, with those written for tourists 
additionally printed in English; and most parts of 
the Internet site are available in German, French, 
Italian and English (Beydoun, 2008).
(b) On individual multilingualism required for the 
accommodation, so far as possible, of the cus-
tomer: 
• On the telephone: ‘Beim ersten Zeichen, dass 
uns jemand nicht versteht, wechseln wir in 
die Sprache des Anrufenden. Wenn das nicht 
möglich ist, sprechen wir Hochdeutsch’. [At the 
first indication of a lack of understanding, we 
switch into the language of the caller. If this is 
not possible, we speak Standard German.] 
This need is reiterated through a whole series of 
measures concerning employees’ multilingual 
skills during hiring and training of personnel. 
An initial analysis of online job offers (24 April 
2008) confirms that Public Service B explicitly 
demands, for a variety of contexts, good linguistic 
skills, particularly when it comes to national 
languages:
• Sie 
sind 
deutscher 
oder 
französischer 
Muttersprache und haben ausgezeichnete 
Kenntnisse der jeweils anderen Sprache. [French 
or German mother-tongue, with excellent knowl-
edge of the other language.]
• Vous maîtrisez la langue française et avez de 
bonnes connaissances d‘allemand (écrit et parlé). 
[You have a solid command of French, with good 
knowledge of German (written and spoken).]
Elsewhere, Public Service B has developed 
linguistic profiles for its personnel:
• Kommunikation und somit auch Fremdsprachen 
gehören zu den Kernkompetenzen des Verkaufs- 
und Zugpersonals. [Communication and thus 
foreign languages are within the basic skills of 
sales and train staff.]
• Dieses Sprachprofil ist Teil des Anforderungsprofils 
der beiden Berufsbilder ‘Zugbegleitung’ und 
‘Verkauf’ der <Public Service B>. [This linguistic 
profile is part of the job specifications for train 
and sales staff in Public Service B.]
The practice of linguistic accommodation of the 
customer, seen above, is thus written into the phi-
losophy of the company. As a result, one can 
observe an important, visible, measurable and 
consistent ‘impact’ of the management of multi-
lingualism in Public Service B.
However, does the behaviour illustrated at the 
outset truly represent the impact of the multilin-
gual philosophy of the company? This can still be 
doubted to some extent. To begin with, this behav-
iour may not be so much part of the output as 
defined above, but part of the real effects (out-
comes) of measures taken by the company in the 
field of behavioural planning and/or the represen-
tations of the relevant agents. If it is relatively 
easy to find indicators by which to measure 
output, it is by no means equally straightforward 
to do so in relation to effects as exemplified by the 
indicators mentioned below. A combination of 
methods – analysis of semi-directed interviews 
and different types of discourse (brochures, web-
sites) for representations, participatory observa-
tion, recording and analysis of oral interaction 
corpora, etc., – for various practices, must be 
grappled with. These indicators are very diverse, 
such as the circulation of different versions of 
brochures and their availability at points of sale, 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
485
the number of readers per Internet-site version, 
employees’ real-time usage in the situations out-
lined in the guide, the actual linguistic compe-
tence of the employees and its outcome in salary 
terms, the dominance of German, the reduction of 
French and, particularly, Italian to minority status 
within mixed groups, and so forth. In this case, 
one would have to demonstrate that the cause–ef-
fect link between these behavioural patterns and 
the ‘Linguistic Guide’ is at least plausible. This is 
the case in call centres where the employees’ lin-
guistic behaviour is monitored continuously, thus 
raising their awareness of the rules and regulations 
imposed by the company (Duchêne, pers comm). 
As far as we could observe, no such monitoring of 
the application of the guidelines takes place in 
Public Service B.
The ‘bottom-up’ perspective
Having said the above, it should be noted that 
company interventions are far from always being 
transparent. Often, they seem to reveal a tacit 
shared knowledge; everyone ‘knows’ that a rule 
exists, even if it is not written. Frequently, deci-
sion-making processes are opaque – in that they 
obfuscate responsibilities – or are simply unknown. 
This shows that not all of the recurrent practices 
which can be observed within companies can be 
attributed to interventions ‘from upstairs’. Often, 
they represent social behaviour patterns co-
constructed by the agents, reacting in a way which 
eludes managerial interventions. The relation 
between possible interventions and recurrent prac-
tices must be tackled ‘the other way up’, as it 
were, by describing regularities in practices before 
asking whether these are themselves generated by 
the internalization of ‘hidden’ interventions or by 
the ‘free’ movement of extant social forces even 
if these seem to conform to the company’s 
philosophy.
To illustrate this, in Example 2 we analyse a 
second oral interaction at a ticket booth between 
an employee, who will here be named Studer, and 
a Brazilian customer: 
In an extreme exolinguistic situation (where 
there is no common variety), the buyer and the seller 
negotiate the choice of language at the beginning of 
the interaction by laying out the possible resources 
Example 2
Studer
guete tag
good day
Customer
pardon
Studer
pardon ? Oui oui ?
pardon ? yes yes
Customer
je parle português
I speak Portuguese
Studer
oh je parle pas português ((final s pronounced))
oh, I don’t speak Portuguese
Customer
Brasilia
Studer
okey. italien ou français oui oui ?=
ok, Italian or French
Customer
=<duos passagem para Freiburg deutsch>.
Two tickets to Freiburg german
Studer
Freiburg Deutschland jä okey. (22) voilà, si vous,
faire la carte à la machine? oui. (3) va bene. (5)
c’est sans une code. vous fais ((sic)) la signature
après. (2) non non il va revenir. ((client holds
credit card instead of letting it go)) Si vous fais
votre signature pour cinquante huit ?
Freiburg Germany yeah ok … here, could you put the credit card into the 
machine? yes … that’s good … it is without code … you sign afterwards … no 
no, it will get back … can you sign for fifty eight?
Customer
((signs)) (13)
(....)
Studer
voilà. il prossimo treno (.) binario cinco hm?
Dodici diciotto.
That’s good … the next train … track five yes? at eighteen past twelve
Customer
(3) merci. [obrigado].
Thank you (in French) thank you (in Portuguese)

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
486
(Portuguese, Italian, French, German), but with no 
choice being made. Effectively, Studer at first 
ascertains the impossibility of choosing the cus-
tomer’s language; however, rather than following 
the ‘guide’ (‘if you cannot speak the customer’s 
language, choose Standard German’), he proposes 
two Romance languages between which a choice 
can be made. The customer responds with a mix of 
simplified Portuguese and German. This multilin-
gual communication strategy succeeds; Studer 
confirms the destination in German and prints the 
ticket. Then, he asks the client to place his credit 
card into the machine in highly approximated 
French, confirms the action, this time in Italian 
(‘va bene’), continues the explanation in simpli-
fied French and then oversees the act of signing. 
Later on, Studer gives further information on 
the next train in a mix of French (‘voilà’), Italian 
(‘il prossimo treno/binario/dodici diciotto’) and 
Spanish (‘cinco). At the point of acknowledge-
ment, the customer combines French and 
Portuguese, and Studer reacts with a juxtaposition 
of German and French (‘bitteschön, service’) and 
concludes the interaction with approximated 
Italian (‘molto grazio). 
How is this interaction to be interpreted? One 
of the first things that must be said is that it is a 
successful interaction, as Studer himself confirms; 
the customer buys the desired ticket. This success 
is clearly due, at least in part, to mutual knowledge 
of a simple and recurrent script (mention of 
the destination, payment by credit card), but 
also to the optimal employment of a package of 
verbal and non-verbal means which the agents 
have at their disposal. The mention of a given 
language does not lead to its exclusive usage, 
but serves as a contextualization cue to flag its 
pertinence. In fact, the mutually accepted solution 
is the multilingual mode. Furthermore, as Studer 
mobilizes his resources, he does so according to a 
subjacent representation that Romance languages 
are intercomprehensible; at the same time, 
he glosses over the boundaries between the lan-
guages by speaking – consciously or otherwise – 
some kind of ‘pan-Romance’. Studer’s behaviour 
and representations do not correspond to one 
another entirely, but their self-clarification is 
mutual. 
The discussion with Studer reveals a high 
degree of metalinguistic consciousness. He is 
clearly proud of his multilingualism, which repre-
sents, in a workplace context which he describes 
as characterized by extreme linguistic diversity, a 
tool indispensable for his work. Thanks to his 
large repertoire, he is also able to help others. 
Going beyond the company’s basic instructions, 
he has developed a package of strategies used to 
communicate successfully. Amongst these strate-
gies, one can note not only the use of English as a 
‘default’ language but also recourse to the inter-
comprehensibility of Romance languages. His 
responses regarding ‘language mixes’ are for the 
most part ambivalent; he recognizes his alterna-
tion between French and the Alemannic dialect 
with Alsatians, and uses lexical code-switching 
and translinguistic wordings when he speaks 
Dutch.20 However, what is most striking about 
Studer’s representations is a perspective which is 
far more differentiated from the employment of 
multilingual repertoires than that which is found in 
the company’s documentation, which limits agents 
to the choice of one language or another. 
Comparing what is said with what is done, it can 
be stated that Studer is far more ‘multilingual’ in 
his behaviour, in the sense that he mixes more 
languages with ease, than he is conscious of him-
self – and that he goes far beyond the guidelines of 
the company contained in its official documents.
One of the things we were interested in know-
ing was whether or not the recurrent behaviour 
patterns observed during the sales interactions at 
the Basel ticket booth represent the impact of the 
company’s language management, or a social 
practice freely developed by the agents in 
question. In order to answer this question, we had 
to consider the significance of the company’s 
language management and its impact. We can 
return to this question by making the following 
statement: the recurrently observable patterns in 
our ticket booth interaction corpus are very likely 
a reflection, or a manifestation, of a ‘multilingual 
philosophy’ on the part of the company, which is 
Studer
[bitteschön]. Service
you’re welcome (German) you’re welcome (French)
Customer
obrigado (h)
thank you (in Portuguese)
Studer
molto grazio. ((sic))
thank you (in Italian)
Studer
((to the researcher)) es goht mit händ und füess aber
es goht
it works, with hands and feet, but it works

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
487
laid out in a ‘linguistic guide’ recommending 
certain forms of behaviour and, doubtless, training 
courses which seek to disseminate these forms of 
behaviour to newly-recruited ticketing staff. 
Moreover, the regular behaviour of employees, on 
both individual and collective bases, can be 
explained by the internalization and transforma-
tion of these instructions within forms of repre-
sentation and lines of argument which are shared 
between station colleagues. The importance of 
recruitment and internal linguistic training poli-
cies indicates that they explicitly take into account 
the key role which employees’ individual multilin-
gualism plays in the enactment of a multilingual 
philosophy, which is, for the most part, territorial 
in the sense of the Swiss territoriality principle of 
languages.
From a conceptual point of view, this reinforces 
the position of those who suggest that the classical 
notion of competence be replaced by that of lin-
guistic repertoire, or even verbal resources (for 
references, see Moore et. al., 2007). The term 
‘resources’ designates an indefinite and open 
package of grammatical and syntactic (and, of 
course, paralinguistic) microsystems, partially 
stabilized and available to both speaker and inter-
locutor. These microsystems can stem from differ-
ent varieties of one language or from different 
languages, as well as diverse discursive experi-
ences. They are shaped like semi-organized sets of 
often heterogeneous means, similar to a handy-
man’s toolbox. Some are prefabricated and 
memorized, whilse others are innovated utterance-
creation procedures, amongst which can be found 
heuristic means designed either to reinforce 
already available communicative resources or to 
develop hypotheses pertaining to the interpreta-
tion of other languages. In other words, they allow 
the speaker to create and play around – to conduct 
a verbal activity in a particular context, and thus 
to take risks (Lüdi and Py, 2009), a wonderful 
example of which we have seen in Example 2.
32.4  THE MANAGEMENT OF 
MULTILINGUALISM IN AND BY 
HIGHER EDUCATION INSTITUTIONS
To show the indirect relations between linguistic 
strategies and practices, the need to introduce 
stratification between the different levels implied, 
and the need to distinguish between overt policies 
and covert policies, we will here cite an example 
of research conducted in Lausanne, taken from 
the DYLAN subproject on institutions of higher 
education. This aims to analyse the effects of 
multilingualism on the processes of constructing 
and transmitting knowledge, the comparison of 
these multilingual practices in the representations 
of the different agents implied, and the alignment 
of these practices and representations with lin-
guistic strategies put in place by higher education 
institutions.
Language strategies and planning 
at university and faculty levels
The example to be analysed is taken from a mar-
keting course given at the Faculty of Commercial 
Higher Education at the University of Lausanne. 
The University of Lausanne has recently pre-
scribed a number of precise rules pertaining to 
teaching languages at all levels of the syllabus; the 
university’s official language is French. Tuition 
can be given entirely in other languages, but this 
is restricted to teaching and examinations con-
ducted by language departments at the Faculty of 
Arts and language tuition in other faculties, aside 
from French.
The linguistic policy of the University of 
Lausanne can be summarized as follows:
• Bachelor’s degree level: first year Bachelor’s 
teaching is obligatorily in French. If the teaching 
language is, in theory, French, courses can be 
given in other languages on a one-off basis from 
the second year onwards, insofar as the study 
path of the preceding year (or years) ensures that 
the student can acquire the necessary linguistic 
skills, according to the required level. Exam 
papers can be submitted, at the student’s discre-
tion, either in French or in the teaching language 
(with some exceptions).
• Master’s degree level: faculties can choose the 
teaching and examination language and must 
clearly communicate their choice to the stu-
dents of each subject. However, in the spirit 
of encouraging multilingualism, it is advised 
that all programmes of study include multiple 
teaching languages, or ‘language modules’ for 
which the language is different to the teaching 
language.
• At faculty level, similar regulations apply.
As such, through the prism of the Bologna system, 
the University of Lausanne gives clear instruc-
tions, most notably in relation to the Master’s 
degree, which is of particular interest to us here; 
all Master’s degrees from Lausanne must have a 
multilingual component, reflecting the value-
added status that such a component affords to 
candidates in the job market and aiming to imbue 
the Lausanne Master’s degree with a unique value 
when compared with the monolingual default. 
The university sees this as a mark of quality to be 
promoted alongside its faculties.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
488
Discrepancy between declared 
strategies and implicit strategies
However, despite these directives, certain Master’s 
degrees are entirely in English (finance, political 
economics), with others partially in English (man-
agement), and thus show the linguistic strategy’s 
areas of inefficacy – the pockets of resistance 
which elude intervention, responding to different 
rationales which are difficult to tame. In this 
sense, one can describe the result (output) of these 
directives as partial. Beyond the output/results of 
the recommendations made at the institutional 
level, of which direct traces can be seen in the 
documentation produced by the faculties (teach-
ers’ and students’ linguistic requirements, multi-
lingual courses, student information, etc.), it is the 
real consequences/outcomes which are of more 
interest to us. When considering the offerings 
(‘outputs’) available, we can ask ourselves to what 
extent agents benefit from them, how they work, 
what is their quality, etc., by employing qualita-
tive (discourse analysis, conversational analysis, 
etc.) and quantitative (number of courses offered 
in other languages, number of students enrolled in 
each course, etc.) methods. We should therefore 
question the extent to which language policies 
give rise to practical consequences, since their 
role largely seems to be the provision of a sym-
bolic discourse, and some effects for which they 
are credited may be due to other causes.
Amongst the other Master’s degree courses 
described as multilingual in the Faculty of 
Commercial Higher Education’s documentation, 
certain courses are nevertheless exclusively mono-
lingual (i.e. English) in terms of practice, and 
show a clear discrepancy between the Faculty’s 
declared linguistic policy and the implicit policy, 
according to the effective consequences of the 
declared policies in their practical applications. As 
such, it is important to consider each level of the 
stratification outlined above.
Individual representations
Explicit language policies can give rise to varied 
language use and individual representations, more 
or less in accordance with these policies, and 
many unique language strategies and reflections 
on language use can be found. We will here cite 
the case put forward by one of the teachers. Aware 
of the different levels of linguistic policy on the 
one hand and of effective policies and practices on 
the other, he has constructed his own language 
policy which he has developed further in a refer-
ence book. In its own way, this constitutes a theo-
rization of the impact of linguistic policies on 
linguistic practices in the field of management 
and marketing. In particular, he has investigated 
the question of the influence of different lan-
guages on policies and strategies within this field, 
and has notably published a series of reference 
books which integrate the comparative dimension. 
Additionally, he is directing a thesis which con-
cerns the influence of Chinese on management 
styles such as hierarchy, etc., and on certain 
aspects of marketing. He cites a particular exam-
ple which has led him to acknowledge the exist-
ence of a conceptual-level difference resulting 
from the language factor, with the vocabulary 
being heterogeneous and translations being only 
partially possible. He gives the example of an 
accounting concept which he presented in French, 
in an introductory course, and which he thought 
he knew the meaning of until the day that a 
German-speaking student questioned his explana-
tion, according to the translation of this concept 
into German. He realized that the interpretation of 
this concept diverged significantly according to 
the language into which the concept was trans-
lated. More generally, languages exercise, accord-
ing to him, an influence over each discipline, and 
in particular his discipline of marketing. He also 
maintains that in his L2 English courses, market-
ing work prompts him to focus even more on the 
question of linguistic and cultural diversity, and he 
describes multilingualism as an ‘unexploited 
resource’, most notably in the institutional context 
within which he works, where knowledge of con-
ceptual differences is only considered to be a ‘soft 
skill’, and therefore peripheral. In acknowledging 
this impact of language and culture on knowledge, 
he identifies at the same time the limits of this 
impact, especially in his field, management. He 
considered that management is relatively neutral 
when it comes to language differences, compared, 
for instance, to law or accounting.21 This is due, 
according to him, to its essentially monolingual 
and monocultural character. The knowledge and 
know-how pertaining to management were essen-
tially developed in the USA, with other languages 
adapting concepts without changing them at the 
most basic level. Languages would be of issue in 
the application of these terms, but not in their 
conceptual contents. Moreover, he asserts that he 
does not have to resort to a specific way of think-
ing to be able to present his material in one lan-
guage or another, as his own teaching practices 
have always been truly bilingual – in that he has 
always taught the material in English and French. 
He has produced a ‘theory’, which is not short of 
contradictions, but which nevertheless has the 
merit of thematizing the question of languages in 
given disciplines. 
What is of even greater interest to us is the way 
in which he thematizes the paradox arising from 
the double requirement of responding to the 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
489
challenges of globalization (posed by English) 
and diversification (posed by multilingualism), 
and his attempt to respond to this with a solution 
which he terms ‘thick standardization’ (an expres-
sion he himself derived from the anthropologist 
Clifford Geertz’s ‘thick description’)22 – a way of 
articulating both unity and diversity. For him, 
singing the praises of radical differences and 
denying the advantages of standardization is an 
undesirable path, the danger being that one can 
fall into a ‘retro’ or passé defence of diversity 
which may often be construed as pure nostalgia. 
On the contrary, ‘thick standardization’ focuses on 
the complex dynamic between diversity and stand-
ardization and on the conception of the different 
within the homogeneous, the diversity within 
uniqueness. From the outset, the link between the 
standard and the desire to reach a minimal thresh-
old of mutual comprehensibility must be made 
according to the detection of deceptive standardi-
zation – the failure to comprehend even when you 
think you do. As such, English as ‘the only lan-
guage’ leads to the false impression of a shared 
meaning. Nevertheless, beyond a negation of the 
standard, which always seems to assert itself in a 
globalized world, a new form of standardization 
must be sought out, a ‘thick standardization’ 
which contains traces of multilingual compari-
sons. It consists more precisely of the examination 
of a subject in a multilingual context in order to 
increase its common identification (i.e. the sense 
truly shared, or not shared, by speakers of different 
languages), to find sense configurations produced 
by particular languages and their influence on dif-
ferent aspects of the research process. As such, one 
can glean from ‘thick standardization’ a better 
comprehension of the subjects of discourse and, at 
the same time, the phenomena which embed them-
selves within them, as the description is richer in 
meaning and the shared and non-shared aspects of 
this meaning are clearly stated and understood. 
Finally, we attempt to see how the ‘statements’ 
from these discussions come into play in his 
teaching.
An example of a multilingual course
The example which we take relates to teaching 
conducted in English, the L2 of both teacher and 
students. The example comes from a lecture given 
to an audience of around 80 students of the 
Faculty of Commercial Higher Education enrolled 
in the Master of Science in Management degree, 
entitled ‘International Marketing’. This degree 
lasts two years and is bilingual to the extent that 
the obligatory teaching takes place in English and 
elective modules are taught partly in English and 
partly in French. The aim of the course is 
to familiarise students with the principal situations 
and the principal choices of international opera-
tions and marketing policy which companies are 
faced with in a global environment, to provide 
basic knowledge regarding the influence of culture 
and language on different aspects of marketing 
and to develop precise perspectives on selected 
themes within the field of international marketing 
management (Müller et al., 2008).
This objective makes reference to a particular-
ity of international marketing, as the teacher 
interprets it, in that linguistic and cultural diver-
sity are part of the material under consideration. 
In particular, the aim is to understand the influ-
ence of different languages on the marketing 
policy to be adopted, in order to sell a given prod-
uct anywhere in the world. In this sense, the ques-
tion of linguistic diversity is a disciplinary issue 
within the course.
Throughout this extract (Table 32.2) the central 
purpose of the teacher’s presentation is to explain 
the influence of local taste on consumption pat-
terns in different regions/cultures. In order to 
achieve this, he initiates a presentation which can 
be sliced into three parts: in the first (1–16), (the 
teacher US introduces the new topic (local taste 
for similar items) and goes on to ask if an explana-
tion has already been given (no response from the 
students), alluding to the subject of süss vs sucré. 
In the second part (17–40), US presents two 
examples (one linguistic, one cultural) linked to 
the topic by again taking the terms süss and sucré, 
and adding to them sweet, and then develops the 
opposition between sweet and salty. He then 
details how these examples are to be dealt with 
and concludes in the third part (41). Our interest 
in this sequence is to observe how US develops his 
topic, which subjects he chooses as examples and 
what they are like, as well as to gauge the different 
types of strategies he uses in order to understand 
if – and how – multilingualism is exploited as a 
resource. In order to do this, we return to the 
second part of his presentation. 
In 17–18, US introduces the lexemes süss, sucré 
and sweet; the example he chooses to illustrate 
his topic ‘local taste for similar items’ is thus mul-
tilingual and thematizes a possible difference 
between these lexemes in each language (modal-
izing pure lexical equivalents by recategorizing 
with more or less). Having introduced the idea of 
‘positive or negative judgment’ regarding sweet 
and süss (19), he again introduces the notions of 
‘figurative sense’ and ‘proper sense’, which he 
applies to the English lexeme (my sweet darling) 
(20) to demonstrate the fact that the figurative 
sense of sweet within the given expression is not 
translatable as sucré in French. This is clearly a 
metalinguistic treatment of a multilingual example. 

Table 32.2 Course sequence 
Line
Speaker
Sequence
1
US
local taste/ . for similar items:\ ok\
2
...
3
US
we all know that products can be: . made with: . a little a content of sugar/
4
...
5
...
6
US
maybe I (already) explained this about süß:/ .. ((French pronunciation)) <versus> sucré
7
US
did I:/
8
...
9
US
no/
10
(1.1)
11
US
or you do not remember/
12
(0.8)
13
US
or I really did not do it/
14
...
15
US
((quick and low)) <ok>
16
(0.8)
17
US
so ((laughter)) let me/ .. if-&if you take/ .. what are/ pure . lexical equivalents\ . more or 
less\ (1.2)
sucré:/ sü:ß/ (2.0) and sweet\ . ((lower)) <ok\>
18
(2.1)
19
US
so there is a POsitive .. value judgement . ON .. sweet/ . and süß\ &in german/ . and in 
english 
you have 
a positive value judgement/ aspiration?)) which is indicated by the FIGUrative sense\
20
US
((quick and low)) <ok>&you have the proper sense/ . and you have the figurative-&figurative is/
((aspiration)) when you say 
for instance/ .((slower)) <my sweet darling>\ . ((quieter)) <ok\>
21
...
22
US
and I say it in french/ . you-&you can not say/ . ((slower)) <mon chéri sucré>\ (1.0) ou 
ma
((pronunciation of the fem.
ending)) s<chérie:>\ ((aspiration?)) you can say/ . ((slower)) <ma DOUC:E . chérie>\ 
((lowering of
voice)) <for instance>
23
...
24
US
looks a little bit nineteenth century\
25
S
((students laugh))
26
US
borderline\ ok/
27
US
(aspiration)) but typically/ (1.4) you have a taste/ (0.9) ok/ .. you have two sort of taste 
(so) very
basic/
28
US
(1.0) ((writes on board))
29
US
you have salty/ (1.3) and you have sweet\
30
US
(0.5) ((writes on board))
31
US
ok\
32
US
(0.5) ((writes on board))
33
US
and in in many countries/ (0.8) there can be some overlap\
34
(0.5)
35
US
so you can A:DD/ (0.5) to . a salty . dish (0.7) some sweet ingredients\
36
(0.8)
37
US
and in SOME other countries the two universes ... ARE .. fully separated\
38
(0.5)
39
US
so people DO not tend/ ... to mix/ (0.6) sweet . and salty/ .. euh:: items\ food items\ . ok\
40
(0.25)
41
US
((clicks tongue)) ((aspiration)) and the la-&the- ... the next you know\ . its local taste
for similar items/ O:R/ .
different use\ [...]
Sequence: US, teacher; S; students.

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
491
However, one should note that, until this point, the 
multilingual dimension is only mentioned in 
citation, and that, where it is used as an example, 
it is not used as a means.23 After a joke (24–26), 
US creates a topical break by introducing two 
sorts of taste (sweet and salty, 29); sweet is no 
longer considered in opposition to its French and 
German counterparts, but in opposition to salty; 
the treatment method is no longer metalinguistic. 
In the final part of the presentation, US presents 
a final eventuality (the overlaps which can 
exist between sweet and salty (33–35), then the 
opposition of the two tastes (37–39)). Without 
transition – and without leaving room for 
questions – US closes the topic and passes quickly 
onto the next.
Code-switching as an object vs 
code-switching as a resource
The degree of multilingualism in this example is 
fairly low and declines in two ways – in terms of 
translinguistic marks (all forms of traces of L1 in 
L2 utterances, see Lüdi, 2006) and in the subject 
matter considered. In this episode, there are traces 
of the teacher’s L1 (French) in his teaching in L2. 
But they belong mainly to the exolinguistic-
monolingual type (Lüdi and Py, 2003), i.e. they 
consist of an involuntary incomplete inhibition of 
his L1 when using L2 in a monolingual mode 
(Grosjean, 2001). Nevertheless, US’s discourse 
seems to exhibit a number of translingustic marks 
which suggest a degree of multilingualism in the 
classroom session, and that this impacts upon the 
manner in which knowledge is imparted and 
developed – even if we find no example of code-
switching in the actual organization of the dis-
course. First, some of the explanations provided 
by the teacher make use of simple grammatical 
structures and a basic lexicon. As such, wordings 
and rewordings (see, for instance, 39) are charac-
terized by a certain simplification of relatively 
complex content which might be beneficial for the 
mediation of, and access to, the latter. Secondly, 
there seem to be L1 calque phenomena on L2 in 
the syntax and general organization of the dis-
course (such as the introduction of the topics), 
according to the information provided by some L1 
English teachers. This could also have an impact 
at the level of intercomprehension, insomuch as this 
calque could facilitate the transmission of informa-
tion and the francophone students’ comprehension.24
The next step in our research regarding this 
practice will compare the explanations provided 
in this class delivered in the L2 and those provided 
by the same teacher in the L1 equivalent (‘control 
course’), as well as a more in-depth study on 
possible calques using anglophone informants’ 
information.
Beyond the occurrence of transfers from the L1 
to the L2 and vice versa, this extract – as well as 
the practice from which it is taken – is character-
ized by a relatively low degree of multilingualism. 
For instance, Code-switching, seen as a practice 
exploiting two (or more) languages to communi-
cate and functioning in a multilingual mode as a 
bi-/multi-lingual repertoire resource (see: Auer, 
2000; Grosjean, 2001; Lüdi and Py, 2003), is not 
used in the course in question. Other languages 
intervene, but principally in the form of what we 
called lexical code-switches and translinguistic 
wordings in Section 32-3 and which Auer (2000) 
calls transfers – i.e isolated units inserted into the 
English discourse and taken as exemplifications or 
explanations. In this case, these other languages 
are not used as means of communication, instead 
remaining at the level of citation.
At first blush, then, there is no exploitation of 
multilingual strategies as didactic interaction 
resources insofar as the interlocutors do not 
explicitly make use of bi-/multi-lingual resources 
such as Code-Switching. Multilingualism is not so 
much exploited as a (communicative) strategy, but 
the (didactic) strategy makes use of multilingual-
ism as a subject.
However, in the discussion, whereas multilin-
gualism is stated to be an ‘unexploited resource’, 
there is a very narrow notion of ‘resource’. The 
focus is put primarily on languages as subjects of 
study which serve to facilitate marketing (con-
crete policies), and less so on the role of lan-
guages/language in the conceptual construction 
and knowledge-transmission within the discipline 
(Berthoud 2008b, Berthoud 2008c). This could be 
directly linked to some observations made about 
the recorded sequences, notably the disconnect 
between the linguistic (and cultural) dimension 
and the disciplinary dimension. The teacher him-
self picks up on this disconnect regarding the 
students’ acquisition. According to him (and the 
exam results), students do not manage to integrate 
the interlinguistic and intercultural dimension 
within their marketing knowledge and know-how. 
The students do not just appear to be unsettled by 
the polysemy which multilingualism creates 
(where they would prefer a ‘univocal truth’), but 
also seem to not to be developed or ‘sophisticated’ 
enough (or aware enough) of multilingual prac-
tice. One of the conditions under which multilin-
gualism could succeed is therefore, according to 
the teacher, a more rigorous selection of students. 
The poverty of code-switches observed in his 
practice and, hence, the lack of full exploitation of 
multilingualism as a resource or a communicative 
strategy could be explained by his statements. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
492
And in this sense, his teaching method appears to 
be the direct application of his stated linguistic 
policy. This is a remarkable fact if one considers 
the number of other instances in the DYLAN 
project in which effective practice largely goes 
beyond its potential for clarification, in which 
agents exploit the multilingual factor in ways far 
more varied than they think and say that they do, 
and in doing so shows considerable discrepancies 
between practices and representations. Here, the 
exploitation of the multilingual dimension – that 
which is theorized by the teacher for his 
subject – is seriously limited in the construction of 
didactic discourse and, evidently, in students’ 
knowledge construction. This is as though, in 
some way, its explicit and controlled representa-
tions trap it within a highly rigid schema and 
prevent it from resorting to other, more spontane-
ous and varied strategies in which multilingualism 
would be exploited as a means and not just as a 
subject under consideration.
From this we can see the importance of achiev-
ing practices in which multilingualism is effec-
tively exploited as a resource in a multilingual 
mode, capable of a richer theorization and leaving 
room for creativity. ‘Emergent’ rules guide these 
practices while at the same time emerging from 
these practices. And it is in this sense that we speak 
about a new ‘bottom-up’ type of linguistic policy, 
directly inspired by observed practices, avoiding 
the imposition of simplified schemata and instead 
fuelled by the complexity of practices, in order to 
be able, in turn, to impact upon them. This is what 
we converge upon as one of the principal condi-
tions of an impact which is both possible and per-
tinent to linguistic policies regarding practice.
32.5 CONCLUSIONS
This Chapter was not intended to give a compre-
hensive overview of language policies and strate-
gies, but rather to illustrate one possible approach 
to the field by way of a recent research project 
dealing with some key questions in the context of 
the management of linguistic diversity in compa-
nies and institutions of higher education. 
It has become evident that the management of 
multilingualism has many different forms in the 
business and higher education worlds. And it is only 
partially the result of explicit management meas-
ures. These, and more implicit regulations  – such 
as the decision of a leader of a laboratory, which 
can only just be considered as principally German-
speaking, to privilege the use of that language, 
so requiring the whole team to ‘juggle with 
languages’, in the name of efficiency and the qual-
ity of the work – are essentially based on the 
representations of the agents. First, the advantages 
and disadvantages of the exploitation of multilin-
gual repertoires, conceived of as shared resources, 
in the same agents’ discourses can as a result be 
gauged. However, the work of the linguist need 
not stop there. The linguist cannot limit him- or 
herself to finding statements made by the agents 
which the latter more or less already know. It is 
often only the detailed analysis of these agents’ 
practices which reveal the schemas and methods 
of which they make use (but of which they are 
not conscious) and which uncover the cognitive 
and strategic advantages of these multilingual 
practices which may result. 
Indeed, our first analyses allowed us to begin to 
understand the great richness contained in the 
self-regulation of the culture of multilingual com-
munication, provided that this is preferred or at 
least tolerated by those in charge. It not only 
became clear that a ‘multilingual philosophy’ con-
tributes greatly to the emergence of such practices 
but also that it cannot be imposed in a ‘top-down’ 
fashion, instead needing to develop from the 
‘bottom up’. Institutions and businesses can sig-
nificantly contribute to the creation of a frame-
work that favours the creation of a multilingual 
microclimate: for example, by demanding multi-
lingual skills, forming linguistically-mixed groups, 
not to mention convincing those in charge that 
their commercial and research success will see 
sustainable benefit from it.
NOTES
1 Québec: Loi sur la langue officielle [Official 
Language Law] (Bill 22, adopted in 1974 by the 
National Assembly of Quebec, making French the 
official language of the province).
Canada: Official Languages Law (1969, enacted 
15 September 1988, with the objective of consolidat-
ing the equality of French and English within the 
federal institutions).
France: Toubon Law (adopted 23 February 1994 
by the Council of Ministers, modified 27 July 
1994 – it intervenes in five domains–namely, the 
workplace, consumption (the displaying of goods), 
teaching, audiovisual media (programming and 
advertisements), and conferences and the like (Calvet, 
1996: 70).
2 Fishman (1974): ‘The term language planning 
refers to the organized pursuit of solutions to lan-
guage problems, typically at the national level’. 
Cooper (1989): ‘The deliberate efforts to influence 
the behavior of others with respect to the acquisi-
tion, structure, or functional allocation of their 
language codes’. Schiffman (1996): ‘Language plan-
ning involves formal and informal activities to change 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
493
the way people use language’. Eastman (1983): lan-
guage planning refers to ‘decision-making that goes 
into determining what language use is appropriate in 
particular speech communities’; it ‘looks at the 
choices available to a speech community and at pos-
sible recommendations of language policy for adop-
tion by that community’ and ‘has to do with the way 
people’s ideas about language are coordinated’.
3 For instance, resurrection of a dead language 
(Hebrew), dialect selection (Francien –> French) or 
dialect mixing (Rumantch Grischun) [the examples 
are not part of the quoted table AB/GL].
4 Abandonment of Latin in favour of European 
languages at the beginning of the Modern Era; 
prescription of French as the language of jurisdiction 
by François I; choice of High German for the Bible 
translations of Luther and Zwingli; assertion of local 
languages in the Baltic countries since the achieve-
ment of autonomy; selection of a variety as a 
national language (‘language of a political, social, 
cultural entity’), official language (‘what govern-
ments use to do their business’) as compared to 
vernacular languages (‘first languages of people 
socially or politically dominated by a group with a 
different language’) (UNESCO, 1951: 689–90).
5 Academies have been instituted to guard the 
avenues of their languages, to retain fugitives, 
and repulse invaders; but their vigilance and 
activity have hitherto been vain; sounds are too 
volatile and subtile for legal restraints; to enchain 
syllables, and to lash the wind, are equally the under-
takings of pride, unwilling to measure its desires by 
its strength. (Samuel Johnson, Preface to the 
Dictionary)
6 For example, ‘Whenever possible, use plurals 
(people, they) and feminine pronouns, rather than 
only masculine pronouns and ‘pseudo-generics’ such 
as man, unless referring specifically to males’ 
(Linguistic Society of America, Guidelines for nonsex-
ist language).
 7 Fishman (1969) discusses the relation between 
the linguistic background of a country and the type 
of language planning in place when selecting 
‘national’ or ‘official’ languages
 8 For example, linguistic unity based on a 
foreign language has been described as ‘cultural 
abortion’ (Diop, 1974).
 9 For example, in January/February 1997, the 
US Congress discussed the Bill Emerson English 
Language Empowerment Act containing the proposi-
tion that ‘English must become our official language’ 
[Congressional Record: 7 January and 5 February 
1997 (Extensions)]. Note that the US Constitution 
does not specify any official language.
10 In a frequently quoted paper, Landry and 
Bourhis (1997: 25) proposed a new approach for the 
study of multilingual and polyglossic societies: the 
analysis of the linguistic landscape: “The landscape 
of public road signs, advertising billboards, street 
names, place names, commercial shop signs, and 
public signs on government buildings combines to 
form the linguistic landscape of a given territory, 
region or urban agglomeration.” (cf. Gorter 2006; 
Backhaus, 2007; Shohamy and Gorter 2008 for bib-
liographical overviews). 
11 ‘Public Service A is a multilingual company 
and encourages multilingualism in the workplace. In 
its internal linguistic provisions, it offers internal lan-
guage courses as well as the possibility to work in 
other linguistic regions’.
12 The DYLAN Project is an integrated project 
from the Sixth Framework Programme, Priority 7, 
‘Citizens and governance in a knowledge based soci-
ety’, with 19 partners, from 12 countries. It addresses 
the core issue underlying topic 3.3.1 – whether and, 
if so, how a European knowledge-based society 
designed to ensure economic competitiveness and 
social cohesion can be created despite the fact that, 
following enlargement, the European Union is lin-
guistically more diverse than ever before.
Table 32.3 Types of selection of official languages in developing nations
Type of language situation
A-modal 
Uni-modal 
Multi-modal
Examples 
Indonesia
Israel
Indonesia
Cameroon
Thailand
Pakistan
Philippines
Somalia
Sri Lanka
Tanzania
Ethiopia
Malaysia
Perceived sociocultural 
integration
No integrating great tradition 
at the national level
One great tradition at the 
national level
Several great traditions 
seeking separate socio 
political recognition
Selection of national 
language
Governed by considerations 
of political integration: 
nationism
Governed by considerations 
of authenticity: nationalism
Governed by need to 
compromise between 
political integration and 
separate authenticities
Language planning concerns
Minor: exonormative 
standardization of LWC
Modernization of traditional 
language
Modernization of several 
traditional languages

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
494
the methodology it represents have gained currency 
in the social sciences and beyond. Today, ‘thick des-
cription’ is used in a variety of fields, including the 
type of literary criticism known as New Historicism.
23 Here, we observe transfers, but not code-
switching, according to the typology of Auer 
(2000).
24 On the other hand, the same phenomenon 
could prove to be an obstacle for non-francophone 
students.
REFERENCES
Alexander, N. (2006) Language Education Policy, National 
and Sub-National Identities in South Africa. Strasbourg: 
Council of Europe.
Auer, P. (2000) ‘A conversation analytic approach to code-
switching and transfer’, in W. Li (ed.), The Bilingualism 
Reader. London: Routledge. pp.166–187. 
Backhaus, P. (2007) Linguistic Landscapes. A Comparative 
Study of Urban Multilingualism in Tokyo. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.
Barère, B. (1794) Rapport du Comité de salut public sur les 
idiomes du 8 pluviôse an II. [Report of the Public Safety 
Committee on languages, 8th day of Pluviôse, Year II.] 
Barth, L. A. (2008) Gestion des compétences linguistiques 
asymétriques dans l’interaction. L’exemple d’une gare 
internationale. Bâle, Institut d’études françaises et franco-
phones. Mémoire de licence.
Beacco, J.-C. (2004) Agir pour le plurilinguisme en Europe : 
Les profils nationaux des politiques linguistiques éduca-
tives. [Acting for multilingualism in Europe: national pro-
files of educational linguistic politics’] http://www.ciep.fr/
courrieleuro/2004/0204_beacco.htm. 
Berthoud, A.-C. (2008a) ‘Le projet DYLAN ‘Dynamiques des 
langues et gestion de la diversité.’ Un aperçu’, 
Sociolinguistica, 22: 171–185.
Berthoud, A.-C. (2008b) ‘Regards croisés sur un plurilinguisme 
à inventer’, in Cahiers de l’ILSL 23. Université de Lausanne.
Berthoud, A.-C. (2008c): ‘Mehrsprachigkeit als Kaleidoskop 
des Wissens’, in G.Lüdi, K. Seelmann, and B. Sitter-Liver, 
(eds), Sprachenvieltalt and Kulturfrieden. Sprachminderheit 
– Einsprachigkeit – Mehrsprachigkeit: Probleme und 
Chancen sprachlicher Vielfalt. Fribourg: Academic Press; 
Stuttgart: Kohlhammer Verlag.
Beydoun, S. (2008) Der Webauftritt der SBB CFF FFS: eine 
mehrsprachige Webseite? Bâle: Institut d’études françaises 
et francophones.
Bruhn, M. (2003) Integrierte Unternehmens – und 
Markenkommunikation. Strategische Planung und operative 
Umsetzung. Stuttgart: Schäffer-Poeschel Verlag.
Calvet, L.-J. (1996) Les politiques linguistiques. Paris, PUF.
Cooper, R. L. (1989) Language Planning and Social Change. 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Diop, C. A. (1974) The Cultural Unity of Black Africa 
[Translation of L’Unité culturelle de l’Afrique noire.] 
Chicago: Third World Press.
13 The ‘terrains’ of enquiry are international 
companies based in Switzerland (Pharmaceutical 
Company A, Pharmaceutical Company B, Bank A), 
Swiss outlets of international companies based over-
seas (Financial Services A, Insurance A), companies 
working in all of the linguistic regions of Switzerland 
(Public Service A, Public Service B, Department Store 
A) as well as companies operating in the metropoli-
tan region of Basel (Hospital A, Factory A, Bank B). 
The example here is from Public Service B.
14 As such, CGT activists from the GEMS 
(General Electric Medical Systems) Society, Yvelines, 
France, won a legal victory – according to the 
Toubon Law of 1994 – against the company, which 
ultimately had to accept that technical documents 
composed overseas must be systematically translated 
into French. The same complaint would doubtless 
not be heard within a different legislative framework, 
such as that of the Netherlands.
15 The ‘Toolbox for the promotion of linguistic 
diversity in the company’ is a nationwide online plat-
form initiated by ch Stiftung, a Swiss foundation 
which has the aim of helping companies to foster 
multilingualism. (http://werkzeugkasten.chstiftung.
ch/Werkzeugkasten/tabid/341/Default.aspx)
16 ‘I have already started English courses ump-
teen times, and every time I’ve had a fit of rage, do I 
have to learn this shit, I don’t want to etc., so in the 
end I give up sooner or later.” For details, see Lüdi, 
Höchle and Yanaprasart (in press).
17 This is what is stipulated, in a slightly differ-
ent context, by the Swiss Army Service Regulations of 
22 June 1994: ‘The superior expresses himself so far 
as possible in the language of the subordinate’.
18 German, French and Italian only; Public 
Service B does not operate in the Romansch-speaking 
region.
19 This is adapted from a study at a workshop 
running parallel to the DYLAN Lyon Consortium 
Meeting, 2008.
20 We define ‘translinguistic wording’ as a com-
municative strategy for getting oneself out of a pre-
dicament caused by limited lexical resources in L2; it 
consists of the conscious use of single words or 
longer sequences of L1 (or in any other language 
likely to be understood by the native speaker of L2) 
as a form of rescue (see Lüdi, 2003, 2006: 33).
21 A citation taken from the semi-directed dis-
cussion: I reckon, when a concept has been stated in 
English from the word go, why translate it, eh?
22 In anthropology and other fields, a ‘thick 
description’ of a human behaviour is one that 
explains not just the behaviour, but its context as 
well, such that the behaviour becomes meaningful to 
an outsider.
The term was used by the anthropologist Clifford 
Geertz in his The Interpretation of Cultures (1973) to 
describe his own method of doing ethnography 
(Geertz, 1973: 5–6, 9–10). Since then, the term and 

LANGUAGE POLICY AND PLANNING
495
Duchêne, A. (2008) Ideologies Across Nations. The 
Construction of Linguistic Minorities at the United Nations. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Eastman, C. M. (1983) Language Planning: An Introduction. 
San Francisco: Chandler and Sharp.
Fichte, J. G. (1808) Reden an die Deutsche Nation 
[Speeches to the German Nation]. Berlin: In der 
Realschulbuchhandlung. 
Fishman, J. A. (1969) ‘National languages and languages of 
wider communication in the developing nations’, 
Anthropological Linguistics, 11(4): 111–35.
Fishman, J. (1974) Advances in Language Planning. The 
Hague: Mouton.
Geertz, C. (1973) ‘Thick description: toward an interpretive 
theory of culture’, in The Interpretation of Cultures: 
Selected Essays. New York: Basic Books. pp. 3–30.
Gorter, D. (ed.) (2006)‚ ‘Linguistic landscape: a new 
approach to multilingualism’, International Journal of 
Multiling ualism, 3(1).
Grégoire, H. (1794) Rapport sur la Nécessité et les Moyens 
d’anéantir les Patois et d’universaliser l’Usage de la 
Langue française du 16 prairial an II. [Report on the neces-
sity and means of defeating patois and universalising 
the use of the French language, 16th day of Prairial, 
Year II.] 
Grosjean, F. (2001) ‘The bilingual’s language modes’, in 
J. L. Nicol (ed.), Language Processing in the Bilingual. 
Oxford : Blackwell. pp. 1–25.
Haugen, E. (1959) ‘Planning for a standard language in 
modern Norway’, Anthropological Linguistics, 1(3): 8–21.
Haugen, E. (1983) ‘The implementation of corpus planning: 
theory and practice’, in J. Fishman, and J. Covarrubias, 
(eds), Progress in Language Planning: International 
Perspectives. Berlin: Mouton. pp. 269–89.
Herder, J. G. von (1794) ‘Briefe zur Beförderung der Humanität 
[Letters for the advancement of humanitarianism]’, in 
J. G. V. Heder: Sämtliche werke. Ed. B. Suphan, Vol. XVII. 
Berlin (1881). 
Kaplan, R. and Baldauf, R. (1997) Language Planning from 
Practice to Theory. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Landry, R. and Bourthis, R. Y. (1997) Linguistic landscape and 
ethnolinguistic vitality. An empirical study, in: Journal of 
Language and Social Psychology 16/1 (1997), S. 23–49.
Lüdi, G. (2003) ‘Code-switching and unbalanced bilingual-
ism’, in: J. -M. Dewaele, A. Housen, A. and W. Li (eds), 
Bilingualism: Beyond Basic Principles. Festschrift in Honour 
of Hugo Baetens Beardsmore. Clevedon: Multilingual 
Matters. pp. 174–88. 
Lüdi, G. (2006) ‘Multilingual repertoires and the consequences 
for linguistic theory’, in K. Bührig and J. D. ten Thije, (eds), 
Beyond Misunderstanding. Linguistic Analyses of 
Intercultural Communication. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 11–42.
Lüdi G. and Py, B. (2003) Etre bilingue. [Being bilingual.] 
3rd edn. review. New York: Lang. 
Lüdi, G. and Py, B. (2009) ‘To be or not to be … a multilingual 
speaker’, International Journal of Multilingualism and 
Multiculturalism, 6(2): 154–67.
Lüdi, G., Seelmann, K. and Sitter-Liver, B. (eds), (2008) 
Sprachenvielfalt und Kulturfrieden. Sprachminderheit – 
Einsprachigkeit – Mehrsprachigkeit: Probleme und Chancen 
sprachlicher Vielfalt. Fribourg: Academic Press; Stuttgart: 
Kohlhammer.
Lüdi, G., Höchle, K. and Yanaprasart, P. (forthcoming) 
‘Dynamiques langagières et gestion de la diversité: 
l'exemple d'une grande entreprise pharmaceutique inter-
nationale basée en Suisse', in P. Danler et al. (eds), Actes 
du XXV Congrès International de Linguistique et Philologie 
Romanes.
Mackey, W. F. (1976) Bilinguisme et contact des langues. 
Paris: Klincksieck.
Maurais, J. et al. (1987) Politique et aménagement linguis-
tique. Québec: Conseil de la langue française, 1987.
Moore, D. and Castellotti, V. (eds.) (2007): La compétence 
plurilingue: regards francophones. Bern: Peter Lang.
Müller, G., Gajo, L, Berthoud, A.C., Steffen, G., Pantet, J., 
Jacquin, J., (2008) Working Paper 2. Research team UNIL: 
Université de Lausanne.
Orban, L. (2008) A New Strategy for Multilingualism: 
A Strategy for all EU Citizens. Presentation of the 
Communication on Multilingualism to the European 
Parliament’s Committee on Culture on 6 October 2008 in 
Brussels. (http://www.lanqua.eu/files/L%20Orban_EN_
New_Strategy.pdf)
Schiffman, H. F. (1996) Linguistic Culture and Language 
Policy. New York: Routledge. 
Shohamy, E. and Gorter, D. (eds) (2008) Linguistic Landscape. 
Expanding the Scenery. London: Routledge.
Tutzinger, T. (1999) Tutzinger Thesen zur Sprachenpolitik 
in Europa. Erarbeitet auf der Tagung “Euro-Deutsch” des 
Deutschen Germanistenverbandes in und mit der 
Evangelischen Akademie Tutzing am 3./4.6.1999, in: Der 
Sprachienst Heft 6/99, 220–222. (auch: http //www. 
Germanistenverband.de/akitv/tutzing.html)
UNESCO (1951): The use of vernacular languages in 
education. Paris, Unesco.
Widmer, J., Coray, R., Acklin M. D. and Godel, E. (2004) Die 
Schweizer Sprachenvielfalt im öffentlichen Diskurs – 
La diversité des langues en Suisse dans le débat public. 
Bern et al.: Peter Lang.

33
33.1 INTRODUCTION
Language variation is at the heart of sociolinguis-
tics; it is therefore to be expected that sociolin-
guists might take an interest in linguistic diversity, 
and that they might be concerned about its loss. 
But the nature of linguistic diversity, how to meas-
ure it, and reactions to its decline, are the subject 
of considerable debate. 
Both sociolinguistic research and language 
documentation share values such as the primacy 
of authentic recording of natural speech, diversity, 
and the notion that language is/does more than 
just the transfer of referential information. In 
terms of methodology, both use audio and video 
recordings to produce language corpora. Both are 
also concerned with the effects of language con-
tact: for example, how a language loses function-
ality in the face of one or more powerful 
language(s) of wider communication, and its 
impact on the structure and vocabulary of the 
smaller language (Muysken, 2008). Endangered 
language documentation goes further in that it is 
concerned directly with recording and maintain-
ing linguistic diversity. 
Overviews of the study of language endanger-
ment usually start with a list of statistics about the 
number of languages in the world, the proportion 
considered endangered, etc. The validity of such 
an approach is questionable, as the basis of the 
estimates is by no means clear. The usual source 
of statistics concerning the number of languages 
and their speakers is the Ethnologue’, subtitled 
‘An encyclopedic reference work cataloging all of 
the world’s 6912 known living languages’ (Gordon, 
2005). Its Introduction recognizes that its headline 
exact figure is problematic:
Complete information on all of the world’s lan-
guages is not available; thus the total number of 
living languages in the world cannot be known pre-
cisely. Because languages are dynamic and undergo 
constant change, there will never be a stable 
number of the living languages of the world (ibid.).
More and more sociolinguists are challenging 
the notion that language boundaries can be 
defined, seeing them as constructs established for 
linguists’ convenience (for example, Irvine and 
Gal, 2000; Ricento, 2005; Makoni and Pennycook, 
2006). The Ethnologue acknowledges such con-
cerns, defending its approach as follows:
The Ethnologue approach to listing and counting 
languages as though they were discrete, countable 
units, does not preclude a more dynamic under-
standing of the linguistic makeup of the countries 
and regions in which clearly distinct varieties can 
be distinguished… . Every language is character-
ized by variation within the speech community 
that uses it (Gordon, 2005).
The usual distinction between languages and 
dialects is that dialects are mutually comprehensible 
varieties of languages, which are distinct and 
mutually unintelligible. Some linguists conduct 
experiments to measure degrees of mutual com-
prehensibility (e.g. Cheng, 1996; Hammarstrom, 
2008; Komarova and Niyogi, 2004; Tang and van 
Heuven, 2009). However, mutual intelligibility is 
to a certain extent a function of language attitudes 
and ideologies – whether people want to under-
stand each other. Paradoxes such as the mutual 
incomprehensibility of Chinese ‘dialects’ com-
pared to the mutual comprehensibility of 
Scandinavian languages are clearly motivated by 
political and nationalistic considerations. 
Ahmad (2008) points out that most overviews 
of language endangerment omit mention of 
Language Endangerment
J u l i a  S a l l a b a n k

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
497
sign languages (an exception is Harrison, 2007). 
Sign languages face similar problems to other 
minority languages, as well as prejudice from 
those who do not recognize them as full lan-
guages. Local ‘village’ sign languages may be 
threatened by contact with larger, national or 
international sign languages. Factors endangering 
sign languages include deaf education, where 
policies fluctuate between using sign language 
and speech-based strategies such as lip-reading. 
In richer communities, sign languages are 
endangered due to the increased use of cochlear 
implants to ‘cure’ deafness (Crasborn and 
Zwitserlood, 2008).
Language communities around the world, espe-
cially linguistic minorities, are becoming more 
aware of the symbolic value of their speech varie-
ties, partly as a reaction to globalization (Trudgill, 
2004; see also Section 33.6 below, and Slembrouck, 
this volume). This has led to an increasing demand 
for local varieties to be recognized as languages in 
their own right; to reflect this the number in 
Ethnologue has increased. 
Although the number of languages counted is 
increasing, it is generally recognized that linguis-
tic diversity is decreasing. Throughout history, 
languages have died out and been replaced by 
others formed through language contact, or 
through divergence due to lack of communication 
over distances (Dalby, 2002). Until recently this 
was seen as a natural cycle. What worries an 
increasing number of linguists is the growing 
number of linguistic varieties no longer being 
learnt by children, coupled with a tendency for 
speakers to shift to languages of wider communi-
cation, especially varieties of English. Linguistic 
typologists are concerned that linguistic construc-
tions might disappear without the field even 
becoming aware that it might be possible to say 
things in a certain way. For example, there are 
only a few languages known to have object–verb–
subject word order, which before the 1960s was 
thought to be non-existent. 
33.2  REACTIONS TO ENDANGERMENT: 
FROM LINGUISTS AND FROM 
SPEECH COMMUNITIES
The impending loss of linguistic diversity led 
some linguists to issue a ‘wake-up call’ to the 
profession. A special issue of the journal Language 
(Hale et al., 1992), based on a colloquium held at 
the annual meeting of the Linguistic Society of 
America, drew attention to the scale of language 
endangerment. Krauss (1992: 10) estimated that 
the majority of the world’s languages would be 
severely endangered by 2100 and called for ‘some 
rethinking of our priorities, lest linguistics go 
down in history as the only science that has pre-
sided obliviously over the disappearance of 90% 
of the very field to which it is dedicated’. Since 
then a number of initiatives have been launched, 
such as:
• The Hans Rausing Endangered Language 
Project,1 which funds documentation projects, 
maintains an archive of recordings, transcrip-
tions and metadata, and runs an academic 
programme.
• The Volkswagen Foundation’s sponsorship of the 
DoBeS (Dokumentation Bedrohter Sprachen)2 
project.
• In the USA, The National Endowment for 
the Humanities (NEH) and National Science 
Foundation (NSF) Documenting Endangered 
Languages initiative (DEL): ‘a new, multi-year 
effort to preserve records of key languages 
before they become extinct’.3
• The European Science Foundation Better Analyses 
Based on Endangered Languages programme 
(EuroBABEL) whose main purpose is ‘to promote 
empirical research on underdescribed endan-
gered languages, both spoken and signed’.4 
• Smaller non-profit initiatives, notably the 
Foundation for Endangered Languages5 and the 
Endangered Languages Fund.6 
Apart from the Foundation for Endangered 
Languages (as from 2008), all of these fund only 
documentation, not programmes primarily aimed 
at language revitalization. The response of the 
academic community has thus been overwhelm-
ingly to ‘preserve key records’ of rare language 
typologies before they disappear rather than to try 
to maintain modes of expression in active use. In 
contrast, if and when speaker communities become 
concerned about language loss, they tend to focus 
on language revitalization. 
There has been a certain amount of tension 
between these two aims. A statement by two 
Alaskan linguists, Dora Marks Dauenhauer and 
Richard Dauenhauer, sums up the dichotomy 
neatly: ‘Preservation … is what we do to berries 
in jam jars and salmon in cans … . Books and 
recordings can preserve languages, but only 
people and communities can keep them alive’ 
(quoted in Lord, 1996; Maffi, 2003; Walsh, 2005).7 
Some linguists understandably feel that their 
strengths lie in language description, while some 
activists are impatient to start revitalizing and 
teaching their language without waiting for a 
corpus or description on which to base dictionar-
ies, grammars and classroom materials. 
Of course, efforts have been made to reconcile 
the different priorities. The longer a language 
can be kept in use, the more material there is 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
498
to document. It is understandable that communi-
ties should prefer to focus on maintaining the 
living language, but documentation can also play 
a more active role by providing valuable data for 
teaching materials based on fluent usage (for 
example, accurate reflections of pronunciation 
and usage, traditional stories, songs and rhymes 
for use in school lessons). Some revitalization 
activities can of course be performed without 
documentation, especially those which do not rely 
on formal teaching. However, dictionary produc-
tion, an important step for a language whose 
speakers wish to raise its prestige and establish it 
as a ‘proper language’ (Ausbau, in the terms of 
Kloss, 1967), is difficult without collecting a 
corpus of the language through documentation. 
It is common for a language community not to 
realize, or value, what they are losing before it is 
gone (or almost), in which case properly archived 
language documentation can prove invaluable in 
providing future generations with an idea of how 
their ancestral language was used in practice and, 
in several instances, in piecing back together a 
language which is no longer used actively. The 
examples of Cornish, Manx, Miami and Kaurna 
(see below) have demonstrated that it is never too 
late to save at least some elements of a language. 
Communities are often unaware of the decline of 
their language, or may be in denial about it. I am 
not the only researcher to have noticed that speak-
ers do not always associate lack of language use 
with cessation of language transmission; by the 
time they realize that their children cannot speak 
the ancestral language, it is too late to teach them 
(Dauenhauer and Dauenhauer, 1998; Sallabank, 
2007). The arrival of an external linguist signals 
external interest in the language, which can have 
an important influence on a speech community’s 
attitudes towards their language(s) and general 
self-confidence. 
Field linguists in the twenty-first century are 
acutely aware of problems associated with earlier 
anthropological approaches and the assumption of 
intellectual property rights by external research-
ers, and now place great importance on collabora-
tion with language communities. In the USA and 
Australia, indigenous communities are increas-
ingly insisting on control over their linguistic 
resources, following numerous instances where 
linguists and publishers have benefited from lin-
guistic material without even informing commu-
nities, who understandably feel aggrieved at what 
they perceive as the theft of their cultural heritage. 
Don Thornton, a member of the Cherokee Nation 
of Oklahoma, relates how he bought a Cherokee–
English Dictionary written by a professor 
from Northeastern University and took it to his 
grandmother. 
[S]he replied with her frailed but angry voice: 
‘That man used to come to my house for three 
years asking how to say words in Cherokee. Pretty 
soon it would be lists of phrases. I fixed his lists for 
three years and all I wanted was a copy of the 
finished work but never received one.’ (Thornton 
Media, 2008)
Grinevald (2003) applied the sociolinguistic 
framework of Cameron et al. (1992, 1993) to 
language documentation, distinguishing: 
(a) fieldwork simply conceived of as ON a language
(b) fieldwork with the added dimension of doing it 
FOR a language community
(c) fieldwork WITH the speakers of the language 
community rather than FOR them
(d) the possibility and ideally ultimate goal of field-
work done BY speakers of the language commu-
nity themselves. (Grinevald, 2003: 58)
The focus in language documentation training8 
is now strongly on a collaborative, empowerment 
approach. As well as being involved in project 
decisions, speakers acting as informants for 
funded projects are called ‘consultants’ and are 
usually paid for their work. 
There are numerous examples of positive rela-
tions between communities and external linguists 
being crucial to the success of projects. For example, 
Amery’s research on Kaurna, a ‘sleeping’ lan-
guage (that is, with no native speakers) of the 
Adelaide plains, Australia, acted as a catalyst for 
community interest in the language (Amery, 
2000). Kaurna had not been spoken since the nine-
teenth century, and there were no sound record-
ings. The only surviving elements were a few 
place names and a small number of words shared 
by nearby languages, plus some teaching materi-
als published by two German priests in 1840. 
Grenoble and Whaley (2006: 66–7) describe the 
project as a ‘remarkable success’: the language 
has developed from no use at all to limited active 
use – for example, in formal greetings, public 
speeches and rituals – although it is seldom used 
in everyday conversation. 
Products of linguistic documentation are usu-
ally archived at the linguist’s university or at one 
of the documentation centres mentioned earlier, 
and copies are deposited with local archives where 
available. Audio and video recordings are 
made available to the community, as well as any 
dictionaries or literacy materials produced, and 
community members control the extent of wider 
access to the materials (David Nathan, HRELP 
archivist, personal comm). This is essential in 
cases where recordings include private or 
culturally-sensitive material, or where for political 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
499
reasons speakers do not want to be identified but 
still wish to preserve their language. 
Language change and attrition
Language change is universal, and a language that 
does not change is no longer a living tongue; it 
may therefore seem paradoxical that the rate and 
amount of language change tends to be much 
higher in an endangered language (Dorian, 1981: 
154). Endangered languages may lack, or lose, 
particular registers (such as those used with offi-
cialdom), and functional reduction leads to stylis-
tic and vocabulary shrinkage, so that the language 
may not have terms for all situations (Dorian, 
1977). From here it is but a short step to a lan-
guage being seen as inadequate and ‘not a proper 
language’, and to a downward spiral of loss of 
status and of speakers. 
Language shift often accompanies a shift away 
from traditional close-knit social networks where 
people all know each other (see Vetter, this 
volume). In endangered language situations, the 
average age of speakers is rising, and friends 
and relatives from speakers’ social networks 
are passing away: one of my consultants stated, 
‘I’ve had nobody to speak it to since my mother 
died in 1995’. Speakers are also increasingly 
infirm and immobile, and so less able to interact 
socially. The longer they are isolated from fellow 
speakers, the more of the language they forget, 
and consequently they feel less confident when 
an opportunity to speak it does arise (e.g. to a 
linguist). 
Language revitalization measures can help 
maintain social networks, for example the Master–
Apprentice schemes pioneered with Native 
American languages in California (Hinton, 1997), 
where fluent speakers (usually older) are paired 
with learners. As well as providing practice for 
learners or latent speakers, who may have had 
passive exposure to a language but have little pro-
ductive competence, such schemes give isolated 
older speakers opportunities to speak their native 
language. 
Common linguistic consequences of endanger-
ment include:
• Reduction or impoverishment: the loss of 
grammatical components without elaboration of 
another component to make up for this loss.
• Simplification or regularization: structures 
increase in regularity; for example, irregular 
verbs become more regular and marked struc-
tures give way to unmarked ones. Elaborate 
syntactic structures may become simplified or 
disappear completely, and analytic structures 
(made up of several words, in a particular order) 
may replace synthetic ones (where inflections 
and morphology convey much of the meaning). 
For example, in the following example from 
Dyirbal, a language of North Queensland, 
Australia, the younger speaker does not use the 
ergative case (which marks the subject of a transi-
tive verb), and replaces traditional word order 
with English-influenced word order:
Traditional Dyirbal  
‘Young Dyirbal’ 
girimu-gu jugumbil bajan 
gugar bajan ban
 
 
 
 jugumbil 
snake-ERG woman bite 
goanna bite woman 
‘The snake bit the woman.’ ‘The goanna bit the
 
 
 
 woman.’
(adapted from Schmidt, 1985)
At the same time, through language contact, a 
language may gain new structures (Denison, 
1977). The following example is from my research 
on Guernesiais, spoken in the Channel Islands, 
between England and France:
i fao gardaï hao lé guernésiais 
we must keep up Guernesiais
Some campaigners regret and resist such 
changes, but it is a truism that older people always 
complain about young people's usage, even in 
non-endangered languages. Some language plan-
ners wish to purify their language of contact 
features (for example, see Rice and Saxon, 2002). 
The question then arises, at what stage in its 
development should a language be maintained? 
Which form(s) should be documented? Such 
dilemmas illustrate the problems associated with 
drawing linguistic boundaries.
Attempts to expand a language into new 
domains are not always welcomed by traditional-
ists, nor by those who do not want to ‘buy into’ a 
standardizing and hegemonic ideology. An endan-
gered language may not have terms for techno-
logical innovations, or a standard or agreed written 
form: How, and by whom, should decisions on 
such issues be made? 
It should not be assumed that all linguistic 
change in endangered languages implies decay. In 
some cases an increase in grammatical complexity 
has been observed (Aikhenvald, 2002), and it is 
now clear that loss and simplification are just one 
aspect of a more elaborate picture (Dorian, 1999). 
In Guatemala, Barrett (2008) found that younger 
speakers of Sipakapense, a Mayan language, 
code-switch less with Spanish compared to the 
oldest generation, which contradicts trends seen 
elsewhere. Barrett suggests that this is due to 
increased confidence in the language and high-
lights the important role of language ideologies in 
cases of language contact and shift. 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
500
33.3  FACTORS IN LANGUAGE 
ENDANGERMENT 
Assessing language vitality
Assessing levels of language knowledge and use 
is an important element of language planning. The 
best-known framework is Fishman’s (1991) 
‘Graded Intergenerational Disruption Scale’ 
(GIDS), which describes eight stages of commu-
nity language loss and suggests revitalization 
measures to counter each stage. The scale runs 
from 8 (worst case) to 1 (fairly safe). 
8: Reassembling the language from isolated older 
speakers and teaching it to adults
7: Most users are socially integrated and ethnolin-
guistically active, but they are beyond child-
bearing age
6: Informal intergenerational oracy and its demo-
graphic 
concentration 
and 
institutional 
reinforcement
5: Literacy in the minority language in the home, 
school and community, but without extra-
communal support
4: Use of the minority language in lower educa-
tion that meets the requirements of compulsory 
education laws
3: Use of the language in the work sphere, outside 
the immediate community, by speakers of both 
the minority and the dominant language
2: Use of the language in local/regional mass 
media and governmental services
1: Education, work sphere, mass media and gov-
ernmental operations at higher and nationwide 
levels
(Adapted from Fishman, 1991)
The GIDS is often used to plot the status of 
languages. However, it has been criticized for 
focusing on literacy and for having a Western bias, 
criticisms which are not necessarily justified. 
According to the GIDS, intergenerational 
transmission in the family is the ‘gold standard’ of 
language vitality and the most important factor in 
language survival; education and literacy can 
wait. This emphasis is taken further by Krauss 
(1997), who analyses levels of transmission using 
a 10-way distinction. However, the focus on inter-
generational transmission has been challenged by 
Romaine (2006), who points out that few, if any, 
language movements have actually followed 
Fishman’s advice; most focus on school-based 
language teaching (see below). 
Another frequently cited framework used to 
measure the health of a language is ethnolinguistic 
vitality (Giles, Bourhis and Taylor, 1977). This 
taxonomy utilizes a social psychological approach 
to measure three structural variables: status, 
demographics and institutional support. It was 
extended in the 1980s to include ‘subjective eth-
nolinguistic vitality’, recognizing that objective 
assessments and comparisons are less likely to be 
significant in language survival than the subjective 
perceptions of community members (both those 
who do and do not speak the language). However, 
it focuses on economic rather than the social value 
of languages, and on institutional rather than 
community support. 
A framework which takes many of these criti-
cisms into account is that produced by a group of 
eminent linguists for UNESCO, which identifies 
nine factors in language vitality, each of which is 
graded on a 0–5 scale:
1 Intergenerational language transmission
2 Absolute number of speakers
3 Proportion of speakers within the local popula-
tion
4 Trends in existing language domains
5 Response to new domains and media
6 Materials for language education and literacy
7 Governmental and institutional language poli-
cies, including official status and use
8 Community members’ attitudes toward their own 
language 
9 Amount and quality of documentation 
(UNESCO, 2003a; Grenoble and Whaley, 2006: 4)
This framework recognizes that factors cannot 
easily be separated: for example, domains a lan-
guage is used in relate to attitudes. It also includes 
the amount and quality of documentation, which 
can be a direct consequence of low status: minor-
ity language varieties may not have been deemed 
worthy of description or documentation. However, 
although the preamble to the framework stresses 
the importance of language revitalization, it is not 
included in the framework itself. The latest edition 
of the UNESCO Atlas of Languages in Danger of 
Disappearing (Moseley, 2009), which used this 
framework, was criticized by many communities 
for focusing on endangerment rather than 
measures being undertaken to revitalize or revive 
languages. 
Another criticism of the UNESCO framework 
is that it focuses on factors relevant to developed, 
Western contexts, notably 5, ‘Response to new 
domains and media’. At the same time, it omits the 
degree of sedentism of the population (which also 
reflects economic sustainability). Migration, espe-
cially to urban centres, is a major factor in lan-
guage shift (Friederike Lüpke, personal comm).
Husband and Saifullah-Khan’s criticism of 
ethnolinguistic vitality as ‘an uncritical naming of 
parts’ (1982: 195) can be aimed at most typolo-
gies. They can be useful to compare situations, but 
nearly all provide descriptions rather than analysis 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
501
or explanation. Indeed, Schiffman (2002: 141) 
claims that typologies are now seen as theoreti-
cally ‘passé’ and ‘guilty of the latter-day sin of 
essentialism’. Dobrin, Austin and Nathan (2007) 
stress that each situation is unique, and that ‘docu-
mentary work derives its quality from its appropri-
ateness to the particularities of that situation’; 
attempts to create one framework to fit all circum-
stances are not particularly useful.
Dobrin et al. (ibid.: 61–3) observe a tendency 
towards ‘reduction of languages to common 
exchange values’ in which languages are priori-
tized by ‘degree of endangerment’ using ‘official’ 
metrics and scales such as the ‘deceptively pre-
cise’ numbers published in the Ethnologue, or by 
(misuse of) the ‘endangerment index’ in UNESCO 
(2003a). They emphasize that there is a lack of an 
agreed framework for assessing quality, progress 
and value in the documentation of endangered 
languages (ibid.: 64); as noted in Section 33.4 
below, this is also the case with revitalization.
A key feature of language endangerment is that 
there is frequently little data available on the kinds 
of questions asked in these frameworks. Rather 
than comparative frameworks, context-specific 
information on language attitudes and patterns 
of use can be very useful: ‘Who speaks what lan-
guage when, and where?’ (Fishman, 1965). Such 
questions can only be answered after prolonged 
contact with a community, using ethnographic 
research methods: expanding ‘Who, when and 
where?’ to ‘Why?’. It is also wise to take into 
account the relationship of the language under 
study (and its speakers) to others (Calvet, 2006); 
speakers of endangered languages are usually 
multilingual. The attitudes of those who do not 
speak the language are also relevant, as they may 
influence opinions and control funding. 
What causes language endangerment?
Causes of language endangerment can be divided 
into four main categories.
1. Natural catastrophes, famine, disease: for exam-
ple, Native American languages (disease) and 
Malol, Papua New Guinea (earthquake).
2. War and genocide: for example, Tasmania (geno-
cide by colonists), Brazilian indigenous peoples 
(land disputes) and El Salvador (civil war).
3. Overt repression: for example, Kurdish, Welsh 
and Gikuyu.
4. Cultural/political/economic dominance : for example, 
Ainu, Manx, Sorbian, Quichua and many others. 
 
(synthesized from Nettle and Romaine, 2000; 
Crystal, 2000)
The dividing lines between these categories can 
sometimes be difficult to distinguish: for example, 
in the Americas, disease and suppression of native 
cultures spread with colonization. Overt repres-
sion can include violence and genocide, and the 
line between overt and covert suppression can 
blur. Although some linguists prefer to steer clear 
of ‘political’ issues, language endangerment is 
inevitably entwined with political factors (Dorian, 
1993). 
The fourth category, which is the most common, 
can be further subdivided into five common factors: 
• Economic: for example, rural poverty leads to 
migration; if the economy improves, tourism may 
bring speakers of majority languages.
• Cultural dominance: for example, education and 
literature through the majority or state language 
only.
• Political: for example, education policies which 
ignore or exclude local languages, lack of recog-
nition or political representation. 
• Historical: for example, colonization, bound-
ary disputes, the rise of one group and their 
language. 
• Attitudinal: for example, minority languages 
become associated with poverty, illiteracy and 
hardship. 
The first four of these all feed into the last: a 
strong local culture or political support can help 
maintain a language, but many people identify a 
dominant language, or a language of wider com-
munication, with economic advancement, and a 
small language as ‘useless’. Such views are influ-
enced by value systems which treat multilingual-
ism as divisive, inefficient, useless and expensive 
– ‘language as a problem’ (in the terms of Ruíz, 
1984) – rather than as a resource which fosters 
local economies and cultures. 
Languages are often associated with ethnic, 
regional or national identity, a tradition going 
back to the Romantic movement; and political 
autonomy or self-determination is often viewed as 
one of the keys to safeguarding a language’s vital-
ity (Fishman, 1991). This is not always seen in a 
positive light, since there is also a tendency to 
assume that linguistic diversity contributes to 
inter-ethnic conflict (Brewer, 2001; Cameron, 
2007: 284). However, several studies have found 
recognition of linguistic rights and ethnic identity 
necessary for conflict resolution (e.g. Daftary, 
2000; Ashmore et al., 2001).
Even where there is no overt repression of a 
minority or its language, there is often little active 
political support. Wright (2004: 187) comments 
that ‘Laissez-faire policies mean that the lan-
guages of power and prestige will eventually take 
over in all situations of contact. Benign neglect … 
[is] always de facto support for the language of the 
group that is already dominant’. Inaction or 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
502
‘benign neglect’ on the part of authorities there-
fore implies collusion in language death. 
Such factors have led many communities to 
campaign for official support for language main-
tenance and revitalization. An official reversal of 
attitudes can counteract hostility towards a minor-
ity culture (Keskitalo, 1981; Dorian, 1987: 63–4). 
However, Williamson (1991) and Fennell (1981) 
warn that official support cannot save a language 
without community commitment. Fennell points 
out that despite government support, Irish contin-
ues to decline. Dorian (1987: 66) notes that ‘com-
pulsory Irish’ lessons in schools created aversion 
towards the language in the early days of mainte-
nance efforts; there was little consultation with 
local people or representation of their views in 
decision-making, and no attempt to foster positive 
attitudes towards the language. 
Negative attitudes are not only held by domi-
nant language speakers but also are internalized 
by speakers of minority languages (Bourdieu, 
1977: 164; Kroskrity, 2000: 13). They are thus 
both outcome and cause of shift to the dominant 
language. Denison (1977) speaks of ‘language 
suicide’, and Ladefoged (1992) asserts that many 
minority language speakers consciously trade 
their traditional language for economic gain. 
Language shift is often presented as language 
choice, but Dorian (1994) notes that people are 
often faced with a lack of freedom in language 
choice and identity formation, resulting from eco-
nomic necessity and internalized ideologies of 
inferiority. 
33.4  LANGUAGE REVITALIZATION IN 
PRACTICE
Numerous language communities have overcome 
economic disadvantage, discrimination and ideolo-
gies of deficit to support and increase the use of their 
languages. Negative attitudes dominate the litera-
ture; the revitalization phase of language endanger-
ment is a more recent development which is less 
well documented and inadequately theorized. 
Fishman’s (1991) GIDS is predicated on an 
important prerequisite: ‘assuming prior ideologi-
cal clarification’ – i.e. that language planners have 
agreed policies on fundamentals such as what 
exactly they are trying to preserve, and why it 
is desirable. In his revisiting of the framework 
10 years later, Fishman (2001: 541) admitted that 
it is quite common for enthusiasts to embark on 
language planning and revitalization activities 
without such clarification, and without convincing 
arguments with which to counter critics. 
Revitalization movements are characterized by 
enthusiasm rather than by planning and evaluation 
and, as noted by Romaine (2006), there is still 
relatively little ‘prior ideological clarification’. 
Endangered language communities may well not 
be aware of revitalization measures tried else-
where, or of choices available, and may need to 
develop such clarification through a process of 
trial and error.
It is noticeable that the vast majority of lan-
guage revitalization efforts reported in academic 
literature take place in Westernized countries, 
often among ‘Fourth World’ indigenous peoples. 
The number of revitalization projects in Asia and 
Africa found in a recent literature search can be 
counted on one hand for each of these continents, 
although the vast majority of the world’s endan-
gered languages are to be found there. Asian and 
African languages feature prominently in lan-
guage documentation, but as yet these rarely seem 
to progress to revitalization. It is unclear whether 
this is because of a lack of interest among speak-
ers, funding restrictions, lack of resources, or a 
lack of reporting in mainstream publications.9 But 
the fact that most reported revitalization takes 
place in economically prosperous countries with 
good communications and education infrastruc-
ture (albeit geared to the dominant community’s 
needs) suggests that a certain level of resourcing 
is advantageous. Grenoble and Whaley (1998: 52) 
describe economics as ‘the single strongest force 
influencing the fate of endangered languages’.
An increasing number of publications provide 
principled guidance to practitioners: e.g. Bradley 
and Bradley (2002); Hinton and Hale (2002); and 
Grenoble and Whaley (2006). Most focus on 
measures in a particular context, and stress that it 
is impossible to guarantee that they will work if 
transplanted elsewhere, even if the causes of lan-
guage endangerment are similar. Overviews often 
list measures geographically rather than themati-
cally (e.g. Hinton and Hale, 2002). An exception 
is Lee and McLaughlin (2001: 38–9), who list 24 
suggestions under the headings ‘What pairs of 
persons can do’, ‘What families can do’ and 
‘What communities can do’. The following is an 
attempt to group practices according to premise. 
Community-based language learning
Community-based language learning programmes 
are complementary or alternative to formal educa-
tion (which will be discussed below). ‘Master–
Apprentice’ schemes, mentioned earlier, are easy 
to implement, requiring little funding or bureauc-
racy (although materials and coordination are of 
course useful). Where funding is available, par-
ticipants may be expected to spend considerable 
time together and be compensated for loss of 
earnings (Hinton, 1997).

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
503
Intensive and residential courses were used in 
Israel during the revival of Hebrew, and the idea 
has been copied elsewhere – for example, in New 
Zealand (Nicholson, 1990), Ireland and Wales 
(Baker, 1999) and in Lithuania (Csató and Nathan, 
2007). In smaller communities such schemes may 
not be feasible, but enthusiasts may organize 
social gatherings where those attending are 
encouraged to speak the language, sometimes 
involving traditional games or sports, or semi-
formal language teaching activities. Such gather-
ings are valuable in providing exposure when a 
language is no longer used in traditional domestic 
domains. 
A related type of measure suggested by Lee 
and McLaughlin is ‘fine-arts and dramatic pro-
ductions that utilize and promote the native lan-
guage’. Similar activities include cultural or 
storytelling festivals, or individuals or groups who 
sing in an endangered language – either traditional 
songs or modern ones which might attract younger 
learners. 
Language in the environment
Increasing the visibility of a language is a key 
method of raising its status and increasing its 
domains of use. As Kallen (2005) points out, the 
choice of language in signage is not neutral, and 
reflects language policy, history, community lan-
guage use and identity. Gorter (2006) notes that 
‘the visibility or non-visibility of a language in 
public is a message in and of itself’. A note of 
caution was sounded by Gunther (1989), however: 
‘It seems that bilingual road-signs and some 
schooling in the minority language are seen as 
substitutes for parental or other early-childhood 
language learning’. 
Endangered-language media
Mass media have a considerable influence on 
language choice, often bringing the dominant 
language into the home for the first time. The 
provision of minority-language radio, television, 
websites, CD-ROMs and print media can be seen 
as redressing a historical wrong as well as provid-
ing motivation for increased use. They also pro-
vide useful exposure for learners, especially if a 
language is extremely endangered. 
Radio services run by indigenous peoples can 
also contribute to political, cultural, educational 
and linguistic awareness. Since the 1960s, a radio 
station which broadcasts in Shuar, a Jivaroan lan-
guage in Ecuador, has played an important role in 
enabling speakers to undertake effective commu-
nity action by facilitating communication over 
long distances and promoting cultural traditions 
(Gnerre, 2008).
Like linguistic landscape, the media are a 
prime target area for campaigners wishing to 
increase the status and prestige of a language 
(Cotter, 1999; Kelly-Holmes, 2000; Moseley 
et al., 2001). Language in the media is almost 
always seen in this light, while the value of 
providing a service for what is often a dwindling, 
ageing base of native speakers can be overlooked. 
This affects the type of programming provided, as 
elderly speakers are likely to have tastes which 
differ considerably from those of younger 
viewers, which in turn may influence elders’ 
confidence in their language. 
In places where the technology is available, 
initiatives have been launched to establish a virtual 
presence for endangered languages on the Internet 
(Bauman, 2003; Bennett, 2003). Increasingly, 
endangered languages can be found on social net-
working sites and in Internet chat rooms, which 
can provide input and practice for learners (espe-
cially those of computer-literate age). 
Organizations such as OpenOffice.org10 and 
Rosetta Stone11 cater for increasing demand for 
software and platforms that can accommodate 
many languages, though usually this is only pro-
vided for those with sufficient speakers and insti-
tutional support for software companies to take 
notice, such as Irish and Ma-ori. 
Not all communities welcome either new media 
or literacy in their languages (see below), espe-
cially if these are not developed by the community 
itself (or in consultation with them). As noted 
earlier, with regard to Kaurna, some communities 
are protective of their languages. The Mapuche 
tribe of Chile tried to sue Microsoft when the 
software company produced a version of Windows 
in their language without consultation.12
Once again, a note of caution has been sounded: 
Dauenhauer and Dauenhauer (1998) criticize 
‘technical fixes’ which may be promoted instead 
of changing personal behaviour and simply speak-
ing a language more.
Education and endangered languages
There is debate in language movements world-
wide about the role of schools (for example, 
Hornberger and King, 1996; Romaine, 2006). 
Having an endangered language taught in schools 
is seen as ‘a crucial domain for language usage … . 
When mandatory schooling occurs exclusively in 
a national language, the use of local languages 
almost inevitably declines’ (Grenoble and Whaley, 
2006: 10), especially when speakers remember 
humiliating experiences such as the residential 
schools that indigenous children were sent to in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
504
North America and Australia in order to ‘civilize’ 
them. Gaining acceptance in schools therefore 
plays a key symbolic role in many endangered 
language revitalization campaigns. It is also per-
ceived as a means of increasing status, prestige 
and perceived utility, as well as of improving edu-
cational outcomes among indigenous peoples 
(Hornberger, 2008).
Language provision in schools can range from 
very small amounts of extra-curricular teaching to 
bilingual/immersion and minority-language-me-
dium education. Grenoble and Whaley (ibid.) 
maintain that including the minority language as a 
secondary subject is not an adequate response, 
citing UNESCO (2003b): ‘Education in the lan-
guage is essential for language vitality’ (emphasis 
in original). However, experiences such as that of 
the Isle of Man show that starting on a small scale 
can be necessary to gain the acceptance of the 
majority population: optional extra-curricular 
classes led eventually to a full Manx-medium 
school. 
The Breton Diwan and Ma-ori ko - hanga reo 
started as community-run playschemes with 
native-speaker helpers, to enable transmission to 
skip a generation. According to census figures, 
this has led to a dramatic increase in the number 
of children in New Zealand able to speak Ma-ori 
(Benton and Benton, 2001: 425). These ‘language 
nests’ are seen as a particularly successful area of 
language revitalization, and have led to provision 
growing with the children. 
A major practical problem with revitalizing 
highly-endangered languages through schools is 
the lack of suitably proficient and trained teachers. 
Hinton (2003) provides guidance for such circum-
stances, stressing the need for teachers to have 
mentors (usually a fluent older speaker,13 as in a 
Master–Apprentice programme) and to use as 
much of the language as possible in the class-
room, for example, in ritual exchanges and class 
management.
There are also more fundamental issues. 
Educationalists and linguists now agree that moth-
er-tongue education provides the best start for 
children (Baker, 1999; 2001); however, Mühlhäusler 
(1990) warns that this should not be simply a 
stepping-stone to literacy in the dominant lan-
guage, as is common in Africa and in ‘transitional’ 
classes in the USA. This recommendation also 
raises awkward questions regarding education 
through an endangered language that is no longer 
the children’s mother tongue.
Maffi (2003) quotes a comment from Nancy 
Dorian: ‘The introduction of a heritage language 
into the school curriculum has been known to 
seduce communities whose language is at risk into 
believing that interrupted family transmission is 
no longer a problem since the schools are dealing 
with transmission’. Research in Wales has found 
that although bilingual education had successfully 
increased the number of young people who could 
speak Welsh, it did not lead to renewal of inter-
generational transmission: young people stopped 
speaking Welsh once they left school (Edwards 
and Newcombe, 2005: 137). In places where 
endangered languages are promoted through edu-
cation, traditional domains may be reversed: as 
official endorsement increases, use in informal 
contexts decreases. 
Re-establishing intergenerational 
transmission
Although ‘informal intergenerational oracy’ is a 
stated aim of most revitalization movements, it is 
the most difficult to regain once interrupted. The 
Irish government even tried offering payments to 
parents for raising children to speak Irish to a 
recognized standard, though without the desired 
success (Hindley, 1990; Ó Riagáin, 1997). A more 
recent programme in Wales, Twf (‘growth’), 
encourages families to bring children up bilin-
gually, and is promoted by midwives and health 
workers (Edwards and Newcombe, 2005). 
Bilingual education had produced a generation 
with proficiency in academic Welsh, but without 
the type of language (and the motivation) needed 
for childrearing. Project workers contribute to 
childbirth preparation classes, which are seen as a 
critical time to persuade parents of the benefits of 
bilingualism. Another key aim is social inclusion, 
as a social divide is seen in take-up of bilingual 
education (ibid.: 143).
33.5 LITERACY AND STANDARDIZATION
In revitalization movements, schooling and stand-
ardization often go hand in hand. Written lan-
guages are held in higher esteem than non-written 
vernaculars, and endangered languages are often 
associated with illiteracy. Many activists therefore 
believe that establishing a standardized written 
form is essential for raising the status of their 
language, expanding its uses and having it accepted 
as a ‘proper language’. 
As with schooling, however, these assumptions 
are problematic. Schieffelin, Woolard and 
Kroskrity (1998: 17) observe that 
Movements to save minority languages are often 
structured, willy-nilly, around the same received 
notions of language that have led to their oppres-
sion … language activists find themselves impos-
ing standards, elevating literate forms and uses, 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
505
and negatively sanctioning variability in order to 
demonstrate the reality, validity, and integrity of 
their languages. 
A high level of local variation is common in 
endangered languages, which typically have no 
prestige or urban variant; standardization may 
therefore entail the loss of dialect diversity. Where 
endangered languages have been accepted in 
schools, it is common for a ‘unified’ standard to 
be developed: for example, Basque (Urtéaga, 
2005) and Gaelic (Dorian, 1981: 88). Divergence 
may develop between younger speakers who have 
learnt the unified version through education, and 
older native speakers of ‘authentic’ varieties 
(Grenoble and Whaley, 2006). In Lagunas, 
Ecuador, ‘the introduction of Unified Quichua 
into the community has created (or perhaps 
only accentuated) generational and educational 
differences within the community’ (Hornberger 
and King, 1996: 422). However, unlike cases 
in Europe, the school version avoids contact 
influences:
The Quichua of the older members of the com-
munity, commonly referred to as ‘authentic 
Quichua’, while reflecting the phonological system 
of the region, contains many Spanish loan words 
and has lost some elements of its morphological 
structure. The Quichua which is being learned and 
on occasion spoken by the younger, better edu-
cated, and more politicized of Lagunas is the rela-
tively ‘pure’ standardized variety, known as Unified 
Quichua (Hornberger and King, 1996: 421).
However, Mühlhäusler (2000: 328) argues that 
‘the preservation of conservative constructions is 
far less important than the promotion of condi-
tions in which a new generation of users can 
revive and adapt older forms of speech’, which is 
both a justification for ‘modernizing’ languages 
and a challenge to linguistic purism. 
The choice of terminology or orthography for a 
language does not simply involve choosing value-
free signs or words; it can also imply ‘buying in’ 
to prescriptivism. Jaffe (1999: 28) comments that 
‘distinguishing good from bad usage’, as is 
common in schools, reproduces the structures of 
domination. My research into the indigenous lan-
guage of Guernsey suggests that writers of an 
endangered language may relish the freedom 
offered by lack of standardization by using a wide 
variety of non-standard spellings, although this 
may be due as much to lack of literacy training as 
to resistance to standardization. However, unpre-
dictable spellings increase the problems of sec-
ond-language learners. 
The French sociolinguist Marcellesi (1986, 
2003) suggested the solution of a ‘polynomic’ 
language, in which respect for variation is com-
bined with a strong perception by speakers of a 
distinct, distinguishable language.14 This concept 
proposes an alternative model to prescriptivism, 
and anticipates the postmodern challenging of 
languages as ‘defined and static systems’ (Wright, 
2007). However, it may not be practicable to 
implement in schools. Jaffe (2005) describes les-
sons in Corsican which attempt to follow this 
model and cater for regional variation, but in prac-
tice it seems that students are simply offered a 
choice between two approved spellings, rather 
than free variation in spelling such as I found 
among native speakers of Guernesiais.
33.6 LANGUAGE AND IDENTITY
Many supporters of endangered languages claim 
that when a language dies out, a unique way of 
looking at the world also disappears (for example, 
Fishman, 1989; Nettle and Romaine, 2000; Dalby, 
2002). Grimes (2001) asserts that the disappear-
ance of a language means the extinction of a 
‘unique creation of human beings that houses a 
treasure of information and preserves a people’s 
identity’. Major funders of language documenta-
tion take similar views: the Hans Rausing 
Endangered Languages Project15 has as its motto 
‘because every last word means another lost 
world’, and the US National Endowment for the 
Humanities Documenting Endangered Languages 
program website16 cites its Chairman, Bruce Cole, 
as saying ‘Language is the DNA of a culture, and 
it is the vehicle for the traditions, customs, stories, 
history, and beliefs of a people. A lost language is 
a lost culture’. This view is related to notions that 
a language is tied to particular local conditions 
(Mühlhäusler, 2000: 335), territory (Laponce, 
1987) and culture. A link between language and 
identity is often treated as a given, with little 
discussion of its nature. 
Much of the discourse on endangered lan-
guages thus seems somewhat essentialist and 
deter ministic, which has attracted criticism from 
sociolinguists, especially Duchêne and Heller 
(2007). But this does not mean that there is no link 
between language and culture, or that endangered 
languages have no cultural value. ‘But neither is 
[language] reconstituted and reconstructed by 
every speaker anew in every generation. … And 
much of culture (if we still accept the notion that 
there is such a thing) is transmitted through lan-
guage’ (Schiffman, 1996: 9). 
Many recent writers, influenced by postmod-
ernism, see identities not as fixed, formal realities, 
but rather as fluid, shaped while people compose 
and position themselves within the various social 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
506
settings of their everyday lives (for example, 
Castells, 2004; Omoniyi and White, 2006). This 
may help to account for the paradox whereby 
many endangered language speakers claim a 
strong identification with their language, yet do 
not transmit it to their children. As Le Page and 
Tabouret-Keller (1985: 239–40) note, feelings of 
ethnic identity can survive total language loss. 
Dorian (1999: 31) comments, ‘Because it is only 
one of an almost infinite variety of potential iden-
tity markers, [a language] is easily replaced by 
others that are just as effective. In this respect the 
ancestral language is functionally expendable’. 
Bankston and Henry (1998) note that a strong 
identification with a minority language may not 
always correlate positively with language mainte-
nance, particularly when it comes to transmitting 
a low-status variety to children. In addition, in a 
multilingual environment, different languages 
may be used to express different aspects of per-
sonal identity, as they are used in different roles 
and domains (Friederike Lüpke, pers comm).
There is a trend for campaigners to focus their 
attention on language as a symbol of identity, 
rather than on the social and economic factors 
which contribute to language shift, or on mainte-
nance of living languages through intergenera-
tional transmission. For example, Bankston and 
Henry (2000) describe the ‘commodification of 
ethnic culture’ amongst Cajuns in Louisiana, 
where an increased emphasis on Acadian heritage 
coincides with acculturation and language shift; 
perhaps this attempt to make culture more visible 
is a reaction to the divorce of language and culture 
from speakers. Mohanty (2000: 56) suggests that 
collective identity can be consciously forged 
through re-examination of accepted cultural mean-
ings and values. In the context of language shift 
such re-examination might challenge accepted 
ideologies such as ‘majority language = progress’, 
as has happened in Wales and the Basque Country 
in Spain. 
Postmodern ideas on the constructed, fluid 
nature of identity are not well known among ‘lay’ 
people, and many take for granted received, essen-
tialist views of language, culture and identity. 
Freeland and Patrick (2004: 8) assume that folk 
ideologies will challenge essentialist views of 
language and identity, and language boundaries, 
whereas my research findings indicate that people 
tend to have quite traditional views on these mat-
ters (Sallabank, 2006). As noted by May (2004) 
and Patrick (2004), distinguishing oneself by lin-
guistic differentiation continues to be important 
for groups’ and individuals’ identity construction; 
and Nieldzielski and Preston (2003), like Mohanty 
(2000), stress that respondents’ perceptions 
are valid factors in researching language. Such 
‘folk linguistic’ ideologies are more likely to 
affect linguistic outcomes than objective evidence 
for or against linguistic determinism. 
Identification with a language, and strong emo-
tional bonds to it, do not guarantee its mainte-
nance or transmission in the face of other pressures. 
But it is hard to see how a minority language can 
be maintained without a focus on identity: it is 
difficult to rationalize on instrumental grounds 
alone. Campaigning therefore often leans heavily 
on links with traditional culture and identity. A 
careful line needs to be trodden, however, between 
this and alienating both younger generations and 
non-indigenous people (Myhill, 1999). In the Isle 
of Man, revival of the Manx language is motivated 
by a desire to ‘hold on to something uniquely 
Manx’, but at the same time, Manx is being 
repositioned to create an ‘inclusive’ identity, 
which both natives and incomers can identify with 
(Cain, 2008). 
33.7  WHY WORRY ABOUT LANGUAGE 
ENDANGERMENT?
Most researchers in the field of language endan-
germent are predisposed to a favourable attitude 
towards 
maintaining 
linguistic 
diversity. 
Nevertheless, some commentators question this. 
Edwards (1985) takes a pessimistic view that lan-
guage shift is natural and inevitable. Malik (2000), 
in a review of Nettle and Romaine (2000), claims 
that proponents of linguistic diversity are ‘impos-
sibly nostalgic’: ‘There is nothing noble or authen-
tic about local ways of life; they are often simply 
degrading and backbreaking’. Like Cameron 
(2007), he claims that the ‘belief that different 
peoples have unique ways of understanding the 
world … draws on the same philosophy that gave 
rise to ideas of racial difference’. As noted earlier, 
struggles for self-determination and linguistic 
rights are often connected; but so too are efforts 
to reduce disadvantage, and to improve minori-
ties’ educational achievement. Linguists tend to 
promote diversity rather than hegemony, and 
cannot be blamed for the misappropriation of 
nineteenth-century Romantic ideas by twentieth-
century extremist groups.
De Swaan (2004) claims that languages ‘do not 
die out but are abandoned by those who used to 
speak them’, echoing Denison’s (1977) view that 
speakers collude in ‘language suicide’; however, 
as noted above, language ‘choice’ is not always 
free. Ladefoged (1992) claims that many people 
accept the loss of their language as the price of 
entering modern society, commenting ‘Who am I 
to say he was wrong?’ about a Dahalo speaker in 
Kenya who smiled when affirming that his son 
spoke only Swahili. In response, Dorian (1993) 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
507
notes that some of the youngest members of 
endangered language communities have begun to 
berate their elders for choosing not to transmit the 
ancestral language and so allowing it to die.
Ladefoged (1992), Malik (2000) and de Swaan 
(2004) follow the common assumption that mem-
bers of minority groups benefit materially from 
shifting to a dominant language. According to 
Nettle and Romaine (2000), this benefit does not 
necessarily materialize. On the other hand, cam-
paigns for minority and linguistic rights can have 
tangible benefits. Thieberger (1990) examines 
seven reasons commonly advanced for the mainte-
nance of Australian Aboriginal languages: preser-
vation of linguistic resources, social cohesion, 
identity, diversity, language maintenance as part 
of cultural maintenance, individual well-being 
and social justice. Although Thieberger finds each 
to have merit, he argues that the appeal to morality 
and social justice provides the strongest justifica-
tion: by allowing speakers to maintain a connec-
tion with their cultural past, a maintenance 
programme gives Aboriginal peoples a voice in 
the new Australia. 
Fishman (1991) asserts that those who wish to 
reverse language shift ‘should not be embarrassed 
about the fact that theirs is basically a value posi-
tion … because the position of their opponents is 
also no more than a value position’ (ibid.: 19). As 
Wright (2004: 225) notes, ‘The strongest argu-
ment for taking the necessary institutional deci-
sions to support maintenance of a language has to 
be because its individual speakers wish to do so.’ 
Communicating with the public
This chapter has emphasized that language endan-
germent cannot be separated from other problems 
such as socioeconomic disadvantage or lack of 
political rights. But in publicizing their cause, 
campaigners (and linguists) frequently avoid such 
potentially controversial arguments and focus on 
more ‘soft and furry’, comfortable explanations 
such as parallels with the loss of ecological diver-
sity. An actual correlation between linguistic and 
biological diversity observed by biological scien-
tists (Sutherland, 2003) has been taken up enthu-
siastically by campaigners such as the organization 
Terralingua17 and some researchers (for example, 
Haarmann, 1986; Skutnabb-Kangas, 2002). It has 
received considerable public attention – for 
example, in popular books such as Dalby (2002) 
and in the media. 
Both field- and sociolinguists have criticized 
such strategies (for example, Hill, 2002; Dobrin, 
Austin and Nathan, 2007; Duchêne and Heller, 
2007). However, as Dobrin et al. (2007: 60) com-
ment, ‘While analytically suspect in a number of 
respects, this “emotive and moralistic” discourse 
[Cameron, 2007: 269] has been – and continues to 
be – highly effective’. Public and scholarly inter-
est in language endangerment has never been so 
high, with tangible results in terms of funding for 
documentation and the number of degree pro-
grammes and training courses available; the disci-
pline of linguistics has also become more socially 
relevant (Dobrin et al., 2007: 60). 
To what extent does it matter if some miscon-
ceptions circulate due to ‘strategic simplification’ 
(Heller, 2004: 286)? Do they propagate patroniz-
ing, exoticist views of indigenous peoples? Do 
they damage the survival of linguistic diversity in 
the long term? Hill (2002: 128–9) asks, ‘Can 
endangered-language advocates modify their rhet-
oric in such a way as to balance between the two 
audiences, helping community activists to rally 
people in endangered-language communities to 
defend and reclaim their languages while simulta-
neously attracting resources from dominant com-
munities?’ Hill recommends the promotion of 
linguistic human rights as an ‘appropriate stance 
in opposition to oppression’; however, this too has 
been criticized, especially the link between dis-
courses of language rights and essentialist views 
of identity and linguistic boundaries (Freeland and 
Patrick, 2004). 
33.8 CONCLUSION
The picture painted above may at times look 
gloomy. Grenoble and Whaley (2006: ix) note 
soberly that most language revitalization efforts to 
date have been failures, although ‘there are enough 
success stories to warrant optimism’. Around the 
world, attitudes towards endangered languages are 
changing, at all levels from local to international. 
A degree of support for indigenous languages is 
now accepted policy in the European Union and in 
Canada, the USA, South Africa and New Zealand, 
and by international bodies such as the Council of 
Europe and UNESCO.
Through language revitalization measures, 
speakers gain in confidence and awareness, and 
are able to challenge ideologies of deficit. This is 
seen in the example of Mayan described by 
Barrett (2008), and by Newman, Trenchs-Parera 
and Ng (2008), who suggest that support for bilin-
gualism and the easing of divisions in Catalunya 
are signs of increased ‘linguistic cosmopolitan-
ism’, ‘a stance that looks beyond parochial own-
group communities and favors bridging linguistic 
boundaries’. As Newman et al. note, it is signifi-
cant that minority languages can be valued when 
they take on such symbolic roles. Elsewhere too, 
indigenous languages are being ‘rebranded’ to 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
508
create an ‘inclusive’ identity that all members of 
the community can express themselves through, 
from indigenous people to those most recently 
arrived. 
NOTES
1 www.hrelp.org/, accessed 9 June 2008.
2 www.mpi.nl/DOBES/, accessed 9 June 2008.
3 www.neh.gov/grants/guidelines/del.html, 
accessed 9 June 2008.
4 www.esf.org/index.php?id=4632, accessed 9 
June 2008.
5 www.ogmios.org, accessed 9 June 2008.
6 www.endangeredlanguagefund.org/, accessed 
9 June 2008.
7 The original source is unclear.
8 For examples of training, see http://www.
hrelp.org/events/workshops/eldp2008_6/ and http://
www.linguistics.ucsb.edu/faculty/infield/, accessed 
24 June 2008.
9 Grass-roots community efforts are particularly 
likely to be undocumented or not the subject of 
research.
10 http://www.openoffice.org/, accessed 30 
June 2008.
11 http://www.rosettastone.com/, accessed 30 
June 2008.
12 
http://news.softpedia.com/news/The-
Mapuche-Indians-Wage-Legal-War-Against-
Microsoft-41037.html, accessed 18 May 2009. For 
discussion of the language sovereignty issue see 
http://blogs.usyd.edu.au/elac/2006/11/sovereignty_
over_languages_and_1.html (accessed 18 May 
2009).
13 Although this may cause problems if the 
older speaker favours linguistic purism: see Section 
33.5 below.
14 Marcellesi’s works are not well known among 
English-speaking linguists, as they are only available 
in French.
15 The author is currently employed in the 
Endangered Languages Academic Programme at 
SOAS (School of Oriented and African Studies), part of 
the Project, but is free to express her own opinions.
16 http://www.neh.gov/grants/guidelines/del.
html, accessed 28 June 2008.
17 http://www.terralingua.org/, accessed 28 
June 2008.
REFERENCES
Ahmad, M. (2008) ‘What factors contribute to sign language 
endangerment?’. MA dissertation, School of Oriental and 
African Studies, London.
Aikhenvald, A. (2002) ‘Language obsolescence: progress or 
decay? The emergence of new grammatical categories in 
“language death”’, in D. Bradley and M. Bradley (eds), 
Language Endangerment and Language Maintenance. 
London: Routledge Curzon. pp. 144–55. 
Amery, R. (2000) Warrabarra Kaurna! Reclaiming an Australian 
Language. Lisse: Swets and Zeitlinger.
Ashmore, R. D., Jussim, L. and Wilder, D. (eds) (2001) Social 
Identity, Intergroup Conflict, and Conflict Reduction. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Baker, C. (1999) Encyclopaedia of Bilingualism and Bilingual 
Education. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Baker, C. (2001) Foundations of Bilingual Education and 
Bilingualism. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Bankston, C. L. III and Henry, J. (1998) ‘The silence of the 
gators: Cajun ethnicity and intergenerational transmission 
of Louisiana French’, Journal of Multilingual and 
Multicultural Development, 19: 1–23.
Bankston, C. L., III and Henry, J. (2000) ‘Spectacles of ethnic-
ity: festivals and the commodification of ethnic culture 
among Louisiana Cajuns’, Sociological Spectrum, 20: 
377–407.
Barrett, R. (2008) ‘Linguistic differentiation and Mayan 
language revitalization in Guatemala’, Journal of 
Sociolinguistics, 12(3): 275–305.
Bauman, R. (ed.) (2003) Voices of Modernity: Language 
Ideologies and the Politics of Inequality. Studies in the 
Social and Cultural Foundations of Language. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bennett, R. (2003) ‘Saving a language with computers, 
tape recorders, and radio’, in J. Reyhner, O. Trujillo, 
R. L. Carrasco and L. Lockard (eds), Nurturing Native 
Languages. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University. 
pp. 59–77. http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/NNL/NNL_5.pdf. 
Accessed 28 June 2008.
Benton, R. and Benton, N. (2001) ‘RLS in Aotearoa/
New Zealand 1989–1999’, in  J. A. Fishman (ed.), Can 
Threatened Languages be Saved? Reversing Language 
Shift, Revisited: A 21st Century Perspective. Clevedon, UK: 
Multi lingual Matters. pp. 423–50.
Bourdieu, P. (1977) Outline of a Theory of Practice. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Bradley. D. and Bradley, M. (eds) (2002) Language 
Endangerment and Language Maintenance. London: 
Routledge Curzon.
Brewer, M. B. (2001) ‘Intergroup identification and intergroup 
conflict: when does ingroup love become outgroup hate?’, in 
R. D. Ashmore, L. Jussim and D. Wilder (eds), pp. 17–41.
Social Identity, Intergroup Conflict, and Conflict Reduction. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cain, A. (2008) Paper presented at Workshop on Language 
Revitalisation, Centre for Language in Social Life, Lancaster 
University, 16 May 2008.
Calvet, J. -L. (2006) Towards an Ecology of World Languages. 
Cambridge: Polity.
Cameron, D. (1992) Researching Language: Issues of Power 
and Method. London: Routledge.
Cameron, D. (2007) ‘Language endangerment and verbal 
hygiene: history, morality and politics’, in A. Duchêne and 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
509
M. Heller (eds), Discourses of Endangerment. London: 
Continuum. pp. 268–87.
Cameron, D., Frazer, E., Harvey, P., Rampton, M. B. H. and 
Richardson, K. (1993) ‘The relations between researcher 
and researched: ethics, advocacy and empowerment’, in 
D. Graddol, J. Maybin and B. Stierer (eds), Researching 
Language and Literacy in Social Context. Clevedon, UK: 
The Open University/Multilingual Matters. pp.18–25.
Castells, M. (2004) The Power of Identity: The Information 
Age: Economy, Society and Culture. Oxford: Blackwell.
Cheng, C. (1996) ‘Quantifying dialect mutual intelligibility’, in 
C.-T. J. Huang, and Y.-H. A.  Li (eds), New Horizons in 
Chinese Linguistics. Dordrecht: Kluwer. pp. 269–92.
Cotter, C. (1999) ‘From folklore to “News at 6”: maintaining 
language and reframing identity through the media’, in 
M. Bucholz, A. C. Liang and L. A. Sutton (eds), Reinventing 
Identities: The Gendered Self in Discourse. New York: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 369–87.
Crasborn, O. and Zwitserlood, I. (2008) ‘Just in time? The 
importance of creating sign language archives’, paper 
presented at Sociolinguistics Symposium 17, Vrije 
Universiteit, Amsterdam, 3–5 April 2008.
Csató, É. Á. and Nathan, D. (2007) ‘Multiliteracy, past and 
present, in the Karaim communities’, Language 
Documentation and Description 4.
Crystal, D. (2000) Language Death. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Daftary, F. (2000) Insular Autonomy: A Framework for Conflict 
Settlement? A Comparative Study of Corsica and the 
Aaland Islands. Flensburg: European Centre for Minority 
Issues. http://www.ecmi.de/download/working_paper_9.
pdf. Accessed 27 June 2008.
Dalby, A. (2002) Language in Danger. London: Penguin.
Dauenhauer, N. M. and Dauenhauer, R. (1998) ‘Technical, 
emotional, and ideological issues in reversing language 
shift: examples from Southeast Alaska’, in L. A. Grenoble 
and L. J. Whaley (eds), Endangered Languages: Language 
Loss and Community Response. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. pp. 57–98.
Denison, N. (1977) ‘Language death or language suicide?’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 12: 
13–22.
de Swaan, A. (2004) ‘Endangered languages, sociolinguistics, 
and linguistic sentimentalism’, European Review, 12: 
567–80. doi: 10.1017/S1062798704000481.
Dobrin, L., Austin, P. and Nathan, D. (2007) ‘Dying to be 
counted: the commodification of endangered languages in 
documentary linguistics’, in P. Austin, O. Bond and 
D. Nathan (eds), Proceedings of Conference on Language 
Documentation and Linguistic Theory, 7–8 December 2007. 
London: School of Oriental and African Studies. pp. 59–68.
Dorian, N. C. (1977) ‘The problem of the semi-speakers in 
language death’, Linguistics, 191: 23–32.
Dorian, N. C. (1981) Language Death: The Life Cycle of a 
Scottish Gaelic Dialect. Philadelphia: University of 
Pennsylvania Press.
Dorian, N. C. (1987) ‘The value of maintenance efforts which 
are unlikely to succeed’, International Journal of the 
Sociology of Language, 68: 57–67.
Dorian, N. C. (1993) ‘A response to Ladefoged’s other view of 
endangered languages’, Language, 69: 575–9.
Dorian, N. C. (1994) ‘Choices and values in language shift 
and its study’, International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language, 110: 113–24.
Dorian, N. C. (1999) ‘Linguistic and ethnographic fieldwork’, 
in J. A. Fishman (ed.), Handbook of Ethnic Identity. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. pp. 25–41.
Duchêne, A. and Heller, M. (eds) (2007) Discourses of 
Endangerment. London: Continuum.
Edwards, J. R. (1985) Language, Society, and Identity. Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell.
Edwards, V. and Newcombe, L. P. (2005) ‘Language transmis-
sion in the family in Wales: an example of innovative 
language planning’, Language Problems and Language 
Planning, 29: 135–50.
Fennell, D. (1981) ‘Can a shrinking minority be saved? Lessons 
from the Irish experience’, in E. Haugen, J. McClure and 
D. Thompson (eds), Minority Languages Today: A Selection 
from the Papers Read at the First Conference on Minority 
Languages. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. 
pp. 32–9.
Fishman, J. A. (1965) ‘Who speaks what language to whom 
and when’, La Linguistique, 2: 67–88.
Fishman, J. A. (1989) Language and Ethnicity in Minority 
Sociolinguistic Perspective. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (1991) Reversing Language Shift: Theoretical 
and Empirical Foundations of Assistance to Threatened 
Languages. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Fishman, J. A. (ed.) (2001) Can Threatened Languages be 
Saved? Reversing Language Shift, Revisited: A 21st Century 
Perspective. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. 
Freeland, J. and Patrick, D. (eds) (2004) Language Rights and 
Language Survival. Manchester: St Jerome Press.
Giles, H., Bourhis, R. and Taylor, D. M. (1977) ‘Towards a 
theory of language in Ethnic Group Relations’, in H. Giles 
(ed.), Language, Ethnicity and Intergroup Relations. 
London: Academic Press. pp. 307–48.
Gnerre, M. (2008) ‘I heard it on the radio: indigenous lan-
guage radio and political activism’, paper presented at 
ELAP Workshop on Engagement and Activism in 
Endangered Languages Research, 2 May 2008, School of 
Oriental and African Studies, London.
Gordon, R. G., Jr. (ed.) (2005) Ethnologue: Languages of the 
World. 15th edn. Dallas, Tx.: SIL International. Online ver-
sion: http://www.ethnologue.com/. Accessed 6 June 2008.
Gorter, D. (2006) ‘Introduction: the study of the linguistic 
landscape as a new approach to multilingualism’, 
International Journal of Multilingualism, 3: 1–6.
Grenoble, L. A. and Whaley, L. J. (eds) (1998) Endangered 
Languages: Language Loss and Community Response. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Grenoble, L. A. and Whaley, L. J. (2006) Saving Languages: An 
Introduction to Language Revitalization. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Grimes, B. F. (2001) ‘Global language viability: causes, symp-
toms and cures for endangered languages’, Notes on 
Linguistics, 4: 205–23.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
510
Grinevald, C. (2003) ‘Speakers and documentation of 
endangered languages’, Language Documentation and 
Description, 1: 52–72. London: Hans Rausing Endangered 
Languages Project.
Gunther, W. (1989) ‘Language conservancy or: Can the 
anciently established British minority languages survive?’, 
in D. Gorter, J. F. Hoekstra, L. G. Jansma and J. Ytsma 
(eds), Fourth International Conference on Minority 
Languages, Vol. II: Western and Eastern European Papers. 
Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 53–68.
Haarmann, H. (1986) Language in Ethnicity: A View of Basic 
Ecological Relations. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Hale, K., Yamamoto, A., Krauss, M., Ladefoged, P. and 
Watahomigie, L. (1992) ‘Special issue on endangered 
languages’, Language, 68: 1–42.
Hammarstrom, H. (2008) ‘Counting languages in dialect con-
tinua using the criterion of mutual intelligibility’, Journal of 
Quantitative Linguistics, 15: 34–45.
Harrison, D. (2007) When Languages Die. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Heller, M. (2004) ‘Analysis and stance regarding language and 
social justice’, in J. Freeland and D. Patrick (eds), Language 
Rights and Language Survival. Manchester: St Jerome. 
pp. 283–6.
Hill, J. H. (2002) ‘“Expert Rhetorics” in advocacy for endan-
gered languages: who Is listening, and what do 
they hear?’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 12(2): 
119–33.
Hindley, R. (1990) The Death of the Irish Language: A 
Qualified Obituary. London: Routledge.
Hinton, L. (1997) ‘Survival of endangered languages: 
The 
Californian 
Master–Apprentice 
program’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 123: 
177–91.
Hinton, L. (2003) ‘How to teach when the teacher isn’t fluent’, 
in J. Reyhner, O. Trujillo, R. L. Carrasco and L. Lockard 
(eds), Nurturing Native Languages. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern 
Arizona University. pp. 79–92. http://jan.ucc.nau.edu/~jar/
NNL/NNL_6.pdf. Accessed 28 June 2008.
Hinton, L. and Hale, K. (eds) (2002) The Green Book of Language 
Revitalization in Practice. San Diego: Academic Press.
Hornberger, N. (ed.) (2008) Can Schools Save Indigenous 
Languages? Policy and Practice on Four Continents. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hornberger, N. H. and King, K. (1996) ‘Language revitalization 
in the Andes: can the schools reverse language shift?’, 
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 
17: 427–41.
Husband, C. and Saifullah-Khan, V. (1982) ‘The viability 
of ethnolinguistic vitality: some creative doubts’, Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 3: 
195–205.
Irvine, J. T. and Gal, S. (2000) ‘Language ideology and linguis-
tic differentiation’, in P. V. Kroskrity (ed.), Regimes of 
Language: Ideologies, Politics and Identities. Santa Fe, NM: 
School of American Research Press.
Jaffe, A. (1999) Ideologies in Action: Language Politics on 
Corsica. Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Jaffe, A. (2005) ‘L’éducation bilingue corse et la polynomie’ 
[‘Corsican bilingual education and polynomia’], Marges 
Linguistiques, 10: 282–300. http://www.revue-texto.net/
marges/marges/Documents%20Site%201/00_
ml102005/00_ml102005.pdf. Accessed 5 June 2008.
Kallen, J. (2005) ‘The linguistic landscape in Ireland: tourism 
and national (re)presentation’, paper presented at 
Association Internationale de Linguistique Appliquée, 
Madison, Wisconsin, 24–29 July 2005.
Komarova, N., and Niyogi, P. (2004) ‘Optimizing the mutual 
intelligibility of linguistic agents in a shared worlds’. 
Artificial Intelligence, 154: 1–42.
Kelly-Holmes, H. (ed.) (2000) Special Issue on ‘Minority 
Language Broadcasting’, Current Issues in Language and 
Society, 7. http://www.multilingual-matters.net/cils/007/2/
default.htm. Accessed 28 June 2008.
Keskitalo, I. (1981) ‘The status of the Sámi language’, in 
E. Haugen, J. McClure and D. Thompson (eds), Minority 
Languages Today: A Selection from the Papers Read at the 
First Conference on Minority Languages. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press. pp. 152–62. 
Kloss, H. (1967) ‘“Abstand languages” and “Ausbau 
languages”’, Anthropological Linguistics, 9: 29–71.
Krauss, M. (1992) ‘The world’s languages in crisis’, Language, 
68: 4–10.
Krauss, M. (1997) ‘The indigenous languages of the North: a 
report on their present state’, Senri Ethnological Studies, 
44: 1–34.
Kroskrity, P. V. (ed.) (2000) Regimes of Language: Ideologies, 
Polities, and Identities. Santa Fe, NM: School of American 
Research Press.
Ladefoged, P. (1992) ‘Another view of endangered 
languages’, Language, 68: 809–11.
Laponce, J. (1987) Languages and Their Territories. Toronto, 
UK: University of Toronto Press.
Lee, T. S. and McLaughlin, D. (2001) ‘Reversing Navajo 
language shift, revisited’, in J. A. Fishman (ed.), Can 
Threatened Languages be Saved? Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. pp. 23–43.
Le Page, R. B. and Tabouret-Keller, A. (1985) Acts of Identity: 
Creole-Based Approaches to Language and Ethnicity. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lord, N. (1996) ‘Native tongues’, Sierra, 81: 46–69.
Maffi, L. (2003) ‘The “business” of language endangerment: 
saving languages or helping people keep them alive?’, in 
H. Tonkin and T. G. Reagan (eds), Language in the Twenty-
First Century: Selected Papers of the Millennial Conferences 
of the Center for Research and Documentation on World 
Language Problems. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 67–86.
Makoni, S., and Pennycook, A. (eds) (2006) Disinventing and 
Reconstituting Languages. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Malik, K. (2000) ‘Let them die’, Prospect, November. 2000: 
16–17. Reproduced at http://www.kenanmalik.com/essays/
die.html. Accessed 28 June 2008.
Marcellesi, J.-B. (1986) ‘Actualité du processus de 
naissance de langues en domaine roman’, Cahiers de 

LANGUAGE ENDANGERMENT
511
Linguistique Sociale, Vol. 9, Sociolinguistique Romane. 
Rouen: University of Rouen. pp. 21–9. Reproduced at 
http://membres.lycos.fr/bulot/cauchois/Marcel.htm. 
Accessed 28 June 2008.
Marcellesi, J.-B., Bulot, T., and Blanchet, P. (2003) 
Sociolinguistique: Epistemologie, Langues Regionales, 
Polynomie. Paris: l’Harmattan.
May, S. (2004) ‘Rethinking linguistic human rights: 
answering questions of identity, essentialism and 
mobility’, in J. Freeland and D. Patrick (eds), Language 
Rights and Language Survival. Manchester: St Jerome. 
pp. 35–54.
Mohanty, S. P. (2000) ‘The epistemic status of cultural iden-
tity’, in P. M. L. Moya and M. R. Hames-Garcia (eds), 
Reclaiming Identity: Realist Theory and the Predicament of 
Postmodernism. Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press. pp. 29–66.
Moseley, C. (ed.) (2009) UNESCO Atlas of the World’s 
Languages in Danger of Disappearing. UNESCO. Online 
edition at, http://www.unesco.org/culture/ich/index.php?
pg=00206. Accessed 5 June 2009.
Moseley, C., Ostler, N. and Ouzzate, H. (eds) (2001) 
Endangered Languages and the Media: Papers from the 
5th Foundation for Endangered Languages Conference. 
Bath: Foundation for Endangered Languages.
Mühlhäusler, P. (1990) ‘“Reducing” Pacific languages to 
writing’, in J. E. Joseph and T.J. Taylor (eds), Ideologies of 
language. London: Routledge. pp. 189–205.
Mühlhäusler, P. (2000) ‘Language planning and language 
ecology’, Current Issues in Language Planning, 
1(3): 306–67.
Muysken, P. (2008) ‘Endangered language documentation 
and sociolinguistics: the case of Bolivia’, plenary address at 
Sociolinguistics Symposium 17, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, 3–5 April 2008.
Myhill, J. (1999) ‘Identity, territoriality and minority language 
survival’, Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development, 20: 34–50.
Nettle, D., and Romaine, S. (2000) Vanishing Voices: The 
Extinction of the World’s Languages. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
Newman, M., Trenchs-Parera, M. and Ng, S. (2008) 
‘Normalizing bilingualism: the effects of the Catalonian 
linguistic normalization policy one generation after’, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 12(3): 306–33.
Nicholson, R. (1990) ‘Maori total immersion courses for adults 
in Aotearoa/New Zealand: a personal perspective’, in 
J. Reyhner (ed.), Effective Language Education Practices 
and Native Languages Survival. Choctaw, OK: Native 
American Language Issues. pp. 107–20.
Nieldzielski, N. A. and Preston, D. R. (2003) Folk Linguistics. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Omoniyi, T., and White, G. (eds) (2006) The Sociolinguistics of 
Identity. London: Continuum.
Ó Riagáin, P. (1997) Language Policy and Social 
Reproduction: Ireland 1893–1993. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Patrick, D. (2004) ‘The politics of language rights in the east-
ern Canadian Arctic’, in J. Freeland and D. Patrick (eds), 
Language Rights and Language Survival. Manchester: 
St Jerome. pp. 171–90.
Rice, K. and Saxon, L. (2002) ‘Issues of standardization 
and community in Aboriginal language lexicography’, in 
W. Frawley, K. C. Hill and P. Munro (eds), Making 
Dictionaries: Preserving Indigenous Languages of the 
Americas. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
pp. 125–54.
Ricento, T. (ed.) (2005) An Introduction to Language policy. 
Oxford: Blackwell.
Romaine, S. (2006) ‘Planning for the survival of linguistic 
diversity’, Language Policy, 5: 441–73. 
Ruíz, R. (1984) ‘Orientations in language planning’, 
NABE Journal, 8: 15–34. Reprinted in S. L. McKay, and 
S. L. C. Wong, (eds) (1988) Language Diversity: Problem or 
Resource? New York: Newbury House.
Sallabank, J. (2006) ‘Guernsey French, identity and language 
endangerment’, in T. Omoniyi, and White, G. (eds), 
The Sociolinguistics of Identity. London: Continuum, 
pp. 131–56.
Sallabank, J. (2007) ‘Endangered language maintenance and 
social networks’, in P. Austin, O. Bond and D. Nathan 
(eds), Proceedings of Conference on Language 
Documentation and Linguistic Theory, 7–8 December 
2007. London: School of Oriental and African Studies. 
pp. 197–208.
Schieffelin, B., Woolard, K. A. and Kroskrity, P. V. (eds) (1998) 
Language Ideologies: Practice and Theory. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Schiffman, H. F. (1996) Linguistic Culture and Language 
Policy. London: Routledge.
Schiffman, H. F. (2002) ‘Comment’, International Journal of 
the Sociology of Language, 157: 141–50.
Schmidt, A. (1985) Young people’s Dyirbal: An Example of 
Language Death from Australia. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2002) ‘Language key to life on Earth’, 
Language Magazine, April 2002: 22–4.
Sutherland, W. J. (2003) ‘Parallel extinction risk and global 
distribution of languages and species’, Nature, 423: 
276–9.
Tang, C. and van Heuven, V. J. (2009) ‘Mutual intelligibility of 
Chinese dialects experimentally tested’, Lingua 119: 
709–32.
Thieberger, N. (1990) ‘Language maintenance: why bother?’, 
Multilingua, 9: 333–58.
Thornton Media, Inc. (2008) ‘Language tools for Indian 
country’, 
http://www.ndnlanguage.com/story.html. 
Accessed 23 June 2008.
Trudgill, P. (2004) ‘Glocalisation and the Ausbau sociolinguis-
tics of modern Europe’, in A. Duszak and U. Okulska (eds), 
Speaking from the Margin: Global English from a European 
Perspective. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.
UNESCO Ad Hoc Expert Group on Endangered Languages. 
(2003a) ‘Language vitality and endangerment’, http://
www.unesco.org/culture/ich/doc/src/00120-EN.pdf. 
Accessed 27 June 2008.
UNESCO. (2003b) ‘Safeguarding of endangered languages: 
recommendations for action plans’, International Expert 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
512
Meeting, Paris, 10–12 March 2003. http://www.unesco.
org/culture/ich/doc/src/00117-EN.pdf. Accessed 27 June 
2008.
Urtéaga, E. (2005) ‘La langue basque au début du XXIe siècle’ 
[‘The Basque language in the early 21st century’], Marges 
Linguistiques, 10: 175–89. http://www.revue-texto.net/
marges/marges/Documents%20Site%201/00_
ml102005/00_ml102005.pdf. Accessed 5 June 2008.
Walsh, M. (2005) ‘Will Indigenous languages survive?’, 
Annual Review of Anthropology, 34: 293–315.
Williamson, R. C. (1991) Minority Languages and Bilingualism: 
Case Studies in Maintenance and Shift. Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex.
Wright, S. (2004) Language Policy and Language Planning: 
Nationalism and Globalisation. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Wright, S. (2007) ‘The right to speak one’s own language: 
reflections on theory and practice’, Language Policy, 6: 
203–24. 

Global Englishes
A l a s t a i r  P e n n y c o o k
34
34.1 INTRODUCTION
It is not hard to make a case that English is inti-
mately involved with processes of globalization. 
From its wide use in many domains across the 
world, or the massive efforts in both state and 
private educational sectors to provide access to the 
language, to its role in global media, international 
forums, business, finance, politics and diplomacy, 
it is evident not only that English is widely used 
across the globe but also that it is part of those 
processes we call globalization. What this means 
for English, other languages and cultures, and 
processes of global change, however, is much 
harder to determine. Much work over the past 
20 years has been done under the label of world 
Englishes (WE), a term that has been employed 
with various meanings (Bolton, 2004). It may be 
used as an umbrella term to cover all varieties 
of English across the world (analysed from a 
diversity of perspectives), to refer more narrowly 
to new varieties of English that have developed, 
particularly in former British colonies, or more 
narrowly again to the particular framework devel-
oped by Braj Kachru and his colleagues to analyse 
such Englishes. 
The focus of this chapter is considerably 
broader than this world Englishes focus: it looks 
critically not only at this Kachruvian school but 
also at linguistic imperialism and English as a 
lingua franca (ELF). Most important, it does so 
within a focus on globalization (hence global 
Englishes). In order to address such concerns, it 
is important first of all to establish what is meant 
by globalization. As with all socio-linguistic ques-
tions, mapping relations between language and 
society depends not only on robust understandings 
of language but also on strong conceptualizations 
of the social. I therefore sketch out some of 
the major concerns around globalization in an 
attempt to clarify what is at stake when we con-
sider English globally. This will be followed by a 
sociology of global English, with a focus on the 
ways English is related to media, development, 
inequality, religion and other key concerns in a 
globalizing world. Then I shall turn to concerns 
about the language itself, as a threat to other 
languages, as a lingua franca, as a collection of 
varieties of English (hence global Englishes). The 
chapter concludes with a discussion of potential 
new ways forward for thinking about global 
Englishes. 
34.2 GLOBALIZATION AND ENGLISH
Vast amounts have been written about globaliza-
tion. Lacking space or reason to try to cover this 
burgeoning literature, I shall instead draw 
attention to certain themes that have implications 
for discussions of English. First, globalization is 
not only about economic processes but also about 
political, technological and cultural processes as 
well. Kumaravadivelu (2008: 32), sees globaliza-
tion in terms of new ‘interconnections and flows 
among nations, economies and peoples. It results 
in the transformation of contemporary social 
life in all its economic, political, cultural, techno-
logical, ecological, and individual dimensions’. 
To view all aspects of globalization as flowing 
from the role of international capital is to overlook 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
514
several concerns. While globalization is of course 
interlinked with international capital, it is by no 
means reductively determined by it. Capitalism 
remains a driving force in the world, yet it is not 
clear that we live in an era of capitalism so much 
as corporatism (Graham, Luke and Luke, 2007; 
Pennycook, 2007), where a particular set of neo-
liberal ideologies predominate, turning publicly-
owned sectors into privately-run corporations and 
emphasizing a free market to which large corpora-
tions should have access. Although global ine-
qualities of poverty, health and education remain 
primary concerns, it is more useful to see globali-
zation as complexly related to these than as syn-
onymous with their cause. International relations 
of trade, commerce, pollution, interaction and 
intervention are fundamentally inequitable, but it 
is not useful to reduce globalization only to a term 
that reflects such inequities.
Secondly, therefore, to suggest that globaliza-
tion is only a process of US or Western domina-
tion of the world is to take a narrow and ultimately 
unproductive view of global relations. Likewise, 
to view culture and language in terms only of 
reflections of the economic is to miss the point 
that new technologies and communications are 
enabling immense and complex flows of people, 
signs, sounds and images across multiple borders 
in multiple directions. The very point about 
globalization is that it is global, and thus inevita-
bly caught up in multiple influences. Indian and 
Philippine call centres, indigenous education 
conferences, global migrations of workers, 
Japanese animated cartoons, anti-globalization 
networks, fashion trends, salsa classes, gay and 
lesbian travel organizations, the ubiquity and 
similarity of urban graffiti – these are all part of 
globalization. Globalization may be better under-
stood as a compression of time and space, an 
intensification of social, economic, cultural and 
political relations, a series of global linkages that 
render events in one location of potential and 
immediate importance in other, quite distant loca-
tions (Giddens, 1999). Education is a good 
example of this, with students moving in increas-
ing numbers to take up educational possibilities 
elsewhere (Singh and Doherty, 2004), resulting in 
changing practices in the new ‘educational contact 
zones’, and new flows of knowledges across 
borders. This diversity of concerns can be cap-
tured in part by Appadurai’s (1996) formulation of 
‘scapes’ – ethnoscapes (the new mobility of tour-
ists, migrants and refugees), technoscapes (new 
technologies), financescapes (flows of capital), 
mediascapes (global media) and ideoscapes (ideas 
and values) – and the various additions that have 
been made to them, including sacriscapes (reli-
gion) (Waters, 1995), eduscapes (global educa-
tional movements), and of interest to the theme of 
this paper, global linguascapes (languages) 
(Pennycook, 2007). 
Thirdly, globalization is both old and new: we 
need to understand both its historical precedents 
and its contemporary particularity. While Steger 
(2003) suggests that globalization can be mapped 
more or less against the entirety of human history, 
others, such as Robertson (2003), describe succes-
sive waves of globalization starting with the era of 
European expansionism. For Mignolo (2000: 
236), although the scope and speed of current 
globalization is without precedent, it is ‘the most 
recent configuration of a process that can be 
traced back to the 1500s, with the beginning 
of transatlantic exploration and the consolidation 
of Western hegemony’. Such an account of 
globalization, as intimately tied to colonial expan-
sion, accords well with an overview of the spread 
of English: from a minor language isolated to an 
island off the north coast of Europe in the 
sixteenth century, it was the expansion of British 
colonialism, as people moved to colonize newly 
invaded territories (North America, Australia), and 
to work within newly colonized states (India, 
Nigeria), that led to its first wave of expansion 
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. The 
subsequent emergence of the United States of 
America as a dominant global player in the 
twentieth century played a major role in the cur-
rent dominance of English. Such perspectives, 
that render globalization the latest manifestation 
of European imperialism, have, however, been 
critiqued for failing to account for ‘the novelty of 
the structures and logics of power that order the 
contemporary world. Empire is not a weak echo of 
modern imperialisms but a fundamentally new 
form of rule’ (Hardt and Negri, 2000: 146). 
Unlike the old imperialism(s), which were 
centred around the economic and political struc-
tures and exchanges of the nation-state (indeed, 
the two were in many ways mutually constitutive), 
globalization may also be seen to represent a fun-
damentally new set of relations. A view of globali-
zation as the historical continuation of European 
imperialism also suffers from a Eurocentrism that 
overlooks the role of other empires (Ottoman, 
Chinese, Japanese, to name a few) and global 
forces. It is nevertheless not so hard to reconcile 
these two arguments: on the one hand, if we lose 
sight of the historical precedents of the current 
state of globalization, we lose a crucial under-
standing of how current global conditions have 
come into being; on the other, if we focus too 
much on continuity, we fail to see that the forces 
of globalization demand new ways of thinking, 
new solutions to new problems. Similarly with 
English, it is useful on the one hand to account for 
its current global position in terms of the shift 
from eighteenth- and nineteenth-century British 

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
515
colonialism to twentieth-century American 
imperialism. Yet it is also important, on the other 
hand, to acknowledge that the new conditions of 
twenty-first-century globalization require new 
ways of thinking about states, languages and 
social orders. 
So finally, globalization demands that we think 
differently. The rapid and extensive changes 
brought about by globalization cannot be concep-
tualized through pre-globalization lenses. There is 
an important distinction between an understand-
ing of globalization as a realist position that 
focuses on the state of the world under late capi-
talism, and an alternative position that focuses on 
the ways in which globalization undermines our 
modernist modes of thought. This way of thinking 
is, in part, captured by Radhakrishnan’s (2007: 
313) explanation of ‘worldliness’ as acknowledg-
ing ‘that the very one-ness of the world can only 
be understood on the basis of an irreducible per-
spectival heterogeneity’. Not only does globaliza-
tion thus invoke new forms of localization but  
also it changes them. As Edwards and Usher 
(2008: 24) explain, ‘the integration of the globe 
reconfigures rather than supplants diversity, in the 
process introducing new forms of economic, 
social and cultural creolisation’. Central here is 
not only the concern as to whether globalization is 
a process of homogenization or heterogenization 
(increasing similarity or increasing diversity) 
(Pennycook, 2003; Kumaravadivelu, 2008), but 
also what new forms of language, culture and 
knowledge it brings about and what new ways of 
thinking about these it makes possible. 
It is evident, therefore, that while we cannot 
deal with English without also dealing with glo-
balization, we need to consider very carefully how 
we understand globalization in order to under-
stand global Englishes. English is now embedded 
in many parts of the global system: one need only 
map it against a list of ‘scapes’ (finance, media, 
tourist, religion, knowledge production) to see its 
global significance. At the very least, we need to 
understand how English operates in an uneven 
world (cf. Radhakrishnan, 2003), how English is 
involved in global flows of culture and knowl-
edge, and how English is used and appropriated 
by users of English round the world, from popular 
culture to unpopular politics, from international 
capital to local transaction, from diplomacy to 
peacekeeping, from religious proselytizing 
to secular resistance. Yet the very conditions of 
globalization and the role of global English also 
demand that we rethink what we mean by 
language, language spread, native speakers, or 
multilingualism. Indeed, globalization requires 
us to consider whether we should continue to 
think of languages as separate, distinguishable, 
countable entities. I shall return to these concerns 
at the end of this chapter after looking in greater 
depth at the social, cultural and political roles 
played by English, and the changes that English 
has undergone. 
34.3 ENGLISH IN AN UNEVEN WORLD
The first set of concerns about English and glo-
balization are questions of the sociology of English 
and its relation to globalization. It is common in 
language studies and English language teaching to 
talk in terms of English as the ‘language of inter-
national communication’ rather than a language 
embedded in processes of globalization. English 
is all too often assumed to be a language that 
holds out the promise of social and economic 
development to all those who learn it, a language 
of equal opportunity, a language that the world 
needs in order to be able to communicate. Yet any 
critical analysis suggests that it is also an exclu-
sionary class dialect, favouring particular people, 
countries, cultures, forms of knowledge and pos-
sibilities of development; it is a language which 
creates barriers as much as it presents possibili-
ties. As Tollefson (2000: 8) warns, ‘At a time 
when English is widely seen as a key to the eco-
nomic success of nations and the economic well-
being of individuals, the spread of English also 
contributes to significant social, political, and 
economic inequalities’. 
Bruthiaux (2002: 292–3) argues convincingly 
that, for many of the world’s poor, English lan-
guage education is ‘an outlandish irrelevance,’ and 
‘talk of a role for English language education in 
facilitating the process of poverty reduction and a 
major allocation of public resources to that end is 
likely to prove misguided and wasteful’. Bringing 
a sophisticated economic analysis to the question 
of global English, Lysandrou and Lysandrou 
(2003: 230) argue that ‘the embrace of the English 
language is to the detriment of the majorities of 
communities the world over insofar as it contrib-
utes to their systematic dispossession’.1 Thus we 
need to distinguish very clearly between individu-
ally-oriented access arguments about escape from 
poverty, and class-oriented arguments about large-
scale poverty reduction. 
For those who already speak English, the economic 
value of the language translates directly into 
greater opportunities in education, business, and 
employment. For those who must learn English, 
however, particularly those who do not have 
access to high-quality English language education, 
the spread of English presents a formidable obstacle 
to education, employment, and other activities 
requiring English proficiency (Tollefson, 2000: 9).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
516
As Ramanathan’s (2005: 112) study of English 
and Vernacular medium education in India shows, 
English is a deeply divisive language, tied on the 
one hand to the denigration of vernacular lan-
guages, cultures, and ways of learning and teach-
ing, and, on the other, dovetailing ‘with the values 
and aspirations of the elite Indian middle class’. 
While English opens doors to some, it is simulta-
neously a barrier to learning, development and 
employment for others.
Some of the harshest critiques of the global role 
of English have come from Robert Phillipson 
(1992, 1994, 2003), whose views have attracted a 
great deal of debate. There is nothing in fact very 
controversial about Phillipson’s definition of 
English linguistic imperialism in terms of the 
ways in which English is constantly promoted 
over other languages (1992: 47), or his concern 
with the role of institutions such as the British 
Council and their constant sponsorship of English 
language teaching, nor indeed with his focus on 
how the promotion of English has become embed-
ded in various tenets of English language 
teaching, such as promoting native speaker 
teachers of English over their non-native speaker 
counterparts, or suggesting that the learning of 
English is better started as early as possible 
(a trend that is continuing worldwide, with English 
language teaching occurring more and more at the 
primary and even pre-primary levels). And despite 
major debates about the notion of language rights 
(see  Wee, 2005; Brutt-Griffler, 2002a, 2002b), 
there is nothing particularly controversial either 
about broad support for languages other than 
English in the face of the dominance of English 
in education systems and other institutions 
worldwide. If this were all that was at stake in the 
notion of linguistic imperialism, the debate would 
only be about the detrimental effects of the pro-
motion of English over other languages, and the 
extent of the threat that this poses to the use, and 
in some cases the existence, of other languages. 
These are clearly concerns we need to continue to 
take very seriously.
Phillipson is concerned with much more than 
this, however, since he also argues that English is 
deeply connected to particular forms of Western 
culture and knowledge. ‘Linguistic imperialism’, 
he suggests, ‘dovetails with communicative, cul-
tural, educational, and scientific imperialism in a 
rapidly evolving world in which corporate-led 
globalization is seeking to impose or induce a 
neo-imperial world order’ (Phillipson, 2006: 357). 
This is a much stronger claim than one that 
suggests only that English is being promoted over 
other languages, since it links English on the one 
hand to particular forms of culture and knowl-
edge, and on the other to a process of globaliza-
tion that is always in favour of certain neo-imperial 
powers and is always in the direction of homoge-
nization. At stake therefore in this vision of 
English linguistic imperialism is not only the 
dominance of English in relation to other lan-
guages but also the role English plays in much 
broader processes of the dominance of forms of 
global capital and the homogenization of world 
culture (Phillipson, 1999: 274). 
This is, of course, a much larger claim and a 
much harder relationship to demonstrate beyond a 
general observation concerning the conjunction of 
the spread of English and certain economic and 
political formations. Yet for Phillipson (2008: 38), 
‘acceptance of the status of English, and its 
assumed neutrality implies uncritical adherence to 
the dominant world disorder, unless policies to 
counteract neolinguistic imperialism and to resist 
linguistic capital dispossession are in force’. 
While Phillipson thus quite appropriately locates 
English within inequitable relations of globaliza-
tion, and shows that rather than an accidental 
process, the global spread of English has been 
very deliberate policy, his vision of globalization 
is also a narrow ‘homogenization’ perspective 
(Pennycook, 2003; Kumaravadivelu, 2008) that 
allows for little understanding of the complexity 
of global flows and resistances. This perspective 
cannot adequately account for the ways in which 
the spread of English has also been a result of an 
active desire for English (see Brutt-Griffler, 
2002a), which in turn cannot be dismissed as a 
form of misguided subjection to global hegemony 
without also bringing in to play a heavy-handed 
notion of ideology that implies that the demand 
for English is only a superstructural reflection of 
neo-capital and English infrastructure.
While we ignore Phillipson’s warnings at our 
peril, it is also crucial to understand the ways in 
which English is resisted and appropriated—how 
English users ‘may find ways to negotiate, alter 
and oppose political structures, and reconstruct 
their languages, cultures and identities to their 
advantage. The intention is not to reject English, 
but to reconstitute it in more inclusive, ethical, and 
democratic terms’ (Canagarajah, 1999: 2). One of 
the problems, as Bruthiaux (2008) points out, 
caused by the rhetoric of linguistic imperialism 
is that the particular understanding of language 
and globalization that it promotes occludes other 
critical approaches to English and globalization. 
By assuming a globalization-as-homogenization 
thesis, by linking English indelibly to forms of 
neoliberal capital, and by supporting nationalist 
counter-discourses, the linguistic imperialist 
position presents the same flattened world that it 
aims to critique. The equation of a linguistic impe-
rialism thesis with a critical standpoint, and the 
frequent dismissal of this totalizing version of 
events on the grounds that it overstates the case, 

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
517
draws attention away from the necessity to evalu-
ate the global spread of English critically and 
carefully. 
We also need to consider with care the kinds of 
oppositional strategies that different critical frame-
works engender: ‘If inaction on language policy in 
Europe continues, at the national and suprana-
tional levels’, Phillipson (2003: 192) warns, ‘we 
may be heading for an American-English only 
Europe’. While the ways in which English has 
come to dominate exchanges in European con-
texts need to be considered carefully, the measures 
taken to oppose it also need to be considered with 
caution. Arguing for the need to safeguard diver-
sity through the support of other European 
languages, particularly French, Hagège (2006: 37; 
my translation), for example, argues that ‘to 
defend a culture is also to defend the language in 
which it is expressed’. To defend diversity in 
terms of bolstering national languages, however, 
is to operate with a view that the nation-state and 
its attendant languages is a guarantor of diversity, 
a view that runs counter to the broader image of 
diversity put forward both by more complex 
models of a plurilingual Europe (see the DYLAN 
project, for example) and by proponents of a 
creolist position, which valorizes mixing and 
hybridity over the purisms of national languages 
(Bernabé, Chamoiseau and Confiant, 1993). 
More broadly, this concern over the threat to 
other languages posed by English has become part 
of the wider debate over linguistic human rights, 
and whether linguistic diversity can be guaranteed 
through international legislation (Skutnabb-
Kangas, 2000). Widely debated in terms of its 
practicality, whether the focus should be on lin-
guistic or cultural diversity, and how linguistic and 
minority rights are related (May, 2001; Wee, 
2005), this ‘willingness to use the language of 
human rights on the global level to frame local 
linguistic demands vis-à-vis global English’ 
(Sonntag, 2003: 25) may also fall into the trap of 
continuing to promote the very ways of thinking 
about language and diversity that are part of the 
problem. A language rights perspective thus pro-
motes the defence of linguistic diversity in terms 
of less powerful languages being accorded equal 
rights with dominant languages, and does so 
within a political perspective on human rights that 
promotes global solutions to local problems. 
The point here is not that we should avoid ques-
tions of power in relation to English: any good 
sociolinguistic study has to make power central. 
What we need, however, is a focus on the work-
ings of power at the local level, rather than 
assumptions about the effects of power based on 
totalizing analyses: good sociolinguistics also has 
to be local (Pennycook, 2010). If we look, for 
example, at the question of the motivations to 
learn English, it is important to move beyond 
assumptions that English is learned only in rela-
tion to pragmatic goals of social and economic 
development. As Piller and Takahashi (2006) 
observe, we need to understand the gender and 
sexual politics involved in English language learn-
ing, since English is marketed in relation to a 
particular set of images of sexual desire. Thus 
‘English emerges as a powerful tool to construct a 
gendered identity and to gain access to the roman-
ticized West’. For young Japanese women, they 
argue, ‘surrounded by the multiple discourses of 
English as a desirable and powerful language’, 
this desire for English becomes ‘increasingly gen-
dered and romanticized’ (Piller and Takahashi, 
2006: 69). 
In the context of the Philippines we get a very 
different story. With around eight million Filipino 
working overseas, from domestic workers in 
Singapore or Hong Kong to construction workers 
in Southeast Asia or the Middle East, and boat 
crews across the world, the Philippines has devel-
oped educational and linguistic policies to develop 
and encourage this export of workers. This policy 
of English for global competitiveness (Lorente 
and Tupas 2002) means that English has become 
an increasingly commodified language through 
the educational system, so that the export of work-
ers with greater English linguistic capital can 
bring a greater economic return on the educational 
investment. As Tupas (2008: 98) points out, this 
‘commodification of English in the Philippines’ 
should not be considered in terms of ‘English as a 
monolithic language since, more importantly, it is 
the different English language proficiencies that 
are commodified in terms of the varying mone-
tary, instrumental and symbolic values attached to 
them by the market’. Lorente’s (2007) study of 
Filipino domestic workers in Singapore, and the 
‘scripts of servitude’ that they learn to gain jobs, 
shows how these different forms of linguistic 
capital operate in a competitive job market where 
particular performances in English are valued in 
particular ways. Such studies allow us to see how 
this global language is always also a local lan-
guage caught up in local economic and political 
relations. 
For Phillipson and Skutnabb-Kangas (1996: 
439; italics in original) English is part of ‘the 
homogenization of world culture … spearheaded 
by films, pop culture, CNN and fast-food chains’. 
More detailed analyses of popular culture, the 
complex global circuits of flow of culture and 
language, and the ways in which languages are 
borrowed, used, taken up and changed, however, 
suggest that we need more multifaceted investiga-
tions of these processes than such dismissals 
of mass cultural homogenization (Pennycook, 
2007). As studies of hip-hop and language use 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
518
(Alim, Ibrahim and Pennycook, 2009), for exam-
ple, have shown, while certain hubs of cultural 
production, such as the metropolitan centres of 
France and the USA, remain highly influential, 
the flows of popular culture and language are by 
no means simply from centre to periphery, but 
rather operate in highly complex and dynamic 
circuits of influence. While the flow back into the 
centres may be limited, the directions and take-up 
of cultural production are many and diverse. 
Once cultural formations such as hip-hop become 
localized, furthermore, the movement into local 
languages, and particularly the mixing of local 
and metropolitan languages, brings about new 
relations among languages and cultures. In addi-
tion, engagement with popular culture in diverse 
contexts is by no means a process of passive con-
sumption; rather it is about the active construction 
of different possible worlds and identities.
Amongst many other domains in which English 
is tied in particular ways to forms of culture and 
knowledge, the relations between English and 
religion are important. As Karmani (2005: 262) 
observes, ‘as the “war on terror” rages on military, 
political, and media fronts, a crucial much-forgot-
ten battle is also being contested on the linguistic 
front: between “Islam and English” ’. The promo-
tion, use and teaching of English in such contexts 
cannot be understood without an appreciation of 
the control of oil, current concerns about terror-
ism, and the recent increase in global battles over 
religious affiliation. Attention has also been drawn 
recently to the connections between English lan-
guage teaching and Christian missionary activity 
(Edge, 2003; Pennycook and Coutand-Marin, 
2003). As Varghese and Johnston observe, the 
widespread use of English, and the opportunities 
this provides for missionary work dressed up as 
English language teaching (ELT), raises 
profound moral questions about the professional 
activities and purposes of teachers and organiza-
tions in our occupation. The status of ELT in 
missionary work is especially important in light of 
post-9/11 developments in world politics and the 
role of an American foreign and domestic policy 
driven increasingly by imperialist goals and guided 
by an evangelical Christian agenda (2007: 6).
As part of a comprehensive sociolinguistics of 
global English, therefore, we undoubtedly need 
closely studied accounts of the ways in which 
English is embedded in local economies of desire, 
and the ways in which demand for English is part 
of a larger picture of images of change, moderni-
zation, access and longing; it is tied to the 
languages, cultures, styles and aesthetics of popu-
lar culture, with its particular attractions for youth, 
rebellion and conformity; it is enmeshed within 
local economies, and all the inclusions, exclusions 
and inequalities this may entail; it is bound up 
with changing modes of communication, from 
shifting Internet2 uses to its role in text-messag-
ing; it is increasingly entrenched in educational 
systems, bringing to the fore many concerns about 
knowledge, pedagogy and the curriculum. We 
need to understand the diversity of what English is 
and what it means in all these contexts, and we 
need to do so not with prior assumptions about 
globalization and its effects, but with critical stud-
ies of the local embeddedness of English. 
34.4  THE CHANGING FACE OF WORLD 
ENGLISHES
Critiquing the linguistic imperialist take on the 
global spread of English for being in itself a ‘new 
form of linguistic colonialism’, Bhatt (2005: 33) 
argues that such a view overlooks ‘the role various 
Englishes play in different social, economic, and 
political market-places’ in contexts such as India. 
This perspective shifts the viewpoint in two sig-
nificant ways. First it stresses the local contexts of 
English use: while English may be a global lan-
guage, this also always implies local usage, which 
needs to be understood contextually. Secondly, it 
turns its focus away from sociologies of English 
and instead looks at the sociolinguistics of the 
language in terms of the effects that the global 
spread of English has wrought on English itself. 
This becomes an inherently pluralist endeavour, 
focusing on different Englishes in different con-
texts. While the WE agenda has dominated this 
focus since the 1980s, the more recent emergent 
focus on ELF has also engendered considerable 
current debate. 
Rejecting the dominance of native speaker 
(‘inner circle’) varieties of English, the WE per-
spective has taken up a strong focus on heterogeny 
by looking at ‘implications of pluricentricity … 
the new and emerging norms of performance, and 
the bilingual’s creativity as a manifestation of the 
contextual and formal hybridity of Englishes’ 
(Kachru, 1997: 66). The WE paradigm has focused 
on the ways in which English has become locally 
adapted and institutionalized to create different 
varieties of English (different Englishes) around 
the world (B. Kachru, 1985, 1986, 1992; Y. Kachru 
and Nelson, 1996). This work has been very sig-
nificant in a number of ways. It has opened up a 
large field of study of difference in terms of new 
Englishes and has made it possible to argue that 
different forms of English should be understood 
as local varieties rather than errors, interlan-
guages, dialects or misformations. The central 
focus has been on descriptions of those varieties 

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
519
of English that have developed in former British 
colonies where English has an internal role within 
the country (Singaporean, Indian, Philippine, 
Malaysian, Nigerian and Kenyan Englishes, 
amongst others). 
Bhatt (2005: 26) talks of the 
evidence of local practices to demonstrate 
creativity and systematicity in the so-called English 
linguistic ‘chaos.’ The examination of currently 
evolving hybrid codes and discourses provides an 
understanding of how Indian English speakers and 
writers navigate sociolinguistically between their 
regional riches and the homogenized global 
norms. 
From studies of the particular use of particles such 
as ‘lah’ in Singaporean and Malaysian English 
to the use of the invariant ‘isn’t it’ across new 
varieties (for discussion, see Bhatt, 2005), from 
analyses of syllable-timed as opposed to stress-
timed versions of English (the tendency in many 
new versions of English to use intonation patterns 
based on more even patterns of stress than the 
particular patterns of central varieties) to the regu-
larization of structures such as ‘discuss about’ (by 
analogy with ‘talk about’, ‘think about’ and so 
on), and from the vocabulary of Hong Kong 
English (chop (personal seal or stamp), astronaut 
(someone whose family is based overseas but who 
works in Hong Kong, commuting back and forth), 
cage (partitioned bed space among Hong Kong 
urban poor), ABC (American- or Australian-born 
Chinese)) to the development of terms such as 
prepone in India (to move an appointment 
forward – back formation from postpone) (see  
Bolton, 2000, 2004; Kachru, 2005; Y. Kachru and 
Nelson, 2006) the case has been made that each of 
these constitutes a variety of English that should 
be considered on an equal footing with other 
varieties, such as American, British or Australian 
English. 
The WE framework thus promotes a fundamen-
tally pluralist vision of language and the world, 
opposing attempts to control, own and define 
English according to centrist, native-speaker 
norms. If the linguistic imperialism paradigm 
presents a critique of the homogenizing tenden-
cies of English and globalization, then that of WE 
presents its counterpart, the heterogenizing possi-
bilities offered by globalization. It is a celebration 
of diversity and the centrifugal forces of bi-
multi-lingual English language use, attempting ‘to 
alter and relocate the focus of our ongoing debate 
on this linguistic icon. The English language is 
generally discussed as a language that is in Asia, 
but not of Asia’ (Kachru, 2005: 9). Many detailed 
accounts of how such ‘outer circle’ varieties of 
English differ at all levels – phonological, syntactic, 
lexical, semantic, pragmatic – from inner-circle 
varieties have been produced (Baumgardner, 1993, 
for Pakistan, for example; Bautista, 2000, for the 
Philippines; Bolton, 2002, for Hong Kong; and so 
on) alongside the argument that such varieties 
need to be established as the local norms by which 
standards of correctness are judged. 
The ‘expanding circle’ of all other English 
users (from China to Brazil) has received less 
attention, yet there are significant debates emerg-
ing over the status that should be accorded to local 
varieties in this expanding circle, and whether the 
sometimes derogatory terms such as ‘Chinglish’, 
‘Japlish’ and so forth should be reclaimed to 
describe valid local English variants. At the heart 
of these debates is the question as to whether, or 
under what conditions, a linguistic item that dif-
fers from an inner-circle version of that item – the 
pluralization of supposedly non-pluralizable 
nouns, such as furnitures or researches, is a com-
monly cited example – should be accorded varietal 
rather than incorrect status. If nothing else, a 
major achievement of WE has been to encourage 
us to think in terms of divergent varieties within 
different circles, rather than along lines of correct-
ness or incorrectness in relation to a putative and 
often undefined inner-circle standard. 
While a WE perspective has been influential in 
making its case for a diversity of Englishes, it has 
been critiqued on a number of grounds. Leaving 
aside the political quietism that often has little to 
say about the role of English in an uneven world 
(Parakrama, 1995; Canagarajah, 1999), or the 
concern that by making hybridity its central focus 
it may fall into the trap of bad postcolonial theory 
where ‘the notion of the ‘‘hybrid’’ can become as 
fixed a category as its essentialist nemesis’ (Zuberi, 
2001: 239–40), a major concern is how good it is 
as a form of sociolinguistics. Probably the best 
known and most often cited dimension of the WE 
paradigm is the model of concentric circles already 
alluded to: the inner circle refers to English in 
countries such as the UK, USA or Australia, 
where English is the native language of a large 
part of the population, and where the varieties of 
English spoken have often been considered the 
standard norms for the rest of the world; the outer 
circle describes English in those former colonies 
of Britain or the USA, such as Singapore, India, 
Malaysia, the Philippines or Nigeria, where 
English is widely used for internal purposes and 
where local norms of appropriacy may have 
developed; and the expanding circle refers to the 
rest, from China to Brazil, where English is used 
predominantly for communication outside the 
country, and where norms may still be considered 
to be those of the inner-circle countries. 
Although only ‘tentatively labelled’ (Kachru, 
1985: 12) in earlier versions, it has been claimed 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
520
more recently that ‘the circles model is valid in 
the senses of earlier historical and political con-
texts, the dynamic diachronic advance of English 
around the world, and the functions and standards 
to which its users relate English in its many 
current global incarnations’ (B. Kachru and 
Nelson, 1996: 78). Yano (2001: 121) refers to this 
model as the ‘standard framework of world 
Englishes studies’, and of all current discussions 
around global Englishes, it is probably this model 
that is most widely referred to. While it has clearly 
therefore served some purposes in providing 
labels for different contexts of language use, it 
shares the concern of other domains of sociolin-
guistics (for extended discussion, see Williams, 
1992) that if it is underpinned by questionable 
sociology, it must also be questionable as a socio-
linguistic enterprise. Of serious concern here is 
the descriptive adequacy of the circles, the ascrip-
tion of a variety along national lines within these 
circles, and the concomitant tendency to overlook 
further variety at the expense of establishing a 
nationally-based new variety.
As Bruthiaux (2003: 161) points out, the 
descriptive and analytic inconsistency of the con-
centric circle model gives it little explanatory 
power. This ‘superficially appealing and conven-
ient model conceals more than it reveals’ since it 
attempts to compare varieties of English, different 
speaker types and geographical locations all at 
once. Its use of inconsistent criteria to categorize 
so-called varieties of English is confounded by a 
‘primarily nation-based model’. Holborow (1999: 
59–60) points out that the concentric circle model 
fails ‘to take adequate account of social factors 
and social differences within the circles’. Rajadurai 
(2005) suggests that even if the concentric model 
may have worked in the past, its over-reliance on 
historical and geographical frames of reference 
render it unable to deal with the current global 
spread of English. 
The concentric model of English at the heart of 
the WE framework overlooks difference within 
regions and ascribes variety based on postcolonial 
political history: where a nation-state was created, 
so a variety emerged. By positing these new 
Englishes, it perpetuates the myth of national 
languages that the global spread of English allows 
us to start to rethink, and does so by focusing on a 
narrow selection of standardized forms in particu-
lar communities. As Parakrama (1995: 25–6) 
argues, ‘The smoothing out of struggle within and 
without language is replicated in the homogeniz-
ing of the varieties of English on the basis of 
‘‘upper-class’’ forms. Kachru is thus able to theo-
rize on the nature of a monolithic Indian English’. 
While appearing, therefore, to work from an 
inclusionary political agenda in its attempt to have 
the new Englishes acknowledged as varieties of 
English, this approach to language is remorse-
lessly 
exclusionary. 
Ultimately, 
concludes 
Bruthiaux, ‘the Three Circles model is a 20th 
century construct that has outlived its usefulness’ 
(2003: 161).
34.5  THE RISE OF LINGUA FRANCA 
ENGLISH
Phillipson (2003: 176) warns that the use of 
English across Europe is leading to ‘a simplified, 
pidginized but unstable “Euro-English” that 
inhibits creativity and expressiveness, whether 
English is used as a mother tongue or as a foreign 
language, a language that is spoken with so much 
imprecision that communication difficulties and 
breakdowns multiply’. Others, however, have 
addressed the question of what happens to English 
when used as a lingua franca on a less deficit-
oriented basis. Taking up many concerns common 
to the WE framework, studies of ELF have sought 
to identify features common to regional ( particu-
larly European and Asian) communication among 
diverse users of English. While there is a wide 
variety of work under this rubric, the attempts to 
describe a lexicogrammatical (Seidlhofer, 2001) 
or phonological (Jenkins, 2000) core of ELF have 
received wide attention. ELF researchers, explains 
Jenkins (2006b: 161), ‘seek to identify frequently 
and systematically used forms that differ from 
inner circle forms without causing communica-
tion problems and override first language 
groupings’. The point, then, is to find, through 
analyses of corpora of English language use, how 
communication is achieved across regions. What 
regular forms that differ from native speaker 
norms appear not to impede – indeed may appear 
to improve – communication? 
The ELF approach has been critiqued from the 
WE perspective on the grounds that it falls into the 
camp of those approaches to English that ‘idealize 
a monolithic entity called “English” and neglect 
the inclusive and plural character of the world-
wide phenomenon’ (Kachru and Nelson, 2006: 2). 
Such a critique, however, as Jenkins (2006b) 
points out, is misguided, since it rests on the 
mistaken assumption that ELF is the same as 
English as an international language, which in 
turn may be associated with the notion of World 
Standard (Spoken) English proposed by authors 
such as Crystal (2003). While Crystal’s notion is 
of a possibly emergent variety of common spoken 
English rather than any prescribed version, it dif-
fers from both the pluricentric focus of WE and 
from the lingua franca focus. Certainly the 
suggestion that ELF somehow promotes inner-
circle norms is mistaken since ‘ELF researchers 

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
521
specifically exclude mother tongue speakers from 
their data collection. Indeed, in its purest form, 
ELF is defined as a contact language used only 
among non–mother tongue speakers’ (Jenkins, 
2006b: 160). A plausible case can in fact be made 
that the ELF focus is trying to address precisely 
that gap left by the holes in the WE model: how to 
come to grips with a non-centrist understanding of 
English as an international language that is 
dependent neither on hegemonic versions of 
central English nor on nationally defined new 
Englishes, but rather attempts to account for the 
ever-changing negotiated spaces of current lan-
guage use. The ELF model, it is argued, ‘liberates 
L2 speakers from the imposition of native speaker 
norms as well as the cultural baggage of World 
Englishes models’ (Rubdy and Saraceni, 2006: 8).
A major focus of debate is whether the descrip-
tion of ELF is also used as a basis for teaching, i.e. 
as a prescriptive rather than a descriptive tool. As 
Rani Rubdy and Mario Saraceni suggest,
So long as the underlying tacit assumption is that 
once the Lingua Franca core is systematically codi-
fied, it can then be used as a model for teaching 
and learning this form of English in the classroom, 
the question that arises is whether one form of 
prescription is not being (unwittingly or even 
wittingly) replaced by another (2006: 10).
Certainly, some of the discussions about ELF do 
seem to suggest more than just a descriptive 
project. Expressing concerns with the trend in 
applied linguistic circles to adopt a laissez-faire 
attitude towards heterogenization, Jenkins (2006a: 
35) suggests that ‘if a policy of pluricentricity is 
pursued unchecked, there is a danger that mutual 
comprehension may be impeded, that accents will 
move further and further apart until a stage is 
reached where pronunciation presents a serious 
problem to lingua franca communication’. Yet the 
ELF protagonists vehemently reject accusations 
of prescriptivism, arguing that it is precisely ‘the 
polymorphous nature of the English language’ 
(Seidlhofer, 2006: 42) that is of interest, that they 
are ‘trying to understand as far as possible emi-
cally, from participants’ perspectives, what they 
do when they negotiate meaning in these encoun-
ters’ (Seidlhofer, 2006: 44), or that an ELF 
approach ‘closely approximates … Kachru’s idea 
of a ‘‘polymodel’’ approach to the teaching of 
English’ (Kirkpatrick, 2006: 81). 
Whereas some ELF researchers therefore claim 
an interest only in description rather than prescrip-
tion (to the extent that such a distinction is work-
able; see Harris, 1981), there are other reasons 
why the prescriptive label does not hold. Although 
Jenkins (2006a: 36) maintains a goal to ‘safeguard 
mutual phonological intelligibility’, she does not 
do so by seeking ‘to impose a monolithic pronun-
ciation model on ELF users’. Rather, she suggests 
that anyone participating in international commu-
nication needs to be familiar with, and have in 
their linguistic repertoire for use, as and when 
appropriate, certain forms (phonological, lexico-
grammatical, etc.) that are widely used and widely 
intelligible across groups of English speakers from 
different first language backgrounds. This is why 
accommodation is so highly valued in ELF research 
(Jenkins, 2006b: 161).
For other ELF researchers, meanwhile, the goal is 
not in any case to propose a model, but rather 
simply to account for the diversity of language 
uses that are tied neither to native nor to nativized 
varieties (Kirkpatrick, 2006) in order to capture 
how ‘postcolonial speakers of English creatively 
negotiate the place of English in their lives’ 
(Canagarajah, 2006: 200).
As Rubdy and Saraceni (2006: 13) put it,
In the end, the validity of the English as an 
International Language/English as a lingua franca 
proposal will probably depend upon whether or 
not it chooses to embrace a polymodel approach 
to the teaching of English or a monolithic one, 
whether it leads to the establishing and promoting 
of a single (or a limited form of) Lingua Franca 
Core for common use among speakers in the 
Outer and Expanding Circles, possibly stripped of 
any cultural influences, or whether it will be flexi-
ble enough to manifest the cultural norms of all 
those who use it along with the rich tapestry of 
linguistic variation in which they are embedded.
Indeed, Canagarajah (2007: 91) prefers the term 
Lingua Franca English (LFE) with its suggestion 
that English emerges in its use as a lingua franca 
rather than being a language with prior existence 
that is pressed into service as a lingua franca 
(ELF). LFE, he suggests, ‘does not exist as a 
system out there. It is constantly brought into 
being in each context of communication’. 
34.6  CONCLUSION: NEW LANGUAGES 
FOR NEW TIMES
While there are often serious disagreements 
between proponents of different positions on 
global Englishes – (Kachru (2005), for example, 
dismisses both critical and conservative approaches 
to the global spread of English as ‘victimology’ 
while suggesting that English as a lingua franca is 
a misuse of the term) – it is nevertheless worth 
noting that all are in favour of diversity in one 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
522
form or another. The critique of the homogenizing 
forces of linguistic imperialism is counterbal-
anced by an emphasis on language rights as a 
guarantor of diversity (Skutnabb-Kangas, 2000); 
the WE model places its hopes in a heterogeneous 
plurality of Englishes. Both treat a relation 
between language, culture and nation as the 
lynchpin of diversity. The ELF/LFE approaches, 
meanwhile, move either centripetally towards 
descriptions of English diversity or centrifugally 
towards an understanding of the possibilities of 
English use in diverse contexts, while suggesting 
a more open-ended relation between language, 
culture and nation.
At various points in this chapter we have 
encountered the critique that discussions of the 
global role of English have failed to engage with 
the injunction to think differently. Several of these 
approaches to global English – whether linguistic 
imperialism and language rights, or WE and some 
approaches to ELF – remain stuck within twenti-
eth-century frameworks of language and diversity. 
As Canagarajah (2007: 98) points out, 
The hegemonic thrust of global English derives 
from the dominant assumptions of linguistics, 
informed by the modernist philosophical move-
ment and intellectual culture in which they devel-
oped. To begin with, the field treats language as a 
thing in itself, an objective, identifiable product. 
The field also gives importance to form, treating 
language as a tightly knit structure, neglecting 
other processes and practices that always accom-
pany communication.
Just as a language rights perspective maintains a 
twentieth-century model of international relations, 
so a WE perspective maintains a focus on national 
Englishes. Neither raises the question of whether 
we need to reconsider what languages are in more 
fundamental terms. 
According to Bruthiaux (2003: 174), 
While the Three Circles model has provided us 
with a convenient shorthand for labeling contexts 
of English worldwide, the categories that the 
model created have also had the unfortunate side-
effect of reifying the content of these categories 
and of encouraging the notion that Englishes are 
Englishes, regardless of circle. 
It is also less than clear whether the WE focus on 
diversity is in fact so different from a lingua franca 
approach as its proponents claim. Thus, when Braj 
Kachru focuses on ‘educated South Asian English’ 
rather than ‘Broken English’ (2005: 39), he is 
surely open to the same critiques that he levels at 
the purveyors of ELF. As Canagarajah (1999: 180) 
observes, in Kachru’s ‘attempt to systematize the 
periphery variants, he has to standardize the lan-
guage himself, leaving out many eccentric, hybrid 
forms of local Englishes as too unsystematic. In 
this, the Kachruvian paradigm follows the logic of 
the prescriptive and elitist tendencies of the center 
linguists’. The question we need to face, therefore, 
is how we think about language and diversity 
under conditions of globalization and how we can 
get beyond those ways of thinking that have 
dominated modernist conceptions of language and 
diversity.
In much of this writing on global Englishes, 
then, there are several important factors missing. 
There is often a failure to engage more fully with 
diversity. We are still confronted, for example, by 
the inability to deal with pidgins and creoles, a 
concern noted a number of times by Mufwene, 
who suggests that ‘the naming practices of new 
Englishes has to do more with the racial identity 
of those who speak them than with how these 
varieties developed and the extent of their struc-
tural deviations’ (2001: 107). English-based cre-
oles present a problem for much of the thinking of 
WE because of their origins, status and diversity, 
and yet their exclusion from discussion remains 
problematic. One framework that does seek to 
incorporate creoles alongside other postcolonial 
Englishes (PCEs) is Schneider’s (2007: 32) 
Dynamic Model of the evolution of Postcolonial 
Englishes, which suggests that ‘PCEs have 
emerged by undergoing a fundamentally uniform 
process which can be described as a progression 
of five characteristic stages: foundation, exonor-
mative stabilization, nativization, endormative 
stabilization, and differentiation’. In this ‘over-
arching and unifying perspective’ that moves 
away from the ‘static and individualizing typolo-
gies of earlier perspectives’ we have the most 
comprehensive attempt yet to pull the diverse 
observations about Englishes into one framework 
in which differences between varieties of English 
are ‘instantiations of characteristic phases of an 
underlyingly uniform process’ (2007: 313). 
Yet, while getting away from the nation-state 
as the unit of analysis, and favouring instead the 
speech community, this model incorporates all 
diversity into one model of uniformity. By arguing 
that ‘the evolution of language follows principles 
of its own’ and that we should therefore separate 
such investigation from broader social and 
political concerns (2007: 19), Schneider avoids 
exactly those concerns that need to remain central 
to any understanding of language change: global 
Englishes are deeply embedded in economic and 
political processes. Furthermore, we need to con-
sider that none of these models of English spread 
will have much relevance for English users unless 
they also take into account the dynamics 
of English in an uneven world. Whether we are 

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
523
talking of WE or ELF, access to such models ‘will 
still be largely determined by one’s proximity to 
education and, for that matter, all other related 
symbolic goods in the social market’ (Tupas, 
2006: 180). Whatever we may make of the limita-
tions of a linguistic imperialism framework, we 
nevertheless also need to be wary of simultane-
ously rejecting a focus on questions of power and 
inequality in relation to access and variety in 
global Englishes. 
These discussions of global Englishes will also 
have little relevance unless they shift their ways of 
thinking about languages. LFE, suggests 
Canagarajah (2007: 94), ‘is not a product located 
in the mind of the speaker; it is a social process 
constantly reconstructed in sensitivity to environ-
mental factors’. The central concern that the 
debates between these rival conceptualizations 
leave uncontested is how we can understand 
diversity outside those very frameworks that are 
part of the problem. Neither a defence of national 
languages and cultures, nor a description of a core 
of ELF, nor even a focus on plural Englishes ade-
quately addresses questions of diversity under 
new conditions of globalization. Rather than cen-
trist descriptions of local Englishes, we need by 
contrast to move towards an understanding of the 
worldliness of English, whereby the very oneness 
of English can only be understood on the basis of 
local perspectives of difference (Pennycook, 2010; 
Radhakrishnan, 2007). This is not a question of 
pluralizing Englishes but of understanding the 
ways different language ideologies construct 
English locally. Questioning the ways in which we 
have come to think about languages within coloni-
alism and modernity, and regarding the grand 
narratives of imperialism, language rights, linguae 
francae or world Englishes with suspicion, this 
perspective looks towards local, situated, contex-
tual and contingent ways of understanding 
languages and language policies. 
What this suggests is the need to think about 
English and globalization outside the nationalist 
frameworks that gave rise to twentieth-century 
models of the world. In dealing with English in 
an uneven world, we do need to understand its 
historical formation within forms of nationalism 
and imperialism, and its contemporary roles in 
the inequitable distribution of resources, in the 
promotion of certain ideas over others and in the 
threat it may pose to other languages, cultures and 
ways of being. And yet we need simultaneously to 
appreciate not only its appropriation and relocali-
zation by diverse users but also its reconfiguration 
as something different. Perhaps it is time to ques-
tion the very notions that underpin our assump-
tions about languages (Jacquemet, 2005; Makoni 
and Pennycook, 2007), to ask whether the ways 
we name and describe languages as separate 
entities and the ways we view bi- and multilin-
gualism are based on twentieth-century episte-
mologies that can no longer be used to describe 
the use of languages in a globalizing world. If it is 
clear that the ways we think about language are 
inevitably products of particular historical 
contexts, then an age of globalization suggests 
that we need both to reflect on how and why we 
look at languages as separate, countable, describ-
able entities in the way we do, and to consider 
that languages may be undergoing such forms of 
transition as to require new ways of conceptuali-
zation in terms of local activities, resources or 
practices.
NOTES
1 This does not imply, however, that the solution 
lies in opposing the spread of English, since it is ‘the 
realm of economic policy, not that of language 
policy, that one should look to for redress’ (Lysandrou 
and Lysandrou, 2003: 230). 
2 Contrary to some suppositions, recent obser-
vations of language use on the Internet have sug-
gested that while the total sum of English language 
use may be increasing, its proportional representa-
tion is decreasing as more languages are used (see 
Danet and Herring, 2007; Graddol, 2006).
REFERENCES
Alim, H. S., Ibrahim, A. and Pennycook, A. (eds) (2009) Global 
Linguistic Flows: Hip Hop Cultures, Youth Identities, and 
the Politics of Language. New York: Routledge.
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at Large: Cultural Dimensions 
of Globalization. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Baumgardner, R. (ed.) (1993) The English Language in 
Pakistan. Karachi: Oxford University Press.
Bautista, M. L. (2000) Defining Standard Philippine English: Its 
Status and Grammatical Features. Manila: De La Salle 
University Press.
Bernabé, J., Chamoiseau, P. and Confiant, R. (1993) Éloge de 
la créolité. Paris: Gallimard.
Bhatt, R. (2005) ‘Expert discourses, local practices, and 
hybridity: the case of Indian Englishes’, in A. S. Cangarajah 
(ed.), Reclaiming the Local in Language Policy and Practice. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. pp. 25–54.
Bolton, K. (2000) ‘The sociolinguistics of Hong Kong and the 
space for Hong Kong English’, World Englishes, 19(3): 
265–85.
Bolton, K. (ed.) (2002) Hong Kong English: Autonomy and 
Creativity. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Bolton, K. (2004) ‘World Englishes’, in A. Davies and C. Elder 
(eds), The Handbook of Applied Linguistics. Oxford: 
Blackwell. pp. 369–96.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
524
Bruthiaux, P. (2002) ‘Hold your courses: language education, 
language choice, and economic development’, TESOL 
Quarterly, 36(3): 275–96.
Bruthiaux, P. (2003) ‘Squaring the circles: issues in modeling 
English worldwide’, International Journal of Applied 
Linguistics, 13(2): 159–77.
Bruthiaux, P. (2008) ‘Dimensions of globalization and applied 
linguistics’, in P. Tan and R. Rubdy (eds), Language as 
Commodity: Global Structures, Local Marketplaces. London: 
Continuum. p. 1–30.
Brutt-Griffler, J. (2002a) World English: A Study of its 
Development. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.
Brutt-Griffler, J. (2002b) ‘Class, ethnicity, and language rights: 
an analysis of British colonial policy in Lesotho and 
Sri Lanka and some implications for language policy’, 
Journal of Language, Identity and Education, 1(3): 207–34.
Canagarajah, S. (1999) Resisting Linguistic Imperialism in 
English Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Canagarajah, S. (2006) ‘Interview’, in Rubdy, R. and M. Saraceni 
(eds), English in the World: Global Rules, Global Roles. 
London: Continuum. pp. 200–12.
Canagarajah, S. (2007) ‘The ecology of global English’, 
International Multilingual Research Journal, 1(2): 89–100.
Crystal, D. (2003) English as a Global Language. 2nd edn. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Danet, B., and Herring, S. C. (eds) (2007) The Multilingual 
Internet: Language, Culture, and Communication Online. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
DYLAN project: language dynamics and management of 
diversity. http://www.dylan-project.org/Dylan_en/home/
home.php [last accessed 14 April 2009].
Edge, J. (2003) ‘Imperial troopers and servants of the lord: a 
vision of TESOL for the 21st century’, TESOL Quarterly, 37: 
701–8.
Edwards, R. and Usher R. (2008) Globalisation and 
Pedagogy: Space, Place and Identity. 2nd edn. London: 
Routledge.
Giddens, A. (1999) Runaway World: How Globalisation is 
Reshaping Our Lives. London: Profile Books.
Gradoll, D. (2006) English Next: Why Global English May 
Mean the End of ‘‘English as a Foreign Language’’. 
London: British Council.
Graham, P., Luke, C. and Luke, A. (2007) ‘Globalization, cor-
poratism, and critical language education’, International 
Multilingual Research Journal, 1(1).
Hagège, C. (2006) Combat pour le Français: au nom de la 
diversité des langues et des cultures. Paris: Odile Jacob.
Hardt, M. and A. Negri. (2000) Empire. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press.
Harris, R. (1981) The Language Myth. London: Duckworth.
Holborow, M (1999) The Politics of English: A Marxist View of 
Language. London: Sage Publications.
Jacquemet, M. (2005) ‘Transidiomatic practices, language and 
power in the age of globalization’, Language & 
Communication, 25: 257–77.
Jenkins, J. (2000) The Phonology of English as an International 
Language. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jenkins, J. (2006a) ‘Global intelligibility and local diversity: 
possibility or paradox?’, in R. Rubdy and M. Saraceni (eds), 
English in the World: Global Rules, Global Roles. London: 
Continuum. pp. 32–9.
Jenkins, J. (2006b) ‘Current perspectives on teaching world 
Englishes and English as a lingua franca’, TESOL Quarterly 
40(1): 157–81.
Kachru, B (1985) Standards, codification, and sociolinguistic 
realism: The English language in the Outer Circle. In R. Quirk 
and H.G. Widdowson (eds.) English in the World: Teaching 
and Learning the Language and Literatures Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 11–30.
Kachru, B. (1997) ‘World Englishes and English-using com-
munities’, Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 17: 
66–87.
Kachru, B. (2005) Asian Englishes: Beyond the Canon. 
Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Kachru, B and C Nelson (1996) World Englishes. In Sandra 
McKay and Nancy Hornberger (eds.) Sociolinguistics in 
Language Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 71–102.
Kachru, Y. and C. Nelson (2006) World Englishes in Asian 
contexts. Hong Kong: Hong Kong University Press.
Karmani, S. (2005) ‘English, ‘‘terror’’, and Islam’, Applied 
Linguistics, 26(2): 262–7.
Kirkpatrick, A. (2006) ‘Which model of English: native-
speaker, nativized or lingua franca?’, in R. Rubdy and 
M. Saraceni (eds), English in the World: Global Rules, 
Global Roles. London: Continuum. pp. 71–83.
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2008) Cultural Globalization and 
Language Education. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Lorente, B.P. and Tupas, T.R.F. (2002) ‘Demythologizing 
English as an economic asset: the case of Filipina domestic 
workers in Singapore’, ACELT Journal, 6(2): 20–32.
Lorente, B.P. (2007) ‘Mapping English linguistic capital: the 
case of Filipino domestic workers in Singapore’. Unpublished 
PhD thesis, National University of Singapore.
Lysandrou, P. and Lysandrou,Y. (2003) ‘Global English and 
proregression: understanding English language spread in 
the contemporary era’, Economy and Society, 32(2): 
207–33.
Makoni, S. and Pennycook, A. (eds) (2007) Disinventing and 
Reconstituting Languages. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
May, S. (2001) Language and Minority Rights: Ethnicity, 
Nationalism and the Politics of Language. London: Longman.
Mignolo, W. (2000) Local Histories/Global Designs: Coloniality, 
Subaltern Knowledges, and Border Thinking. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Mufwene, S. (2001) The Ecology of Language Evolution. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parakrama, A. (1995) De-Hegemonizing Language Standards: 
Learning from (Post)Colonial Englishes about ‘English’. 
Basingstoke: MacMillan.
Pennycook, A. (2003) ‘Beyond homogeny and heterogeny: 
English as a global and worldly language’, in C. Mair (ed.), 
The Cultural Politics of English. Amsterdam: Rodopi. pp. 3–17.
Pennycook, A. (2007) Global Englishes and Transcultural 
Flows. London: Routledge.
Pennycook, A. (2010) Language as a Local Practice. London: 
Routledge.

GLOBAL ENGLISHES
525
Pennycook, A. and Coutand-Marin, S. (2003) ‘Teaching 
English as a missionary language’, Discourse: Studies in the 
Cultural Politics of Education, 17(3): 337–53.
Phillipson, R. (1992) Linguistic Imperialism. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Phillipson, R. (1994), ‘English language spread policy’, 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 107: 
7–24.
Phillipson, R. (1999) ‘Voice in global English: unheard chords 
in Crystal loud and clear. Review of D. Crystal, English as a 
Global Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press’, 
Applied Linguistics, 20(2): 265–76.
Phillipson, R. (2003) English only Europe? Challenging 
Language Policy. London: Routledge. 
Phillipson (2006) ‘Language policy and linguistic imperialism’, 
in T. Ricento (ed.), An Introduction to Language Policy: 
Theory and Method. Oxford: Blackwell. pp. 346–61.
Phillipson, R. (2008) ‘The linguistic imperialism of neoliberal 
empire’, Critical Inquiry in Language Studies, 5(1): 1–43.
Phillipson, R. and Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (1996) ‘English only 
worldwide or language ecology?’, TESOL Quarterly, 30(3): 
429–52.
Piller, I. and Takahashi, K. (2006) ‘A passion for English: desire 
and the language market’, in A Pavlenko (ed.), Bilingual 
Minds: Emotional Experience, Expression and Respresen-
tation, Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 59–83.
Radhakrishnan, R. (2003) Theory in an Uneven World. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Radhakrishnan, R. (2007) ‘Globality is not worldliness’, in 
R. Radhakrishnan, Kishori Nayak, R. Shashidhar, 
Ravishankar Rao Parinitha and D. R. Shashidhara (eds), 
Theory as Variation. New Delhi: Pencraft International. 
pp. 313–28.
Rajadurai, J. (2005) ‘Revisiting the concentric circles: concep-
tual and sociolinguistic considerations’, The Asian EFL 
Journal Quarterly 7(4): 111–30.
Ramanathan, V. (2005) The English-Vernacular Divide: 
Postcolonial Language Politics and Practice. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.
Robertson, R. (2003) Three Waves of Globalization: A History 
of a Developing Global Consciousness. London: Zed Books.
Rubdy, R. and Saraceni, M. (2006) ‘Introduction’, in R. Rubdy 
and M. Saraceni (eds), English in the World: Global Rules, 
Global Roles. London: Continuum. pp. 5–16.
Schneider, E. (2007) Postcolonial English: Varieties around the 
World. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Seidlhofer, B. (2001) ‘Closing a conceptual gap: the case for a 
description of English as a lingua franca’, International 
Review of Applied Linguistics, 11(2): 133–58.
Seidlhofer, B. (2006) English as a Lingua Franca in the 
expanding circle: What it isn't. In R. Rubdy and M. Saraceni 
(eds) English in the World: Global Rules, Global Roles. 
London: Continuum,  40–50.
Singh, P. and Doherty, C. (2004) ‘Global cultural flows and 
pedagogic dilemmas: teaching in the global university 
contact zone’, TESOL Quarterly, 38(1): 9–42.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2000) Linguistic Genocide in 
Education—or Worldwide Diversity and Human Rights? 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sonntag, Selma (2003) The Local Politics of Global English: 
Case Studies in Linguistic Globalization. Lanham, MD: 
Lexington Books.
Steger, M. (2003) Globalization: A Very Short Introduction. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Tollefson, J. (2000) ‘Policy and ideology in the spread of 
English’, in J. K. Hall and W. Eggington (eds), The 
Sociopolitics of English Language Teaching. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters. pp. 7–21.
Tupas, R. (2006) ‘Standard Englishes, pedagogical paradigms 
and conditions of (im)possibility’, in R. Rubdy and M. Saraceni 
(eds), English in the World: Global Rules, Global Roles. 
London: Continuum. pp. 169–85.
Tupas, R. (2008) ‘Anatomies of linguistic commodification: the 
case of English in the Philippines vis-à-vis other languages 
in the multilingual marketplace’, in P. Tan and R. Rubdy 
(eds), Language as Commodity: Global Structures, Local 
Marketplaces. London: Continuum. pp. 89–105.
Varghese, M. and Johnston, B. (2007) ‘Evangelical Christians 
and English language teaching’, TESOL Quarterly, 41(1): 
5–31.
Waters, M. (1995) Globalisation. London: Routledge.
Wee, L. (2005) ‘Intra-language discrimination and linguistic 
human rights: the case of Singlish.’, Applied Linguistics, 
26(1): 48–69.
Williams, G. (1992) Sociolinguistics: A Sociological Critique. 
London: Routledge.
Zuberi, N. (2001) Sounds English: Transnational Popular 
Music. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.


PART 6
Applications


35
35.1 INTRODUCTION 
Forensic linguistics in the broadest sense is the 
application of linguistics to three principal 
domains: written legal texts, spoken legal prac-
tices and the provision of evidence for criminal 
and civil investigations and courtroom disputes 
(see www.tinyurl.com/forensic-linguist for a brief 
video presentation on the work of the forensic 
linguist). Naturally the division between spoken 
and written texts suggested in the above charac-
terization is somewhat fluid. So, for example, the 
UK Police Caution and the equivalent United 
States Miranda warnings are provided as written 
texts to every police officer, but they are animated 
into spoken form by an arresting or interviewing 
officer, while, conversely, the spoken testimony of 
witnesses, for example in an audiencia within the 
Chilean inquisitorial system (Gibbons, 2001) or 
when being interviewed at the scene of a crime by 
a police officer, is often transformed and con-
densed into a written text mainly authored by the 
interviewer. These transformations of mode 
between written and spoken are clearly in them-
selves of great linguistic interest and they may 
also have legal implications and consequences. 
Even more complicated transformations can 
occur in English courtrooms. Initial police-
investigative interviews with suspects have been 
standardly tape-recorded for the past 25 years, but 
normally the legal professionals work most of the 
time, before and during the trial, with a written 
transcription of what was (heard by a non-present 
transcriber to have been) said. However, when a 
particular police interview is of crucial impor-
tance, the lawyer may decide that the jury should 
hear it in full – in such cases, to many lay people’s 
surprise, the tape of the original interview is 
not played to the court, but, somewhat bizarrely, 
the police officer and the lawyer ‘perform’ the 
written text. The majority of the legal profession-
als on both sides are apparently unaware of the 
semantic changes that such a double conversion 
process can accidentally, and at times deliberately, 
introduce. 
Nevertheless, the tripartite distinction between 
legal texts, legal discourse and the provision of 
evidence is a convenient one and will be largely 
followed in this chapter.
35.2  A BRIEF HISTORY OF FORENSIC 
LINGUISTICS
Although forensic linguistics is a relatively recent 
discipline, interest in how, and to what effect, 
language is used in legal and forensic contexts 
dates back to at least ancient Greece and Rome. 
In the fourth century BC, Aristotle produced a 
typology of rhetoric according to the occasions it 
served, distinguishing between political, ceremo-
nial and forensic oratory; the latter he associated 
with the courtroom. In the first century AD, Gaius 
Aelius Gallus published, in Latin, a volume 
‘On the meaning of words referring to the law’, 
Forensic Linguistics
M a l c o l m  C o u l t h a r d ,  T i m  G r a n t 
a n d  K r z y s z t o f  K r e d e n s

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
530
(in modern terms, a monolingual dictionary of 
legal language), and over a century later, Sextus 
Pompeius Festus, a Roman grammarian, included 
in his encyclopaedic lexicon a considerable 
number of legal entries. If anything, those early 
works certainly indicated that law was to a large 
extent instituted through language, a diagnosis 
that was to be confirmed and acted upon vigor-
ously many centuries later. 
On a practical level, issues of language rights 
and language planning also have a long history. In 
England, the Pleading in English Act of 1362 was 
enacted to replace French with English in legal 
proceedings, and the Blasphemy Act of 1650 
penalized acts of, inter alia, ‘filthy and lascivious 
speaking’, although rather than being aimed at 
suppressing bad language, it was in fact an attempt 
to silence a Protestant sect known as the Ranters 
(McEnery, 2005). A law with a significant impact 
on the linguistic situation in Spain was King 
Charles III’s 1768 decree giving the Castillian 
dialect priority in administration and education. 
Among the pioneering works in the twentieth 
century were Wróblewski’s (1948) exposition of 
the differences between legal language and the 
language of the law, Philbrick’s (1949) Language 
and the Law: the Semantics of Forensic English, 
essentially a textbook for lawyers, and Gowers 
(1953) chapter on the nature of legal language. In 
1963, Mellinkoff published a seminal study, where 
he called for simplification and clarity of legalese. 
Five years later the phrase ‘forensic linguistics’ 
was coined by Svartvik (1968) in an analysis 
where he demonstrated considerable stylistic dis-
crepancies across four confession statements 
allegedly made by Timothy Evans, a Welshman 
executed in 1950 for the murder of his baby 
daughter and pardoned posthumously 16 years 
later. Svartvik did not build on earlier scholarship, 
which was irrelevant for his purposes, but rather 
opened a new door. However, perhaps unfairly, it 
is his phrase that has come to function as superor-
dinate to describe most activity where legal and 
linguistic interests converge, at least in the 
English-speaking world. To be sure, most texts in 
the last 40 years have been produced in English, 
though it would be wrong to overlook the franco-
phone tradition of jurilinguistique, Polish jurys-
lingwistyka, and German Sprache und Recht 
(‘language and law’) and Rechtslinguistik (‘legal 
linguistics’), which can be traced back to early 
nineteenth-century Prussia. That said, the term 
‘forensic linguistics’ has been adopted through 
direct translation by German (Forensische 
Linguistik) and Spanish and Portuguese (lingüis-
tica forense), amongst other languages.
When it comes to the provision of language-
based evidence, it is safe to assume that linguists 
(or, in the early days, ‘philologists’) have assisted 
law-enforcement agencies, lawyers and courts of 
law ever since linguistics gained a visible pres-
ence, though it is not easy to trace what must 
have been isolated instances of such activity. The 
earliest well-documented casework comes from 
the 1970s and includes: Hannes Kniffka’s contri-
butions in the German legal system (Kniffka, 
2007); Raven McDavid’s involvement in a trade-
mark dispute (McDavid (1977) in Butters, 2008); 
Michael Gregory’s evidence on a disputed confes-
sion statement (Gregory, 2000); and Roger Shuy’s 
evidence in a case of solicitation to murder (Shuy, 
2005). Mention must be made also of the early 
days of forensic phonetics, i.e. a discipline draw-
ing on acoustic and articulatory properties of 
speech: in 1960, tape-recorded evidence was 
deemed admissible by Poland’s Supreme Court, 
which a few years later led to the creation by the 
Polish police of what must have been one of the 
first forensic phonetics laboratories in the world; 
similar developments soon followed in countries 
of the former Eastern bloc. In Canada and the 
USA, evidence based on ‘voiceprints’ was used as 
early as in 1966 (Tosi, 1979).1 
Forensic linguistic casework and research have 
been advancing rapidly since the beginning of the 
1980s (Danet, 1980; Kniffka, 1981; Levi and 
Walker, 1990; Coulthard, 1993; Solan, 1993; for 
forensic phonetics see, in particular, Hollien, 
1990; Rose, 2003) and today the field is thriving, 
with more and more research into aspects of lan-
guage and law, ever more books and papers pub-
lished, and ever-growing numbers of linguists 
asked to act as expert witnesses all over the globe.
35.3 WRITTEN LEGAL TEXT 
There has been substantial study of legal texts – 
statutes, contracts and wills – and much of this 
work has been motivated recently by the concerns 
of Plain Language campaigners. The laws of a 
country have universal application, and yet they 
are written in such a way that a large number of 
the citizens to whom they apply are unable to fully 
understand them. As well as statutes and criminal 
codes, written legal texts can comprise an agree-
ment between either two laypersons or between 
a layperson and an organization or corporation. 
A good example might be a household insurance 
document. Figure 35.1 shows the main title page 
of such a document. This document, insuring a 
‘private dwelling house’ in Leicester, UK for 
£5250.00, was signed on 9 July 1963. 
Before considering the language variety of this 
document, the typography and layout clearly iden-
tify it as a legal contract. Although such devices 
have no legal effect, the emphatic gothic script 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
531
used to head each of the paragraphs indicates that 
this is a document to be taken seriously. After the 
headings, the first paragraph of the insurance 
policy reads thus:
Whereas the Insured named in the schedule hereto 
has by a signed proposal and declaration which 
proposal and declaration the Insured has agreed 
shall be the basis of this contract and 
be held as incorporated herein applied to the 
Company for insurance against the contingencies 
hereinafter specified.
The lack of punctuation is no transcription error. 
Indeed, as with international treaties and United 
Nations resolutions, this household insurance 
document is written as a single sentence. In this 
case the sentence is entirely unpunctuated, with-
out even a terminal full stop. Structuring of the 
sentence is provided through paragraphing, and in 
some parts through changes in typeface and the 
provision of numbered lists, and this may assist 
the reader to some degree. The whole policy docu-
ment is presented as a single sheet of paper, 
printed on both sides and designed to be folded in 
Figure 35.1 Insurance document from UK, 1963

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
532
half and then in three, revealing a further title page 
with an instruction to the insured that:
This Policy should be read carefully and returned 
for correction if any alteration is required therein.
There is no suggestion that correcting (or indeed 
adding) punctuation is the kind of alteration one 
might require of the drafters. Indeed the combined 
pragmatic effect of these features suggests that the 
document is not intended to be read by an ordi-
nary reader, let alone corrected. Special training is 
required and expected of the readers of this text, 
and lay readers may well be unable to fully 
engage with it or even understand many of its 
implications. 
As with any text designed for a specialist audi-
ence, we might expect it to contain lexical items 
which are rare; and sure enough we find items 
such as proposal, contingency and indemnify, and 
also archaisms such as witnesseth. It is not, 
however, these ‘terms of art’ which are the main 
cause of lexical difficulty in comprehension. The 
more substantial problem is the heavy use of rare 
functional items such as whereas, herein, hereto, 
hereinbefore and hereunder. One striking feature 
of many of these rare functional words is that they 
are self-referential. That is to say, they refer to 
other locations within the text rather than to the 
world outside. Legal texts need to maintain a 
constant meaning even while the social (and per-
haps physical) circumstance of the world which 
they describe changes. One explanation for this 
self-referential language is that referring to the 
external world must be done extremely carefully. 
One way this is achieved is to gather together all 
the potentially-changing information about the 
world into one part of the document. This is 
referred to as the ‘schedule’. In this insurance 
document there is a strongly-specified schedule, 
which includes the (witnessed) identity of the 
insured, the identity of the ‘Mortgagees’ and of 
course the address of the private dwelling house. 
This ‘Scheduled’ information is enclosed in a table 
and restricted to one sparsely filled page of the 
document. The distinction between internal textual 
information and scheduled real-world information 
thus explains some of the linguistic oddity. 
Other features of this text which make it diffi-
cult to read have also been identified by other 
linguists (e.g. Tiersma, 1999). These include nom-
inalization, multiple embedding of sub-clauses, 
and the use of redundant or near-redundant lists 
such as ‘storm tempest and flood’ (which are 
insured against) and ‘rebellion, revolution and 
insurrection’ (which are not). Tiersma identifies 
these features as originating in oral legal tradition 
and, in an insurance document, can be seen to 
have a more functional role than for example in a 
‘will and testament’.
The 1960s insurance document can be usefully 
contrasted with a contemporary one signed in 
Leicestershire in 2008 (Figure 35.2). This docu-
ment is clearly intended to appear to be consumer 
friendly. The Schedule providing the specific 
information is a separate single sheet and the 
Policy booklet is now 41 pages long, with the text 
referring to the Buildings cover using about twice 
as many words as that of the earlier policy. 
Whereas the older document provided general 
cover with rather generalized terms and exclusions, 
the modern document consists of four detailed 
pages of terms. A variety of documentary design 
devices, colour and the use of headings and indexes, 
are all intended to assist the reader; in addition, this 
document is, in the main, well-punctuated.
The biggest linguistic difference is the near 
complete absence of the rare, self-referential func-
tional items. Replacing them are different types of 
references to other named and numbered sections. 
Some of these references are very explicit – for 
example ‘see section 5.4’ – but others are more 
hidden. Some of the words such as ‘buildings’ 
have special definitions beyond their ordinarily 
understood meaning and they appear in bold. The 
reader can, if they wish, look up these definitions 
at the end of the booklet. This device renders the 
surface-level text easier to read but produces a 
kind of hypertext document, the understanding 
of which involves processing rather complex 
legal language which has been removed to 
distant sections of the booklet. These underlying 
definitions and exclusions are perhaps at a linguis-
tic midpoint between the complex 1960s text and 
the superficially accessible top-level text within 
the contemporary booklet. The exclusion on ‘War’ 
for example reads:
Any consequence whatsoever resulting directly or 
indirectly from or in connection with any of the 
following regardless of any other contributing 
cause or event: war invasion act of foreign enemy 
hostilities or a warlike operation or operations 
(whether war be declared or not) civil war rebellion 
revolution insurrection civil commotion assuming 
the proportions or amounting to an uprising, mili-
tary or usurped power.
This exclusion is only lightly punctuated – 
although it is a list, it contains no commas – and 
while one embedded clause is indicated by the use 
of brackets, earlier embedding is not, and so on.
Even in the top-level text there remain lists of 
near synonyms such as ‘riot, civil unrest, strikes, 
and labour or political disturbances’ (which are 
now insured) but within the ‘General Conditions’ 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
533
and ‘General Exclusions’ these features of legal 
language are much more pronounced. 
One final striking difference between the two 
documents is the more personal tone of the con-
temporary policy: rather than referring to ‘The 
Company’, the pronoun ‘We’ is used (in a bold 
typeface indicating it is a defined term). A lot of 
work has been done to help the contemporary text 
appear friendly to consumers, and comparison 
with the 1960s document reveals the reforms 
which have been effective in achieving this. 
However, the legal language of the document still 
persists and it is the ‘small print’ of the definitions 
and exclusions which will often contain the 
legal force which enables the insurer to avoid 
paying out.
Explanations for the persistence of legal lan-
guage in these documents and in the written texts 
of statutes, wills and other legal texts can vary; 
one suggestion is that the conservatism of legal 
language creates professional protection for law-
yers and their clerks. By this explanation, the 
move from the legal document of the 1960s to the 
consumer document of the twenty-first century 
might be interpreted as a social shift indicating 
a diminution in the power of the legal profession. 
Tiersma (1999) has a good discussion of this 
history. A more benign explanation for the persist-
ence of legalese in contemporary drafting lies in 
the nature of legal documents themselves; as we 
have seen, they have to be written to be context-
free, time-travelling documents unaffected by 
shifts in the sands of meaning. It can be argued 
that this quest for sociolinguistic independence 
and the accompanying quest for precision require 
a document to be encapsulated in its own defini-
tions and such documents will thus always be 
strange and require expert interpretation. 
While failure to understand an insurance docu-
ment can have financial consequences, failure to 
understand the Police Caution or the Miranda 
warnings can result in someone losing their lib-
erty, and failure by jury members to understand 
some Pattern Jury Instructions could result in 
someone losing their life. Forensic linguists have 
interested themselves in such important texts. 
Cotterill (2000), Rock (2001, 2007) and Shuy 
(1997) have examined different aspects of the 
Police Caution and the Miranda warnings, pointed 
out significant linguistic/communicative problems 
and suggested, sadly so far to no avail, changes 
and improvements. The only recorded success in 
this area has been that of Gibbons (2001) working 
with the New South Wales police to improve their 
Figure 35.2 Insurance document from UK, 2008

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
534
version of the caution. By contrast, Ainsworth 
(2010) depressingly traces the gradual erosion of 
the Miranda rights to a point where, despite the 
wording, ‘You have the right to remain silent’, it 
has become virtually impossible in practice for 
those arrested in the United States to claim their 
right to remain silent.
Some forensic linguists in the United States 
have moved beyond describing problems to inter-
vention. Levi (1993) reports on a lexical analysis 
of a set of jury instructions concerned with impos-
ing the death penalty, which she undertook as part 
of an expert report in an appeal against the imposi-
tion of the sentence. She was asked to express an 
opinion on the question ‘How well could [the 
language of the jury instructions] have served its 
purpose in communicating clearly to the jury the 
legal concepts they needed to understand for sen-
tencing in a capital case?’. The instructions in 
question were (highlighting added): 
If you unanimously find from your consideration of 
all the evidence that there are no mitigating fac-
tors sufficient to preclude the imposition of a 
sentence of death then you should return a verdict 
imposing a sentence of death.
If, on the other hand, you do not unanimously find 
that there are no mitigating factors sufficient to 
preclude the imposition of a sentence of death 
then you should return a verdict that the sentence 
of death should not be imposed.
Levi produced a detailed argued case focusing on 
the inherent vagueness of sufficient and the rarity 
of preclude and concluded that there were 
grave doubts about the comprehensibility of the 
instructions. Dumas (2002) produced a similar 
damning and disturbing linguistic analysis of the 
Tennessee Pattern Instructions for the definition of 
‘reasonable doubt’. However, the most useful 
input to date has been by Tiersma (2010), a trained 
linguist and law professor, who acted as ‘linguis-
tic consultant’ over a period of six years to two 
committees of judges and lawyers set up in 1997, 
following the perceived O. J. Simpson debacle, to 
redraft the Californian instructions so that they 
would ‘accurately state the law using language … 
understandable to jurors’ (Kelso, 1996). The much 
more comprehensible Pattern Instructions became 
effective in 2006, so, if you are going to commit a 
crime in the States, make sure it is in California.
35.4 SPOKEN LEGAL DISCOURSE
Spoken legal discourse pervades the legal 
system from the moment of arrest and the first 
communication of rights (Rock, 2007) through 
police interview, interrogation and charge, to the 
announcement of the verdict at the end of the trial. 
Since the Police and Criminal Evidence Act of 
1984, all significant police interviews in England 
and Wales have had to be tape-recorded and this 
has, incidentally, provided a body of data for 
research. Within the UK in particular, but also 
internationally, there has been considerable 
research into techniques of police interviewing 
(e.g. Williamson, 1993; Milne and Bull, 1999: 
Heydon, 2005), much of it occasioned by a concern 
about coercive interviewing following a number 
of miscarriages of justice that came to light during 
the 1980s and early 1990s. Most of the research 
on interviewing has been carried out by psycholo-
gists and the techniques espoused are aimed at 
retrieving a maximum of useful and relevant 
information from interviewed suspects and wit-
nesses, including vulnerable adults and children, 
without exposing them to coercive or suggestive 
pressures (e.g. Milne and Bull, 1999; Gudjonsson, 
2003). So far, with some notable exceptions 
(Aldridge and Wood, 1998; Heydon, 2005), the 
practical impact of linguists in this area has been 
limited. 
The psychological research has fed into a sub-
stantial project of police training and accreditation 
of interviewers, with hierarchal recognition of 
expertise and specialization into different policing 
areas (e.g. interviewing of children, fraud inter-
viewing, etc.). The relative lack of impact of lin-
guists is changing and they are becoming more 
involved with researching interviews in a way 
which can directly impact on police training. 
Heydon’s (2005) work has led to her involvement 
in training in Australia. In the UK, the authors 
of this paper have delivered training courses to 
police forces on question types, the preparation of 
witness statements and how to manage interpreters 
in police interviews. If linguists are to involve 
themselves in this way, in police training and 
practices, they must rely on a well-researched 
understanding of the interview in its legal and 
sociolinguistic context, and they must also be 
prepared to engage with the practicalities. 
One recent contribution to research into police 
interviewing, which takes a linguistic approach, is 
Stokoe and Edwards’ (2008) examination of what 
they call ‘Silly Questions’ in police interviews. 
They cite such fine examples as:
• Did Melvin give you permission to throw the 
hammer at his front door? (90)
• D’you ’ave permission to smash it basically? (93)
Stokoe and Edwards take a conversation analy-
sis approach and describe the turn-taking and 
conversation management which occurs around 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
535
exchanges such as these. They make a number of 
observations, including the fact that interviewing 
officers distance themselves from such questions 
through the use of discourse markers, such as 
extended hesitations and false starts in the run-up 
to these questions, and also, on occasions, by 
prefacing such questions with explicit phrases 
such as ‘For the record…’ Such distancing relieves 
the interviewer of the embarrassment of asking 
such silly questions but also underlines the impor-
tance of understanding that ‘the record’ is a cru-
cial, unspeaking participant in police interviews. 
The record in UK suspect interviews is always an 
electronic recording (either audio or video) but 
can, in other jurisdictions, be a transcript, notes or 
witness statement. 
The purpose of such questions is clearly to 
establish the knowledge of the interviewee against 
a specific point of law, but there is a wider point 
of explanation for the silliness of these questions 
which also goes some way to explaining the 
silliness in the language of the insurance policies 
and the wider oddity of legal language. In police 
interviews, phrases such as for the record or for 
the tape go some way to making explicit the pres-
ence of the Court in the interview suite. The 
record can be usefully considered as the ear of the 
Court in the interview and acknowledgment of 
the existence of the Court in the room renders 
these questions rather less silly. Indeed, Haworth 
(2008) argues that some police officers’ skill in 
questioning is such that the primary audience for 
their questions might be considered the Court, 
rather than the respondent in the room. 
In the insurance documents it is less explicit, 
but here too the primary audience, in the sense of 
the audience that determines the lexis, syntax and 
overall structure of the document, is the Court. 
Insurance documents are not written principally to 
be understood by the consumer. Where a trade-off 
is necessary between ease of comprehension and 
legal precision, the texts are written first and fore-
most to be legally watertight. If a dispute should 
arise, the matter will be taken to Court. The police 
interview is not a private conversation between the 
interviewer and the suspect; rather, it is explicitly 
designed to be overheard by the Court. In lay–
legal communication, the needs of the Court are 
always paramount, and this can be observed in as 
diverse contexts as the restraining orders applied 
to abusive partners and judges’ instructions to 
juries. 
Once an individual has been investigated and 
charged, they may end up in court, and the well-
studied area of courtroom linguistics includes: 
work on the language of sexual assault and rape 
trials (Ehrlich (2001) and this volume); work 
focused on the input of different participants – 
lawyers, witnesses, experts (Cotterill, 2003; 
Heffer, 2010); and work on specific processes like 
cross-examination or summing-up (Heffer, 2005, 
2007). Finally, there is a body of work on prison 
language and the activities of offenders in prison; 
this includes interaction with prison staff (Mayr, 
2003), with psychologists engaging in treatment 
programmes (Lea and Auburn, 2001) and the lan-
guage varieties used by prisoners more generally 
(e.g. Looser, 2004).
Although procedurally different, the contexts 
mentioned above can each be associated with dif-
ferent linguistic issues, which in turn take on a 
fresh significance when one of the actors involved 
does not speak the language of the jurisdiction in 
question and requires the assistance of an inter-
preter. According to the provisions of Article 6 of 
the European Convention on Human Rights: 
[e]veryone charged with a criminal offence has the 
following minimum rights: (a) to be informed 
promptly, in a language which he (sic) understands 
and in detail, of the nature and cause of the accu-
sation against him; (…) (e) to have the free assist-
ance of an interpreter if he cannot understand or 
speak the language used in court.
There are similar national regulations and, as a 
result, in many multilingual societies interpreters 
work in courts of law, police stations, probation 
offices, prisons, etc. Research in the area of legal 
interpreting focuses on communication issues and 
ways in which semantic misrepresentation arises 
in interpreter-mediated interaction in such set-
tings, with most attention devoted to court inter-
preting. Hale (1999: 57) found that when Spanish/
English interpreters translated lawyers’ questions 
in courtroom proceedings, they tended to ignore 
discourse markers, which, she notes, ‘are impor-
tant in portraying a speaker’s intentions and adding 
tone and force to their utterances’. Berk-Seligson 
(2002: 181) studied the impact of hedging devices 
on the evaluation of a Mexican-American witness 
by mock jurors. She got them to listen to two ver-
sions of his interpreted testimony – one with and 
another without hedges – and found that those 
who listened to the latter evaluated the witness 
more favourably on all of the four social/psycho-
logical traits tested (convincingness, competence, 
intelligence, trustworthiness). Filipovic´ (2007) 
describes how differences between patterns of 
lexicalization of motion events in English and 
Spanish affected interpreted witness testimonies 
in a number of trials in California. If there is one 
concern that these studies have in common, it has 
to do with the fact that inadequate interpreting can 
have quite tangible repercussions for the adminis-
tration of justice. Filipovic´’s findings seem also 
to imply that because of certain typological 
differences between languages, it may be simply 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
536
impossible to communicate successfully in one 
language the meanings formulated in another.
35.5  INVESTIGATIVE AND 
EVIDENTIAL LINGUISTICS
On some occasions the linguist is asked to provide 
investigative assistance or expert evidence for use 
in Court. Within the linguistics literature there has 
been considerable focus on the rules for admission 
of authorship identification evidence to criminal 
prosecutions, but the role of the linguist in provid-
ing evidence is broader than this. Much of the 
evidence provided by linguists does not involve 
authorship identification, and the assistance a 
linguist may offer is not restricted to only provid-
ing evidence for criminal prosecution. Investigative 
linguistics can be considered that portion of 
forensic linguistics which provides advice and 
opinions for investigative and evidential purposes. 
Under UK law, investigative advice and opinion is 
subject to disclosure, and so the linguist needs to 
be cognizant of the needs of the court when under-
taking any investigative work. 
Although it is not the only concern of investiga-
tive linguists, one of their main areas of interest is 
authorship analysis. Linguists are approached to 
comment on the authorship of many kinds of texts 
in cases where alleged infringements of the law 
appear to have been effectuated or accompanied 
by linguistic substance. Examples include extor-
tion letters, suicide notes, plagiarized literary 
works or terrorist conspiracy documents, and, 
more and more, these incriminating texts are 
coming from digital sources such as the Internet 
or mobile phones. The linguist’s task is carried 
out with two underlying assumptions: that every 
language user has a unique linguistic style, or 
‘idiolect’, and that features characteristic of that 
style will recur with a relatively stable frequency. 
There seem to be good reasons to make the first 
of these assumptions, as it can easily be con-
firmed through simple impressionistic observation 
of variation in individual linguistic habits. For 
example, no two independently-produced student 
essays on the same topic will ever be identical. 
This is so because the biologically- and socially-
conditioned uniqueness of individual mental 
experience means that members of the same 
speech community make different choices to 
lexicalize their meanings. The second assumption, 
though intuitively appealing, still requires 
more empirical confirmation, particularly when 
it comes to identifying individual patterns of lan-
guage use across different situations, modes of 
production, etc.
The notion of idiolect has been around under 
different guises since at least the seventeenth cen-
tury, when Blaise Pascal made a connection 
between personal characteristics and linguistic 
style in his Pensées. In 1753, Georges-Louis 
Buffon’s often-cited aphorism ‘Le style est 
l’homme même’ encapsulated the interrelation of 
an individual’s personality with his language 
style, and in 1817 Samuel Taylor Coleridge noted 
that ‘[e]very man’s language varies according to 
the extent of his knowledge, the activity of his 
faculties, and the depth or quickness of his feel-
ings’ (1847: 489). In linguistics, idiolect was first 
deemed worthy of investigation by Hermann Paul 
in the late nineteenth century and got extensive 
treatment in Sapir (1927), though the first use of 
the term itself is attributed to Bloch (1948). 
Interestingly, if sociolinguistics seemed like a 
natural milieu for further investigations, it in fact 
failed to provide answers, choosing to focus 
almost exclusively on communities rather than 
individuals. A notable exception is the work of 
Barbara Johnstone, who posits that ‘it is more 
enlightening to think of factors such as gender, 
ethnicity, and audience as resources that speakers 
use to create unique voices, than determinants of 
how they will talk’ (1996: 56). From a forensic 
linguistic perspective this is an attractive sugges-
tion as not much is known about the dynamics of 
how, say, lexical or syntactic choices are made by 
individuals.
Nevertheless, sociolinguistic findings about 
how particular linguistic forms are associated with 
certain social variables can be of great help in 
forensic linguistic casework, simply because, in 
addressing authorship issues, the linguist needs 
to ensure that potentially telling features are 
individual, i.e. idiolectal, and not dialectal, soci-
olectal, genderlectal, etc. A linguistic pattern 
found to recur regularly in the texts under investi-
gation may also be genre-specific or the result of 
accommodation effects. Put simply, sociolinguis-
tics can help reveal the sources of variation.
35.6 SINGLE TEXT PROBLEMS
When asking questions about the origins of a text 
a basic distinction can be made between single 
text problems and comparative questions (Grant, 
2008). A single text problem occurs where 
comparison texts are unavailable or where an 
investigation is not yet narrowly focused on a 
small pool of suspects. These non-comparative 
problems do sometimes in fact concern more than 
one text, but where this is the case the set of texts 
can be combined to create a single group of texts 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
537
which can be analysed together. In these situations, 
the linguist is essentially being asked whether 
they can determine anything about the writer from 
their written style and sometimes to elaborate 
potential meanings from unclear or ambiguous 
communications. Faced with such questions it is 
important to distinguish between psychological 
and linguistic considerations. Psychological com-
mentary on a threatening letter might include an 
opinion on the dangerousness of the writer and the 
likelihood that they would carry out their threat. 
Providing such opinions is not the role of a lin-
guist. The linguist might comment on the fact that 
a communication was intended to threaten (directly 
or indirectly) and on the possible dislocation 
between communicative intent and perceived 
meaning, or they may be asked to provide assist-
ance in decoding a language variant to help the 
court come to its own view on intent, but they 
are in no position to comment on the intentions of 
the writer. 
A recent example where a single text problem 
involved clarification of meaning was a case in 
which the task was to provide a transcription of an 
Internet Relay Chat (IRC) between two members 
of the London Afro-Caribbean community. The 
conversation appeared to contain a conspiracy to 
murder. Commissioned by the prosecution, the 
task was to provide a ‘translation’ and gloss of the 
conversation which contained a high level of 
abbreviations and word-forms typical of ‘net-
speak’ (Crystal, 2006), and also a high number of 
dialect items narrowly specific to the particular 
community of the two interactants. One part of the 
chat included the offer:
ill get da fiend to duppy her den. 
Interpreting da and den is fairly straightforward. 
These are accent stylizations typical of the more 
abbreviated forms of computer-mediated commu-
nication and ‘fiend’ is fairly common street slang 
for a drug addict. The verb form to duppy is, 
however, rarer in British English and crucial to the 
interpreted meaning. Analysis of the etymology of 
'duppy' suggests an origin in Jamaican folklore 
where a duppy is a kind of ghost. A corpus-based 
approach (collecting data from community-
relevant Internet sites) shows this original mean-
ing has spilled over into the realm of video 
gaming where duppies are zombies and other 
‘undead’ characters. Within the collected corpus, a 
few examples were found for the use of ‘duppy’ as 
a verb, and these did seem to indicate meanings 
associated with shooting and killing, but the 
danger of arguing from very few examples is that 
these might be considered rare or idiosyncratic 
uses. The combined etymological and corpus 
analysis, however, allows the linguist to construct 
an argument that this turn within the IRC chat 
conversation is indeed an offer by one protagonist 
to get a drug addict to kill their victim. In 
expressing this opinion the linguist has to be 
extraordinarily careful to make clear that they 
have no comment on whether this is merely a 
conversation containing an unpleasant fantasy, or 
whether it constitutes a real plan to kill. The 
judgement of intent is not for the linguist. 
On some occasions, when a linguist is faced 
with a single text, they will not be asked to explain 
meanings within that text but rather to identify 
sociolinguistic or, for spoken samples, sociopho-
netic features which might provide information 
about the author. In an unrelated case to that 
described above, the following paragraph was 
taken from a letter addressed to the British Prime 
Minister. It was sent on headed paper purporting 
to be from a UK police force and this passage 
concerns the death of Diana, Princess of Wales: 
She was an innocent girl who tried to do her best 
in a world governed by old cruel farts. […] Sir, the 
whole system stinks. Sometimes, I am ashamed to 
be white by the things others are allowed to say 
and do. Why did many stand by and allow Diana 
to be killed? Surely, this cannot be right? Many in 
this force are gutted by the things we have come 
to know and are told to keep quiet about. Sir, it is 
time to bring these shameful things out into the 
open. Please. Do’nt [sic] let our country go down 
the pan just to protect the interests of a few bad-
minded people.
There are a number of sociolinguistic clues in this 
letter which can help provide a profile for the 
writer. Perhaps the most striking sociolinguistic 
clues are the dialect items, innocent girl, gutted, 
these shameful things and bad-minded people. 
Bad-minded people can be revealed (by simple 
Internet searches) to be a feature of a Jamaican 
variety of English. Considerable caution is 
necessary, however, when drawing a conclusion 
based on this observation; this cannot be taken as 
evidence that the writer is Jamaican, but only that 
he is likely to have been exposed to Jamaican 
varieties of English. Recent work on lexical 
priming (Hoey, 2005) can help support such 
conclusions. Other than the difficulty with demar-
cating the linguistic and the psychological, there 
is a further difficulty in divorcing language from 
its content. In the above paragraph the writer 
claims to be a white policeman. In fact he turned 
out to be a black British man of Jamaican origin 
who had never served in the police. 
Given the amount of work on language and 
gender a further question arises as to the gender of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
538
the writer. This throws into relief the methodo-
logical problem of any form of profiling (whether 
linguistic or psychological). Normal scientific 
method moves from observation of a large number 
of examples to a generalization. Profiling involves 
taking a single example and, by matching it to 
a well-founded generalization, drawing a conclu-
sion about that instance. This reversal of ‘normal’ 
scientific method must be done with caution and 
is prone to error. The single instance could easily 
be a statistical outlier such that any generalization 
might be considered to not apply. 
The most successful attempts to profile single 
texts into sociolinguistic categories do so using 
complex computational and statistical models and 
take into account a large number of linguistic 
variables. Argamon et al. (2003), for example, 
started with about a thousand language variables 
and, using machine learning techniques, built a 
classifier for gender discrimination tasks; also, in 
other work, they examined discrimination for age 
and first language of the non-native English writer 
(e.g. Koppel, Schler and Argamon, 2009). Such 
work might be used in intelligence and screening 
tasks but in the forensic context it is not certain 
enough to provide evidence to the courts. 
As a matter of course, single-author concerns 
are different when the linguist works with spoken 
language. In such cases, determination of gender 
normally poses no problem and additional 
information can be derived. A sociolinguistic pro-
file for a law enforcement agency could thus 
include such characteristics of the offender as his/
her age, geographical provenance, social back-
ground, level of education or ethnicity. It must be 
stressed that profiles of this kind can never be 
treated as absolute, in the sense of always being 
true of the speaker in question. Speech is subject 
to various kinds of socio-stylistic variation as 
people are usually quite successful at manipulat-
ing their phonetic repertoire according to, for 
example, formality of situation or level of mutual 
familiarity. Free from such limitations is informa-
tion on medical conditions, affective states and 
alcohol or drug intoxication, which can some-
times be obtained from speech samples.
Perhaps the most famous example of sociolin-
guistic profiling comes from the ‘Yorkshire 
Ripper’ case. In 1981, a lorry driver named Peter 
Sutcliffe was convicted of murdering 13 women 
in West Yorkshire and Manchester between 1975 
and 1980. In the course of the police investigation, 
phoneticians Stanley Ellis and Jack Windsor 
Lewis were asked to comment on the accent of a 
man, who, in a tape-recorded message, said he 
was responsible for 11 of the murders. They 
pointed to the Southwick and Castletown areas of 
Sunderland and excluded accent disguise, and 
after a time also noted that the recording could be 
a hoax. Unfortunately, their concern was not 
shared by the police, who eliminated men without 
a Sunderland accent from their list of suspects, 
including the real murderer, Sutcliffe, a native of 
Bradford. In 2005, the hoaxer was eventually 
identified; he was still a resident of a Sunderland 
suburb a mile from Castletown.
35.7  COMPARATIVE AUTHORSHIP 
PROBLEMS
In some authorship analysis cases considerable 
material is available against which anonymous or 
disputed texts can be compared. If there is suffi-
cient material, such cases might be described as 
‘authorship recognition’ cases rather than author-
ship identification (Hänlein, 1999). In these cases 
there may be a small pool of suspect authors and 
sample texts may have been collected from all and 
the task is then essentially one of classification. 
Alternatively, there may only be a single sus-
pected author and in this case the linguist has to 
weigh the evidence of similarity and difference 
between texts of known authorship and disputed 
texts, and also weigh sociolinguistic explanations 
for any similarity or difference in order to reach 
a yes/no opinion on whether to exclude or include 
the suspect as a possible author of the disputed 
message(s). Much of the forensic linguistic work 
that goes to court is concerned with this type of 
author assignment. Growingly, such cases involve 
email, and instant and text messaging, and typi-
cally there is a suspicion that the named sender 
was not the actual sender. Cases include emails 
containing threatening, abusive or defamatory 
material, instant messaging interactions between 
children, mature adults posing as adolescents for 
grooming purposes, and text messages sent from 
the mobile phones of people suspected to have 
been dead at the time of sending. Although the 
details and therefore the analytic approach 
change from case to case, the basic strategy is 
the same: the forensic linguist creates a series of 
collections of data or ‘corpora’ – at least two and 
often more depending on the case and the question 
s/he is asked to address – and then sets out to 
discover the distinctive/idiolectal/idiosyncratic 
features of each of the corpora.
To exemplify: Jenny Nicholl disappeared on 30 
June 2005 and her mobile phone, normally in 
frequent use, remained switched off – after nine 
days it was switched on very briefly to send two 
text messages to friends. It was switched on again 
five days later to send two messages in quick suc-
cession to her father and has never been used 
again. Police suspected that she had not authored 
the four messages. Coulthard was provided with 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
539
the four suspect messages and 11 authenticated 
text messages sent by Jenny in the preceding 
months to the two friends. 
In these cases providing an opinion is a two-
stage process. The first stage is to decide if the 
language evidence is compatible with the person 
under consideration having produced the data. If 
at that stage the decision is positive, a second 
stage is to decide how distinctive are the features 
that are shared.
In the Jenny Nicholl case there were of course 
many identical choices, but analysis showed that 
certain texting abbreviations used in the authenti-
cated messages like im, m not, ive, cu and fone 
were not instanced at all in the suspect messages, 
which used the alternatives I am, aint, ave, cya 
and phone, while for several other items where 
Jenny had one fixed choice the suspect messages 
displayed variations. In other words, Jenny had a 
set of encoding rules that differed from those 
instanced in the suspect texts and these systematic 
differences between the two corpora led Coulthard 
to conclude that the form of the suspect messages 
was not compatible with their having been pro-
duced by Jenny.
As a second step, a set of texts produced by the 
suspect were analysed and the analysis showed 
that his choices overlapped with, though were not 
identical to, those of the suspect messages; in 
other words, they were compatible. One explana-
tion for this lack of total fit could be that he had 
tried to disguise his own style and/or to imitate 
that of Jenny which would be the Prosecution 
view. These differences could, of course, be evi-
dence that he was not in fact the author, but simply 
shared a lot of the systematic choices with the real 
author. For example, Hollien (2002) reports a 
forensic phonetic case where he was convinced 
that a voice committing a crime was that of the 
accused, even though there were one or two very 
minor differences. Late in the day he discovered 
that the accused had a twin and that his voice 
matched the suspect samples even more closely. 
Fortuitously, in the Nicholl case, Coulthard had 
access to a series of emails written by one of the 
suspect’s daughters and she turned out to share 
many of the same distinctive features: in other 
words, her style was also compatible. The degree 
of overlap with the suspect messages was less, but 
she needed to be included with him, on the basis 
of the linguistic analysis, in the group of possible 
authors, although he shared more features with the 
suspect texts and on linguistic grounds alone was 
a more likely author. 
As regards spoken language, another interest-
ing example is provided in Baldwin and French 
(1990), who describe the case of M, a Catholic 
man who, passing himself off as a member of a 
protestant paramilitary organization in Northern 
Ireland, threatened to kill the members of a family 
unless money was paid to him. After he was 
arrested, samples of his voice as well as record-
ings of the voice of the extortionist were made 
available to Professor John Baldwin, an expert 
phonetician, whom the prosecution expected to 
make a positive identification claim. With the 
converse being the case, Professor Baldwin was 
then approached by the defence lawyers, who 
invited him to make another recording of M’s 
voice. This time, however, Baldwin’s conclusion 
was that the extortionist and M were in fact the 
same person: the reason for such a turn of events 
being accent-switching, a sociolinguistic phenom-
enon triggered by, for example, the kind of atti-
tude speakers assume towards their interlocutors. 
It transpired that when interrogated by the police, 
M was using an adopted accent apparently in 
order to distance himself from the officers. He 
was eventually sentenced to 10 years’ imprison-
ment, though on evidence other than linguistic.
The forensic phonetician is normally required 
to compare incriminating spoken substance with 
speech samples known to have been delivered 
by the suspect (or the accused). In the process, a 
set of potentially individuating features is identi-
fied and segments are processed in respect of 
qualitative and quantitative characteristics. 
Acoustic analysis is concerned with such param-
eters as, inter alia, vowel formant trajectories, 
mean fundamental frequency, duration of the 
noise burst related to the release stage of plosives 
and duration of pauses. Relevant values are 
obtained in the course of computer-aided analysis 
and are made available for visual interpretation as, 
for example, spectrograms. The actual articulation 
of particular speech sounds as well as the phono-
logical processes employed by a speaker are in 
turn central to auditory analysis. In the case of M, 
for example, the salient features chosen for analy-
sis were ‘the widespread use of the glottal stop ... 
the use of a back rounded diphthong in words like 
‘cold’, ‘go’, etc. ... and the ... pronunciation of 
dental fricatives’ (Baldwin and French, 1990: 105). 
Needless to say, auditory analysis is often con-
cerned with sociolinguistic (or, to be precise, 
sociophonetic) sources of language variation.
35.8 UNIQUENESS OF UTTERANCE
Another concept on which the forensic linguist 
draws is uniqueness of utterance—the idea that 
fairly quickly in stringing words together any 
speaker/writer produces a unique string (Coulthard, 
2004). Sometimes the authorship question involves 
already known authors and, in such cases, the 
forensic linguist is asked whether (parts of) a text 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
540
claimed by author A is too similar to another text, 
produced by author B, to have been produced 
independently. 
With growing frequency linguists are being 
asked to help academic colleagues in the 
detection or confirmation of student plagiarism. 
Any linguistically-based investigation of plagia-
rism is based consciously or unconsciously on the 
notion of idiolect. In other words, it is expected 
that any two writers writing on the same topic, 
even if intending to express very similar mean-
ings, will, because of their differing linguistic 
histories, choose an overlapping, but by no means 
identical, set of lexico-grammatical items to do so. 
It follows from this that, in any comparison of two 
texts, the more similar the set of lexical items 
chosen, the greater the likelihood that one of the 
texts was derived, at least in part, from the other 
(or, alternatively, that both were derived from a 
third text), rather than composed independently. 
Whereas (occasional) identical strings in two 
texts which are supposed to have different authors 
can be indicative of unacknowledged borrowing 
or plagiarism, it is harder to argue the case when 
the second text is (supposedly) produced by the 
same author on a different occasion but without 
recourse to the first. The example I want to use 
is from a famous English murder case, dating 
from 1978, where one piece of strongly-contested 
evidence was a record of a police interview with a 
suspect. 
In this case, four men were accused, and subse-
quently convicted, solely on the basis of the 
confession of one of them, Patrick Molloy, of the 
murder of a 13-year-old newspaper delivery boy, 
Carl Bridgewater. There was no corroborating 
forensic evidence and Molloy later retracted his 
confession, but to no avail. He admitted that he 
did actually say (most of) the words recorded 
as his confession, but insisted that he was being 
told what to say, while he was dictating the con-
fession, by a policeman who was standing behind 
him. In other words he said he spoke – but did not 
author – the confession.
The police, in order to reinforce the credibility 
of Molloy’s confession, produced a contempora-
neous handwritten record of an interview which 
they claimed had taken place immediately before 
the confession-dictation session and which con-
tained substantially the same information 
expressed in words very similar to those of the 
confession. Molloy denied that this interview had 
ever taken place and counter-claimed that the 
interview record had been  fabricated later on the 
basis of the by-then pre-existing confession. As is 
evident from a cursory glance at the two extracts 
below which are taken, respectively, from the 
statement which Molloy admitted making and the 
interview record which he claimed was falsified, 
the similarities are enormous; I have highlighted 
them in bold. 
Extract from Molloy’s Statement
(20) I went downstairs and the three of them 
were still in the room. (21) They all looked 
shocked and were shouting at each other. 
(22) I heard Jimmy say, “It went off by acci-
dent”. (23) I looked and on the settee I saw the 
body of the boy. (24) He had been shot in the 
head. (25) I was appalled and felt sick.
Extract from Disputed Interview with Molloy
P. 
What were the others doing?
(20) The three of them were still in the room.
P. 
What were they doing?
(21) They all looked shocked and were 
shouting at each other.
P. 
Who said what?
(22) I heard Jimmy say ‘it went off by accident’.
P. 
Did you see the boy’s body?
(23) Yes sir, he was on the settee.
P. 
Did you see any injury to him?
(24)  Yes sir, he had been shot in the head.
P. 
What happened then?
(25)  I was appalled and felt sick.
At the time of the trial there were no forensic 
linguists in Britain to question the authenticity of 
the interview record or challenge the prosecution 
claim that such similarity was exactly what one 
would expect when one has the same person 
telling the same story twice in quick succession. 
The four accused were convicted, Molloy died in 
prison, and the other three served 18 years. 
Following recent research on uniqueness of utter-
ance, no linguist would now dispute that the mas-
sive similarity of the two texts demonstrates that 
they were not produced independently and, if 
needed, additional linguistic support for this 
observation is provided by the lack of cohesion 
between some of the invented questions and the 
surrounding text – see in particular the Q–A pairs 
20–22.
35.9 DISPUTED MEANINGS
If authorship issues account for arguably the 
greatest proportion of linguists’ activity associated 
with the provision of evidence, they have a strong 
contender in the disputed meanings which may 
arise in legislative acts, contracts, transcripts of 
speech, alleged slander or libel, trademark and 
copyright disputes, etc. In some countries courts 
are often disinclined to admit such evidence 

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
541
on the assumption that judges and jurors, as 
competent language users, have the capacity to 
understand and interpret the linguistic matter in 
question. This is exemplified by an English Court 
of Appeal ruling in a case of assault occasioning 
actual bodily harm (Stubbs, 1996), where the Lord 
Chief Justice rejected a linguistic opinion demon-
strating how the language of a lower-court judge’s 
summing-up may have influenced the decision of 
the jury, on the grounds that: 
... what the meaning is of the language used by a 
learned Judge in the course of his directions to the 
jury is a matter for this Court to determine and is 
not a matter for any linguistic expert (Stubbs, 
1996: 239).
However, people, including judges, may some-
times have contrasting intuitions about the mean-
ing of a piece of language. In 2002, in Poland, a 
landlord who wanted to evict his tenants but was 
unable to do so for legal reasons, sent them a letter 
of which the following is an adequate translation:
You should know that I will smoke you out of the 
house in an unprecedented way .... I declare that 
each tenant who has made the decision to stay in 
the house against my will, is themself fully respon-
sible for their fate and the fate of their relatives. If 
someone’s health or life is affected, it will be so at 
their own wish.
While the Court of the first instance found the 
landlord guilty of making a threat to harm or kill, 
the learned judges of the Appeal Court offered a 
different reading and overturned the verdict. Even 
so, the landlord subsequently resorted to a more 
subtle, semiotic, means of making his feelings 
known by sending the tenants a festive card with 
the picture of a Christmas tree from which were 
suspended hanged paper cut-out human figures. 
Incidentally, the case also illustrates all too clearly 
the problems raised in legal and linguistic discus-
sions (see, for example, Ross (2004) and Butler 
(1997), respectively) of what actually constitutes 
a threat. 
Instances of cases where meaning was at issue 
are abundant in the literature. Lentine and Shuy 
(1990), for example, report on their contribution 
to a trademark infringement case, in which the 
McDonald’s Corporation won an injunction 
against Quality Inns International – a company 
which some time earlier had announced its plans 
for a new chain of economy hotels that it intended 
to call McSleep Inns. Having carried out an analy-
sis of distributional patterns of the formative Mc-, 
Lentine and Shuy found that it was unlikely ‘that 
one would immediately associate Mc- with 
McDonald’s’ (1990: 358). Shuy (1986) writes 
about his involvement as an expert in another, 
criminal, case where a prominent politician and 
two other men were indicted for an insurance 
fraud. The main body of evidence was transcripts 
of clandestinely tape-recorded conversations, 
during which the defendants allegedly accepted 
bribes in return for help in securing a state con-
tract for an insurance company. Following a prag-
matic analysis, Shuy demonstrated that no speech 
act had occurred in the conversations that would 
corroborate the prosecution’s version of events. 
The five defence attorneys used some of Shuy’s 
findings in their summary arguments and the 
defendants were found not guilty.
Durant (1996) gives an account of semantic and 
pragmatic evidence he provided regarding the exp-
ression economical with the truth in a case of libel, 
while McMenamin (1993) provides an exhaustive 
analysis of the meaning of the term accident, as 
appearing in the insurance policy of a father whose 
18-month-old child died of Sudden Infant Death 
Syndrome (SIDS). More recently, Butters (2007, 
2008) has described his opinions in a number of 
trademark disputes in the United States.
Somewhat underreported are cases where 
linguists comment on naming practices. Many 
jurisdictions have laws preventing parents from 
giving names to their newborn children that could 
have potentially adverse consequences. In Poland, 
for example, officials have the right not to register 
a name that ridicules, is indecent, diminutivized, 
or makes it impossible to distinguish the sex of the 
child. Registrars also use the legally non-binding 
guidelines published by the Polish Language 
Council and in the more problematic cases seek its 
opinion directly. Although different disputed 
names pose different problems, the Council’s 
opinions typically include references to etymol-
ogy, cultural connotations, as well as phonetic and 
orthographic issues. A recent case involved the 
name Da˛b (‘oaktree’) as a second given name for 
a male child. After a long legal battle at many 
judicial levels, Poland’s Supreme Administrative 
Court finally rejected the contention that the name 
does not indicate the child’s sex and can ridicule 
(noting that ‘the word is synonymous with 
strength, honour and magnanimity’). The Court 
disagreed also with the Polish Language Council’s 
opinion that, even if used as a second name, it can 
cause distress to the child.
Within the forensic linguistic community there 
has recently been a bitter dispute over ‘Charlatanry’. 
This dispute was initiated by an article entitled 
Charlatanry in forensic speech science (Eriksson 
and Lacerda, 2007). The authors attacked the 
validity of a commercial computational system 
which purports to detect particular stresses in 
speech and goes on to claim that these phenomena 
are indicative of deception. The scientific criticisms 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
542
contained within the article appear to be sound, 
but sadly the use of the word ‘charlatanry’, and 
the wider tone of the article, led to threats of libel 
action and the publisher withdrew the electronic 
version of the article from their website. The 
issues of charlatanry, ‘junk science’ (Chaski, 
2001) and bad or good practice are very real con-
cerns for forensic linguists who act as experts. 
The United States federal jurisdiction is unu-
sual in holding legal hearings to determine the 
validity of a forensic science before it can be 
admitted to the courts. Howald (2009) provides a 
discussion of some of the issues this process pro-
vokes for linguistic testimony. In other adversarial 
jurisdictions, the Court tends to hear opposing 
experts and come to a case-specific determination 
as to whether the evidence provided is more pro-
bative than prejudicial. In inquisitorial systems, 
the Court tends to appoint an expert who in certain 
circumstances can be challenged by parties to the 
case. Outside of the United States, the evaluation 
of the Court in determining the admission of 
expert evidence tends not to concentrate on the 
method but focuses on the expert. Experts in 
the UK are rather inclusively defined as having 
the qualifications and experience such that their 
knowledge can be said to be over and above that 
expected of the jury. 
Following a series of miscarriages of justice 
in the UK, an attempt was made to remedy this 
situation through the creation of a Council for the 
Registration of Forensic Practitioners (CRFP). 
The CRFP set up an accreditation system and 
register where criteria were set for good science 
and good administrative processes such that 
practitioners’ case files could be evaluated against 
these criteria. In September 2008, after consider-
able debate and work on devising criteria for 
linguistics, a forensic linguistics register was 
opened. Sadly, after 10 years in existence, in the 
spring of 2009 funding was withdrawn from the 
organization and the CRFP was closed. In the UK 
there are no plans for a direct successor organiza-
tion. In the Independent newspaper, Sue Black, a 
Professor of Forensic Anthropology at the 
University of Dundee, commented: 
The UK is at risk of being at the mercy of ‘forensic 
cowboys’ – those who profess their expertise but 
may have little or no means of backing up their 
alleged credentials. The CSI factor has left us with 
hordes of eager but underqualified graduates, 
keen to scale the perimeter fence of forensic 
science, and we are about to take away the border 
guards (Independent, 22 March 2009).
The challenges of working as a forensic practi-
tioner are considerable. Taking academic knowl-
edge of linguistics and applying it to a context 
where an analysis has significant consequences is 
both challenging and rewarding. It is necessary but 
not sufficient to have real expertise in linguistics, 
and to be able to apply that expertise imaginatively 
to sets of data which can be small, selective and in 
a variety of ways imperfect. It is easy to be led to 
conclusions by adversarial bias, or by a real moti-
vation to help victims of horrific crimes or to pre-
vent potential miscarriages of justice. Charlatanry 
may be a real danger but there are insidious dan-
gers to even the competent linguist. 
Forensic linguistics is, however, not only 
restricted to the practice, i.e. the provision of evi-
dence for investigative or legal processes; linguists 
also have much to contribute in studying and 
understanding these contexts. Through the aca-
demic study of language and the law, and language 
used in legal processes, linguists can help provide 
a greater understanding of these contexts and 
enhance the likelihood of justice being served. 
NOTE
1 A recent resolution of the International 
Association for Forensic Phonetics and Acoustics 
refers to the methodology used in those early cases 
as ‘without scientific foundation’, and recommends 
that ‘it should not be used in forensic casework’ 
(www.iafpa.net/voiceprintsres.htm).
REFERENCES
Ainsworth, J. (2010) ‘Curtailing coercion in police interroga-
tion: the failed promise of Miranda v. Arizona’, in 
M. Coulthard and A. Johnson (eds), Handbook of Forensic 
Linguistics. London: Routledge, 111–25.
Aldridge, M. and Wood, J. (1998) Interviewing Children: A 
Guide for Child Care and Forensic Practitioners. London: 
Wiley.
Argamon, S., Koppel, M., Fine, J. and Shimoni, A. R. (2003) 
Gender, genre and writing style in formal written texts. 
Text, 23(3). 
Baldwin, J. and French, P. (1990) Forensic Phonetics. London: 
Printer Publishers.
Berk-Seligson, S. (2002). The Bilingual Courtroom: Court 
Interpreters in the Judicial Process. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Bloch, B. (1948) ‘A set of postulates for phonemic analysis’, 
Language, 2: 1–15.
Butler, J. (1997) Excitable Speech: A Politics of the Performative. 
London: Routledge.
Butters, R. (2007) ‘Changing linguistic issues in US trademark 
litigation’, in M. Turell, M. Spassova and J. Cicres (eds), 
Proceedings of the Second European IAFL Conference on 
Forensic Linguistics/Language and the Law, Barcelona: 
Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 29–42.

FORENSIC LINGUISTICS
543
Butters, R. (2008) ‘A linguistic look at trademark dilution’,Santa 
Clara Computer and High Technology Law Journal, 24: 
101–13.
Chaski, C. (2001) ‘Empirical evaluations of language-based 
author identification techniques’, Journal of Forensic 
Linguistics: The International Journal of Speech Language 
and the Law, 8(1). 
Coleridge, S. T., Coleridge, H. N. and Coleridge, S. (1847). 
Biographia Literaria, or, Biographical Sketches of my 
Literary Life and Opinions. New York: Wiley and Putnam.
Cotterill, J. (2000) ‘Reading the rights: a cautionary tale of 
comprehension and comprehensibility’, Forensic Linguistics: 
The International Journal of Speech Language and the Law, 
7(1): 4–25. 
Cotterill, J. (2003) Language and Power in Court. London: 
Palgrave.
Coulthard, M. (1993) ‘On beginning the study of forensic 
texts: corpus, concordance collocation’, in M. Hoey (ed.), 
Data Description and Discourse. London: Harper Collins.
Coulthard, M. (2004) ‘Author identification, idiolect and lin-
guistic uniqueness’, Applied Linguistics, 25(4): 431–447.
Crystal, D. (2006) Language and the Internet. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Danet, B. (1980) ‘ ‘‘Baby’’ or ‘’Fetus’’? Language and the 
construction of reality in a manslaughter trial’, Semiotica, 
32(3, 4): 187–219.
Dumas, B. (2002) ‘Reasonable doubt about reasonable doubt: 
assessing jury instruction adequacy in a capital case’, in 
J. Cotterill (ed.), Language in the Legal Process. London: 
Palgrave. pp. 246–59.
Durant, A. (1996) ‘Allusions and other ’‘innuendo meanings’’ 
in libel actions: the value of semantic and pragmatic 
evidence’, Forensic Linguistics, 3(2): 195–210.
Ehrlich, S. (2001) Representing Rape: Language and Sexual 
Consent. London: Routledge.
Eriksson, A. and Lacerda, F. (2007) ‘Charlantry in forensic 
speech science: a problem to be taken seriously’, International 
Journal of Speech Language and the Law, 14(2): 169–93.
Filipovic, L. (2007) ‘Language as a witness: insights from 
cognitive linguistics’, International Journal of Speech 
Language and the Law, 14(2).
Gibbons (2001) ‘Revising the language of New South Wales 
police procedures: applied linguistics in action’, Applied 
Linguistics, 22(4): 439–469.
Gowers, E. (1953) The Complete Plain Words. London: Pelican.
Grant, T. D. (2008) ‘Approaching questions in forensic 
authorship analysis’, in J. Gibbons and M. T. Turell (eds), 
Dimensions of Forensic Linguistics. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Gregory, M. (2000) ‘Doing forensic linguistics: endangered 
people in the community’, in E. Ventola (ed.), Discourse 
and Community. Doing Functional Linguistics. Tubingen: 
Gunter Narr Verlag.
Gudjonsson, G. (2003) The Psychology of Interrogations and 
Confessions. London: Wiley.
Hale, S. (1999) ‘Interpreters’ treatment of discourse markers in 
courtroom questions’, Forensic Linguistics, 6(1): 57–82.
Hänlein, H. (1988) Studies in Authorship Recognition—A 
Corpus Based Approach. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Heffer, C. (2005) The Language of Jury Trial: A Corpus-Aided 
Analysis 
of 
Legal-Lay 
Discourse, 
Basingstoke/
New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Heffer ,C. (2007) ’Judgement in court: evaluating participants 
in courtroom discourse’, in K. Kredens and S. Gozdz-
Roszkowski (eds), Language and the Law: International 
Outlooks, Frankfurt am Mein: Peter Lang, 145–79.
Heffer C (2010) ’Narrative in the trial: Constructing crime 
stories in court’ in M. Coulthard and A. Johnson (eds), 
Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics, London, 
Routledge, 199–217.
Heydon, G. (2005) The Language of Police Interviewing: a 
Critical Analysis, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hoey, M. (2005) Lexical Priming: A New Theory of Words and 
Language. Abingdon: Routledge.
Hollien, H. (1990) The Acoustics of Crime: The New Science of 
Forensic Phonetics. New York: Plenum.
Hollien, H. (2002) Forensic Voice Identification, London: 
Academic Press.
Howald, B. S. (2009) ‘Authorship attribution under the 
rules of evidence: empirical approaches in the layperson 
legal system’, Speech, Language and the Law. The 
International Journal of Forensic Linguistics, 15(2): 
219–47.
Johnstone, B. (1996) The Linguistic Individual: Self-Expression 
in Language and Linguistics. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Kniffka, H. (1981) ‘Der Linguist als Gutachter bei Gericht. 
Ueberlegungen und Materialien zu einer ‘‘Angewandten 
Soziolinguistik‘‘ ’, in G. Peuser and S. Winter (eds), 
Angewandte 
Sprachwissenschaft. 
Grundfragen—
Bereiche—Methoden. Bonn: Bouvier Verlag H. Grundmann. 
pp. 584–634.
Kelso, J.C. (1996) ‘Final report of the blue ribbon commission 
on jury system improvement‘, Hastings L.J., 47: 1433.
Kniffka, H. (2007) Working in Language and Law. A German 
Perspective. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Koppel, M., Schler, J. and Argamon, S. (2009) ‘Computational 
methods in authorship attribution’, Journal of the American 
Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(1): 
9–26.
Lea, S. and Auburn, T. (2001) ‘The social construction of rape 
in the talk of a convicted rapist’, Feminism and Psychology, 
11(1): 11–33.
Lentine, G. and Shuy, R. W. (1990) ‘Mc-: meaning in the 
marketplace’, American Speech, 65(4): 349–66.
Levi, J. N. and Walker, A. G. (eds) (1990) Language in the 
Judicial Process. New York: Plenum Press.
Levi, J. N. (1993) ‘Evaluating jury comprehension of the Illinois 
capital sentencing instructions’, American Speech, 68, i, 
20–49.
Looser, D. (2004) ‘Lexicography on the inside: doing time in 
every New Zealand prison’, International Journal of 
Lexicography, 17: 69–87.
Mayr, A. (2003) Prison Discourse. Language as a Means of 
Control and Resistance. London: Palgrave.
McEnery, T. (2005) Swearing in English: Bad Language, 
Purity and Power from 1586 to the Present. London: 
Routledge.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
544
McMenamin, G. R. (1993) Forensic Stylistics. Amsterdam: 
Elsevier.
Mellinkoff, D. (1963) The Language of the Law. Boston, 
Toronto: Little, Brown and Company.
Milne, R. and Bull, R. (1999) Investigative Interviewing: 
Psychology and Practice. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons.
Philbrick, F. A. (1949) Language and the Law: The Semantics 
of Forensic English. New York: Macmillan.
Rock, F. (2001) ’The genesis of a witness statement’, Forensic 
Linguistics, 8(2): 44–72.
Rock, F. (2007) Communicating Rights: The Language of 
Arrest and Detention. Basingstoke, London: Palgrave 
Macmillan.Shuy.
Rose, P. (2003) Forensic Speaker Identification. New York: 
Taylor & Francis.
Ross, S. D. (2004) Deciding Communication Law: Key Cases in 
Context. Philadelphia, PA: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Sapir, E. (1927) ‘Speech as a personality trait’, American 
Journal of Sociology, 32: 892–905.
Shuy, R. W. (1986) ‘Some linguistic contributions to a criminal 
court case’, in S. Fisher and A. Todd (eds), Discourse and 
institutional Authority: Medicine, Education and Law. 
Westport, CT: Ablex. pp. 234–49.
Shuy, R. (2005) Creating Language Crimes: How Law 
Enforcement Uses (and Misuses) Language. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Solan, L. M. (1993) The Language of Judges. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Stokoe, E. and Edwards, D. (2008) ’ ‘‘Did you have permission 
to smash your neighbour’s door?’’ Silly questions and their 
answers in police suspect interrogations’, Discourse and 
Society, 10(1): 89–111.
Stubbs, M. (1996) Text and Corpus Analysis—Computer-
assisted Studies of Language and Culture. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
Svartvik, J. (1968) The Evans Statements: A Case for 
Forensic Linguistics. Gothenburg: Gothenburg University 
Press.
Tiersma, P. M. (1999) Legal Language. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Tiersma (2010) ’Instructions to jurors: Redrafting California's 
jury instructions’, in M. Coulthard and A. Johnson (eds), 
Routledge Handbook of Forensic Linguistics, London, 
Routledge, 251–64.
Tosi, O. (1979) Voice Identification: Theory and Legal 
Applications. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Williamson, T. A. (1993) ‘From interrogation to 
investigative policing: strategic trends in police question-
ing’,  Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 
3: 89–99.
Wróblewski, B. (1948) Jezyk prawny i prawniczy. Kraków: 
Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences.

Language Teaching and 
Language Assessment
C o n s t a n t  L e u n g
36
36.1 INTRODUCTION
In the past 40 years or so the fields of language 
teaching and assessment have taken account of the 
social dimensions in language and language use in 
a variety of ways. Sociolinguistics, with its central 
concern for achieving an understanding of the 
relationship between language and society, has 
contributed substantially to the ‘socio-ising’ of 
language teaching and assessment. Language 
teaching and language assessment can be, and 
sometimes are, conceptualized in terms of princi-
ples and theories that are context-independent. For 
instance, a grammar-based approach may be indif-
ferent to the who, where, how and why questions 
of language use because of its focus on the formal 
system of a language, grammar. This view can be 
justified by an epistemological assumption that 
language is primarily an autonomous phenomenon 
unsullied by instances of language use. By exten-
sion, language teaching and assessment can there-
fore treat ‘language’ as a more or less stable body 
of objectified, formal and context-independent 
knowledge (see Bell, 1981: Ch. 5; Swann, 2002 for 
further elaboration). The contact with ideas from 
sociolinguistics has helped to create a more socially-
informed conceptual and theoretical infrastructure 
for language teaching and assessment.
Many areas within sociolinguistics are poten-
tially relevant to language education generally. An 
early example of an attempt to capture this broad 
connection is Pride (1979) which, inter alia, links 
the following areas of sociolinguistics to language 
teaching and learning: sociolinguistic surveys, 
children’s sociolinguistic competence and dialect 
diversity, standard and non-standard language in 
relation to bilingualism and minority communities, 
and the use of pidgin. Preston (1989) discusses the 
relevance of variationist accounts of language 
forms and language use for second language 
acquisition. Spolsky (1989: 3), in a discussion on 
conditions for second language learning, presents 
his focal questions in this classic sociolinguistic 
formulation: ‘Who learns how much of what lan-
guage under what conditions?’
This chapter will attempt to trace some of the 
key conceptual and theoretical connections 
between aspects of sociolinguistics and language 
teaching and assessment since the 1970s. Examples 
from curriculum development and classroom 
teaching will be used to illustrate, where appropri-
ate, how ideas might have been applied in practice. 
It is notoriously difficult to periodize ideas and 
their influences. It is not suggested here that prior 
to the 1970s there had been no attempt to apply 
sociolinguistic (however defined) insight in lan-
guage education. Indeed the opposite may be the 
case. For instance, Howatt (with Widdowson) 
(2004: 142) reported that in the British colonies of 
Malaya and Singapore in the 1900s there was rec-
ognition that the wholesale importation of gram-
mar school English language and literature courses 
were inappropriate because the pupils were learn-
ers of English in a foreign language context. The 
value of using the 1970s as a reference point lies 
in the fact that it represents a moment when there 
was a decisive shift from primarily a grammar and 
structure orientation to a more socially-sensitive 
perspective in language teaching and assessment, 
particularly in English-speaking countries. More 
importantly, many of the arguments presented to 
advance the case for the embracing of the ‘social’ 
then are, perhaps in slightly different guises, still 
part of the ongoing debate now.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
546
The main connections between sociolinguistics 
and language teaching and assessment will be 
traced historically through two lines of develop-
ments in this discussion. The first is the body of 
work broadly associated with ethnography of 
communication. In this respect, the work of Hymes 
(references in later sections) has influenced not 
only how language is conceptualized for language 
education but also how the social can be taken into 
account in complex linguistic and educational 
environments. The second line of development 
concerns systemic functional linguistics (SFL), 
with particular reference to the work of Halliday 
and his colleagues (references in later sections). 
The fundamental insight of SFL – that the use of 
language is itself a constitutive part of social 
action and that linguistic resources, e.g. lexis and 
grammar, themselves embody social meaning – 
has generated another body of work that connects 
language education to the social world. As Berns 
(1990) observes, both Hymes and Halliday share 
the view that social life shapes people’s use of 
language, but they diverge in terms of how lan-
guage is conceptualized and analysed.
For reasons of scope and space, I will not 
attempt a comprehensive survey of all the sociolin-
guistics output relevant to language teaching or 
education; instead, the main purpose is to develop 
an account that highlights some of the currents in 
sociolinguistics that have been fed into language 
teaching and assessment. In this discussion, the 
terms ‘language teaching’ and ‘language assess-
ment’ are used broadly; examples will be drawn 
from the teaching of a language to students for 
whom it is not their mother tongue, e.g. English as 
a foreign language in Japan or English as an addi-
tional/second language in Australia for linguistic 
minority students, as well as the teaching of 
mother tongue. The context of teaching will be 
made explicit where appropriate. The term ‘lan-
guage assessment’ will cover both language testing 
and other forms of assessment. The first half of this 
discussion will be taken up by a largely descriptive 
account of the points of contact between sociolin-
guistics and language teaching and assessment. In 
the second half, I will look at some recent work 
that may have a bearing on further developments in 
sociolinguistically-minded language teaching and 
assessment. The references used in this discussion 
have all appeared in the English language but they 
relate to research in different parts of the world.
36.2 LANGUAGE TEACHING
Communicative language teaching
The development of the concept of communicative 
language teaching (CLT) was generally associated 
with a break with the grammar-focused approaches 
to language teaching that predominated in practice 
up to the 1960s and early 1970s. The emerging 
socially-oriented work of Austin (1962), Halliday 
(1973, 1975), Halliday, McIntosh and Strevens 
(1964) and Sauvignon (1972) (among others) in 
this period paved the way for a paradigm shift in 
language teaching. At a conceptual level, the work 
of Hymes (1972, 1977) on ethnography of com-
munication and communicative competence was 
particularly influential1. His 1972 paper (it first 
appeared in 1966 as a conference paper) presented 
an ethnographically-oriented formulation of the 
notion of communicative competence. This paper 
explicitly addressed language education issues. It 
was partly a critical response to Chomsky’s (1965) 
highly abstracted notion of (grammatical) compe-
tence, and partly a call for language educators to 
take account of the ‘differential competence within 
a heterogeneous speech community, both undoubt-
edly shaped by acculturation’ (Hymes, 1972: 274, 
italics in original). The point here is that if one 
conceptualizes competence as a biologically-en-
dowed facility essentially residing within individ-
uals in homogeneous linguistic communities, as a 
Chomskyan position would suggest, then this 
concept would be of little value to language teach-
ing. Hymes observed that, in actual communities, 
individuals varied in their competences in the use 
of language/s across different social settings (for 
further elaboration, see Hornberger, 1989), and 
that the differentials were associated with socio 
economic and socio cultural factors such as class 
and status.
For Hymes (1972: 277), a child learning to 
communicate through language has to acquire 
‘knowledge of sentences, not only as grammati-
cal, but also as appropriate. He or she acquires 
competence as to when to speak, when not, and as 
to what to talk about with whom, when, in what 
manner’. In other words, there are social rules of 
use, a dimension of language use ‘without which 
the rules of grammar would be useless’ (Hymes, 
1972: 278). This inclusion of the ‘social’ makes it 
necessary to raise questions of context of com-
munication and aspects of socio cultural practice 
when working towards a theory of language in 
use. In this connection, Hymes (1972: 281, empha-
sis in original) suggests that four empirical ques-
tions must be raised:
Whether (and to what degree) something is 
formally possible:
Whether (and to what degree) something is feasible 
in virtue of the means of implementation available;
Whether (and to what degree) something is appro-
priate (adequate, happy, successful) in relation to a 
context in which it is used and evaluated;

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
547
Whether (and to what degree) something is in fact 
done, actually performed, and what its doing 
entails.
The pedagogical relevance of these questions to 
language teaching, and language education more 
generally, was quickly appreciated by language 
educators. A concept of competence that is built 
on a view of contextualized language use is poten-
tially very helpful for teachers who are interested 
in framing their work in socially realistic ways. 
Canale and Swain (Canale, 1983, 1984; Canale 
and Swain, 1980a, 1980b; among others), building 
on the works of Hymes and others, propose that 
communicative competence comprises four com-
ponents (areas of knowledge and skills):
1 Grammatical competence. This component is con-
cerned with ‘ …knowledge of lexical items and of 
rules of morphology, syntax, sentence-grammar 
semantics, and phonology’ (Canale and Swain, 
1980a: 29). A measure of knowledge and skill in 
this area will allow the language learner to make 
sense of and to produce language expressions 
representing literal meaning.
2 Sociolinguistic competence. ‘[It] addresses the 
extent to which utterances are produced and 
understood appropriately in different sociolin-
guistic contexts depending on contextual factors 
such as status of participants, purposes of the 
interaction, and norms or conventions of inter-
action… ’ (Canale, 1983: 7). This component 
deals with what Hymes (1972, 1977) would call 
the rules of use, including what he (1972: 281) 
means by ‘whether (and to what degree) some-
thing is in fact done’.
3 Discourse competence. For Canale (1983: 9), this 
competence is concerned with ‘[u]nity of a text 
[that] is achieved through cohesion in form and 
coherence in meaning. Cohesion deals with how 
utterances are linked structurally and facilitates 
interpretation of a text. For example, the use 
of cohesion devices such as pronoun, synonyms 
…. Coherence refers to the relationship among 
the different meanings in a text, where these 
meanings may be literal meanings, communica-
tive functions and attitudes’. (Also see Halliday 
and Hasan (1976) on cohesion, and Widdowson 
(1978) on coherence.)
4 Strategic competence. This component is con-
cerned with language learners’ ability to achieve 
communication by ‘mastery of verbal and non-
verbal communication strategies that may be 
called into action for two main reasons: (a) to 
compensate for breakdowns in communication 
due to limiting conditions in actual communica-
tion (e.g. momentary inability to recall an idea or 
grammatical form) or due to insufficient compe-
tence in one or more of the other … [component 
competences] above; and (b) to enhance the 
effectiveness of communication (e.g. deliber-
ately slow and soft speech for rhetorical effect)’ 
(Canale, 1983: 11).
This formulation of communicative competence 
represented a considerable shift in the conceptual 
base of second/foreign language pedagogy which 
had been largely grammar-oriented.
The Canale and Swain framework very quickly 
became the central doctrine of the emerging CLT 
approach in the worldwide English Language 
Teaching (ELT) enterprise in the early 1980s 
(Brown, 2000). The strong influence of CLT was 
felt beyond the English language teaching and 
teacher training programmes (often with direct 
links to the Anglo-American academy) in differ-
ent parts of the world and quasi-government insti-
tutions such as the British Council; second/foreign 
language educators in countries such as Germany 
made explicit reference to it in their deliberations 
(e.g. see Edmondson (2001) for an account). The 
development of the European Framework of 
Common Reference for Languages (Council of 
Europe, 2001) has drawn on CLT explicitly. More 
recently, elements of CLT have been incorporated 
in the discussions on content and language inte-
grated learning (CLIL) which is gaining rapid popu-
larity in Europe (see Klippel, 2008). Even a cursory 
glance at the current ELT textbooks and teacher 
training menus would show that the popularity of 
CLT has not diminished in 30 years. (For further 
discussions see Block (2003) and Leung (2005).)
Patterns of use of language/s
There are other bodies of sociolinguistic work that 
have made a contribution to language education. At 
a whole society level, work on patterns of language 
use such as ‘who is speaking what to whom in what 
contexts’ can assist language policymaking and 
educational resources allocation (e.g. Kaplan and 
Baldauf, 1997, Ch. 4; Ohannessian and Ansre, 1979; 
Whitely, 1979). The Linguistic Minority Project 
(1985), for instance, provided data on patterns of 
language use and language teaching among Asian 
and Eastern European minority groups in England. 
However, as Extra (2006) observes, more of this 
kind of survey work is urgently needed in places 
where linguistic diversity is increasing.
Another strand of sociolinguistic work exam-
ines patterns of language use in specific classroom 
contexts, a well-known example of which is 
Functions of Language in the Classroom, edited 
by Cazden, John and Hymes (1972). Hymes has 
this to say in the Introduction:
For language in the classroom, what we need to 
know goes far beyond how the grammar of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
548
English is organized.... It has to do with the rela-
tionship between a grammar of English and the 
ways in which English is organized in use by teach-
ers, by children, and by the communities from 
which they come; with the features of intonation, 
tone of voice, rhythm…; with the meanings of all 
those means of speech to those who use them and 
those who hear them, not in the narrow sense of … 
naming things and stating relationships, but in the 
fuller sense, as conveying respect … concern or indif-
ference, intimacy…, seriousness or play…; with the 
appropriateness of one or another means of speech, 
or way of speaking, to one or another topic, 
person, situation; in short, with the relation of the 
structure of language to the structure of speaking
(Op. cit.: xiii).
The chapters in this volume address a number 
of prominent language education issues in the 
United States at that time (many of which are still 
current some 35 years later). The topics of discus-
sion include the issues surrounding the use of 
African American Vernacular English (AAVE) 
(Fishman and Lueders-Salmon, 1972; and others), 
code-switching (Gumperz and Hernández-Chavez, 
1972), classroom communication issues involving 
first nations (North American Indian) and other 
ethnolinguistic minority children (John, 1972; and 
others) as well as deaf children (Cicourel and 
Boese, 1972), and so on. In relation to this discus-
sion, perhaps Philips’ (1972) paper on participant 
structures in schools in Warm Springs Indian 
Reservation can be seen as a good example of the 
types of enquiries presented in these chapters. 
Philips looked at the Warm Springs Indian chil-
dren’s participation and verbal interaction (in a 
local variety of English) in Grade 1 and Grade 6 
classrooms. It was observed that these Indian chil-
dren showed a general tendency not to take up 
opportunities to respond to teacher questions in 
front of classmates, yet they would engage actively 
in self-directed group projects or tasks. The field-
work data suggested that the children’s levels of 
participation in the different activities were related 
to their community experience. It was suggested 
that in their home and community settings chil-
dren tended to learn by silent observation or by 
sharing tasks (e.g. cleaning a room) with elders 
with little verbal interaction. Furthermore, the 
Indian children were not generally asked to tell 
what they knew or could do while learning; they 
showed their success in learning by producing an 
accomplished deed (e.g. a cooked meal). All of 
this clearly contrasted with the heavy reliance on 
verbal interaction in learning (and the checking 
and displaying of learning) processes in school.
This line of sociolinguistic enquiry has been 
reflected in work situated in other world locations. 
Here are some of the more recent examples. Lin 
(1999) studied the uses of English and Cantonese 
in English-medium secondary schools in Hong 
Kong. In these schools, teachers and students – a 
vast majority of whom were local ethnic Chinese 
Cantonese speakers – are meant to conduct all 
curriculum and school activities through English. 
However, in this study, Lin found that there were 
different practices in different classrooms and 
schools. For instance, in a school located in a 
middle- class/professional neighbourhood, both 
the teacher and the students of a Form 3 class (3rd 
year in secondary school) were comfortable with 
English as a medium for teaching and learning 
activities. In another school, located in an indus-
trial area where the students came from families 
of manual labour or service occupations, the 
teacher of a Form 2 class (2nd year in secondary 
school) would speak first in English to ask ques-
tions, but then she would repeat or elaborate the 
questions in Cantonese to get responses from the 
students. The students would offer answers in 
Cantonese and she would then recast the answers 
in English. She had to do this because the students 
had limited English proficiency and they were not 
yet able to engage in grade-level work through 
English. (See Lin, 2001 for a further discussion.)
Ndayipfukamiye (2001) investigated the use of 
Kirundi and French in rural and urban Grade 5 
(primary school) classrooms in Burundi. The stu-
dents were taught the curriculum through the 
medium of Kirundi and learned French as a sub-
ject up to Grade 4. At Grade 5, curriculum teach-
ing was switched to French-medium. Curriculum 
guidelines suggested that only French should be 
used from Grade 5, and that teachers should build 
on pupils’ life experience for learning. But many 
children, particularly those in rural areas, would 
have little direct contact with French outside 
school, and the kind of background knowledge 
(encoded in French) needed to do the curriculum. 
A consequence of this situation was that teachers 
often resorted to code-switching to teach curricu-
lum content. The following is an example of a 
teacher switching from French to Kirundi to 
connect with the students’ experience:
Key:
Italics – French
Bold – Kirundi
T: on dit qu’on prend ses feuilles pour faire des. pour faire 
les to-its.. vous avez été à I’intérieur? hanyuma hari 
ivyo bariko barwaganya vyitwa hein. donc eh ubu 
biriko birahera mugabo kera ugiye wasanga inzu 
zose zisakaje ivyatsi. ivyatsi. hamwe wasanga ari 
ubgatsi vyo mw ishamba. ahandi ugasanga ari 
ubgatsi? (Op. cit.: 108, original transcription con-
ventions)
Translation into English:
T: it is said that its leaves [the leaves of a tree] are 
used to cover roofs. Have you already been in the 

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
549
countryside? there is a practice that is being com-
bated called thatched roofing er. and so. the prac-
tice is now receding but in the past all the houses 
were covered in thatch. Thatch. It was forest foli-
age and in other instances what could you find? 
(Loc. cit.)
Both Lin and Ndayipfukamiye point to the 
constraints of using a non-local or non-indigenous 
language as medium of instruction in two differ-
ent contexts. Quite often, educational policies 
would promote the use of a non-local language as 
medium of instruction because it is believed that 
this would create a rich language environment 
leading to accelerated acquisition of the preferred 
language. These two studies represent classroom 
research that paints a very different story and 
highlights the importance of taking local social 
circumstances into account.
In ethnically and linguistically diverse schools 
in England where the official medium of the 
national curriculum is English, bilingual assistants 
are sometimes deployed to work with students 
whose English proficiency is not yet able to cope 
with classroom communication unaided. Martin-
Jones and Saxena (2001) examined the ways 
bilingual classroom assistants were positioned 
and used in the classroom by class teachers. These 
assistants tend to come from the local neighbour-
hood and share a minority community language/s 
with the students. They are generally not formally 
trained as teachers. In the classroom, the differen-
tials in professional status and authority are 
reflected in the ways the bilingual assistant’s 
speaking turns are directed by the teacher and the 
minority community languages are subordinated 
to English. Figure 36.1 shows one of the moments 
when the class teacher gave an explicit signal to 
the bilingual assistant to begin to use Urdu to 
explain to the students what had been said in 
English.
The educational policy rhetoric in England in 
the past 30 years has been that all languages are to 
be respected and, where appropriate, they should 
be used in school to promote learning. But as this 
study shows, the prestige and the symbolic author-
ity of English as the official curriculum language 
and the status of non-qualified bilingual assistants 
can in practice mean that minority community 
languages are often consigned to a subservient 
role in the classroom.
As part of a much larger study of language and 
interaction in a London secondary school, 
Rampton (2006) observed some Year 9 (13/14 
year-old students) German lessons. Compared to 
other subject lessons, the teaching in the German 
lessons appeared to be designed to orchestrate 
whole-class activities. Whereas in the other subject 
lessons students were often involved in group 
or individual work, the German lessons were 
organized in a ‘flow’ of activities such as whole-
class listening comprehension, hands-up survey of 
individual answers and choral repetition of drill 
sentences. It is suggested that these observed 
teacher-orchestrated language learning activities, 
which appeared to be representative of foreign 
language teaching in this school and resonated 
with reported data from elsewhere, share similari-
ties with ritual events which can be characterized 
by, among other things, ‘obscurity in proposi-
tional meaning’, ‘parallelism’ and delivery that 
entails fluency and stylized intonation which are 
supported by prescribed proxemics, behaviours 
and attitudes. Clarity in language content meaning 
would not be a priority ‘when they [students] were 
expected to respond to the third-person question 
“what is J__ doing according to her card” with, for 
example, an answer in the first-person – ‘ich 
wache auf’ ((‘I wake up’))’ (Rampton, 2006: 180, 
original typography). Parallelism manifested itself 
in activities such as imitation drills and filling-in 
exercises where students were asked in insert a 
piece of information (e.g., time) into a slot in 
a sentence set up by the teacher. The extract of a 
teacher-orchestrated choral drill in Figure 36.2 
can be seen as an example of an attempt at ritual-
istic delivery.
Rampton also found instances where students 
were not expected to provide personally truthful 
answers in some of the learning activities. For 
instance, a teacher said this to her students in con-
nection with a task involving giving times for 
morning routines: ‘you can give me any time, 
I don’t really mind too much … we’re just practis-
ing this construction’ (op. cit.: 178). These find-
ings suggest an interesting contrast to the official 
foreign languages curriculum goals which include: 
‘[d]eveloping the skills of listening, speaking, 
reading and writing in a range of situations and 
contexts’ and ‘[u]sing imagination to express 
thoughts, ideas, experiences and feelings’ (QCA, 
2007: 166).
In a study on the vitality of African American 
Vernacular English, Labov (2008) suggests that 
AAVE is continuing to flourish and develop. For 
instance, he reports that the use of the commonly 
recognized invariant form be (same form for is, 
am or are) before noun phrases and adjectives has 
now been extended from identificatory meaning to 
signal habitual meaning, e.g.:
A: Do you know where I can find Nukey?
B: She be here [most of the time] but she ain’t here 
 now.
(Labov, 2008: 221)
Labov argues that the maintenance and devel-
opment of AAVE are linked to residential (and 
the associated social and schooling) segregation 
of African Americans, which shows signs of 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
550
continuing and spreading in many cities in the 
United States. Furthermore, it is suggested that the 
use of AAVE is associated with low decoding 
accuracy in reading. Residential segregation is 
itself part of an interlocking set of social and envi-
ronmental factors such as unemployment, poverty, 
low(er) educational achievement (including low 
reading achievement) and other social problems.
Labov’s paper is somewhat different from all the 
other studies cited earlier in this section which 
share a common methodological starting point, i.e. 
they start by focusing on a particular situation of 
language use; the ensuing investigation then 
attempts to describe and explain the circumstances 
and reasons that have led to the observed patterns of 
use of language/s. Labov’s 2008 paper looks at the 
use of AAVE by African Americans as a vernacular 
variety and accounts for its maintenance and devel-
opment in terms of macro-social factors such as 
residential segregation and poverty. The common-
ality among all the papers is the role played by 
social and cultural factors in language use.
It is obvious that the kind of sociolinguistic 
enquiry exemplified by the studies cited in this 
discussion does not always deal with language 
pedagogy in a direct way, unlike the work on com-
municative competence and CLT. But this kind of 
sociolinguistic work provides important descrip-
tion and analysis that help to account for some of 
the complexities and intricacies in language use in 
Key: 
BA- bilingual assistant 
CT – class teacher 
L – learner 
LL – learners 
<E> – English 
<U> – Urdu 
1
CT:
<E>right. Do you know what this is called?
L?:
wire
L?:
+ wire 
CT:
+wire
5
LL:
wire
CT:
and these clips on the end are called crocodile clips. (‘cause they go){ } like a
crocodile like that 
L?:
like a dog 
CT:
like a dog ([nauu]) crocodile clip 
10
CT:
Mrs. A she’ll tell you .. 
BA:
<U>kyaa hai ye<E>clip<U>jo hai∼. Ye<E>wire<U>hai…  
What is this? This clip= This is a wire.  
Ye kyaa hai ye<E>wire<U>hai aur jo iske uupar<E>clip
What’s this? This is a wire. And look at the shape of 
<U>hai uskii<E>shape<U>aage se dekho.<E>crocodile
the clip in front of it. Look from the front. Have you seen a 
   
<U>dekhaa hai jo paanii mai∼ hotaa hai. uske jaisii<E>shape
crocodile {which/it} is found in water? The shape looks like  
15
<U>kaa aise. [wo:~a] {making sound}
Like this.
L?:
[wo: ∼a]
BA:
[wo: ∼a] {CT laughing?}
L?:
[wo:∼a]
20
BA:
<P>e dekh aise..<E>crocodile<U>kii tarah wo:~a. hai
Look, like this. ‘wo:~a’ like a crocodile, isn’t  
naã. kyoõ kii aise khultaa hai. ye hai<E>crocodile clip..=
it? Because it opens like this. This is a crocodile clip.  
<U>hai ye dekho. uskaa muuh kaise khultaa hai<E>crocodile
that. ok here, see, it opens like a crocodile’s mouth  
Figure 36.1 Example of language switching using a bilingual classroom assistant. (Martin-Jones 
and Saxena, 2001:126–127; original transcription conventions).

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
551
classroom communication in specific contexts. 
Such accounts illuminate the socially-enacted 
underside of officially sponsored curriculum 
claims, and they can serve to signal the possibili-
ties and the limits of possibilities of the espoused 
principles and goals.
Systemic functional grammar
Another strand of sociolinguistics that has 
impacted on language teaching is the work of 
Halliday and his associates. The idea of ‘function’ 
in language is understood in terms of the relation-
ship between meaning and language expressions. 
This functional relationship ‘ …reflects the fact 
that language has evolved in the service of par-
ticular human needs … what is really significant 
is that this functional principle is carried over and 
built into the grammar, so that the internal organi-
zation of the grammatical system is also func-
tional in character’ (Halliday, 1975: 16). Halliday 
identified a number of social functions such as 
instrumental function (using language to satisfy 
material needs) and regulatory function (using 
language to control the behaviour of other people) 
and so on. In principle, there are infinite options 
in meaning (expressing social functions) and 
language can be seen as a ‘meaning potential’ 
(op. cit.: 16). Linguistically, the meaning options 
are expressed through three functional compo-
nents (often referred to in the Hallidayan literature 
as metafunctions):
• Ideational – ‘the speaker expresses his experi-
ence of the phenomena of the external world, 
Figure 36.2 Teacher-orchestrated choral drill. (Rampton, 2006: 181).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
552
and of the internal world of his own conscious-
ness’ (op. cit.: 17); thus, language is a means 
with which people talk about the world.
• Interpersonal – the ‘function of language as a 
means whereby the speaker participates in … [a] 
speech situation’ (op. cit.: 17); through this com-
ponent individuals can adopt a role in relation to 
other participants, express their own views and 
values, and so on.
• Textual – an ‘enabling function . . . the func-
tion that language has of creating text’ 
(op. cit.: 17); this component is concerned with 
the deployment and organization of linguistic 
resources (in the broadest sense) to form a text 
(spoken or written) to make meaning in context 
(cf. discourse competence in the Canale and 
Swain framework).
These functional components are conceptual and 
analytical categories. In actual language commu-
nication, they are embedded in and realized by 
instances of speech or writing simultaneously. 
(For a fuller discussion of systemic functional 
grammar see, for example, Halliday and 
Matthiessen, 2000, 2004.)
The work of Schleppegrell, Achugar and Orteíza 
(2004) offers an example of this functional 
approach at work in a language-teaching context.
In school systems where linguistic minority 
students are expected to participate in a common 
curriculum with other students, many of them may 
find the ways in which content ideas are expressed 
through the school language difficult (the school 
language being their additional/second language). 
This kind of domain/subject-specific language is 
often referred to as register. In a United States 
context, Schleppegrell et al., using a functional 
grammar approach, examine how lexical and 
grammatical resources are used in history texts. 
Students need to be able to identify events and 
happenings (ideational function) when working 
with History texts; these tend to be encoded in 
action verbs of processes. However, history texts 
also contain other information. They therefore 
argue that it is important to help students under-
stand that there are different types of verbs and 
that they serve different functions.
The verbs used in writing about history can be clas-
sified as action verbs such as fight, defend, build, vote 
and so forth; saying and thinking-feeling verbs 
such as said, expressed, supposed, like, resent, and so 
forth; and relating verbs such as is, have, is called, 
and so forth. This categorization helps students 
understand when authors are writing about events 
(action verbs), when they are giving opinions or 
telling what others have said (thinking-feeling and 
saying verbs), and when they are giving back-
ground information (relating verbs).
(Schleppegrell et al., 2004: 77)
In addition to looking at verbal processes, 
Schleppegrell and her colleagues also examine 
how actors and agents, i.e. participants, in histori-
cal events are represented. Participants can be 
difficult to identify in history texts. For instance, 
in a statement such as ‘The slave trade peaked in 
the late eighteenth century’, it is not clear who 
might have been involved, nor is it easy to see the 
activities in ‘slave trade’. The use of abstract 
nouns or noun phrases (e.g. ‘slave trade’) may be 
efficient as a means of conveying complex his-
torical events and processes, but the wording can 
obscure the intended meaning. Functional gram-
matical analysis can help make text meaning more 
transparent by unpacking the relationship between 
wording and meaning.
The work of the Language In The National 
Curriculum project (LINC, 1989–1992) in the UK 
(Carter, 1990, 1996, 1997; LINC, 1989–1992) 
also draws on the SFL perspective. This was a 
government-funded initiative to produce teacher 
development material that would support the 
teaching of English (mainstream school subject) 
within the statutory National Curriculum in 
England and Wales. For example, on the topic 
of teaching ‘variations in written language’ the 
following teaching activities are suggested:
• Preparation: the teacher prepares three groups 
of labels – showing writing purposes (printed on 
card, as shown in Figure 36.3), audiences and 
text types – cuts them up and puts them in three 
piles.
• In class: the teacher shuffles each of the three 
piles of cards and lays down each pile face down, 
then turns the top card of each pile face up. The 
random sequencing of the cards in each pile may 
show up in unpredictable combinations such as 
Complain, Unknown Person and Recipe. These 
combinations can be used to generate questions 
such as: Is this combination likely/possible? Is 
written language appropriate for this purpose? 
How would the writer organize the text? This 
kind of teaching activity quite clearly reflects a 
functional view of language use that relates form 
to purpose and context in a systematic way.
In broadly the same period, this functional view 
of language use has also underpinned the develop-
ment of the genre theory approach to teaching 
literacy in schools in Australia. Cope and Kalantzis 
(1993: 67) state that:
…writing and speaking have distinctively different 
linguistic structures; and different ways of using 
language have different social effects. Literacy, 
and the types of transformation of oral language 
that come with literacy, open linguistic doors into 
certain realms of social action and social power. It 
follows that literacy teaching, if it is to provide 

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
553
students with equitable social access, needs to link 
the different social purposes of language in differ-
ent contexts to predict patterns of discourse.
This approach recognizes that in society and in 
education some types of text carry more social 
and educational power than others; government 
committee reports, official curriculum documents 
and textbooks are examples of such powerful 
texts. These texts tend to conform to ‘[g]enres 
[which] are conventional structures which have 
evolved as pragmatic schemes for making certain 
types of meaning and to achieve distinctive social 
goals, in specific settings, by particular linguistic 
means’ (op. cit.: 67). By looking at genre in this 
particular way, it is possible to help students 
understand ‘how language works; who it works for; 
why it works’ (op. cit.: 84) in a context-sensitive 
way. Veel (1997), for example, looks at a number 
of different science texts and relates their linguis-
tic features to the purposes they are designed to 
serve. The following is an example:
Silicones are similar to hydrocarbons, but the 
‘backbones’ of the molecules consist of silicon and 
oxygen atoms, instead of carbon atoms. Attached 
to the silicon atoms are side-chains of carbon and 
hydrogen.
 Silicones have exceptional resistance to heat. 
They repel water, and are not affected by most 
chemicals... (Coghill and Wood, 1989: 117, cited 
in Veel, 1997: 166)
Veel argues that this text, like many school science 
texts, presents and represents science as a body of 
stable and ‘true’ facts or content for learning. In 
terms of sequencing and staging of information in 
secondary school science texts, Veel suggests that 
there are some clearly identifiable genres, for 
instance:
• procedure – this genre serves the social and 
educational purpose of enabling experiments 
and observations; the content is presented in 
three stages: aim-materials needed-steps
• causal explanation – this genre deals with why or 
how an abstract or a not readily observable proc-
ess takes place; it has two stages: identification 
of phenomena-explanation sequence (compris-
ing a number of phases), and so on.
Figure 36.3 The text game. (LINC, 1989–92: 156).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
554
Veel further suggests that school science texts 
tend to follow a knowledge trajectory that starts 
with the genres related to doing science (e.g. pro-
cedures for doing experiments) in the lower years 
of schooling. The ‘doing science’ phase is followed 
by explaining science (e.g. causal explanations), 
organizing scientific information (e.g. descriptive 
and taxonomic reports), and, in the senior years in 
school, challenging science (e.g. exposition of 
argument for or against an issue). Coffin (1997) 
has also observed this movement from the concrete 
(learning about events) to the abstract (arguing 
against a theory) in history. Paying attention to 
language use in particular subject areas can make 
reading and writing more transparent to teach and, 
at the same time, can help students become more 
aware of the close relationship between content 
meaning and language use.
36.3 LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
In this section, ‘language assessment’ will be used 
as a superordinate term to encompass both psycho-
metrically-oriented language testing and class-
room-based teacher assessment of language. The 
relevant issues surrounding these two approaches 
and practices of language assessment will be dis-
cussed in turn. The focus here, in line with the 
perspective taken in the previous section on lan-
guage teaching, will be on the conceptual links 
between sociolinguistics and language assessment.
A good deal of the conceptual and theoretical 
work in language testing in the past 20 years or so, 
particularly in relation to English as a foreign 
language, has been concerned with the notion of 
‘construct’. By construct is meant ‘the ability 
[testers] want to measure’ in an individual test-
taker (Bachman and Palmer, 1996: 89). It is 
argued that, with a defined construct for a particu-
lar test, it becomes possible to develop test items 
(questions) which are designed to tap into target 
ability, as well as to evaluate the validity of the 
way that test scores are understood and inter-
preted. So, for instance, the construct for aca-
demic writing in a given subject at first-degree 
university level may comprise a knowledge of 
grammar, rhetorical organization and register 
appropriate to that subject. The notion of construct 
is thus directly connected to questions of what 
counts as language knowledge and what should be 
included in an ability to use language knowledge 
with reference to context and purpose. In other 
words, the issues here are to do with language 
modelling. It is at this point that language testing, 
a psychometrically-oriented enterprise, connects 
with sociolinguistics, or more precisely, with the 
notion of communicative competence.
The advent of the concept of communicative 
competence in language teaching has been accom-
panied by a search for a language model by lan-
guage testers that would account for the complexity 
in language use (performance) in context. Bachman 
(1990) and Bachman and Palmer (1996), building 
on the work of Hymes, Canale and Swain, 
Sauvignon and others (see earlier references), put 
forward a multi-component hierarchical model of 
language competence which has become a strong 
point of reference in the language testing field since 
the early 1990s. The Bachman model (1990:87), as 
it has come to be known, divides the concept of 
competence into two sub-components: organiza-
tional competence and pragmatic competence. 
In turn organizational competence is made up, at 
the next level below, of grammatical competence 
(e.g. vocabulary and syntax) and textual compe-
tence (e.g. cohesion and rhetorical organization). 
Likewise, pragmatic competence comprises illocu-
tionary competence (e.g. ideational and manipula-
tive functions) and sociolinguistic competence 
(e.g. sensitivity to variety and register, and cultural 
references).
The lineage of this model of competence can be 
easily seen at level of grammatical competence, 
textual competence and sociolinguistic compe-
tence which correspond closely to the grammati-
cal, discourse and sociolinguistic competences set 
out in the Canale and Swain model. Illocutionary 
competence is clearly related to the Hallidayan 
language functions mentioned earlier.
The detailed breakdown of these competences 
at the fourth tier into potentially discrete and iden-
tifiable language features reflects the concerns 
and the operational requirements of language test-
ing. Put differently, language test developers are 
interested in being able to specify what language 
knowledge and/or language use are being sampled 
in any standardized test (for a discussion see 
North, 1993). And it is in the way language speci-
fication is accomplished in the Bachman model 
that one can see the links between language test-
ing and sociolinguistics.
Bachman and Palmer (1996: 44) acknowledge 
that ‘language use, by its very nature, is embedded 
in particularly situations’, and that each instance 
is ‘virtually unique’. However, they argue that ‘it 
is possible … to identify certain distinguishing 
characteristics of language use tasks and to use 
these characteristics to describe a language use 
domain’ (op. cit.). Insofar as contemporary lan-
guage testing tends to claim to be interested in 
test-takers’ ability to use the target language in 
specific domains (e.g. a vocational training course 
for adult immigrants), and for specific tasks (e.g. 
to engage in laboratory experiments), and is not 
interested in their general language ability or com-
petence, this argument connects with the concern 

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
555
for situatedness in the Hymesian notion of com-
municative competence well. If the job of a lan-
guage test is to sample test-takers’ performance in 
a given domain, the specificity of an identified 
domain allows a highly-focused selection of fea-
tures of language to be included in a test. For 
instance, in an English language test developed 
for the purpose of hiring hotel telephone recep-
tionists (located in Asia), the target language use 
domain is telephone room booking and the tasks 
include providing information on room occupancy 
(availability) and verifying credit card details and 
so on. Within these well-defined parameters, the 
grammatical competence to be sampled by the test 
is characterized as ‘Vocabulary: general and spe-
cialized for hotel reservations… ’; pragmatic 
functions are characterized as ‘Functional: 
Ideational and manipulative… ’; and in terms of 
sociolinguistic competence; ‘Dialect: standard …. 
Cultural references: none’ (Bachman and Palmer, 
1996: 310–11).
The communicative competence approach in 
general has been very influential in language test-
ing since the mid-1980s. The Bachman model in 
particular has made a substantial contribution to 
this enterprise. As Alderson and Banerjee (2002: 
80) note in a state-of-the-art review, the Bachman 
model has been ‘very useful as the basis for test 
construction... ’. A glance at the literature in the 
field of language testing would support this view. 
Davies’ (2008) detailed historical account of the 
conception and revision of the hugely popular 
International English Language Testing System 
(IELTS, English language tests) and provides 
some insights into how the concept of communi-
cative competence and the Bachman model have 
been integral to its evolution. Almost invariably, 
all book-length academic discussions (e.g. McKay, 
2006; McNamara, 1996; Weir, 1990) and practical 
guides and resource menus (e.g, Davidson and 
Lynch, 2002; Fulcher and Davidson, 2007) in the 
field contain substantial reference to the concept 
of communicative competence. Its impact is also 
felt in the politically significant Common European 
Framework of Reference for Languages (Council 
of Europe, 2001) which has been designed to 
inform language teaching and learning pro-
grammes, assessment and certification in European 
countries; ‘communicative language competence’, 
comprising linguistic, sociolinguistic and prag-
matic components, forms an important part of its 
theoretical foundations.
Another area of language assessment that has 
made a connection with a strand of sociolinguistics 
is classroom-based formative assessment of stu-
dent language use by teachers. Classroom-based 
formative assessment has gained a good deal of 
policy and professional support in recent years (for 
a discussion see Assessment Reform Group, 2002; 
Black and Wiliam, 1998a, 2006; Broadfoot and 
Black, 2004). A good deal of the current discus-
sions on formative assessment is focused on 
exploring the learning-enabling potential of class-
room interaction between teachers and students, 
and among students themselves. The discussion 
has gravitated around the well-known classroom 
interaction 
Initiation–Response–Evaluation 
(I–R–E) sequence. It is generally observed that the 
Initiation move by the teacher tends to take the 
form of closed or display-oriented questions, e.g. 
What is the population of Greenland? Such ques-
tions tend to lead to short responses by students 
which are, in turn, evaluated by the teacher in 
terms of correctness or accuracy. While this kind 
of exchange between the teacher and the student 
can be used to assess what a student knows, it does 
not necessarily lead to further learning. Black and 
others argue that formative assessment should 
make more educational use of teacher questions 
and teacher evaluation, or more appropriately, 
teacher feedback (Black and Wiliam, 1998b; Black 
et al., 2003; for a wider discussion see Alderson, 
2007; van Lier, 1996). The use of open questions, 
increasing the wait time for a student answer, and 
providing student-oriented feedback that shows the 
next learning steps are all part of the exploration of 
making teacher assessment in the classroom more 
formatively oriented. The discussion by Leung and 
Mohan (2004) on the discourse of classroom-
based formative assessment is an example of an 
attempt to extend this kind of exploration.
Working with data collected in multiethnic 
primary classrooms, which included students 
speaking English as an additional/second lan-
guage, Leung and Mohan, drawing on aspects of 
the work on analysing casual conversations by 
Eggins and Slade (1997), itself a development 
built on Halliday (1994; for more recent discus-
sion, see Halliday and Matthiessen, 2004), sug-
gest that it would be useful to examine classroom 
language interaction in terms of three conversa-
tion moves: offer, continue and respond. For the 
purpose of analysing formative interaction: the 
‘open’ move can be taken to include asking for 
and/or offering to give an answer; ‘continue’ can 
include reasons given for or against an answer; 
and ‘respond’ can include accepting or rejecting 
an answer on offer. The extract in Table 36.1 is an 
example of this analysis. A Year 4 class (9 year 
olds) in a primary school near London had been 
working on an early British history topic. The 
students were by now familiar with the theme. In 
this lesson their task was to read the text of a 
number of paragraphs and decide which sentence 
in each of the paragraphs was the most important 
(in relation to the theme). At the start of this task 
Andy (A), the teacher, explained the task and read 
the first paragraph with the class. He stressed that 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
556
the students should work collaboratively in small 
groups to decide on the most important sentence. 
He then moved around the class to interact with 
students in small groups. The data extract shown 
in Table 36.1 begins when Andy came to the group 
where Farhana (F), Meena (M), Narinder, Sarfia, 
Saleh and Osman (O) were working together. 
These students were at various stages of learning 
English as an additional language.
Using the Eggins and Slade analytic schema it 
is quite easy to see that the teacher, Andy, asked 
questions but did not provide answers himself. 
When an incorrect answer was offered, he elicited 
an alternative answer by asking a question (turn 15). 
At turn 18 when a correct answer was given, Andy 
asked further questions to elicit the reasons used 
by the students. In turns 24 and 26 his questions 
guided the students through a reasoning process. 
From the point of view of developing classroom-
based formative assessment, this analytic approach  
shows the range and the directionality of teacher 
feedback, which can contribute to a fuller under-
standing of classroom interaction and how forma-
tive opportunities can be exploited.
Teacher assessment does not take place in a 
social vacuum. In a study of teacher assessment in 
Table 36.1
Offer answer
Give reasons for/against
Respond to offer
[Andy returns]
13  A:  Have you finished? What have 
you decided? What’s the most 
important sentence?
14 F: ‘Some of the Britons fell back.’
15
A:  ‘Some of the Britons fell back.’ 
Or do you think there’s a more 
important fact?
16
F: yes, yes.
17 A: What, who’s it about?
18 F: King Arthur
19
A: King Arthur.
20
A: Do you think he’s important?
21
Chorus: Yes, yes.
22
A: Right. Why is he important?
23
F: Because he is king.
24
A:  No, what did he do that was so, that’s 
become legendary?
25
M&O: He ruled the kingdom.
26
A:  He ruled the kingdom. It doesn’t say 
that here though. Why was he famous? 
What did he do that was so good?
27
F:  I know. ‘He won overthe 
Anglo-Saxons’ . . .
28
A:  Yes, he fought the Anglo-Saxons 
and he won.
29  A: Let’s have a look at this one 
[reading] ‘The Anglo Saxons 
pushed...’
30
A:  So you think that’s the important 
part [to M, who nods ‘yes’]
31
A:  Why’s it more important than the other 
part that tells you where they. ‘they 
took most of the east and the south 
and they called . . . England ’ Why 
do you think it’s more important that 
the Britons went to Wales . . . or the 
beginning of England?
32
F:  Because . . . it tells you how they did it, 
because where they pushed them.
Source: From Leung and Mohan (2004: 351–2).

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
557
nine primary schools in England, Rea-Dickins and 
Gardner (2000) collected data through a combina-
tion of questionnaires, interviews and classroom 
observations. Some of the sociolinguistically-
oriented research questions in their study yielded 
findings that would otherwise be hidden from 
view. For instance, it is reported that in the schools 
with open plan classrooms where several classes 
may be in the same space, there was pooling of 
teachers and teaching assistants in some curricu-
lum activities. This practice meant that individual 
teachers were not always ‘in demand’ (as they 
would be if they were with their classes in their 
own classrooms). One consequence of this was 
that it was possible for teachers to organize small 
group/one-to-one activities in which formative 
assessment could be carried out. This was reported 
by one of the teachers:
When I say it’s essential I wouldn’t be able to do it 
without this level of staff …. And it’s also the pos-
sibility of having small groups so that you can 
speak to the children individually. If you’re a single 
teacher in a class, very often you get mobbed after 
five minutes …. The quality of assessment I do 
now is streets ahead of what I’d be able to do as a 
single class teacher …’
(Rea-Dickins and Gardner, 2000: 219)
36.4  SOCIOLINGUISTIC ISSUES IN 
LANGUAGE TEACHING AND 
ASSESSMENT: LOOKING AHEAD
This section reflects on some of the ideas and 
developments discussed above, and offers a view 
on the emerging issues that have a bearing on both 
sociolinguistics and language teaching and assess-
ment. My comments will be selective to the extent 
that they are meant to highlight the conceptual and 
theoretical challenges posed by some of the current 
debates in the relevant fields, including applied lin-
guistics, language education and literacy studies.
In the move away from grammar-oriented 
approaches to language teaching, the Hymesian-
inspired notion of communicative competence 
offered language educators a dynamic and situated 
perspective on language and language use. Instead 
of generating teaching content out of some formal 
aspect of the target language system, e.g. gram-
matical structures, CLT would first identify what 
and how language is used in the target domain of 
use before drawing up teaching content. This lan-
guage identification process is meant to be carried 
out through a needs analysis (e.g. Brindley, 1989; 
Yalden, 1983). However, as Dubin (1989) and 
Leung (2005) point out, this empirically-oriented 
approach to curriculum development has been 
more honoured in the breach than the observance. 
For example, Brown (2001: 43) offers a set of char-
acteristics of CLT which includes the following:
• use of classroom activities and student tasks that 
would ‘engage learners in the pragmatic, authen-
tic, functional use of language for meaningful 
purposes’
• use of the teacher as ‘a facilitator and guide.... 
Students are therefore encouraged to construct 
meaning through genuine linguistic interaction 
with others’.
This characterization reflects a common professional 
understanding of what passes for ‘communicative-
ness’. However, this rendering of ‘communi-
cativeness’ departs quite significantly from the 
original Hymesian aspirations. Instead of observing 
what goes on in actual communication in specific 
contexts, the concern now is to promote language 
communication in learning activities. Instead of 
finding out how participants use linguistic (and 
other semiotic) resources to communicate in spe-
cific real-world contexts, teachers are asked to use 
their ‘expert’ knowledge to assist students to achieve 
meaningful communication with others in class-
room activities. The use of teacher expertise as a 
guide to ‘genuine’ interaction has also introduced 
teacher-determined norms that may be highly par-
tial and idiosyncratic2.
The migration of a research perspective from 
ethnography to language teaching has led to 
noticeable recontextualization, i.e. selective inter-
pretation of the concept of communicative compe-
tence. It may well be that language teaching 
(however theorized) demands a relatively stable 
body of authoritative knowledge as a foundation, 
whereas a research enterprise such as ethnography 
would, among other things, encourage the discov-
ery of new findings and a commitment to provi-
sionality. From a language teacher’s point of view, 
it may not be all that important to retain a 
research-oriented perspective in day-to-day class-
room work. Conceptually though, the reduction of 
the notion of communication to classroom lan-
guage use and the reliance on teacher expertise to 
facilitate ‘genuine linguistic interaction’ have 
combined to constrict and reify how and what 
language is used in actual communication prac-
tices, leading to an impoverished curriculum base. 
Gilmore (2007) provides a survey of some of the 
consequences of this impoverishment in terms of 
lexicogrammar and discourse pragmatics. For 
instance, it has been found that modal lexical 
items which have been found to occur frequently 
in recorded data of language use are often under-
represented in well-known textbooks. Other docu-
mented instances of non- or under-representation 
reported by Gilmore (op. cit.: 100) include a study 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
558
which found that there was ‘almost no corre-
spondence’ between ‘the language taught for 
meetings in 30 business English textbooks’ and 
the language used in real-life business meetings.
In the field of language testing, the need to 
define target language ability has thrown up some 
complex questions about the components that 
make up such an ability. The operationalization of 
the concept of communicative competence for 
testing (see earlier discussion) has certainly helped 
throw light on this issue. Paradoxically, as 
Widdowson (2001, also see Harley et al., 1990) 
observes, a major conceptual and empirical prob-
lem with the established models or frameworks of 
communicative competence is that little is known 
about how the component competences (e.g. 
grammatical and discourse competences) interact 
in actual stances of language use (test perform-
ance). This observation clearly raises some com-
plex psycholinguistic processing issues. But from 
the point of view of this discussion it also alerts us 
to the particular way in which sociolinguistic con-
cerns have been absorbed in language testing, a 
primarily psychometric enterprise. As mentioned 
earlier, the notion of construct (the target language 
ability to be measured) in language testing is real-
ized in terms of a target language use situation. 
However, the ‘social’ dimension of the target lan-
guage use situation in language testing, as 
McNamara and Roever (2006: 32) point out, is 
generally portrayed in terms of test-takers’ 
cognitive ability:
The target language use situation is conceptual-
ized in terms of components of communicative 
language ability, which, in turn, is understood as 
the ability to handle the target language use situ-
ation. The situation or context is projected onto 
the learner as a demand for a relevant set of cogni-
tive abilities; in turn these cognitive abilities are 
read onto the context. What we do not have is a 
theory of the social context in its own right…
Thus the social is converted into cognitive abili-
ties, and the notion of the social context is trans-
formed into a set of particular cognitive abilities 
identified in and attributed to a given situation.
In operationalizational terms, the disconnection 
with the ‘social’ can also be seen in a study carried 
out by Chalhoub-Deville (1997) in which she 
investigates the fit between language assessment 
frameworks that have been developed for local 
purposes and general paradigmatic theoretical 
models of communicative competence (e.g. the 
Bachman model mentioned earlier). These local 
assessment frameworks were derived from criteria 
used by raters to serve a purpose: for example, 
assessing student proficiencies in a language such 
as Arabic in a specific university. She has found 
that while locally-developed assessment frame-
works might focus on aspects of competence 
which are consistent with the general models, e.g. 
grammatical competence, they vary in terms of 
the emphasis they place on the different areas of 
grammar such as morpheme-inflectional markers 
and syntax. Chalhoub-Deville (1997: 14) con-
cludes that ‘theoretical models such as Bachman’s 
… do not provide all-inclusive representations of 
the proficiency construct. Instead these [local] 
frameworks emphasize specific aspects of that 
more general theoretical construct to reflect the 
characteristics of their specific contexts’.
The point made by Chalhoub-Deville is in fact 
related to a wider issue in language assessment 
concerned with the extent to which a single com-
petence model should be used as a basis for the 
assessment in situations where there is considera-
ble ethnic, linguistic and social diversity. For 
instance, Leung and Lewkowicz (2008) examined 
the validity issues that can arise when a ‘common’ 
language model is applied to students with differ-
ent language backgrounds and learning trajecto-
ries. They showed that when a long-term resident/
native speaker-derived model of competent 
English language use is adopted to assess students 
from diverse linguistic minority communities in 
English-speaking schooling systems, factors such 
as age of arrival, home language backgrounds, 
curriculum content, and previous schooling and 
other social experience can all serve to bear on the 
ability to use language effectively in school con-
texts. A failure to take these into account would 
invalidate assessment outcomes.
I will now turn to some more basic constitutive 
sociolinguistic issues that are related to language 
teaching and assessment. In contemporary condi-
tions of increasing contact of people across 
national and language boundaries for a variety of 
reasons, the notions of an ‘intercultural speaker’ 
and ‘intercultural communicative competence’ tap 
into an important area of additional/second 
language learning. Byram, Nichols and Stevens 
(2001) suggest that an intercultural speaker is a 
person who can interpret different perspectives 
and has a willingness and ability to manage social 
interaction with others from a different cultural 
background. The notion of ‘intercultural commu-
nicative competence’ broadens the Hymesian con-
cept to include ‘sociocultural competence’ and 
‘social competence’. Sociocultural competence is 
concerned with the intercultural speaker having a 
certain degree of familiarity with language use in 
specific situations; this involves a knowledge of 
social processes and practices in different cultural 
contexts. Social competence is concerned with 
‘the will and the skill to interact with others’ 
(Byram, 1997: 10). In a sense, intercultural com-
petence here is about engaging in social interaction 

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
559
in situations where one has to actively make use of 
one’s (probably always provisional) knowledge to 
actively make sense and to get on with others; 
whereas in the more conventional conceptualiza-
tion of communicative competence, the concern is 
with making use of known conventions and rules. 
Kramsch (2005, 2006) has also pointed out that to 
communicate effectively in complex multilingual 
and multiethnic encounters, one needs more than 
a knowledge of what native speakers might do. 
For Kramsch (2006: 251), communication, par-
ticularly for college students studying additional 
languages, entails the immersion of ‘whole per-
sons with hearts, bodies, and minds, with memo-
ries, fantasies, loyalties, identities’. This doesn’t 
obviate the need to have the sort of communica-
tive competence mentioned earlier, but, in addi-
tion, Kramsch calls for a ‘symbolic competence’ 
which can enrich communication. This is about a 
capacity to make sense of complexity and ambi-
guity, to make sense of symbolic forms as aesthet-
ics and so on3.
In the established understanding of communi-
cative competence, the starting point is ‘what 
would people do in such and such a situation?’. 
Lee (2006) asks whether communicative compe-
tence is a condition of language teaching or its 
objective. This rhetorically-posed question is 
helpful because it foregrounds the fact that the 
language teaching-learning situation is itself a 
language-using situation, and a certain amount of 
communicative competence is needed, particu-
larly on the part of learners, if engagement with 
learning activities is to be achieved. The following 
extract of a classroom conversation between a 
teacher (T) and a student (J) on ‘crazy and goofy’ 
inventions offers an illustration (Lee, 2006:361):
[ Teacher eliciting and commenting on students’ 
idea of ‘goofy’ inventions]
T: =Wake you up, and I hope the machine would 
then actually get you to class (.) on time, hahaha … 
what else, what’s another (.) possible invention?
J: A robot can (cook)
T: I’m sorry?
J: A robot can (cook) for me.
(0.5)
J: (Cook).
T: Oh, a robot to bring a can of coke to you?
J: Yeah.
In this conversation on imaginary inventions that 
would be useful in everyday life, J (the student), 
despite certain difficulties in pronouncing `cook’, 
has clearly grasped the nature of the teacher’s 
problem in understanding him and produced 
repairs (reiterating `cook’). When the repair efforts 
failed, J resorted to accommodation (consenting 
to the teacher’s `coke’). Lee suggests that this is 
the kind of communicative competence that should 
be taken into account.
This kind of competence is brought into view 
in instances of language use in actual social inter-
action. Understanding communicative compe-
tence in language teaching therefore requires a 
knowledge of what learners can readily do, a kind 
of existential competence, in learning situations. 
This connects with the next point.
Hall, Cheng and Carlson (2006: 226) suggest 
that the language knowledge of an individual is 
closely related to language use:
… language knowledge [is] comprised of dynamic 
constellations of linguistic resources, the shapes 
and meanings of which emerge from continual 
interaction between internal, domain-general cog-
nitive constraints on the one hand and one’s prag-
matic pursuits in his or her everyday worlds on the 
other, that is through language use.
Thus, a person’s communicative repertoire is not 
just ‘learned’ or ‘acquired’, but is constantly being 
shaped and reshaped by experience of use. This 
argument applies to both monolinguals and multi-
linguals. In this view, instead of attempting to 
specify communicative competence with refer-
ence to some external reference point (whether 
based on ethnographic observations or a general-
ized description of a target language use situa-
tion), one would seek to define competence in 
terms of ‘the pragmatic variation in the use of 
language within and across social experiences in 
which individuals are engaged, variation that 
exists even within a single language code’ (op. cit.: 
230). This draws attention to language learning 
and using opportunities afforded to students when 
considering issues of competence. In other words, 
competence is, at least in part, a reflexive outcome 
of language learning experience.
Recent work in academic literacies, a field 
largely concerned with the use of language for 
academic writing in university settings, has also 
shown the need to be reflexive about the notion of 
competence in terms of dynamic interplay between 
locally-interpreted disciplinary practices and 
power relations. It is now reasonably well under-
stood that there isn’t a single common ‘standard’ 
in academic writing that would apply to all disci-
plines and university institutions (e.g. Ivanic˘, 
1997; Lea and Street, 1998; Lillis, 1999, 2001; 
Lillis and Scott, 2007; Street, 2003, 2005). Lea 
and Street (1998) provide an illustrative case 
study of how different disciplines have different 
expectations and practices: a first-year university 
student wrote two essays, one for history and the 
other for anthropology. The student used the same 
format, emphasizing content and factual informa-
tion. His history tutor evaluated his writing 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
560
positively, but he was criticized by his anthropol-
ogy tutor. The anthropology tutor was critical 
because, in his opinion, the essay lacked structure 
and argument. Lea and Street (1998: 165) offer 
this view:
We suggest that the explanation for this diver-
gence of opinion and response lies at a deeper 
level than the surface features of ‘writing’ … the 
cause of the poor assessment of his essay can be 
traced … to the student’s lack of familiarity with 
the subject matter of anthropology, which was not 
his major … and to his greater ease with history 
[his major] … his experience with writing in history 
led him to break down and categorise some fac-
tual aspects of his knowledge in his anthropology 
essay, without attention to some of the implicit 
ways of writing knowledge in his anthropology, 
and in particular the need to abstract theory rather 
than attend to factual detail as evidence …
In this case, the deeply-hidden epistemological 
differences between history and anthropology, as 
interpreted by the tutors concerned, appear to have 
triggered the tutors’ different evaluations.
Alongside disciplinary differences there is also 
the question of power relations. Academic tutors 
are often conferred a good deal of power in rela-
tion to the judging of ‘quality’ in student work. 
Indeed many universities operate statutes that 
explicitly state that academic judgements cannot 
be challenged. Leung (2008) reports an example 
of this power at work in a mock gatekeeping 
moment.4 In England, university applicants are 
required to write a personal statement as part of 
their application. Applicants can use the statement 
as an opportunity to ‘sell’ themselves. The follow-
ing extract is taken from a practice personal state-
ment written by a 17-year-old school student from 
a minority language background.
I want to study a degree in Computer Science 
because I am interested in the role that computers 
play in society now and in the future. Now-a-days 
each and every organisation uses IT. Currently I am 
studying ICT, Mathematics, Physics and Urdu 
which I hope will help me to be successful in 
Computer Science degree. Apart from studying I 
also have some experience of fixing computer 
hardware wiring problems.
 What I find most interesting about the computer 
is that it is helping humans in many aspects of life. 
Where will computers go in the next 15 or 20 
years? What will be the reaction of humans to the 
increasing use of them? My ambition is to be a 
computer engineer either in relation to hardware 
problems, software problems or both. Perhaps I 
will be able to be involved in solving hardware 
design difficulties or in devising better software 
solutions in the areas of databases or spread-
sheets....
(Leung, 2008: 157)
A university admissions tutor was asked to evaluate 
this statement in terms of the admissibility of this 
applicant to an English Language degree programme. 
He indicated that this statement would not per-
suade him to offer this applicant a place because:
… I am … a bit wary of kind of massive, banal, 
generalisations.... OK this person is saying ‘where 
will computers go in the next 15–20 years?.... 
What I find most interesting about the computer is 
that it is helping humans in many aspects of life’ 
my reaction to both of those comments is... big 
deal... you know... say something a bit more pre-
cise about you and why you want to do this course 
and what is computers which interests you in a 
more specific sense...
(loc. cit.).
It is quite clear that the admissions tutor con-
cerned had a preference for certain kinds of infor-
mation. Irrespective of the reason/s lying behind 
such a preference, the point here is that the insti-
tutional authority conferred on tutors has afforded 
him the power to make judgements of student suit-
ability. This power differential is an intrinsic part 
of the judgement and it should be brought into 
analysis.
36.5 CLOSING REMARKS
The contact with sociolinguistics has broadened 
and complexified many of the conceptual assump-
tions of language teaching and assessment. The 
concept of communicative competence in particu-
lar has been a major influence on theory and prac-
tice for the best part of 30 years. The conscious 
inclusion of the social dimension has undoubtedly 
generated innovative moves in curriculum concep-
tualization and assessment frameworks. The incor-
poration of sociolinguistic concepts is, of course, 
an ongoing recontextualization enterprise which 
can lead to some reframing of original ideas, – for 
instance, the pedagogic narrowing of ‘communi-
cation’ in terms of language use in classroom 
activities. Seen in this light, the socio-ising of 
language teaching and assessment is an uncertain 
affair. Much depends on how and how far concep-
tual and research-derived ideas are intellectually 
and practicably integrated into professional prac-
tice. Looking beyond the immediate, and judging 
from the tenets of the work cited in the previous 
sections, there is every reason to believe that the 
broad concept of competence itself is undergoing 

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
561
some fundamental reconsideration in the light of 
changing political and sociocultural experiences, 
and communication practices. The protean nature 
of concepts and ideas in sociolinguistics is itself a 
source of both stimulation and destabilization. 
Some of the emergent thinking may impinge on 
language teaching and assessment in fundamental 
ways. If, for instance, the power exercised by par-
ticipants in social interaction is a major constituent 
in situated communicative competence, how might 
this play out in teaching and assessment? And 
if communicative practices and social norms 
(in interaction) are increasingly negotiated in 
intercultural encounters, how far would we be able 
to describe, teach and assess sociolinguistic and 
strategic competences beyond broad generaliza-
tions? A good deal of challenging work lies 
ahead.
NOTES
1 For other contemporaneous work, see 
Habermas (1970) and Campbell and Wales (1970).
2 This norming process would depend on teach-
ers’ preferred models of formality, politeness, genre 
and so on in relation to learning tasks. In addition, 
teacher-determined norms may promote some 
language varieties (e.g. Standard English) and not 
others; recent debates in English as a lingua franca 
have added considerable complexity to this issue. See 
Jenkins (2006, 2007) for a discussion.
3 The issue of how to handle what people actu-
ally do/say in interaction has also been debated in the 
language- testing literature. From a language-testing 
perspective, the main concern is how to relate 
‘unique’ individual actions in context to a consistent 
pattern of performance or trait. See Bachman (2007) 
for a discussion.
4 This study used Personal Statements produced 
by students in practice sessions to elicit an admis-
sions tutor’s views. In actual university admissions 
procedures, there is no requirement to state such 
views explicitly.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Figure 36.2 from Ben Rampton, Language in Late 
Modernity: Interaction in an Urban School, 2006, 
Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission. 
Lee extracts (page 549) from Yo-Ann Lee, `Towards 
respectification of communicative competence: con-
dition of L2 instruction or its objective', Applied 
Linguistics, 2006, 27(3): 349−76, by permission of 
Oxford University Press.
REFERENCES
Alderson, C. and Banerjee, J. (2002) ‘Language testing and 
assessment (Part II)’, Language Teaching, 35: 79–113.
Alderson, J. C. (2007) ‘The challenge of (diagnostic) testing: 
do we know what we are measuring?’, in J. Fox, M. Wesche, 
D. Bayliss, et al. (eds), Language testing reconsidered. 
Ottawa: University of Ottawa Press. pp. 21–39.
Assessment Reform Group (2002) ‘Assessment for learning: 
10 principles’, Retrieved 24 November 2006, from http://
www.assessment-reform-group.org.uk/CIE3.pdf.
Austin, J. L. (1962) How to do things with words. London: 
Clarendon Press.
Bachman, L. (1990). Fundamental considerations in language 
testing. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bachman, L. F. (2007) ‘What is the construct? The dialectic of 
abilities and contexts in defining constructs in language 
assessment’, in J. Fox, M. Wesche, D. Bayliss, et al. (eds), 
Language testing reconsidered. Ottawa: Ottawa University 
Press. pp. 41–71.
Bachman, L. F. and Palmer, A. S. (1996) Language testing in 
practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bell, R. T. (1981) An introduction to applied linguistics: 
approaches and methods in language teaching. London: 
Batsford Academic and Educational Ltd.
Berns, M. (1990) Contexts of competence: social and cultural 
considerations in communicative language teaching. 
New York: Plenum Press.
Black, P. and Wiliam, D. (2006) Assessment for learning in the 
classroom. In J. Gardner (Ed.), Assessment and learning 
(pp. 9–25). London: Sage.
Black, P. and Wiliam, D. (1998a) ‘Assessment and classroom 
learning’, Assessment in Education, 5(1): 7–73.
Black, P. and Wiliam, D. (1998b) Inside the black box. London: 
King’s College London.
Black, P., Harrison, C., Lee, C., Marshall, B. and Wiliam, D. 
(2003) Assessment for learning: putting it into practice. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Block, D. (2003) The social turn in second language acquisi-
tion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Brindley, G. (1989) ‘The role of needs analysis in adult ESL 
programme design’, in R. K. Johnson (ed.), The second 
language curriculum. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 63–78.
Broadfoot, P. and Black, P. (2004) ‘Redefining assessment? 
The first ten years of Assessment in Education’, Assessment 
in Education, 11(1): 7–27.
Brown, H. D. (2000) Principles of language learning and 
teaching. 4th edn. White Plains, NY: Pearson Education 
(Longman).
Brown, H. G. (2001) Teaching by principles: an interactive 
approach to language pedagogy. 2nd edn. White Plains, 
NY: Pearson Education.
Byram, M. (1997) Teaching and assessing intercultural 
communicative competence. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Byram, M., Nichols, D. A. and Stevens, D. (2001) Developing 
intercultural competence in practice. Clevedon, UK: 
Multilingual Matters.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
562
Campbell, R. and Wales, R. (1970) 'The study of language 
acquisition', In J. Lyons (Ed.), New horizons in linguisitcs 
(pp. 242–260). Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Canale, M. (1983) ‘From communicative competence to 
language pedagogy’, in J. Richards and J. Schmidt (eds), 
Language and communication. London: Longman. pp. 2–27.
Canale, M. (1984) ‘A communicative approach to language 
proficiency assessment in a minority setting’, in C. Rivera 
(ed.), Communicative competence approaches to language 
proficiency assessment: research and application. Clevedon, 
UK: Multilingual Matters. pp. 107–22.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980a) ‘Theoretical bases of com-
municative approaches to second language teaching and 
testing’, Applied Linguistics, 1(1): 1–47.
Canale, M. and Swain, M. (1980b) A domain description for core 
FSL: communication skills. Ontario: Ministry of Education.
Carter, R. (ed.) (1990) Knowledge about language and the 
curriculum: the LINC Reader. London: Hodder.
Carter, R. (1996) ‘Politics and knowledge about language: the 
LINC Project’, in R. Hasan and G. Williams (eds), Literacy 
and society. London: Longman. pp. 1–21.
Carter, R. (1997). Investigating English discourse: language, 
literacy and literature. London: Routledge. Chapter 3.
Cazden, B., John, V. P. and Hymes, D. (eds) (1972) Functions 
of language in the classroom. New York: Teachers College 
Press.
Chalhoub-Deville, M. (1997) ‘Theoretical models, assessment 
frameworks and test construction’, Lanugage Testing, 
14(1): 3–22.
Chomsky, N. (1965) Aspects of the theory of syntax. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Cicourel, A. V. and Boese, R. J. (1972) ‘Sign language acquisi-
tion and the teaching of the deaf’, in B. Cazden, V. P. John 
and D. Hymes (eds), Functions of language in the class-
room. New York: Teachers College Press. pp. 32–62.
Coffin, C. (1997) ‘Constructing and giving value to the past’, 
in F. Christie and J. Martin (eds), Genres and institutions: 
social processes in the workplace and the school. London: 
Continuum. pp. 196–230.
Coghill, G. and Wood, P. (1989). Spectrum Science 3. 
Melbourne: Heinemann.
Cope, W. and Kalantzis, M. (1993) The powers of literacy: a 
genre approach to teaching writing. London: Falmer Press.
Council of Europe (2001) Common European Framework of 
Reference for languages: learning, teaching, assessment. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Davidson, F. and Lynch, B. K. (2002) Testcraft: a teacher’s 
guide to writing and using language test specifications. 
New Haven, ET: Yale University Press.
Davis, A. (2008) Assessing Academic English: testing English 
proficiency 1950–1989 – the IELTS solution. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Dubin, F. (1989) ‘Situating literacy within traditions of 
communicative competence’, Applied Linguistics, 10(2): 
171–81.
Edmondson, W. (2001) ‘Conversational analysis and language 
teaching’, in K. Brinker, A. Gerd, H. Wolfgang and 
S. F. Sager (eds), Text – und Gesprächslinguistik/ Linguistics 
of Text and Conversation. Berlin: de Gruyter.
Eggins, S. and Slade, D. (1997) Analysing casual conversation. 
London: Cassell.
Extra, G. (2006) ‘Dealing with multilingualism in multicultural 
Europe: immigrant and minority languages at home and 
school’, in C. Leung and J. Jenkins (eds), Reconfiguring 
Europe: the contribution of applied linguistics. London: 
Equinox. In association with the British Association for 
Applied Linguistics. pp. 21–40.
Fishman, J. A. and Lueders-Salmon, E. (1972) ‘What has 
sociology of language to say to the teacher? On teaching 
the standard variety to speakers of dialectal or sociolectal 
varieties’, in B. Cazden, V. P. John and D. Hymes (eds), 
Functions of language in the classroom. New York: 
Teachers College Press. pp. 67–83.
Fulcher, G. and Davidson, F. (2007) Language testing and 
assessment: an advanced resource book. London: 
Routledge.
Gilmore, A. (2007) ‘Authentic materials and authenticity in 
foreign language learning’, Language Teaching, 40: 
97–118.
Gumperz, J. J. and Hernández-Chavez (1972) ‘Bilingualism, 
bidialectalism, and classroom interaction’, in C. B. Cazden, 
V. P. John and D. Hymes (eds), Functions of language in the 
classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. pp. 84–108.
Habermas, J. (1970) 'Towards a theory of communicative 
competence', Inquiry, 13, 360–375.
Hall, J. K., Cheng, A. and Carlson, M. T. (2006) ‘Recon-
ceptualizing multicompetence as a theory of lanugage 
knowledge’, Applied Linguistics, 27(2): 220–40.
Halliday, M. (1994). An introduction to functional grammar. 
2nd edn. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1973) Explorations in the functions of 
language. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1975) Learning how to mean: explorations 
in the development of language. London: Edward Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. (2004) An introduction to functional 
grammar. 3rd edn. Revised by C. M. I. M. Matthiessen. 
London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. 
London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K. and Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2000). 
Construing experience through meaning: a language-based 
approach to cognition. London: Continuum.
Halliday, M. A. K. and (revised by) Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. 
(2004) An introduction to functional grammar (3rd ed.). 
London: Arnold.
Halliday, M. A. K., McIntosh, A. and Strevens, P. (1964) The 
linguistic sciences and language teaching. London: 
Longman.
Harley, B., Allen, P., Cummins, J. and Swain, M. (1990) The 
development of second language proficiency. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Hornberger, N. (1989) ‘Tramites and transportes: the acquisi-
tion of second language communicative competence for 
one speech event in Puno, Peru’, Applied Linguistics, 10(2): 
214–30.
Howatt, A. P. R. with Widdowson, H. G. (2004) A history of 
English language teaching. 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.

LANGUAGE TEACHING AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT
563
Hymes, D. (1972) ‘On communicative competence’, in J. B. Pride 
and J. Holmes (eds), Sociolinguistics. London: Penguin.
Hymes, D. (1977) Foundations in sociolinguistics: an ethno-
graphic approach. London: Tavistock Publications.
Ivanic˘, R. (1997) Writing and identity: the discoursal construc-
tion of identity in academic writing. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
Jenkins, J. (2006) ‘Current perspectives on teaching world 
Englishes and English as a lingua franca’, TESOL Quarterly, 
40(1): 157–81.
Jenkins, J. (2007) English as a lingua franca: attitude and 
identity. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
John, V. P. (1972) ‘Styles of learning – styles of of teaching: 
reflections on the education of Najavo children’, in 
C. B. Cazden, V. P. John and D. Hymes (eds), Functions of 
language in the classroom. New York: Teachers College 
Press. pp. 331–43.
Kaplan, R. B. and Baldauf Jr, R. B. (1997) Language planning: 
from practice to theory. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual 
Matters.
Kramsch, C. (2005) ‘Post 9/11: foreign languages between 
knowledge and power’, Applied Linguistics, 26(4): 545–67.
Kramsch, C. (2006) ‘From communicative competence to 
symbolic competence’, The Modern Language Journal, 
90(2): 249–52.
Labov, W. (2008) ‘Unendangered dialects, endangered 
people’, in K. King, N. Schilling-Estes, L. Wright Fogle, 
J. J. Lou and B. Soukup (eds), Sustaining linguistic diversity: 
endangered and minority languages and language varieties 
(Georgetown University Round Table on Languages and 
Linguistics). Washington, DC: Georgetown University Press. 
pp. 219–328.
Language in the National Curriculum (1989–92) LINC material 
available on CD ROM or DVD http://www.phon.ucl.ac.uk/
home/dick/ec/linc.htm: LINC Project.
Lea, M. and Street, B. (1998) ‘Student writing in higher educa-
tion: an academic literacies approach’, Studies in Higher 
Education, 23(2): 157–72.
Lee, Y.-A. (2006) ‘Towards respecification of communicative 
competence: condition of L2 instruction or its objective’, 
Applied Linguistics, 27(3): 349–76.
Leung, C. (2005) ‘Convivial communication: recontextualizing 
communicative competence’, International Journal of 
Applied Linguistics, 15(2): 119–44.
Leung, C. (2008) ‘Second language academic literacies: con-
verging understandings’, in B. Street and N. H. Hornberger 
(eds), Encyclopedia of language and education. Vol. 2. 
New York: Springer. pp. 143–61.
Leung, C. and Lewkowicz, J. (2008) ‘Assessing second/addi-
tional language of diverse populations’, in E. Shohamy and 
N. H. Hornberger (eds), Encyclopedia of language and 
education. Vol. 7. New York: Springer. pp. 301–17.
Leung, C. and Mohan, B. (2004) ‘Teacher formative assess-
ment and talk in classroom contexts – assessment as dis-
course and assessment of discourse’, Language Testing, 
20(3): 335–59.
Lillis, T. M. (1999) ‘Whose common sense? Essayist literacy 
and the institutional practice of mystery’, in C. Jones, 
J. Turner and B. Street (eds), Student writing in university: 
cultural and epistemological issues. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. pp. 127–47.
Lillis, T. M. (2001) Student writing: access, regulation, desire. 
London: Routledge.
Lillis, T. M. and Scott, M. (2007) ‘Defining academic literacies 
research: issues of epistemology, ideology and strategy’, 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(1): 5–32.
Lin, A. M. Y. (1999) ‘Doing-English-Lessons in the reproduc-
tion or transformation of social worlds?’, TESOL Quarterly, 
33(3): 393–412.
Lin, A. M. Y. (2001) ‘Symbolic domination and bilingual classroom 
practices in Hong Kong’, in M. Heller and M. Martin-Jones 
(eds), Voices of authority: education and linguistic 
difference. Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing. pp. 139–68.
Linguistic Minority Project (1985) The other languages of 
England. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
McKay, P. (2006) Assessing young language learners. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McNamara, T. F. (1996) Measuring second language 
performance. London: Longman.
McNamara, T. and Roever, C. (2006) Language testing: the 
social dimension. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Martin-Jones, M. and Saxena, M. (2001) ‘Turn-taking and the 
positioning of bilingual participants in classroom discourse: 
insights from primary schools in England’, in M. Heller and 
M. Martin-Jones (eds), Voices of authority: education and 
linguistic difference. Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing. 
pp. 117–38.
Ndayipfukamiye, L. (2001) ‘The contradictions of teaching 
bilingually in postcolonial Burundi: from Nyakatsi to 
Maisons en Étages’, in M. Heller and M. Martin-Jones (eds), 
Voices of authority: education and linguistic difference. 
Westport, CT: Ablex Publishing. pp. 101–16.
North, B. (1993) The development of descriptors on scales of 
language proficiency. Washington, DC: National Foreign 
Language Center.
Ohannessian, S. and Ansre, G. (1979) ‘Some reflections on the 
educational use of sociolinguistc surveys’, in J. B. Pride 
(ed.), Sociolinguistic aspects of language learning and 
teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. 57–70.
Philips, S. U. (1972) ‘Participant structures and communicative 
competence: Warm Springs children in community and 
classroom’, in C. B. Cazden, V. P. John and D. Hymes (eds), 
Functions of language in the classroom. New York: 
Teachers College Press. pp. 370–94.
Preston, D. R. (1989). Sociolinguistics and second language 
acquisition. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Pride, J. B. (ed.) (1979) Sociolinguistic aspects of language 
learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
QCA; Qualifications and Curriculum Authority (2007) The 
National Curriculum. London: QCA.
Rampton, B. (2006) Language in late modernity: interaction in 
an urban school. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rea-Dickins, P. and Gardner, S. (2000) ‘Snares and silver bullets: 
disentangling the construct of formative assessment’, 
Language Testing, 17(2): 215–43.
Sauvignon, S. J. (1972) Communicative competence: an 
experiment in foreign language teaching. Philadelphia: 
Center for Curriculum Development.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
564
Schleppegrell, M. J., Achugar, M. and Orteíza, T. (2004) ‘The 
grammar of history: enhancing content-based instruction 
through a functional focus on language’, TESOL Quarterly, 
38(1): 67–93.
Spolsky, B. (1989) Conditions for second language learning. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Street, B. (2003) ‘What’s “new” in New Literacy Studies? 
Critical approaches to literacy in theory and practice’, 
Current Issues in Comparative Education, 5(2): 1–14.
Street, B. V. (2005) ‘Introduction: New Literacy Studies 
and literacies across educational contexts’, in B. V. Street 
(ed.), Literacies across educational contexts: mediating 
learning and teaching. Philadelphia: Caslon Pubishing. 
pp. 1–21.
Swann, M. (2002) ‘Seven bad reasons for teaching grammar 
– and two good ones’, in J. C. Richards and W. A. Renandya 
(eds), Methodology in language teaching: an anthology 
of current practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 148–52.
van Lier, L. (1996). Interaction in the language curriculum: 
awareness, autonomy and authenticity. London: Longman.
Veel, R. (1997) ‘Learning how to mean – scientifically speak-
ing: apprenticeship into scientific discourse in the second-
ary school’, in F. Christie and J. Martin (eds), Genre and 
institutions: social processes in the workplace and school. 
London: Continuum. pp. 161–95.
Weir, C. J. (1990) Communicative language testing. London: 
Prentice Hall.
Whitely, W. (1979) ‘Sociolinguistic survey at the national 
level’, in J. B. Pride (ed.), Sociolinguistic aspects of lan-
guage learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. pp. 44–56.
Widdowson, H. (1978) Learning language as communication. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Widdowson, H. G. (2001) ‘Communicative language testing: 
the art of the possible’, in C. Elder, N. Brown, E. Iwashita, 
et al. (eds), Experimenting with uncertainty: essays in 
honour of Alan Davies. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. pp. 12–21.
Yalden, J. (1983). The communicative syllabus: evolution, 
design and implementation. Oxford: Pergamon Press.

37
37.1 INTRODUCTION
The analysis of guidelines for non-discriminatory 
language use requires an understanding of how 
language may function as a vehicle for the expres-
sion of bias and discrimination. Language is not 
simply a neutral tool for the transmission of refer-
ential meaning: as an instrument of social practice 
it contributes to the communication, maintenance 
and change of ideologies, attitudes and stereo-
types. Language is used to perform acts of inclu-
sion and exclusion, and is therefore invested with 
the potential to protect or disrupt social relations.
Guidelines are designed to increase the aware-
ness of the discriminatory power of language and 
to offer alternative wordings. Significantly, in 
their introductory sections to guidelines, authors 
tend to emphasize the social functions of language. 
For example, in the guidelines to non-discriminatory 
language published by the University of Salford, 
Greater Manchester, UK (http://policies.salford.
ac.uk/; accessed 19 January 2009) it is pointed out 
that language is both a symptom of and a con-
tributor to the unequal status of women, people 
with disability and people from various ethnic and 
racial backgrounds. Extra visibility in English 
(authoress, female doctor) or emphasis on differ-
ence (the handicapped vs people with physical 
disabilities; an AIDS victim vs a person with 
AIDS) may harm people’s individuality in that 
such practices highlight traits such as gender or 
disability which may be irrelevant to the context. 
Expressions such as the handicapped or AIDS 
victim tend to depersonalize the referent(s) by 
defining the individual person in terms of a devia-
tion from the norm or by invoking associations of 
powerlessness and dependency. Stereotyping, 
derogatory or imposed labelling are identified as 
the major strategies of discriminatory language 
use, with ‘language, sex, and gender‘ receiving 
the most extensive treatment.
‘Language and gender’ also constitutes the 
central theme of the non-discriminatory language 
guidelines issued by The University of Sydney, 
Australia (http://www.usyd.edu.au/staff/styleguide/; 
accessed Jan 19, 2009), focusing on such topics as 
sex, pregnancy, marital status, sexual preference 
and transgender status. In addition to gender, disa-
bility and ethnicity, the Sydney guidelines include a 
section on language and Australian indigenous 
people: care needs to be taken in choosing labels 
that are acceptable to Australian indigenous people, 
some of whom will object to terms such as 
Aborigine(s) or Aboriginal person, while others will 
accept them. The examples of Salford and Sydney 
demonstrate that guidelines typically address global 
(gender/disability) as well as local concerns of dis-
crimination (the multiethnic and multilingual com-
position of Australian or British society). 
The focus of this chapter is on guidelines for 
non-sexist language for the following reasons: 
sexist language practices have been identified in a 
large number of languages, which supports the 
hypothesis that linguistic sexism is a universal 
phenomenon of gender-related discrimination 
(Hellinger and Bussmann (eds), 2001–03). 
Linguistic sexism is of particular interest since it 
affects not only the level of lexical choices but 
also – depending on the type of language – 
involves issues of grammar and word-formation. 
Linguistic sexism is an important area of lan-
guage and gender research (cf. Hellinger and 
Guidelines for 
Non-Discriminatory 
Language Use
M a r l i s  H e l l i n g e r

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
566
Pauwels, 2007). Today, ‘language and gender’ 
presents itself as a particularly dynamic field where 
many voices contribute to theoretical debates and 
the solution of practical problems. Language and 
gender research has developed into an explicitly 
interdisciplinary field which benefits from sociolin-
guistics and discourse analysis as well as from 
sociology, psychology, cultural studies and sexuality 
studies. A large number of comprehensive resources 
are now available that attest to the diversity of issues 
being addressed in the field (e.g. Hall and Bucholtz 
(eds), 1995; Wodak (ed.), 1997; Kotthoff and Wodak 
(eds), 1997; Litosseliti and Sunderland (eds), 2002; 
Eckert and McConnell-Ginet, 2003; Holmes and 
Meyerhoff (eds), 2003; Mills, 2003; Lakoff, 2004; 
Lazar 2005 (ed.), Harrington et al. (eds), 2008; see 
also the journal Gender and Language; valuable 
language and gender links can be found on the 
homepage of IGALA, the International Gender and 
Language Association (http://www.lancs.ac.uk/fass/
organisations/igala/index.htm).
The chapter is structured as follows: in Section 
37.2, ‘Theoretical background’, I outline the 
structural and psycholinguistic foundations of 
linguistic sexism and language reform, including 
references to categories of linguistic gender and 
the relation between language and thought. This 
discussion is placed in the wider context of 
theories of gender.
Section 37.3, ‘Language reform’, focuses on the 
psycholinguistic effects of masculine/male generics. 
The major strategies of non-discriminatory usage, 
i.e. female visibility, symmetrical gender marking 
and avoidance of stereotyping, are outlined and illus-
trated by examples from various languages. Taking 
an explicitly cross-linguistic perspective, I demon-
strate that manifestations of linguistic sexism present 
language-specific problems for language reform 
which require individual solutions rather than an 
adherence to the hegemonic model of English.
Section 37.4, ‘The public discourse on non-
discriminatory language policies’, discusses the 
legal foundations of many guidelines at national 
as well as international level. It also addresses 
strategies of public resistance to language reform, 
which has often been linked to the related context 
of ‘political correctness’.
Section 37.5, ‘Evaluating the impact of guide-
lines for non-discriminatory language’, focuses on 
the implementation and spread of reform meas-
ures. Illustrative examples are job advertising in 
German, alternatives to generic he in English, and 
changes in the use of address labels for women in 
English and German. 
In Section, 37.6, 'Conclusion', the function of 
guidelines as agents in language change is related 
to various other factors which pertain to the 
sociocultural context of the respective speech 
community.
37.2 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Linguistic sexism refers to one type of discrimina-
tory language, i.e. expressions that exclude, trivi-
alize or insult mainly women. Manifestations of 
such practices are:
• Female invisibility: cf. English mankind, German 
Studenten (m) ‘students’, French l’étudiant 
moyen (m) ‘the average student’, Italian i cit-
tadini (m) ‘citizens’, or Spanish los niños (m) ‘the 
children’, in cases that are supposed to include 
female referents.
• Asymmetrical gender-marking: cf. English lady 
philosopher; German Frauenfussball ‘women’s 
soccer’, or French une femme écrivain (m) 
‘a woman writer’, where explicit gender-marking 
is not used in parallel male-specific or neutral 
contexts.
• Stereotyping: cf. English delegates and their 
wives, German Ärzte und Krankenschwestern 
‘doctors (m) and nurses (f)’, or French le sexe 
faible ‘the weak sex’, which portrays women and 
men in traditional gender roles.
Female invisibility may lead to ambiguities and 
potentially false interpretations, as in this example 
from a German newspaper: 
 
Ehe zwischen zwei jungen Türken (m) endet in 
einer Tragödie.
 
'Marriage between two young Turks (m) ends in 
a tragedy.‘
The noun phrase zwei junge Türken contains the 
masculine plural noun Türken which in the con-
text of the noun Ehe ‘(heterosexual) marriage’ 
creates an awkward ambivalence. In many cases, 
additional contextual information is necessary to 
disambiguate expressions which contain mascu-
line/male expressions.
Awareness and documentation of sexist prac-
tices emerged in the 1970s when Robin Lakoff`s 
analysis of Language and Woman’s Place 
(1975, 2004) in the USA, Dale Spender’s Man 
Made Language (1980) in the UK, Luise Pusch’s 
Das Deutsche als Männersprache (1984) in 
Germany, and Marina Yaguello’s Les Mots et les 
Femmes (1978) gained popularity even outside 
academia, initiating extensive research in anglo-
phone countries and elsewhere (for a historical 
overview see Hellinger and Pauwels, 2007: 
652ff.). 
Initiatives for language reform rest on the 
assumption that sexist practices are not only a 
reflection of conservative usage symbolizing 
gender relations in a particular culture but also they 
actively contribute towards the maintenance of 
gendered hierarchies and stereotypes. Whereas the 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
567
first view interprets language as a symptom, the 
second attributes to language the potential of an 
agent in constructing or maintaining social ine-
quality (cf. Cameron, 1992: 102ff., Miller and 
Swift, 1995). 
37.2.1 Categories of gender
Although linguistic sexism has been described as 
a global phenomenon, guidelines for the elimina-
tion of sexist language are necessarily developed 
for one particular language. Guidelines must 
respond to language-specific structural properties 
as well as to current usage norms and the 
sociopolitical context. Therefore, the analysis of 
manifestations of gender and proposals for non-
discriminatory usage requires that the concept of 
‘gender’ be clarified. Four categories of gender 
will be differentiated in this chapter: grammatical, 
lexical, referential and social (cf. Hellinger and 
Pauwels, 2007: Ch. 3).
Grammatical gender
Grammatical gender is one phenomenon that 
structures the lexicon of so-called gender lan-
guages. It is an inherently morphosyntactic prop-
erty of the noun which controls agreement between 
the noun’s gender class (typically feminine, mas-
culine, and often neuter) and some satellite ele-
ment, frequently an article, adjective, pronoun, 
numeral or verbal form. 
For example, in the highly-inflected Slavic 
languages, grammatical gender-marking is much 
more visible than in most Germanic languages, 
simply because more satellite elements have 
gender-variable forms. In the following example 
from Polish, agreement is established between 
the noun and three satellite elements, in each 
case a demonstrative pronoun, a numeral and 
an adjective (cf. Koniuszaniec and Błaszkowska, 
2003: 261). By contrast, the English translational 
equivalents show no formal agreement of this 
kind: 
ten jeden mały chłopiec (m) 
 ‘this one little boy’
ta jedna mała dziewczynka (f )  ‘this one little girl’
to jedno małe dziecko (n) 
‘this one little child’
Obviously, languages with grammatical gender 
like Polish, Russian or French are confronted with 
very different problems in searching for gender-
inclusive alternatives than grammatically gender-
less languages like English, Turkish or Chinese. 
While neutralization rather than female visibility 
is the primary strategy in English for achieving 
gender-fair wording (e.g. flight attendant for stew-
ardess), this strategy plays only a minor role in a 
language with grammatical gender, where female 
visibility is a well-established concept, as in 
German Lehrerinnen und Lehrer ‘teachers (f) and 
teachers (m)’ to replace the traditional masculine 
form Lehrer ‘teachers (m)’. The dominance of 
English in discourses about linguistic sexism has 
often led to unfortunate interpretations suggesting 
that solutions for English might also be applied to 
other languages (cf. Section 37.4). 
Lexical gender
Lexical gender constitutes part of the semantics of 
animate/personal nouns. In English, personal 
nouns such as daughter and son are lexically 
specified as [female] and [male], respectively. 
Such nouns may be classified as gender-specific, 
in contrast to nouns, such as citizen or patient, 
which are considered to be gender-neutral or 
gender-indefinite. A language has lexically-
gendered nouns, irrespective of whether it also 
possesses grammatical gender; cf. the examples in 
Table 37.1 from English, Spanish (which has two 
grammatical gender classes) and Polish (which 
has three). 
Lexical gender may or may not be marked on 
the noun itself. In English, most human nouns are 
not formally marked for lexical gender, with 
exceptions such as widower or princess, which 
show overt lexical gender-marking by suffixation. 
By contrast, lexical gender is marked extensively 
in German, since most personal feminine nouns 
are derived from corresponding masculine nouns 
by means of the fully productive suffix -in, as in 
Bischöfin ‘female bishop’, Elektrikerin ‘female 
electrician’, or Soldatin ‘female soldier’.
Languages have competing processes of 
female-specific suffixation which may be an 
obstacle to promoting female visibility (cf. 
Section 37.3.2). Examples are 
Table 37.1 Lexical gender
Language
Female-specific
Male-specific
Gender-indefinite
English
daughter, girl
son, boy
citizen, patient
Spanish
hermana (f ) ‘sister’
hermano (m) ‘brother’
individuo (m) ‘individual’
Polish
kobieta (f ) ‘woman’
me¸ z·czyzna (m) ‘man’
osoba (f) ‘person’

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
568
• French -ice oratrice ‘speaker (f )’, -euse acheteuse 
‘consumer (f )’, -ère conseillère ‘councillor (f )’
• Polish -ka lekarka ‘doctor (f )’, -ini gospodyni 
‘hostess’, -owa ‘szefowa ‘boss (f )’. 
Productivity of these processes may be variable, 
and apart from indicating the lexical property 
[female], the feminine terms may transport addi-
tional gendered messages, e.g. symbolizing the 
dependence of the female on the male, as in Polish 
profesorowa ‘professor’s wife’. Such language-
specific features will have to be acknowledged 
when proposals for language reform are made. 
While the creation of female-specific nouns will 
lead to more female visibility, this strategy may, 
however, result in unwanted genderization in lan-
guages that not only lack grammatical gender but 
also productive female-specific word-formation 
rules. In these languages, female visibility can 
hardly be recommended as a general solution to 
androcentric practices.
Referential gender
Referential gender relates linguistic expressions to 
the non-linguistic world and identifies a referent 
as ‘female’, ‘male’ or ‘gender-indefinite’. For 
example, personal nouns like German Person (f) 
or Polish osoba (f), both meaning ‘person’, are 
grammatically feminine, lexically gender-indefi-
nite, and may be used to refer to males or females. 
In conservative language, so-called ‘generic’ mas-
culine or male expressions, e.g. German der 
Bürger (m) ‘the citizen’, French les hommes (m) 
‘the men, people’, or English chairman, may be 
used to refer to males, to people whose gender is 
unknown or unimportant in the context, and even 
to females. Even in cases which – presupposing a 
heterosexual cultural tradition – include both a 
female and a male referent, masculine expressions 
may be the default choice, cf. Spanish los novios (m) 
‘the couple’. 
Social gender
Personal nouns have social or ‘covert’ gender if 
the choice of associated words can neither be 
explained by grammatical gender (agreement) nor 
by lexical or referential gender. Social/covert 
gender is a reflection of stereotypical assumptions 
about what are appropriate social roles for women 
and men, including expectations about who will 
be a typical member of the class of, say, surgeon 
or receptionist. 
An illustration of social gender in English is the 
fact that many high-status professional terms such 
as lawyer or scientist will frequently be pronomi-
nalized by he in neutral contexts. By contrast, 
low-status occupational titles such as school-
teacher or nurse will often be followed by ana-
phoric she. In cases of conflict between such 
practices and actual reference, explicit gender-
marking is an option, as in English woman scien-
tist or male nurse. Typically, such marking tends 
to be asymmetrical, since expressions such as man 
scientist or female nurse are not normally used. 
Social gender provides an explanation for stereo-
typically gendered expressions such as French les 
délégués (m) et leurs épouses ‘the delegates and 
their spouses’, the message being that female 
participation is unimportant or marginal. 
37.2.2 Linguistic relativity
Theories of linguistic relativity predict that the 
structural differences between languages correlate 
with cognitive differences observed in native 
speakers of the respective languages (e.g. Whorf, 
1956; Hill, 1988: 14). In more popular wording, 
the hypothesis predicts that languages influence 
people’s world-views or thinking. Frank and 
Treichler noted that ‘in one form or another, this 
hypothesis underlies much current theoretical work 
in sociology, anthropology, criticism, and feminist 
theory’ (Frank and Treichler (eds), 1989: 3).
While it has not been claimed that discrimina-
tory language determines the way people experi-
ence the world, researchers in language and 
gender take the view that androcentric practices 
not only reflect normative ideologies but also are 
instrumental in maintaining and reproducing the 
status quo. Language reform will provide lan-
guage users with alternative concepts of reality, 
thus contributing to changes in attitudes and social 
practices.
Since the 1980s, there has been a considerable 
resurgence of interest in linguistic relativity (cf. 
Hellinger, 1991; Boroditsky, 2003). Researchers 
tend to speak about Whorfian effects rather than 
linguistic relativity (see Lakoff, 1987: 333; Hill, 
1988: 28), emphasizing that the non-linguistic 
effects induced by linguistic differences will not 
affect underlying universal cognitive processes 
which can be recovered under appropriate contex-
tual conditions (Kay and Kempton, 1984: 77). For 
example, spatial and temporal distinctions are 
reinforced by particular language structures, 
making language a powerful tool in shaping native 
speakers’ habitual thinking, but leaving room for 
potential learning. In another example it has been 
shown that the grammatical gender assigned to 
objects (e.g. table, window) does indeed influence 
people’s mental representation of these objects: 
grammatically feminine objects are rated more 
similar to females, grammatically masculine 
objects more similar to males (Boroditsky, 2003). 
The ascription of female/male properties to these 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
569
objects, i.e. people’s thinking about these objects, 
appears to be influenced by grammatical gender. 
In discussing discriminatory language, applied 
linguists and language planners are primarily con-
cerned with intra-linguistic variation. The assump-
tion is that the choice of either traditional wording 
or reformed expressions will affect speakers’ cog-
nition, producing psycholinguistic effects which 
can be interpreted in terms of linguistic relativity 
(cf. Section 37.3.1).
37.2.3 Gender theories
Currently, a tension between various lines of 
thought can be observed in the research on lan-
guage and gender. One approach accepts ‘gender’ 
as a social category and thus acknowledges the 
fact that the binary opposition of ‘female’ and 
‘male’ is still a fundamental principle of social 
structures and practices. Research traditions in 
this framework include sociolinguistic investiga-
tions of women’s and men’s language use which 
began in the 1960s (cf. Trudgill, 1974; Lakoff, 
1975, 2004; O’Barr and Atkins, 1980; Milroy, 
1987; Holmes, 1995; Coates 2004), but also more 
structure-oriented studies that analyse the repre-
sentation of gender in the domains of morphology, 
syntax and semantics (e.g. Hellinger and Bussmann 
(eds), 2001–03).
A second approach distances itself from essen-
tialist assumptions of gender and interprets gender 
as a result of variable social and interactive prac-
tices. Gender is no longer seen as a given social 
category; rather, multiple and sometimes precari-
ous gender identities may be performed depend-
ing on various cultural and contextual factors (cf. 
Butler, 1990, 2004; Bing and Bergvall, 1996; 
Freed, 1996; Hornscheidt, 2002). 
A third position incorporates elements of both 
theoretical approaches. On the one hand, concepts 
of ‘female’ and ‘male’ are still used, but the 
boundaries of these categories are seen as fuzzy 
and variable. In addition, ‘female’ and ‘male’ are 
interpreted as internally diverse rather than homo-
geneous categories. On the other hand, this posi-
tion is deconstructionist in that it interprets 
language use as a set of symbolic practices that 
are instrumental in staging normative or alterna-
tive gender representations (cf. Motschenbacher, 
2006: Ch. 2).
The issue of guidelines may be placed within 
the third framework. Guidelines necessarily deal 
with female and male reference. A major concern 
is the invisibility and derogation of female refer-
ents in language(s), asymmetrical practices in 
referring to females and males, and stereotypical 
assumptions about femininity and masculinity as 
these manifest themselves in language use.
Guidelines are actively involved in ‘doing 
gender’, demonstrating how alternative feminini-
ties and masculinities may be performed by 
employing reformed linguistic practices, e.g., by 
referring to female politicians not only by social 
title plus last name (German Frau Merkel ‘Mrs 
Merkel’) but also by last name only (Merkel), a 
practice which in German is stereotypically asso-
ciated with male reference (see Section 37.3.2). 
Guidelines identify traditional linguistic practices 
as transporting stereotypically gendered mes-
sages, where ‘gendered’ not only means separat-
ing females from males but also placing both 
genders in hierarchical frameworks which func-
tion according to the ideology ‘male as norm’. 
37.3 LANGUAGE REFORM
Alternatives for discriminatory wording have been 
proposed by feminist linguistic activists as well 
as language planning agencies since the 1970s 
(cf. Pauwels, 1998, 2003). The first proposals for 
the elimination of sexist practices emerged from 
academia, popular examples including Miller and 
Swift (1980 [1995]) for English, Guentherodt, 
Hellinger, Pusch and Trömel-Plötz (1980) and 
Hellinger and Bierbach (1993) for German, 
Sabatini (1986) for Italian, Instituto de la Mujer 
(1989) for Spanish, and Au féminin: Guide de 
féminisation des titres de fonction et des textes 
(1991) for Canadian French.
Guidelines are often designed for specific 
domains of use, e.g. a university, a trade union, or 
a publishing house; examples are McGraw-Hill 
(1972), Scott, Foresman and Company (1974), 
American Psychological Association (1977, rev. 
1994), NCTE (National Council of Teachers of 
English) (1975, rev. 1985, rev. 2002), and 
UNESCO (1987, rev. 1999). They are intended to 
offer practical solutions which language users can 
apply freely to their own purposes; e.g. the NCTE 
guidelines offer suggestions for writing papers, 
preparing textbooks, designing oral presentations 
and developing curricula. Of course, bias-free 
educational materials are no guarantee that class-
room discourse will also be bias-free, and it is 
essential to appreciate the role of the teacher as 
a mediator between the text and the learner 
(cf. Sunderland et al., 2002).
As instruments of language planning, reform 
proposals symbolize the dissonance between tradi-
tional prescription and alternative usage. In offer-
ing gender-fair alternatives, guidelines challenge 
the political and social status quo which is charac-
terized by the use of ‘generic’ masculine/male 
expressions to refer to both sexes (cf. Cameron, 
1995; Romaine, 1999: 293). 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
570
At this point, a cautionary note seems appropri-
ate on what sexism in language means. Linguistic 
sexism may not be easy to identify; cf. Mills’ 
(2008) distinction between overt and indirect 
sexism. Seemingly straightforward instances of 
sexism such as the girls in the office (referring to 
adult women) may – under specific pragmatic 
conditions – not be interpreted as offensive. Thus, 
in the analysis of sexism in language, contextual 
features such as public–private, formal–informal, 
or the behavioural conventions (including lan-
guage) in certain communities of practice will 
generally have to be considered.
37.3.1  The psycholinguistic effects of 
masculine/male generics
Convincing arguments supporting language 
reform derive from psycholinguistic evidence 
demonstrating that the generic potential of mascu-
line/male expressions is a myth. Psycholinguistic 
documentation 
is 
available 
for 
English 
(e.g. MacKay and Fulkerson 1979; Gastil, 1990; 
Switzer, 1990; Prentice, 1994), German (Irmen 
and Köhncke, 1996; Braun et al., 1998; Rothmund 
and Scheele, 2004; Irmen and Linner, 2005) and 
French (Houdebine, 1989; Houdebine-Gravaud, 
1998), while empirical research on other lan-
guages is rare; among the exceptions are Braun 
(2000) for Turkish, Engelberg (2002) for Finnish 
and Hornscheidt (2006) for Swedish. Currently, 
an International European Research Network is 
being developed in which (psycho)linguists, cog-
nitive psychologists, neuroscientists and social 
psychologists from six EU member states will 
investigate the cognitive representation of the 
sexes in their languages and the impact of gen-
dered language on behaviour (see EU Framework 
Programmes, Marie Curie Initial Training Network 
Language, Cognition, and Gender; http://cordis.
europa.eu/fp7).
In experimental studies on English, the focus 
has generally been on pronouns (generic he) and 
instances of generic man (mankind, chairman), 
while studies on German – and other languages 
with grammatical gender – have tested the effects 
of masculine personal nouns. Typically, inform-
ants will perform tasks like the following:
• read a story and give the story’s protagonist a name
• complete sentences that require the use of 
anaphoric gendered pronouns
• create a story around a referent, thus construct-
ing the referent as female or male
• decide whether a given sentence can refer to 
females or males
• draw figures to illustrate a sentence or story
• estimate the percentage of females/males in a 
given group of referents
• react to texts, e.g. job advertisements, that 
contain ‘generic’ masculine/male expressions or 
alternatives.
Overwhelmingly, the results of these studies 
demonstrate that androcentric generics invoke 
significantly more male than female imagery, i.e. 
the concept ‘female’ is not generally available 
when androcentric expressions are processed 
by language users. More generally, the studies 
support the view that language ‘shapes and 
reinforces selected cognitive tendencies, usually 
those in conformity with widely accepted cultural 
practices and beliefs’ (Frank and Treichler (eds), 
1989: 9).
It seems ironic that at their 2008 Convention in 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, ZONTA International, 
an organization of professional women whose 
policy is to advance the status of women worldwide 
(http://www.zonta.org), insisted on the continued 
use of the title chairman for their – exclusively 
female – international leaders and executives.
A note of caution is necessary relating to some 
unpredictable psycholinguistic effects of reform 
proposals. In empirical research on German, it 
was found that masculine generics did indeed 
produce significantly more male-specific imagery, 
but the various gender-inclusive alternatives did 
not necessarily produce a gender-symmetrical 
imagery (cf. Hellinger and Pauwels, 2007: 672ff.). 
Only long nominal splitting, e.g. Wähler und 
Wählerinnen ‘voters; literally voters (m) and 
voters (f)’ seems to produce a roughly symmetri-
cal imagery of female and male referents, while 
abbreviated splitting (Wähler/innen ‘voters’) and 
neutral expressions such as die Wahlberechtigten 
‘voters; literally those eligible to vote’ produced 
asymmetries of various kinds. Unexpectedly, the 
so-called ‘internal I’, a recent form of abbreviated 
splitting (WählerInnen ‘voters’), tended to evoke 
an overly female imagery. It appears that ‘internal 
I’ has the effect of politically correct symbol sig-
nalling a pro-feminist attitude (cf. Kargl et al., 
1997; Stahlberg and Sczesny, 2001: 138). 
Finally, adding a footnote to explain that the 
masculine expressions used in the text are intended 
to include women turned out to be totally ineffec-
tive. In fact, this practice created an even stronger 
male bias than the use of generic masculine forms 
(cf. Rothmund and Scheele, 2004: 8). From this 
evidence it may be concluded that in languages 
with grammatical gender the only way to signifi-
cantly increase the availability of the concept 
‘female’ seems to be the use of multiple female-
specific expressions throughout a text. Of course, 
there is an urgent need for research not only on the 
psycholinguistic effects of reformed usage in 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
571
other languages but also on potential changes of 
belief systems and language ideologies.
37.3.2 Strategies of change
Female visibility
Generally, gender-fair language is characterized 
by the following principles: avoidance of false 
generics; female visibility; symmetrical gender-
marking; and avoidance of stereotyping. However, 
these principles must be applied with care, 
acknowledging that languages have different 
structural properties that require individual solu-
tions. In English, the derivation of lexically female 
nouns by suffixation is no longer productive, leav-
ing only a few examples that are still used today 
(actress, usherette, heroine). One recent formation 
is proette ‘female golf professional’. Typically, 
forms such as poetess, aviatrix ‘female pilot’ or 
jockette ‘female jockey’ tend to carry negative 
connotations having undergone processes of 
semantic slippage. In some notorious cases these 
processes have resulted in asymmetrical pairs like 
governor–governess or major–majorette where 
the meaning of the lexically female term cannot 
be derived from the morphologically simpler 
term. Similar examples can be found in many 
other languages: 
• French couturier (m) ‘fashion designer’ vs coutur-
ière ‘seamstress’
• Polish sekretarz (m) ‘(Party) secretary’ vs sekre-
tarka (f) ‘secretary in an office’.
In English, female visibility is primarily re-
commended for pronouns (she or he as an alterna-
tive for generic he), for compounds ending in 
-woman (camerawoman, congresswoman), and in 
cases of explicit gendered reference, as in female 
and male lawyers where the use of lawyers alone 
might be interpreted as excluding females (covert 
gender). The major strategy to avoid false generics 
is neutralization, which includes instances of 
singular they (a lawyer should look after their 
clients) and the use of plural forms (Americans 
like their coffee black as an alternative for an 
American likes his coffee black). 
By contrast, in languages with grammatical 
gender, agreement rules require that articles, 
adjectives or verbal forms which accompany mas-
culine nouns or pronouns must also appear in the 
masculine gender. Such forms are a powerful 
means of communicating the message ‘male as 
norm’. Also, in constructions that coordinate a 
feminine and a masculine noun, related satellite 
forms typically respond to the preceding mascu-
line form, making the feminine noun invisible in 
agreement, as in this sentence from Polish (cf. 
Koniuszaniec and Błaszkowska, 2003: 263):
 
Adam i Ewa s¹ szcze¸ s´ liwi (m)
 
‘Adam (m) and Ewa (f) are happy (m)’
Therefore, in gender languages, female visibil-
ity suggests itself as the primary strategy to avoid 
false generics. However, this strategy will only be 
successful if the language has fully productive 
morphological mechanisms for the generation of 
feminine personal nouns, such as the German 
suffix -in. Since the 1970s, existing feminine per-
sonal nouns have been used more consistently in 
German, especially for individual reference, and a 
large number of new feminine nouns have been 
created: e.g. Bundeskanzlerin ‘female Chancellor’, 
Bischöfin ‘female bishop’, Soldatin ‘female sol-
dier’, Bankerin ‘female banker’, Fundraiserin 
‘female fundraiser’, etc. In addition, numerous 
compounds ending in -frau ‘-woman’ have been 
added to the German lexicon, e.g. Torfrau ‘female 
goalkeeper’, Geschäftsfrau ‘businesswoman’, 
Fachfrau ‘female expert’, Feuerwehrfrau ‘female 
firefighter’, Kneipenfrau ‘woman working in a 
pub’, etc. (cf. Hellinger, 1995).
However, a language may have competing 
derivational mechanisms for the generation of 
feminine nouns. In addition, these mechanisms 
may not be fully productive or may produce for-
mations with additional shades of meaning. This 
is the situation in French where female visibility 
requires multiple solutions (cf. Burr, 2003; 
Schafroth, 2003; Elmiger, 2008).
In France, the Circulaire relative à la féminisa-
tion des noms de métier, fonction, grade ou titre 
(1986) [‘Circular with respect to the feminization 
of the names of professions, functions, grades or 
titles’] was mainly concerned with two issues: 
providing the morphological mechanisms for the 
feminization of existing masculine terms, and 
the prescription of use of the new formations in 
official communication. Some mechanisms of 
derivation are given in Table 37.2
However, there exists uncertainty and uneasi-
ness among language users as to whether or not a 
feminine form should be used, and if so which 
suffix is the best choice. Also, some forms have 
become unacceptable today: e.g. the suffix -esse 
(poétesse ‘female poet’) and compounds such as 
femme-policier ‘female police officer’ (Burr, 
2003: 122f).
Schafroth (2003: 99f) notes a reluctance among 
speakers to accept feminine terms for prototypi-
cally male and/or prestigious professions. He 
points out that morphologically regular feminine 
forms such as ambassadrice ‘female ambassador’, 
conseillère ‘female consultant, advisor’, or inspec-
trice ‘female inspector’ are used mainly for 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
572
socially less important jobs or for charity functions. 
Female agents in more prestigious functions 
would rather be denoted by the respective mascu-
line terms (ambassadeur, conseiller, inspecteur). 
Significantly, Édith Cresson, French Prime 
Minister from 1991 to 1992, was usually referred 
to by masculine labels in newspapers and jour-
nals: le premier ministre (m) and le chef (m) du 
gouvernement ‘the head of government’. The 
debate about female visibility in French received 
momentum when the female ministers in the 
Jospin government requested to be addressed by a 
feminine title (Madame la ministre instead of 
Madame le ministre). In spite of fierce protest 
from the Académie Française, the denomination 
of women by feminine titles was legalized by the 
Prime Minister in 1998 (cf. Burr, 2003: 128).
From a postmodern perspective an increase of 
female visibility in language has been criticized as 
contributing to binary, essentialist symbolizations 
of gender (Bing and Bergvall, 1996: 18; 
Hornscheidt, 1998, 2002; Motschenbacher, 2006: 
39ff.). Such practices would inadvertently rein-
force female–male differences rather than promote 
a deconstructionst approach to gender as learned 
behaviour. This criticism ignores the fact that the 
categories [female] and [male] are deeply embed-
ded in most social practices, including language. 
Gender is a fundamental category not only of 
kinship terminologies, address and honorific 
systems, and non-personal animate nouns, but 
also – especially in languages with grammatical 
gender – structures even morphological and 
syntactic systems. 
Symmetrical gender-marking
Symmetrical gender-marking avoids expressions 
in which females are marked differently from 
their male counterparts, as in English Barack 
Obama and Hillary, or the men and the girls 
where the reference is to female adults. Such prac-
tices often portray the female as the lesser, more 
trivial category. In the German address phrase 
Herrn Paul Müller und Frau ‘to Mr Paul Müller 
and wife’, the female is identified not by name but 
by marital status alone. Typically, the address 
systems of many languages are characterized by 
various gendered asymmetries. Neutral terms are 
often used for males while female/feminine labels 
tend to transport additional information about the 
referent’s marital status; cf. English Mr vs Mrs, 
Miss, Ms; German Herr vs Frau, Fräulein, Italian 
Signor vs Signora, Signorina, Spanish Señor vs 
Señora, Señorita; French Monsieur vs Madame, 
Mademoiselle. This forces language users to 
make choices in addressing female but not male 
referents.
In expressions that explicitly name both sexes, 
men will frequently be identified by a functional 
or professional title, while women simply receive 
a general social label, as in this example from 
German: 
 
Frau (f) Merkel und der (m) CSU-Vorsitzende 
Stoiber 
 
'Mrs Merkel and CSU-leader Stoiber‘
The use of last name alone to refer to women 
(Merkel) continues to be a loaded practice. In a 
Table 37.2 Mechanisms of derivation
French
English
Masculine
Feminine
Suffixation by zero (e muet ‘silent e’) or orthographic e
un architecte
une architecte
‘an architect’
principal
principale
‘director’
chef
cheffe
‘boss’
délégué
déléguée
‘delegate’
professeur
professeure
‘professor’
Additive suffixation
beur
beurette
‘second-generation North African 
living in France’
avocat
avocate
‘lawyer’
animateur
animatrice
‘entertainment officer’
Suppletive suffixation
cocher
cochère
‘driver’
écrivain
écrivaine
‘writer’
vigneron
vigneronne
‘wine farmer’
acheteur
acheteuse
‘consumer’

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
573
study which analysed more than 1600 references 
to German politicians in four German newspapers, 
covering the period from October 2005 to January 
2006, i.e. immediately before and after Angela 
Merkel’s election as German Chancellor, the use 
of first and last names was found to be indicative 
of the paper’s respective political and ideological 
profile (cf. Hellinger, 2006b). Conservative papers 
like the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung avoid the 
use of last name only to refer to women, a practice 
which is common in more liberal papers like Die 
Zeit. The use of social title plus last name (Frau 
Merkel) emerges as a female-specific mechanism, 
since overwhelmingly female but very few male 
politicians are thus identified. In political dis-
course as elsewhere, an excessive emphasis on 
femininity where a corresponding emphasis on 
masculinity does not occur creates gendered 
asymmetries. It may be argued that the newspa-
pers’ labelling practices not only contribute to the 
symbolization of referents as gendered beings, but 
that underlying the choice of referential labels are 
opposing gender ideologies.
Similarly, instances of excessive and unneces-
sary female visibility, as in English woman driver, 
lady philosopher or authoress, Japanese joseiki-
sha ‘literally woman.reporter’, or Indonesian 
dokter perempuan ‘literally doctor.woman’, may 
be interpreted as depicting female referents as an 
exception from the (male) norm. In gender lan-
guages, the combination of a feminine/female-
specific noun with a masculine modifier creates 
similar asymmetries, cf. French une femme 
ingénieur ‘literally a (f) woman (f) engineer (m)’, 
une jeune femme médicin ‘literally a (f) young 
woman (f) doctor (m); Ital. la donna medico ‘liter-
ally the (f) woman (f) doctor (m)’. Compare also 
Italian il iudice donna ‘literally the (m) lawyer 
(m) woman (f)’, where a masculine noun is com-
bined with a feminine/female-specific noun. In all 
these cases, guidelines will recommend symmetri-
cal expressions, in particular avoidance of redun-
dant female-specific identification in genderless 
languages, but the use of feminine occupational 
and functional labels in gender languages.
Avoidance of stereotyping
Stereotyping portrays women as sexualized beings 
by emphasizing their physical features, reproduc-
tive capacities and functions as caretakers (English 
mothering, working mother, housewife; French le 
beau sexe, le deuxième sexe ‘the beautiful/second 
sex, women’). The secondary status of women is 
further symbolized through practices which iden-
tify women in terms of their relationship to men; 
examples are women’s courtesy titles and the 
practice of women changing their name upon 
marriage (cf. Hellinger and Pauwels, 2007: 653). 
Comparing a woman’s achievements to those of 
men, as in she was a second Einstein, or she has 
balls (intended as a ‘compliment’) results in an 
elevated status for the woman, while the reverse, 
i.e. comparing a male to a female, as in he is 
effeminate or he is a sissy, has a demeaning effect. 
Examples where a man benefits from being com-
pared to a famous woman (he is a second Madonna; 
he is a male Jeanne d’Arc) are rare. The same 
behaviour may be evaluated differently depending 
on whether it is performed by a male or female 
agent, cf. English outspoken men vs hysterical 
women or ambitious men vs aggressive women. 
Among instances of stereotyping are expres-
sions which portray women and men as repre-
sentatives of traditional gender hierarchies, where 
women typically occupy the lower (paid) and less 
prestigious ranks. The following examples are 
from German:
Die ideale Beziehung: Sekretärinnen und ihre Chefs
 
'The ideal relationship: Secretaries (f ) and their 
bosses (m)‘
Wo Krankenschwestern den Arzt ersetzen müssen
 
'Where nurses (f ) will have to replace the 
doctor (m)‘ 
Professoren, Putzfrauen und Pförtner
 
‘professors (m), cleaning women (f ) and 
janitors (m)’
Avoidance of stereotyping, especially in texts 
about categories of people rather than particular 
individuals, can easily be achieved by the choice 
of alternative lexical items, e.g., parenting, child-
rearing, or fussing (if a pejorative sense is 
intended) for mothering, or delicate, gentle, 
languid and many others for effeminate.
37.4  THE PUBLIC DISCOURSE ON NON-
DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE 
37.4.1 Language politics
The UNESCO guidelines of 1987 are an early 
example of international language politics. 
Originally, the titles of both the French and the 
English edition made explicit reference to linguis-
tic sexism (Pour un Langage Non Sexiste; 
Guidelines on Non-Sexist Language). In the 1999 
edition, the title of the French version was modi-
fied to Pour l’Égalité des Sexes dans le Langage, 
emphasizing gender equality, while the new 
English title Guidelines on Gender-Neutral 
Language indicates that neutralization rather than 
female visibility is the preferred reform strategy in 
English (see Hellinger, 2004, 2006a).

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
574
Repeatedly (e.g. in 1987, 1989, 1991, 1995), 
UNESCO’s General Conference has discussed the 
question of the elimination of sexist language 
from all UNESCO Basic Texts which must be 
produced in UNESCO’s six working languages, 
i.e. English, French, Spanish, Russian, Arabic and 
Chinese. In 1994, the General Conference adopted 
a resolution stating its conviction that gender-
neutral wording ‘may alter attitudes and expecta-
tions that now constitute a barrier to achieving 
equality of opportunity for women and men’ 
(UNESCO, 1994: 1). It is significant that the 1999 
UNESCO guidelines make reference to global 
legislation: the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights 
(1948), 
the 
Convention 
Against 
Discrimination in Education (1960) and the 
Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of 
Discrimination Against Women (1979); see http://
www.un.org/womenwatch (since January 2008, 
see the website of the UN Office of the High 
Commissioner for Human Rights http://www2.
ohchr.org/; accessed 20 January 2009).
On the national level, guidelines also tend 
to refer to larger legislative frameworks. For 
example, many German guidelines quote from the 
German constitution (GG Grundgesetz) which in 
Art. 3 para. 2 calls for equality of opportunity for 
women and men in all domains of life (work 
sphere, education, social and public services). 
The German Civil Code (BGB Bürgerliches 
Gesetzbuch) rules that – except in such special 
cases as prison personnel, the military or religious 
institutions – a job must not be advertised only for 
men or only for women. Similar references to 
legislative authorities can be found in guidelines 
for other languages, e.g. Austrian German 
(Kargl et al., 1997); Swiss German (Swiss 
Report, 1991; Schiedt and Kamber, 2004); Welsh 
(Awbery, Jones and Morris, 2002); and Dutch 
(Werkgroup, 1982).
In spite of the impressive rhetoric displayed by 
UNESCO’s General Conference, the practical 
consequences of the reform measures were mini-
mal, since non-discriminatory replacements for 
male/masculine generics were largely modelled 
on English. Only a small number of androcentric 
expressions were replaced by gender-inclusive or 
gender-indefinite alternatives For example:
• English (chair)man, mankind → (chair)person, 
humanity
• French homme → la personne humaine, 
l’individu
• Spanish hombres → los seres humanos, las 
personas 
Not only is neutralization the favoured reform 
strategy but also it is claimed that the continued 
linguistic invisibility of women is no problem in 
the UNESCO languages with grammatical gender 
(French, Spanish, Russian and Arabic), since ‘the 
generic use of the masculine form for post titles 
for both sexes is considered acceptable’ (UNESCO, 
1994: 4). In fact, a decision was made to the effect 
that all UNESCO documents must simply carry a 
footnote explaining that any person-denoting term 
is to be interpreted as referring equally to women 
and men. This decision ignores empirical evi-
dence which has demonstrated, e.g. for German, 
that such a footnote is the least effective instru-
ment to achieve a gender-inclusive imagery (cf. 
Section 37.3.1). It also ignores national guidelines 
which take a much more diversified approach to 
non-discriminatory language reform in that they 
acknowledge language-specific properties. 
In Europe, the Committee of Ministers of the 
Council of Europe adopted the UNESCO recom-
mendations on the use of non-sexist language in 
1990 (Council of Europe, 1990), and in 2003 the 
European Parliament recalled that ‘the sexism 
reflected in language is an obstacle to equality 
between men and women’ (EU, 2003: 8). The use 
of non-discriminatory language in all EU docu-
ments was mandatory, ‘since equality is one of the 
democratic values of the European Union’ (EU, 
2003: 30). Considering past legislation in EU 
member states, one should not be overly optimis-
tic as to the practical consequences of such state-
ments for language use outside EU institutions. 
For example, in 1990, the German Federal 
Government adopted the following solutions for 
legal language (Rechtssprache): it recommends 
female visibility in official language (Amtssprache), 
i.e. the language used in administrative communi-
cation, personal documents, educational material, 
etc., but supports the continued use of masculine 
generics in legislative language (Vorschrif-
tensprache), i.e. the language used in decrees, 
laws, etc. (cf. Hellinger, 1995: 305ff.). 
Similarly in France, at the Prime Minister’s 
request the Commission générale de terminologie 
et de néologie (1998) produced a report on the 
feminization of job titles, functional labels and 
academic titles (cf. Burr, 2003: 128ff.). The 
Commission makes a fundamental distinction 
between espace public ‘public sphere’ and espace 
privé ‘private sphere’, for which different and 
sometimes contradictory recommendations were 
made. For example, since a woman’s professional 
title or address label was considered part of the 
private sphere, it was left to the woman’s decision 
whether or not she would request or use a femi-
nized form. In statutory or legal texts, however, or 
in cases where a title did not refer to an individual 
but to the function itself, the use of generic 
masculines continued to be mandatory. 
A considerably more progressive approach to 
changes in legal language was taken by the Swiss 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
575
authorities (see Hellinger, 1995: 307ff.). Although 
the Swiss Report of 1991 also distinguishes 
between administrative language and legislative 
language, the guidelines are intended to apply to 
both varieties. Significantly, the implementation 
of non-sexist guidelines is interpreted as a meas-
ure of language policy far more important than, 
say, the much debated spelling reform. It is 
acknowledged that in everyday Swiss German 
more and more androcentric expressions are being 
replaced by forms of splitting, with the result that 
masculine personal nouns are increasingly losing 
their generic potential. There is an urgent need for 
more documentation of language policies in dif-
ferent countries, of language-specific recommen-
dations, and of the implementation of reform 
measures in various domains of use. 
37.4.2 Voices of resistance
Public responses to feminist language politics 
have frequently revealed openly hostile reactions, 
maintaining that reformed usage violates gram-
mar, is cumbersome and unaesthetic and interferes 
with freedom of speech (cf. Ehrlich and King, 
1994; Cameron, 1995: 132ff.). By contrast, sup-
porters of reformed usage adhere to various 
degrees of linguistic relativity, suggesting that a 
change in behaviour, i.e. using more instances of 
non-sexist language, will enlarge the mental space 
of female imagery and weaken the male-as-norm 
ideology, thus contributing to social change.
The major strategies of resistance are the 
following (cf. Blaubergs, 1980; Hellinger, 1997):
1 It is denied that linguistic discrimination exists. 
Subscribing to the view that language is a neu-
tral instrument of communication, it is claimed 
that androcentric expressions do not contribute 
to the linguistic marginalization of women, and 
that therefore change is unnecessary. This view is 
contradictory in that it cannot explain why only 
gender-inclusive but not androcentric expres-
sions would violate the ideology of language as 
a neutral instrument of communication. 
2 Change is unnecessary, since language is simply 
a reflection of reality. Language change will 
follow social change. This view not only ignores 
the fact that language is instrumental in shap-
ing speakers’ perceptions and interpretations of 
reality but also its potential as an instrument of 
social practice, and more specifically, of social 
protest. 
3 Gender-inclusive 
formulations, 
especially 
instances of female visibility, are interpreted as 
an obstacle to emancipation, since they are inter-
preted as substituting the male norm by a female 
norm. This is a false argument since it distorts the 
fundamental aim of non-discriminatory guide-
lines: namely, the equal linguistic representation 
of both sexes. The replacement of generic mascu-
line/male expressions by generic feminine/female 
expressions has never been part of proposals for 
gender-fair wording.
4 Reform measures are applied to cases which 
require no change, with the intended effect 
that the reform as such is ridiculed. In gender 
languages, this may produce examples such as 
German die Grünen und Grüninnen ‘literally the 
Greens (m) and Greens (f), i.e. male and female 
members of the Green Party’. Of course, the 
formation Grüninnen is ungrammatical, since 
in German, nominalized adjectival plural forms 
such as die Grünen or die Reichen ‘the rich’ are 
not specified for grammatical gender. Another 
example is Führerinnenschein ‘drivers’ (f) licence’; 
German guidelines have not proposed changes to 
non-personal compounds which contain a mas-
culine form, as in Bürgersteig, ‘sidewalk, literally 
citizens’ (m) walk’ or Raucherzimmer ‘smoking 
room, literally smokers’ (m) room’. There are a few 
exceptions, as when the compound refers explic-
itly to an all-female membership, e.g. Deutscher 
Juristinnenbund ‘German Association of Female 
Lawyers’. Another provocative although creative 
case is this example: Frau Ministerin, wir haben 
eine(n) Vorschlag/Idee ‘Mrs Minister, we have 
a suggestion (m)/an idea (f)’. The strategy of 
splitting, i.e. making explicit reference to both 
a female and male referent, is here applied to 
non-personal abstract nouns, thus distorting and 
discrediting original recommendations.
5 Reform measures are interpreted as undemocratic 
since they are believed to violate the principle 
of freedom of speech. In the past, however, no 
such arguments have accompanied the prescrip-
tion of masculine/male generics. In addition, 
the domain of non-discriminatory language 
politics is official language, while no proposals 
have been made – nor can be made – for private 
language.
6 It is claimed that the use of ‘generic’ masculine/
male expressions is simply the result of tradition, 
based on social agreement. This argument is 
unfounded, since ‘social agreement’ really means 
prescription by influential authorities such as 
grammars, stylebooks and language academies. 
Again, the potential of language as an agent in 
social change is ignored.
7 On the stylistic level, reform measures are seen 
as offending the principle of linguistic economy. 
Frequent instances of (pro)nominal splitting are 
interpreted as cumbersome and unaesthetic. 
However, making a choice between stylistic 
elegance and non-discriminatory formulations is 
unnecessary in most cases, since guidelines gen-
erally recommend various strategies or ‘creative 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
576
solutions’, rather than the application of only one 
reform measure. 
Among examples that illustrate how reform pro-
posals can be applied creatively, resulting in texts 
that remain comprehensible and readable, is the 
gender-inclusive version of the Constitution of the 
German Federal State of Lower Saxony. A com-
parison between the original version of 1951, 
which consistently used generic masculine expres-
sions, and the revised version of 1993 supports the 
hypothesis that repeated instances of splitting, but 
also the use of gender-indefinite wording and 
other devices, will considerably reduce the text’s 
male bias, creating an awareness of female par-
ticipation in all constitutional and legal matters 
(cf. Dietrich, 2000). 
37.4.3 Political correctness
The arguments presented by opponents to gender-
inclusive language reform are reminiscent of 
debates about ‘politically correct speech’. 
Originally, political correctness denoted behav-
iour conforming to a political party’s ideology 
(cf. Berman, 1992; Perry, 1992; Peterson, 1994; 
Wirthgen, 1999). In the 1980s, the term was 
applied by the American political left to the imple-
mentation of liberal ideas on American university 
campuses, which included recognition of ethnic, 
sexual, religious and cultural diversity. The term 
was later used by the political right in the USA to 
discredit leftist politics. Conservative criticism 
denounced ‘politically correct’ (PC) language as 
enforced orthodoxy, censorship, and thought con-
trol. While many terms have since found wide 
acceptance (African-American for Black, Native 
American for Indian, Inuit for Eskimo, senior citi-
zen for old age pensioner, or disabled for handi-
capped ), others like physically challenged have 
invited critical, and often ironic commentary, i.e. 
creations such as vertically challenged for short or 
visually challenged for blind (for an analysis of 
PC see Cameron, 1995: Ch. 4). In Germany, the 
use of terms like Ausländer or Türken has been 
criticized by some people as implying racist atti-
tudes; however, alternative wordings such as 
Menschen mit Migrationshintergrund ‘people 
with a migratory background’ or Mitbürger 
türkischer Herkunft ‘fellow citizens of Turkish 
heritage’ have been criticized as euphemistic and 
overly considerate (on political correctness, espe-
cially from a discourse analytical perspective, 
see the special issue of Discourse and Society, 
Vol. 14, 2003). 
‘Politically correct’ terminology is largely con-
cerned with the lexical-semantic level. Typically, 
recommendations consist of lists of words which 
are interpreted as (potentially) offensive, and sug-
gestions of bias-free alternatives (cf. Beard and 
Cerf, 1994, 1995). For example, the Dictionary of 
Cautionary Words and Phrases (1989), published 
by the Multicultural Management Program, con-
tains some 230 nouns and adjectives, plus some 
verbs and idiomatic expressions, which are char-
acterized as demeaning or offensive; cf. these 
examples:
 
Ghetto: Avoid use. Has become a stereotype for
 poor minority community.
 
Latin lover : A stereotype alluding to Latino 
 sexual prowess. Avoid use.
 
Oriental: Unacceptable to some Asian-Americans. 
 Use Asian-American or Asian(s).
Compared to such wordlists, guidelines for 
gender-fair usage have a much wider range of 
application. They involve complex systems of 
personal reference that include not only central 
lexical fields such as kinship terms, occupational 
terms, functional labels, or address systems but 
also domains of grammar (pronominalization, 
agreement) and word-formation (derivation and 
compounding). 
37.5  EVALUATING THE IMPACT 
OF GUIDELINES FOR NON-
DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE
To date, there is a lack of empirical data docu-
menting the impact of guidelines in various 
domains of use. An evaluation of reform measures 
presents considerable problems, since the spread 
of non-discriminatory practices is never just the 
result of language policies alone. Among the non-
linguistic factors influencing processes of lan-
guage change are the historical, cultural and 
ideological contexts of the individual language. 
For example, does the country have a tradition of 
language politics and of public discourse about 
issues of language more generally, e.g. about 
spelling reform, linguistic ‘purity’, or interference 
from other languages (‘anglicisms’)? Is there a 
belief that the language should be saved from 
‘decay’ by opposing any change? Has the country 
experienced a major feminist movement which 
has recognized the feminist critique of language 
as a site of social change? Does the country 
have influential key agents or popular role models 
who will motivate others to adopt alternative 
practices? 
A decrease in the use of masculine/male gener-
ics has been observed in English and a number of 
Western languages (cf. Ehrlich and King, 1994; 
Rubin et al., 1994¸ Pauwels, 1998). However, this 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
577
change may not really be symbolic of pro-feminist 
attitudes. There may be opportunism involved or 
simply experimentation with stylistic variability. 
At the same time, processes of change may not 
necessarily reflect the original intentions of lan-
guage reformers. Below I present three examples 
of observed change which indicate that change 
spreads in non-linear fashion across contexts and 
domains of use. 
37.5.1 Job advertising in German
Since 1980, the German Civil Code (Para. 611b 
BGB) has required that employers use non-
discriminatory language in job advertising as one 
measure to achieve equal opportunities for women 
and men in the work sphere (cf. Hellinger and 
Pauwels, 2007: 670ff.). In 1998, in the process of 
adapting German national law to the guidelines of 
the European Union, the regulation was changed 
from optional to obligatory. Employers must not 
advertise a job or post only for men or only for 
women. Exceptions include domains such as the 
medical profession, prisons or the fashion indus-
try, where only male or only female applicants are 
acceptable.
Since then, changes in advertising practices 
have resulted in a steady increase in gender-fair 
language. In a study of 1987, only 21% of the 
6000 advertisements analysed adhered to gender-
inclusive wording (Brockhoff, 1987), while 10 
years later the percentage had risen to some 45% 
(Oldenburg, 1998). More recent studies (Greve 
et al., 2002; Hellinger, 2004: 286ff.) have docu-
mented an increase in gender-inclusive language 
to over 70%. However, variability within each 
corpus may be considerable, depending on the 
type of newspaper (e.g. national or local, print or 
online version), the paper’s political affiliation, 
and the type of job advertised (manual or profes-
sional). For example, Hellinger’s (2004) analysis 
of some 900 advertisements found that the national 
quality weekly Die Zeit, which advertises prestig-
ious posts in the civil/public service, in universi-
ties, 
research 
centres 
and 
(inter)national 
companies, used gender-inclusive wording in well 
over 90% of advertisements, while regional news-
papers such as Hannoversche Allgemeine or 
Frankfurter Rundschau, which offer a much wider 
range of jobs, still used some 30% of discrimina-
tory language. One local newspaper, Wiesbadener 
Kurier, still contained an exceptional 50% of 
sexist advertisements even in 2003. This evidence 
suggests that not only is there an urgent need 
for the documentation of (non)sexist practices 
in more languages but also for more data from 
various domains of use within a language.
37.5.2  Alternatives to generic he in 
English 
In English, the most widely promoted alternatives 
to generic he are instances of pronominal splitting 
(he or she), generic she, and singular they (for a 
discussion of other alternatives, see Pauwels, 
1998). As a consequence, a decrease in the use of 
generic he has been observed in English since the 
1980s (Cooper, 1984; Markovitz, 1984; Rubin 
et al., 1994). In more recent analyses of news-
papers, academic texts and TV interviews, singu-
lar they has been found to be the preferred 
alternative when reference is to antecedents such 
as person, anyone, or everyone (Newman, 1997; 
Baranowski, 2002). Singular they has also emerged 
as the preferred choice in most forms of spoken 
language, including formal public speech (e.g., 
Pauwels, 2001, 2003). The use of generic he is 
becoming the exception rather than the rule in 
North American, Australian and New Zealand 
varieties of English, while in British English and 
the ‘new’ Englishes, generic he continues to 
dominate, e.g., in Singapore by nearly 90%, and 
the Philippines by some 70% (cf. Pauwels and 
Winter, 2004a, 2004b). Previous research has 
focused on educational domains such as high 
school classrooms, the university campus, the 
lecture hall, and faculty meetings as the main sites 
of change, while there is a lack of documentation 
in other contexts. 
37.5.3 Address terms for women
Frau/Fräulein in German
Since 1937, German Ministers of the Interior have 
repeatedly dealt with the issue of asymmetrical 
address terms, i.e. Herr ‘Mr’ vs Frau ‘Mrs’, 
Fräulein ‘Miss’, the latter term expressing the 
meaning ‘unmarried woman’ but often additional 
connotations such as ‘single’, ‘young’, ‘imma-
ture’, or ‘having no children’. In 1972, the use of 
Fräulein was officially banned from public com-
munication by legislation, since it was no longer 
acceptable that adult women should be treated 
differently from adult men (cf. Hellinger, 2004: 
284ff.)). While the label Fräulein has largely 
disappeared from official usage, it has survived 
in informal communication, mainly as a 
derogatory term.
In a study of the language practices among 
teenage speakers in East and West Germany 
(Reiss, 2007: 174), it was found that the use of 
Fräulein was associated with a large number of 
meanings, among them ‘young’, ‘unmarried’, ‘still 
a virgin’, ‘still living with parents’, and ‘having no 
children’. Contexts in which informants would 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
578
still use or hear the term included: addressing 
a female waiter, as a derogatory term for a kinder-
garten or primary teacher, or used by the informant’s 
mother when angry. 
In Austria, the history of gender-fair language 
dates back to the 1980s, an early influential text 
being Wodak et al. (1987). A decade later, a com-
prehensive treatment of the theoretical as well as 
practical problems of feminist language reform 
was published by the Austrian Ministry for Women 
(Kargl et al., 1997). A more recent concise exam-
ple is ‘Geschlechtergerechtes Formulieren’ ‘gen-
der-fair formulating’ (Wetschanow, 2002). 
Occasionally, more specific issues are addressed 
in ministerial circulars; thus in 2008, the Federal 
Ministry for Education, Science and Culture 
issued a statement concerning academic titles for 
women: while officially feminine forms are not 
recommended, a woman may choose to use Mag.a 
or Dr.in rather than the traditional masculine 
forms (see http://www.bmukk.gv.at/schulen/unter-
richt/ba/sprachliche_gleichbehandlung.xml; 
accessed 21 January 2009). 
Similarly, in Switzerland, the public discourse 
on feminist language reform began in the 1980s. 
In 1988 the Swiss Federal Government set up an 
interdepartmental working group on non-sexist 
language which considered not only Swiss German 
but also French and Italian, the other two official 
languages of Switzerland (Swiss Report, 1991). 
One field of reform was legal language, where the 
Swiss Report recommended female visibility not 
only in administrative language but also in legisla-
tive language. Comparable recommendations by 
the German Bundestag (BRD Report, 1991) were 
much less progressive, supporting for legislative 
language the status quo, i.e. the continued use of 
generic masculine expressions, rather than more 
gender-fair solutions (see Hellinger, 1995: 306ff.). 
Among popular Swiss guidelines are Häberlin 
et al. (1992), Schweizerische Bundeskanzlei 
(1996) and Schiedt and Kamber (2004).
Today, most Swiss (inter)national organizations 
and institutions have their own guidelines, as, for 
example, Amnesty International Switzerland (see 
http://www.amnesty.ch; accessed 4 February 
2009), or one of the numerous guidelines pub-
lished by Swiss universities, e.g. the University 
of Bern (http://www.gleichstellung.uniber.ch; 
accessed 4 February 2009). 
Mrs/Miss/Ms in English
While the disappearance of Fräulein in official 
German has created a symmetrical pair of address 
terms (Frau/Herr), thus simplifying the German 
address system, the reverse process can be 
observed in English. The new formation Ms, 
intended by reformers as a semantically neutral 
title which is indifferent to the referent’s marital 
status, has not replaced Miss. In addition, adop-
tion of the term presents a mixed picture across 
varieties of English. Although the use of Ms has 
increased significantly among Australian women, 
users are not agreed upon the promoted interpreta-
tion of the term. Rather, the term has taken on a 
number of unintended meanings, from ‘sepa-
rated’, ‘divorced’, ‘living in a de facto relation-
ship’, to ‘feminist’ and ‘lesbian’ (cf. Pauwels, 
2001: 142).
Studies on the adoption of non-sexist expres-
sions include: Pauwels (2003) on Australian 
English; Baranowski (2002), Ehrlich and King 
(1994) and Romaine (2001) on American and 
British English; Holmes (2001) on New Zealand 
English; and Pauwels and Winter (2004a, 2004b) 
on postcolonial Englishes. Whereas most of these 
studies document an increase of non-discrimina-
tory usage, acceptance varies considerably across 
the global varieties of English:
The United States and Canada lead the way by a 
small margin from Australia and New Zealand. 
Britain lags quite a bit behind these countries. 
Least evidence of non-sexist language use is found 
in the postcolonial varieties of English in the 
Philippines, Singapore and Hong Kong […] .
(Hellinger and Pauwels, 2007: 673) 
37.6 CONCLUSION
The empirical research on gender-related lan-
guage practices as well as the analysis of dis-
courses about gender-inclusive language support 
the hypothesis that word meanings are not pre-
discursively given, nor can they be determined by 
prescriptive measures. Rather, word meanings are 
continuously being negotiated in a speech com-
munity. As one instrument of challenging hege-
monic assumptions about what masculine/male 
expressions actually refers to, guidelines have 
provoked many voices of resistance. Conservative 
criticism has deliberately distorted reform propos-
als and ignored empirical evidence that has 
decomposed the myth of the generic potential of 
androcentric expressions. Frequently, opponents 
to non-discriminatory wording, and to female vis-
ibility in particular, have resorted to the ‘language 
of war’ (cf. German der radikal-feministische 
Geschlechterkampf um Worte ‘the radical-feminist 
war of the sexes about words’) demonstrating 
that the reform is anything but trivial. It may be 
concluded that an increase in gender-inclusive 
language is symbolic not only of women’s 
active role in defining word meanings, but more 

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
579
generally, 
in 
ongoing 
political 
struggles 
over the equal participation of women in all 
public domains. 
REFERENCES
American Psychological Association (1994) Guidelines to 
Reduce Bias in Language. (Originally Guidelines for Non-
Sexist Language in APA Journals, 1977.)
Au féminin (1991) Au féminin: guide de féminisation des titres 
de fonction et des textes. (Guide de l’Office de la langue 
française.) Québec: Publications du Québec. 
Awbery, Gwenllian, Jones, Kathryn and Morris, Delyth (2002) 
‘The politics of language and gender in Wales’, in Marlis 
Hellinger and Hadumod Bussmann (eds), Gender Across 
Language. The Linguistic Representation of Women and 
Men. Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 313–30.
Baranowski, Maciej (2002) ‘Current usage of the epicene 
pronoun in written English’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
6: 378–97.
Beard, Henry and Cerf, Christopher (1994) The Official 
Politically Correct Dictionary and Handbook. New York: 
Random House.
Beard, Henry and Cerf, Christopher (1995) The Official Sexually 
Correct Dictionary and Dating Guide. New York: Villard Books.
Bergvall, Victoria L., Bing, Janet M. and Freed, Alice F. (eds) 
(1996) Rethinking Language and Gender Research: Theory 
and Practice. London: Longman.
Berman, Paul (1992) Debating P.C.: The Controversy Over 
Political Correctness on College Campuses. New York: 
Delta Publishing.
Bing, Janet M. and Bergvall, Victoria L. (1996) ‘The question 
of questions: beyond binary thinking’, in Victoria L. 
Bergvall, Janet M. Bing and Alice F. Freed (eds), Rethinking 
Language and Gender Research: Theory and Practice. 
London: Longman. pp. 1–30.
Blaubergs, Maija S. (1980) ‘An analysis of classic arguments 
against changing sexist language’, in Cheris Kramarae, 
(ed.), The Voices and Words of Women and Men. Oxford: 
Pergamon. pp. 135–47.
Boroditsky, Lera (2003) ‘Linguistic relativity’, in Lynn Nadel, 
(ed.), Encyclopaedia of Cognitive Science. London: 
Macmillan. pp. 917–22.
Braun, Friederike (2000) Geschlecht im Türkischen. 
Untersuchungen zum sprachlichen Umgang mit einer sozi-
alen Kategorie. Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Braun, Friederike, Gottburgsen, Anja, Sczesny, Sabine and 
Stahlberg, Dagmar (1998) 'Können Geophysiker Frauen 
sein? Generische Personenbezeichnungen im Deutschen‘, 
Zeitschrift für Germanistische Linguistik, 26: 265–83.
BRD 
Report 
(1991) 
Maskuline 
und 
feminine 
Personenbezeichnungen in der Rechtssprache. Bericht der 
Arbeitsgruppe Rechtssprache vom 17. Januar 1990. 
Deutscher Bundestag. Drucksache 12/1041.1991.
Brockhoff, Evamaria (1987) 'Wie fragt Mann nach Frauen?‘, 
Die Zeit, 2 January 1987.
Burr, Elisabeth (2003) 'Gender and language politics in 
France‘, in Marlis Hellinger and Hodumod Bussmann (eds), 
Gender Across Languages. The Linguistic Representation 
of Women and Men, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 119–39.
Butler, Judith (1990) Gender Trouble: Feminism and the 
Subversion of Identity. New York: Routledge.
Butler, Judith (2004) Undoing gender. New York: Routledge.
Cameron, Deborah (1992) Feminism and Linguistic Theory. 
2nd edn. London: Macmillan.
Cameron, Deborah (1995) Verbal Hygiene. London: 
Routledge.
Coates, Jennifer (2004) Women, Men and Language. A 
Sociolinguistic Account of Gender Differences in Language. 
3rd edn. Harlow: Longman. 
Cooper, Robert L. (1984) ‘The avoidance of androcentric 
generics’, International Journal of the Sociology of 
Language, 59: 5–20.
Council of Europe (1990) Recommendation No. R(90)4 on the 
Elimination of Sexism from Language. http://portal.unesco.
org; accessed 21 January 2009.
Dictionary of Cautionary Words and Phrases (1989) University 
of Columbia, MO: Multicultural management program.
Dietrich, Margot (2000) ‘”Gerechtigkeit gegenüber jeder-
mann” – “Gerechtigkeit gegenüber allen Menschen”. 
Sprachliche Gleichbehandlung am Beispiel der Verfassung 
des Landes Niedersachsen’, in Karin M. Eichhoff-Cyrus, and 
Rudolf Hoberg, (eds), Die deutsche Sprache zur 
Jahrtausendwende: Sprachkultur oder Sprachverfall? 
Mannheim: Dudenverlag. pp. 192–223.
Eckert, P. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003) Language and 
gender. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ehrlich, Susan and King, Ruth (1994) 'Feminist meanings and 
the (de)politicization of the lexicon‘, Language in Society, 
23: 59–76.
Eichhoff-Cyrus, Karin M. (ed.) (2004) Adam, Eva und die 
Sprache. Beiträge zur Geschlechterforschung. Mannheim: 
Dudenverlag.
Elmiger, Daniel (2008) La féminisation de la langue en 
Français et en Allemand. Paris: Honoré Champion.
Engelberg, Mila (2002) ‘The communication of gender in 
Finnish‘, in Marlis Hellinger and Hadumod Bussmann (eds), 
Gender Across Language. The Linguistic Representation 
of Women and Men, Amsterdam: John Benjamins. 
pp. 109–32.
European Union (EU) (2003) European Parliament 
1999–2004. Session document. Final A5-0053/2003.
Frank, Francine W. and Treichler, Paula A. (eds) (1989) 
Language, Gender, and Professional Writing: Theoretical 
Approaches and Guidelines for Nonsexist Usage. 
New York: MLA.
Freed, Alice F. (1996) ‘Language and gender research in an 
experimental setting’, in Victoria L. Bergvall, Janet M. Bing and 
Alice F. Freed (eds), Rethinking Language and Gender 
Research: Theory and Practice. London: Longman. pp. 54–76.
Gastil, John (1990) ‘Generic pronouns and sexist language: 
the oxymoronic character of masculine generics’, Sex Roles, 
23: 629–43.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
580
Greve, Melanie, Iding, Marion and Schmusch, Bärbel (2002) 
‘Geschlechtsspezifische Formulierungen in Stellenangeboten’, 
Linguistik Online, 11(2) http://www.linguistik-online.
org/11_02/greschmid.html.
Guentherodt, Ingrid, Hellinger, Marlis, Pusch, Luise F. and 
Trömel-Plötz, Senta (1980)‚ 'Richtlinien zur Vermeidung 
sexistischen Sprachgebrauchs‘, Linguistische Berichte, 
69: 15–21.
Häberlin, Susanna, Schmid, Rachel and Wyss, Eva Lia (1992) 
Übung macht die Meisterin. Ratschläge für einen nicht-
sexistischen Sprachgebrauch. München: Frauenoffensive. 
Hall, Kira and Bucholtz, Mary (eds) (1995) Gender Articulated: 
Language and the Socially Constructed Self. New York: 
Routledge.
Harrington, Kate, Litosseliti, Pia, Sauntson, Helen and 
Sunderland, Jane (eds) (2008) Gender and Language 
Research Methodologies. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Hellinger, Marlis (1991) ‘Feminist linguistics and linguistic 
relativity’, Working Papers on Language, Gender and 
Sexism, 1(1): 25–37.
Hellinger, Marlis (1995) ‘Language and gender’, in Patrick 
Stevenson (ed.), The German Language and the Real 
World. Oxford: Clarendon. pp. 279–314.
Hellinger, Marlis (1997) ‘The discourse of distortion: inclusive 
language policies and political correctness’, in Friederike 
Braun and Ursula Pasero (eds), Kommunikation von 
Geschlecht – Communication of Gender. Pfaffenweiler: 
Centaurus. pp. 164–82.
Hellinger, Marlis (2004) ‘Empfehlungen für einen geschlech-
tergerechten Sprachgebrauch im Deutschen’, in Karin M. 
Eichhoff-Cyrus (ed.), Adam, Eva und die Sprache: Beiträge 
zur Geschlechterforschung. Mannheim: Dudenverlag. 
pp. 275–91.
Hellinger, Marlis (2006a) ‚Sexist language‘, in Encyclopedia of 
Language and Linguistics. 2nd edn. Vol. XI. Oxford: 
Elsevier. pp. 265–72.
Hellinger, Marlis (2006b) ‘Why Merkel is not enough: on the 
representation of fe/male politicians in German 
newspapers’. Paper presented at IGALA 4, Valencia, Spain.
Hellinger, Marlis and Bierbach, Christine (1993) Eine Sprache 
für beide Geschlechter. Richtlinien für einen nicht-
sexistischen Sprachgebrauch. Bonn: UNESCO.
Hellinger, Marlis and Bussmann, Hadumod (eds) (2001–03) 
Gender Across Languages. The Linguistic Representation of 
Women and Men. 3 Vols. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Hellinger, Marlis and Pauwels, Anne (2007) ‘Language and 
sexism’, in Marlis Hellinger and Anne Pauwels (eds), 
Handbook of Language and Communication: Diversity and 
Change. (= Handbooks of Applied Linguistics, Vol. 9). 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter. pp. 651–84.
Hill, Jane H. (1988) ‘Language, culture, and world view’, in 
Frederick J. Newmeyer, (ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge 
Survey. Vol. IV. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
pp. 14–36.
Holmes, Janet (1995) Women, Men, and Politeness. London: 
Longman. 
Holmes, Janet (2001) ‘A corpus-based view of gender in 
New Zealand English’, in Marlis Hellinger and Hadumod 
Bussmann (eds), Gender Across Languages. The Linguistic 
Representation of Women and Men. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins pp. 115–36.
Holmes, Janet and Meyerhoff, Miriam (eds) (2003) The 
Handbook of Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell.
Hornscheidt, Antje (1998) ‘Grammatik als Ort von 
Geschlechterkonstruktion. Eine kritische Analyse’, in Antje, 
Hornscheidt, Gabriele Jähnert, and Annette Schlichter, 
(eds), Kritische Differenzen – geteilte Perspektiven. Zum 
Verhältnis von Feminismus und Postmoderne. Opladen: 
Westdeutscher Verlag. pp. 140–73.
Hornscheidt, Antje (2002) ‘Die Nicht-Rezeption poststruktura-
listischer Gender- und Sprachtheorien der Feministischen 
Linguistik 
im 
deutschsprachigen 
Raum‘, 
in 
Tamara Faschingbauer (ed.), Neue Ergebnisse der 
empirischen Genderforschung. Hildesheim: Georg Olms. 
pp. 5–51.
Hornscheidt, Antje (2006) Die Sprachliche Benennung von 
Personen aus konstruktivistischer Sicht: Genderspezifizierung 
und ihre Diskursive Verhandlung im Heutigen Schwedisch. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Houdebine, Anne Marie (1989) 'La féminisation des noms de 
métiers en français contemporain‘, in Georges Kassaiï, 
(ed.), Contrastes. La différence sexuelle dans le langage. 
Nice: ADEC. pp. 39–71.
Houdebine-Gravaud, Anne Marie (1998) La féminisation des 
noms de métiers. En Français et dans d‘autres langues. 
Paris: l‘Harmattan. 
Instituto de la Mujer (1989) Propuestas para evitar el sexismo 
en el lenguaje. Madrid: Instituto de la Mujer.
Irmen, Lisa and Köhncke, Astrid (1996) ‘Zur Psychologie des 
“generischen” Maskulinums’, Sprache und Kognition, 15: 
152–66.
Irmen, Lisa and Linner, Ute (2005) 'Die Repräsentation gene-
risch maskuliner Personenbezeichnungen. Eine theoreti-
sche Integration bisheriger Befunde‘, Zeitschrift für 
Psychologie, 213: 167–75.
Kargl, Maria, Wetschanow, Karin, Wodak, Ruth and Perle, 
Néla (1997) Kreatives Formulieren. Anleitungen zu 
geschlechtergerechtem 
Sprachgebrauch. 
Wien: 
Frauenministerium.
Kay, Paul and Kempton, Willett (1984) 'What is the 
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis?‘, American Anthropologist, 86: 
65–79.
Koniuszaniec, Gabriela and Błaszkowska, Hanka (2003) 
'Language and gender in Polish‘, in M. Hellinger and 
H. Bussmann (eds), Gender Across Languages. The 
Linguistic Representation of Women and Men. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. pp. 259–285.
Kotthoff, Helga and Wodak, Ruth (eds) (1997) Communicating 
Gender. Amsterdam: Benjamins.
Lakoff, George (1987) Women, Fire, and Dangerous Things. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lakoff, Robin Tolmach (1975) Language and Woman’s Place. 
New York: Harper and Row.
Lakoff, Robin Tolmach (2004) Language and Woman’s Place. 
Ed. Mary Bucholtz. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lazar, Michelle M. (ed.) (2005) Feminist Critical Discourse 
Analysis: Studies in Gender, Power and Ideology in 
Discourse. London: Palgrave Macmillan.

NON-DISCRIMINATORY LANGUAGE USE
581
Litosseliti, Lia and Sunderland, Jane (eds) (2002) Gender 
Identity and Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins.
McGraw-Hill (1972) Guidelines for Equal Treatment of the 
Sexes in McGraw-Hill Book Company Publications. 
Highstown, NJ: McGraw-Hill.
MacKay, Donald and Fulkerson, David (1979) ‘On the compre-
hension and production of pronouns’, Journal of Verbal 
Learning and Verbal Behavior, 18: 661–73.
Markovitz, Judith (1984) ‘The impact of the sexist language 
controversy and regulation on language in university 
documents’, Psychology of Women Quarterly, 8(4): 337–47.
Miller, Casey and Swift, Kate (1995) The Handbook of 
Non-Sexist Writing. 3rd edn. London: The Women’s Press. 
(1st edn, 1980.)
Mills, Sara (2003) Gender and Politeness. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Mills, Sara (2008) Language and Sexism. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Milroy, Lesley (1987) Language and Social Networks. 
Blackwell: Oxford. 
Motschenbacher, Heiko (2006) “Women and Men like 
Different Things”? Doing gender als Strategie der 
Werbesprache. Marburg: Tectum.
NCTE (1975) Guidelines for Nonsexist Use of Language in 
NCTE Publications. National Council of Teachers of English 
(rev. 1985; rev. 2002).
Newman, Michael (1997) Epicene Pronouns: The Linguistics of 
a Prescriptive Problem. New York: Garland Publishing.
O’Barr, William and Atkins, Bowman K. (1980) '"Women’s 
language” or “powerless language”?’, in Sally. McConnell-
Ginet, Ruth Borker, and Nelly Furman (eds), Women and 
Language in Literature and Society. New York: Praeger. 
pp. 93–110.
Oldenburg, Antje (1998) ‘Von Arzthelfern, Bauschlosserinnen 
und anderen Berufstätigen’, Muttersprache, 108: 67–80.
Pauwels, Anne (1998) Women Changing Language. London: 
Longman.
Pauwels, Anne (2001) ‘Spreading the feminist word: the case 
of the new courtesy title Ms in Australian English’, in Marlis 
Hellinger and Hadumod Bussmann (eds), Gender Across 
Languages. The Linguistic Representation of Women and 
Men. Amsterdam: Benjamins. pp.137–51.
Pauwels, Anne (2003) ‘Linguistic sexism and feminist linguistic 
activism’, in Janet Holmes and Miriam Meyerhoff (eds), The 
Handbook of Language and Gender. Oxford: Blackwell. 
pp. 550–70.
Pauwels, Anne and Winter, Joanne (2004a) ‘Generic pronouns 
and gender-inclusive language reform in the English of 
Singapore and the Philippines’, Australian Review of 
Applied Linguistics, 27(2): 50–62.
Pauwels, Anne and Winter, Joanne (2004b) ‘Gender-inclusive 
language reform in educational writing in Singapore and 
the Philippines: a corpus-based approach’, Asian Englishes. 
An International Journal of the Sociolinguistics of English in 
Asia/Pacific, 7(1): 4–21.
Perry, Ruth (1992) ‘A short history of the term “politically 
correct”’, in Patricia Aufderheide (ed.), Beyond PC: Toward 
a Politics of Understanding. Saint Paul. pp. 71–79.
Peterson, Eric E. (1994) ‘Nonsexist language reform and 
“Political Correctness”’, Women and Language, 17: 6–10.
Prentice, Deborah A. (1994) ‘Do language reforms change our 
way of thinking?’, Journal of Language and Social 
Psychology, 13(1): 3–19.
Pusch, Luise F. (1984) Das Deutsche als Männersprache. 
Frankfurt am, Main: Suhrkamp.
Reiss, Kristina (2007) Gender-Sprachbewusstsein bei 
Jugendlichen in Ost und West. Königstein (Ts): Ulrike Helmer 
Verlag.
Romaine, Suzanne (1999) Communicating Gender. Mahwah, 
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Romaine, Suzanne (2001) 'A corpus-based view of gender in 
British and American English‘, in Marlis Hellinger and 
Hadumod Bussmann (eds), Gender Across Languages. The 
Linguistic Representation of Women and Men. Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins. pp. 153–75. 
Rothmund, 
Jutta 
and 
Scheele, 
Brigitte 
(2004) 
‘Personenbezeichnungsmodelle auf dem Prüfstand. 
Lösungsmöglichkeiten für das Genus-Sexus-Problem auf 
Textebene’, Zeitschrift für Psychologie, 212: 40–54.
Rubin, Donald I., Greene, Kathryn and Schneider, Deirdra 
(1994) 'Adopting gender-inclusive language reforms. 
Diachronic and synchronic variation‘, Journal of Language 
and Social Psychology, 13(2): 91–114.
Sabatini, Alma (1986) Raccomandazioni per un uso non 
sessista della lingua Italiana. Roma: Presidenza del 
Consiglio dei Ministri. 
Schafroth, Elmar (2003) ‘Gender in French: structural proper-
ties, incongruences and asymmetries’, in Marlis Hellinger 
and Hadumod Bussmann (eds), Gender Across Languages. 
The Linguistic Representation of Women and Men. 
Amsterdam: John Benjamins. pp. 87–117.
Schiedt, Margret and Kamber, Isabel (2004) ‘Sprachliche 
Gleichbehandlung in der Schweizer Gesetzgebung: Das 
Parlament macht’s möglich’, in Karin M. Eichhoff-Cyrus 
(ed.), Adam, Eva und die Sprache: Beiträge zur Geschlechterfor-
schung schong. Mannhein: Dudenverlag. pp. 332–48.
Schweizerische Bundeskanzlei (1996) Leitfaden zur sprachli-
chen gleichbehandlung im Deutschen. Bern: Schweizerische 
Bundeskanzlei. (abbreviated version 2006)
Scott, Foresman and Company (1974) Guidelines for Improving 
the Image of Women in Textbooks. Glenview, IL: Scott, 
Foresman and Company. 
Spender, Dale (1980) Man Made Language. London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul.
Stahlberg, Dagmar and Sczesny, Sabine (2001) ‘Effekte des 
generischen Maskulinums und alternativer Sprachformen 
auf den gedanklichen Einbezug von Frauen’, Psychologische 
Rundschau, 52: 131–40.
Sunderland, Jane et al. (2002) ‚From representation towards 
discursive practices: gender in the foreign language text-
book revisited‘, in Lia Litosseliti and Jane Sunderland (eds), 
Gender Identity, Discourse Analysis. Amsterdam: John 
Benjamins. pp. 223–55. 
Swiss Report (1991) Sprachliche Gleichbehandlung von Frau 
und Mann in der Gesetzes- und Verwaltungssprache. 
Bericht einer interdepartementalen Arbeitsgruppe der 
Bundesverwaltung. Bern: Schweizerische Bundeskanzlei.

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
582
Switzer, Jo Young (1990) 'The impact of generic word 
choices: an empirical investigation of age- and sex-related 
differences‘, Sex Roles, 22: 69–82.
Trudgill, Peter (1974) The Social Differentiation of English in 
Norwich. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
UNESCO (1987) Guidelines on Non-Sexist Language. Pour un 
langage non sexiste. (rev. 1999) Paris: UNESCO.
UNESCO (1994) UNESCO 145th Session. Item 5.7.1. Paris.
Werkgroup (1982) Werkgroup Wijziging Beroepsnaming. 
Gevraagd. Amsterdam: Uitgave Ministerie von Sociale 
Zaken en Werkgelegenheid en de Aktiegroup Man Vrouw 
Maatschappi.
Wetschanow, Karin (2002) Geschlechtergerechtes Formulieren. 
Wien: Bundesministerium für Bildung, Wissenschaft und 
Kultur. 
Whorf, Benjamin Lee (1956) Language, Thought and Reality. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wirthgen, Andrea (1999) Political correctness: die "korrigierte“ 
Sprache und ihre Folgen. Universität Duisburg-Essen. 
PDF file. (www.linse.uni-due.de) 
Wodak, Ruth, Feistritzer, Gert, Moosmüller, Silvia and 
Doleschal, Ursula (1987) Sprachliche Gleichbehandlung 
von Frau und Mann. Wien: Bundesministerium für Arbeit 
und Soziales.
Wodak, Ruth (ed.) (1997) Gender and Discourse. London: 
Sage.
Yaguello, Marina (1978) Les mots et les femmes. Paris: Payot.

38
38.1 INTRODUCTION
We begin this chapter with the story of Robert 
Dziekanski, who arrived in Canada as a new 
immigrant from Poland in October 2007. The 
40-year-old man, who had never flown before in 
his life, was to be met by his mother, who had 
migrated earlier and was his sponsor, at Vancouver 
International Airport. Exhausted from the inter-
continental flight and without knowledge of 
English or of how to navigate the arrivals section 
of an international airport, Dziekanski spent almost 
10 hours in the restricted arrivals area, presumably 
waiting to be met by his mother (a record of his 
movements during those 10 hours is available in a 
report released by the Canada Border Services 
Agency after his death (Kooner, 2007)). The immi-
gration officer who conferred landed immigrant 
status on him described him as follows:
[V]isibly fatigued and somewhat disheveled show-
ing signs of impatience consistent with behavior 
displayed after a long flight and frustrations due to 
lack of English language skills. At no time did he 
display any signs of behavior that would be cause 
for concern (2007: 2).
Eventually, Dziekanski became very agitated and 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) 
were called in to deal with him. Not speaking any 
English, Dziekanski remained oblivious to the 
officers’ approach – an obliviousness that was 
interpreted as resistance by the officers. The 
assumption of resistance led to their next action: 
he was shot from behind with a taser gun and 
pinned to the floor by four officers. Within
minutes, Robert Dziekanski died. 
The death of Robert Dziekanski, which was 
videoed by another traveller and made the rounds 
on YouTube, triggered national and international 
outrage. Of the range of issues and debates that 
were linked to Dziekanski’s death (e.g. the exces-
sive use of taser guns by the Canadian police or a 
supposed loss of confidence in the Canadian 
nation as a multicultural, democratic country), the 
issue that we want to focus on here is the degree 
to which Dziekanski’s death is language-related. 
Dziekanski’s most basic human right – the right to 
life – was violated because he found himself in a 
situation where, presumably, he became fundamen-
tally disoriented due to his inability to communi-
cate (we write ‘presumably’ because the report of 
the inquest into Dziekanski’s death (CBC News, 
2008) had not been released at the time of writing 
this chapter in February 2009), and because his 
disorientation was interpreted, by police officers, 
as posing a security threat. While the case clearly 
presents human rights issues that are not related to 
language and communication – most notably the 
use of excessive force – it is the inability to com-
municate in an unfamiliar context that exposed 
Dziekanski and made him a target of police 
violence in the first place. Dziekanski’s case may 
be exceptional on two grounds: first, it resulted in 
his death rather than less grave consequences; 
and, secondly, it received international media 
attention and widespread condemnation. However, 
the circumstances of the case itself are common 
enough in today’s world: millions of people are on 
the move across international borders – either 
voluntarily or involuntarily – and are often thrown 
into situations in which they cannot communicate 
effectively. International border checkpoints, 
such as the international arrivals sections of 
Language, Migration and 
Human Rights
I n g r i d  P i l l e r  a n d  K i m i e  T a k a h a s h i

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
584
international airports, are mostly designed to 
restrict international freedom of movement and 
thus present specific communicative challenges to 
the traveller, the conventions of which are familiar 
only to a small minority of ‘frequent flyers’. Even 
in contexts where the linguistic and communica-
tive challenges of international people movements 
are recognized, lack of resources can still result in 
discrimination against transnational migrants. In 
Dziekanski’s case, for instance, immigration officers 
recognized his lack of English but could not help 
him out by bringing in a Polish interpreter because 
of staffing shortages on the evening shift.
It is the aim of the present chapter to examine 
the interrelationship between language, transna-
tional migration and human rights. We use the 
term ‘transnational migration’ as an umbrella term 
for all forms of human movements across inter-
national borders, both voluntary and involuntary, 
and irrespective of the purpose of the travel and 
the length of the anticipated stay. We begin by 
reviewing the role of language in contemporary 
human rights issues. We note that a significant 
body of research exists on ‘linguistic human 
rights’, i.e. the postulated right to the use of a 
specific language, usually the so-called ‘mother 
tongue’, and is sometimes framed in the discourse 
of human rights. However, while the use of a spe-
cific language is sometimes presented as a human 
right, investigations into the role of language – or 
communication more generally – as an overarch-
ing factor in human rights issues are relatively 
rare, particularly in transnational spaces. Existing 
debates, research and institutional practices often 
seem almost blind to the role of language and 
communication in the social inclusion – or rather 
exclusion – of migrants. There is thus a need for a 
language- and communication-focused approach to 
migrants’ human rights as they cross international 
borders and settle outside their countries of origin. 
In the following sections, we explore the lack 
of communication that results from the inability to 
use a particular language as a human rights issue 
in itself, before moving on to examine the role of 
language and communication in migrants’ human 
rights and their social inclusion in two key tran-
snational spaces – where language and differential 
migrant status powerfully mediate access to 
human rights – employment and health. Our 
reasons for choosing these particular spaces are 
two-fold: first, these are spaces where basic 
human rights and social inclusion are produced or 
denied; secondly, language crucially mediates 
migrants’ access to these spaces – knowing the 
language of the host country enhances access to 
employment opportunities and health care. 
Conversely, lack of proficiency in the right 
language(s) usually invalidates other entry require-
ments, such as prior qualifications and experience. 
We recognize that our focus on employment and 
health in this chapter means that we are not cover-
ing some equally important spaces, particularly 
education and the legal system. We have done so 
because the central language and human rights 
issue is around access, and in order to avoid rep-
etition of the same issue in different contexts, we 
have used examples from these contexts in other 
sections of the chapter. In the final section, we will 
present an example of a language learning pro-
gramme that aims at enhancing migrant access, 
the Australian Adult Migrant English Program 
(AMEP). 
Throughout, we endeavor to illustrate our argu-
ment with international examples. At the same time, 
readers will notice a predominance of Australian 
examples. Apart from the fact that we are most 
familiar with the Australian context, there are good 
reasons to focus on the Australian experience 
when it comes to issues of language and the social 
inclusion of migrants. In contrast to most other 
countries that have received significant numbers of 
transnational migrants in recent history, particu-
larly in Europe, Australia has defined itself as an 
immigrant nation for almost a century (Castles and 
Vasta, 2004; Jupp, 2007). Furthermore, in compari-
son to the USA, another country where immigra-
tion is part of the national imagery, Australia has 
consciously adopted and experimented with state 
intervention to facilitate social inclusion, including 
language programmes (Lo Bianco, 2008; Martin, 
1998). Based on our overview of the AMEP and 
other relevant programmes, we will also sketch out 
a broader framework for the provision of language 
services to migrants, in particular translating and 
interpreting, and multilingual resources.
We begin with an overview of the existing 
literature and present a theoretical framework 
for research into the intersections of language, 
migration and human rights.
38.2  LANGUAGE AND HUMAN RIGHTS: 
A THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(United Nations, 1948) mentions ‘language’ only 
once, in Article 2, proscribing, inter alia, dis-
crimination on the basis of language:
Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms set 
forth in this Declaration, without distinction of any 
kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, 
political or other opinion, national or social origin, 
property, birth or other status [our emphasis].
The authors of the Declaration thus saw language 
and human rights as indirectly related; i.e. the 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
585
linguistic profile of an individual or a community 
may lead to their human rights being denied. 
Language can powerfully mediate access to human 
rights, but the authors of the Universal Declaration 
of Human Rights did not conceive of language as 
mediating access to human rights, nor did they see 
a particular language or a particular proficiency 
level as a human right in itself. 
Examples of the violation of human rights on 
the basis of language are numerous from around 
the world, of course, even if one does not consider 
migration as an additional complicating factor. 
There is the obvious human rights violation of the 
prohibition against speaking or using a particular 
minority language in public that can be found in 
many contexts across the world: for example, the 
prohibition against the public use of any language 
other than Amharic during the regimes of Emperor 
Haile Sellassie and Mengistu in Ethiopia (Hussein, 
2008), or the prohibition against the public use 
of any language other than Persian during the 
Shah’s regime in pre-revolutionary Iran (Dei and 
Asgharzadeh, 2003). Such obvious violations of 
the human rights of speakers of a particular 
language, by regimes that have become notorious 
for their high levels of human rights abuses, are 
probably unsurprising. What may be surprising is 
that discrimination against speakers of minority 
languages occurs even in liberal democracies that 
are committed to upholding the principles 
espoused in the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, and that are generally considered good 
world citizens. Consider equality before the law 
(Article 7) as a basic human right. For instance, 
Pousada (2008) describes how the mandatory use 
of English in the federal courts of Puerto Rico 
means that jury service is restricted to upper-class 
Puerto Ricans, who have the required levels of 
proficiency in English. Many defendants thus 
have their right to a fair trial, where they are tried 
by a jury of their own peers, violated. While there 
is nothing in the law that directly says that eligi-
bility for jury service requires upper-class status, 
the fact that high levels of proficiency in standard 
English only occur amongst this group – as a 
direct result of educational privilege – means that 
language mediates against access to jury service 
for the vast majority of Spanish-speaking Puerto 
Ricans (see also Delanty, Wodak and Jones, 2008, 
for related European case studies).
Even where only one language is involved, not 
speaking the ‘right variety’ may result in the 
denial of a fair trial, as Eades (2000, 2006) shows 
in her meticulous analyses of Aboriginal defend-
ants before Australian courts. While the ways in 
which Aboriginal defendants and non-Aboriginal 
legal counsel, magistrates and judges speak 
English seem, superficially, very similar, different 
discourse and pragmatic conventions often mean 
that Aboriginal defendants are effectively prohibited 
from giving evidence, from presenting their char-
acter in a clear and detailed way, and generally 
from engaging in the trial as a meaningful interac-
tion. Their voices are being silenced because both 
parties are ignorant of each other’s varieties and 
the linguistic and cultural expectations that prevail 
in court.
These examples show that the relationship 
between language and human rights is a complex 
one – it is not only about speakers of a particular 
language being discriminated against but also 
about which particular variety is valued in which 
particular context and which particular linguistic 
practices are associated with access to a particular 
human right. We thus see language as a practice or 
a resource that may enhance or restrict access to 
human rights – or social inclusion more generally. 
With Heller (2007: 2), we see language as ‘a set 
of resources which circulate in unequal ways 
in social networks and discursive spaces, and 
whose meaning and value are socially constructed 
within the constraints of social organizational 
processes, under specific historical conditions’. 
Similarly, abstract human rights, as enshrined in 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, are 
instantiated in specific practices that are socially 
constructed in institutions. The valorization of a 
particular linguistic practice in a particular social 
space or a particular institution pertinent to human 
rights – such as the police and the courts, 
the healthcare system or the education system – 
automatically enhances or restricts access to 
human rights on the basis of having the right sort 
of linguistic proficiency. As Bourdieu (1991: 55) 
puts it: ‘[S]peakers lacking the legitimate compe-
tence are de facto excluded from the social 
domains in which this competence is required, or 
are condemned to silence’.
The best – and probably most universally 
pertinent – example of a linguistic practice that 
mediates access to human rights is literacy. In 
most contemporary societies, literacy mediates 
access to health care, consumer rights, further 
education or employment, to name but a few. 
However, we live in a world where basic literacy 
is a ‘right still denied to nearly a fifth of the 
world’s adult population’ (UNESCO, 2005: 17). 
That means that some 771 million people aged 15 
or above are excluded from the access to educa-
tion, health services, career opportunities and full 
citizenship that literacy affords. 
While we thus see the relationship between 
language and human rights as mediated, a move-
ment for specifically linguistic human rights has 
been gaining ground in recent years that sees a 
much more direct relationship between language 
and human rights. In fact, it sees the right to use a 
particular language as a human right. The concept 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
586
of ‘linguistic human rights’ originates in the 
work of Tove Skutnabb-Kangas (e.g. Skutnabb-
Kangas, 2000, 2001, 2003; Skutnabb-Kangas and 
Phillipson, 1994, 1998), and finds its most com-
prehensive expression in the Universal Declaration 
of Linguistic Rights (Follow-up Committee, 1998). 
The concept of linguistic human rights is charac-
terized by an understanding that sees language 
itself at the core of human rights issues and the 
imposition of a language other than the mother 
tongue, particularly through schooling, as a human 
rights violation. Linguistic human rights are thus 
conceptualized as both a collective and an indi-
vidual right: minority groups are seen as having a 
right to their ancestral tongue, and individuals are 
seen as having a right to their mother tongue. 
While the concept of linguistic human rights 
has been enthusiastically embraced by some non-
governmental organizations and international 
organizations, such as UNESCO, it has been con-
troversial within sociolinguistics. One key criti-
cism of the concept of linguistic human rights has 
been that the understanding of ‘language’ it is 
based upon – a bounded entity that is associated 
with a particular ethnic or national group – is in 
itself the product of a particular language ideology 
that brought the modern nation-state and its colo-
nial relationship with internal (and sometimes 
external) minorities into being (Blommaert, 
2001a; Duchêne and Heller, 2007). As Blommaert 
(2001a: 136) explains:
[W]hat counts is not the existence and distribution 
of languages, but the availability, accessibility and 
distribution of specific linguistic-communicative 
skills such as competence in standard and literate 
varieties of the language. Granting a member of a 
minority group the right to speak his or her mother 
tongue in the public arena does not in itself 
empower him or her. People can be ‘majority’ 
members (e.g. they can speak the language of the 
ruling groups in society) yet they can be thor-
oughly disenfranchised because of a lack of access 
to status varieties of the so-called ‘power language’.
Another central criticism of the concept of lin-
guistic human rights hinges on the way in which 
languages are tied to territory in an essentialist 
fashion. The Universal Declaration of Linguistic 
Rights (Follow-up Committee, 1998), for instance, 
defines a ‘language community’ (to which commu-
nity rights accrue in this framework) as follows:
This Declaration considers as a language commu-
nity any human society established historically in a 
particular territorial space, whether this space be 
recognized or not, which identifies itself as a 
people and has developed a common language as 
a natural means of communication and cultural 
cohesion among its members. The term language 
proper to a territory refers to the language of the 
community historically established in such a space 
(italics in the original; pages not numbered).
Even if one were to cast the theoretical criticisms of 
the concept of linguistic human rights mentioned 
above aside, it is easy to see that the close nexus 
between language rights and territory make lin-
guistic human rights a rather blunt instrument, 
once migration out of the traditional territory of 
the language community is added to the picture 
(Wee, 2007). In the next section, we discuss 
how transnational migration complicates the 
relationship between language and human rights.
38.3  LANGUAGE, HUMAN RIGHTS AND 
TRANSNATIONAL MIGRATION
In the examples we quoted above of language-
mediated access to equality before the law, it was 
the rights of citizens – Puerto Ricans are US citi-
zens and Aboriginal Australians are Australian 
citizens – that were at stake, and there is agree-
ment in principle that a violation occurs if work-
ing-class Puerto Ricans cannot be tried by a jury 
of their peers or if Aboriginal Australians cannot 
give adequate evidence before a court. There is 
also a consensus that the state – i.e. the US and 
Australian states, respectively – have a duty to 
right those wrongs even if there is disagreement as 
to how equality before the law can best be 
achieved for these people in the most efficient and 
equitable manner.
However, now consider the following case. In 
1992, Chika Honda arrived in Australia as a 
Japanese tourist on what was supposed to be a 
five-day trip. When heroin was discovered in her 
suitcase and that of four other members of her 
tour, she was first charged with and then convicted 
of drug smuggling and sentenced to up to 15 years 
in prison. She served 10 and a half of these in a 
Melbourne jail and was repatriated to Japan in 
2003. Chika Honda has always maintained her 
innocence and has, after her release, attracted 
substantial support, both in Australia and Japan, 
for a retrial to have herself exonerated (Hyland, 
2008). The argument that a miscarriage of justice 
may have occurred rests mostly on language 
issues and cultural misunderstandings. An entry 
on one of her support websites writes:
They [the suspects/defendants] could not speak 
enough English to communicate with their Legal 
Aid lawyers, let alone give proper evidence in their 
own defence. Worse, police had found it hard 
to find interpreters to conduct interviews and 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
587
the result was a mess: meanings of questions 
and answers were so mangled in translation that, 
like a house built on quicksand, any trial relying on 
those interviews would be hopelessly compro-
mised by its shaky foundations (http://www.usp.
com.au/fpss/news-japan13b.html; last accessed on 
08/02/2009).
In a detailed investigation of one aspect of the 
judiciary process – the cautions (i.e. the Australian 
equivalent of the Miranda warnings in the USA) 
being read to and interpreted for the five suspects 
when they were first detained at Melbourne 
Airport – Nakane (2007) identified six problems 
that disadvantaged the suspects before the law. To 
begin with, the provision of interpreters for non-
English-speaking suspects is a legal requirement 
in Australia. However, the necessity to question 
five Japanese-speaking suspects at once meant 
that five interpreters were needed at the same 
time. Even in a city the size of Melbourne – and 
for a language such as Japanese, which is the most 
widely-learnt foreign language in Australia, the 
language of a significant immigrant community 
and the language of one of Australia’s major 
trading partners – this proved to be difficult. Only 
one accredited interpreter was available, two 
interviews were interpreted by paraprofessionals 
(accredited to translator level) and the accredita-
tion status of two interpreters was unknown (and 
no longer retrievable when the issue of interpreter 
qualifications became a topic of concern during 
the trial). In addition to the lack of qualifications 
of the interpreters, Nakane (2007) found that even 
professional accreditation did not guarantee that 
the interpreters could handle the challenges pre-
sented by interpreting the cautions in a police 
interview. These challenges included the following: 
1 The police officers delivered the cautions in 
segments that were too long for the interpreters 
to interpret accurately.
2 The police officers made arbitrary decisions 
about turn boundaries, which resulted in 
omissions in the interpretations.
3 The importance of comprehension checks was 
underestimated, both by the police officers and 
by the interpreters.
4 The police officers showed no awareness that the 
transformation of a written text into interpreted 
dialogic speech might be difficult.
5 The police officers treated the cautions as 
‘rituals’ rather than ‘real’ communication.
As a result of these shortcomings, some of the 
suspects failed to understand that they were under 
arrest and considered their situation less serious 
than it was, including failing to seek immediate 
assistance from their embassy. Case studies of 
similar language and communication issues faced 
by transnational migrants in judiciary processes in 
Europe and North America can, for instance, be 
found in the work of Kamali (2008), Trinch 
(2006) and Trinch and Berk-Seligson (2002).
There can be little doubt that language – i.e. 
the suspects’, and later defendants’, lack of profi-
ciency in English as well as the interpreters’ lack 
of competence in the genre of the cautions and 
police interviews – meant that these tourists’ 
human rights to equality before the law was vio-
lated. (See also Blommaert (2001b) for an exten-
sive analysis of limited linguistic proficiency 
resulting in narrative inequalities in the asylum 
procedure in Belgium.) The example shows how 
transnational migration complicates considera-
tions of the relationship between language and 
human rights in four ways:
1 A larger number of languages become involved 
and the language and communication needs of 
transnational migrants can be very diverse. 
2 Meeting the needs of an increasingly linguistically-
diverse population has resource implications.
3 The very act of migrating is likely to throw 
migrants into a wider range of contexts where 
their human rights may be compromised or – to 
put it differently – migration generates more 
situations where access to human rights is medi-
ated by language proficiency and communicative 
competence.
4 The international human rights framework is 
set up in such a way that states are charged 
with protecting human rights. However, state 
protection is mediated by citizenship and non-
citizens – i.e. the vast majority of transnational 
migrants – tend to fall between the cracks of 
human rights provisions.
In sum, transnational migration increases the 
complexity of access relationships exponentially 
by bringing a wider range of linguistic proficien-
cies into contact with a wider range of institu-
tional practices, some of which are specifically 
designed to restrict the movement of international 
migration. Indeed, the human right to ‘freedom of 
movement and residence’ (Article 13) is restricted 
by the phrase ‘within the borders of each State’. 
This restriction points to a significant limitation of 
‘universal’ human rights: i.e. access to human 
rights is usually mediated by citizenship. Maher 
(2002: 19) points out that: 
[…] while the human rights regime is international, 
its greatest influence has been to establish stand-
ards for states’ obligations vis-à-vis their own citi-
zenries. Hence, even in Western states that are 
vocal champions of human rights, policymakers 
debate the extent to which they are responsible 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
588
for protecting the full range of human rights for 
noncitizen migrants, particularly migrants lacking 
state authorisation. 
The extent to which the state is under an obligation 
to ensure equal access for non-citizens and the 
extent to which resources of the state should be 
diverted away from citizens is often a matter of 
fierce contestation and mediated by other state 
interests. Rottman, Fariss and Poe (2009), for 
instance, demonstrate, in a detailed analysis of the 
outcomes of applications for asylum before US 
asylum officers and immigration judges, that deci-
sion makers were – in addition to obvious and 
legislated humanitarian considerations – also 
guided by national economic, military and security 
interests. Of particular relevance for the concerns 
of this chapter is the finding that since the terrorist 
attacks of ‘9/11’, Arabic speakers were less likely 
to have their asylum applications accepted than 
speakers of any other language:
Most importantly, physical integrity rights, which 
are supposed to be a central concern in the deci-
sion to grant asylum, seem less important after 
2001 in asylum officers’ decisions and asylum 
applicants from Arabic-speaking countries were 
more likely to have had their claims denied after 
the terrorists – who had similar heritage – struck 
on September 11 of that year (Rottman et al., 
2009: 29).
The question of the obligations of states towards 
non-citizens also ties in with the question of 
‘critical mass’. In the example above of the 
Japanese drug-smugglers detained in Australia, 
we pointed out that even speakers of Japanese, a 
major international language, the language of a 
powerful nation-state and one of the world’s larg-
est economies, and a language that is relatively 
widely-known in Australia, were disadvantaged 
linguistically in their encounter with the Australian 
legal system. It does not take much to imagine 
how speakers of smaller or lesser-known lan-
guages might fare. May (2005: 326) has asked 
‘when there is a sufficient number of these speak-
ers to warrant language protection’ (italics in 
original). This observation is not purely hypo-
thetical as the following case shows. Since May 
2007, twelve refugee families from the small 
West-African nation of Togo have been resettled 
in the regional town of Ballarat (about 88,000 
inhabitants) in Victoria as part of Australia’s 
Humanitarian Settlement Program (Piper, 2009). 
When the first 10 families were due to arrive, the 
local planning committee was not advised of the 
languages these new entrants would speak until 
shortly before their arrival. Finding out what lan-
guage a person from Togo speaks is not simply a 
matter of googling it: with three official languages 
(Ewe, Kabiya, French), 39 other recognized lan-
guages and a literacy rate of less than 40 per cent, 
the linguistic repertoire of an individual Togolese 
is impossible to predict on the basis of country 
information. Mindful of the fact that speakers of 
any West African language would be few and far 
between in Ballarat, a selection criterion for the 
initial 10 families included proficiency in French. 
However, ‘[a]s it was often only the head of 
household who spoke French, […], this led to 
problems communicating with other family mem-
bers, in particular the women’. (Piper, 2009: 27). 
Another positive twist to the story is that it 
emerged that two Ewe speakers from Ghana hap-
pened to live in Ballarat and ‘they were encour-
aged to train and register with language service 
provider(s)’ (Piper, 2009: 27). Australia’s humani-
tarian settlement programme is exemplary and – 
by international standards as far as refugee 
resettlement goes – comparatively well-resourced. 
However, despite this fact and considerable lin-
guistic planning (the choice of French-speaking 
refugees for resettlement) and linguistic good luck 
(two Ewe-speaking residents in Ballarat), the 
challenges to the social inclusion – access to edu-
cation, employment, health care, including torture 
and trauma counselling – of these 10 families are 
formidable on linguistic grounds alone. 
Before we move on to explore the linguistic 
challenges faced by transnational migrants in two 
specific arenas of human rights, i.e. employment 
and health, we want to highlight one further aspect 
of communication in transnational contexts – that 
is, the inability to communicate as a human rights 
issue per se.
38.4  COMMUNICATION AS A 
HUMAN RIGHT
As we explained above, we see language as 
mediating access to human rights and we do not 
see that the idea of having a right to a particular 
language (as in the linguistic human rights con-
cept) is tenable. However, while there cannot be a 
right to a particular language, communication 
itself is a human right and being placed in a 
situation where one cannot communicate is a 
human rights concern, particularly as it is closely 
linked to the gross human rights violations 
involved in slavery and human trafficking. Human 
trafficking itself has emerged as an increasing 
human rights concern linked to transnational 
migration, and so in this section we focus on 
coerced transnational migration. We start by look-
ing back at the transatlantic slave trade. bell hooks 
(1994: 169) imagines the terror on the slave ships 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
589
that brought Africans to the Americas as closely 
linked to language:
When I imagine the terror of Africans on board 
slave ships, on auction blocks, inhabiting the unfa-
miliar architecture of plantations, I consider that 
this terror extended beyond fear of punishment, 
that it resided also in the anguish of hearing a 
language they could not comprehend. The very 
sound of English had to terrify. […] How to 
remember, to invoke this terror? How to describe 
what it must have been like for Africans whose 
deepest bonds were historically forged in the place 
of shared speech to be transported abruptly to a 
world where the very sound of one’s mother 
tongue had no meaning?
Terrors such as those imagined by bell hooks 
for the victims of the transatlantic slave trade are 
as real in the twenty-first century as they were 
200 years ago. In early 2009, the plight of the 
Rohingya of Burma briefly made the news in 
some international media. The Rohingya are an 
indigenous Muslim minority in Burma, who are 
not recognized as Burmese citizens by the Burmese 
regime and who are subjected to grave human 
rights abuses (http://www.rohingya.org/; last 
accessed 01/03/2009). When a couple of boat 
loads of Rohingya refugees arrived in Thailand in 
December 2008, they were detained, beaten, and 
then put back on boats, and towed out to sea, 
where they were finally cast adrift. Interviews 
with some of the survivors who were later rescued 
off Aceh, more dead than alive (broadcast on 
Al Jazeera; http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9p-
WyHJb_T4; last accessed 01/03/2009), show that 
their utter incomprehension of what was being 
done to them was aggravating their situation. One 
of the survivors, interviewed on Al Jazeera TV, 
stated that it was only his belief that God ‘compre-
hends’ that had kept him alive. For the Rohingya, 
and many other victims of systematic human 
rights’ abuses around the world, the inability to 
communicate (to understand the threats of the 
soldiers) is not only a human rights concern in an 
immediate situation – i.e. being subject to military 
brutality, but also one in the broader context of 
finding a voice – and therefore raising concern 
and potential support, in the wider media world. 
The human rights situation of the Rohingya, both 
inside and outside Burma, is catastrophic (http://
www.amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/news/
myanmar-minority-group-peril-20090202; last 
accessed 01/03/2009). Yet, in a world where the 
plight of so many is competing for attention, they 
are hardly noticed on the international stage and 
are even ignored on the regional level (http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/asia-pacific/7916254.stm; 
last accessed 01/03/2009). In January 2009, when 
the Rohingya refugee crisis hit a new high after 
the discovery of the boat off Aceh mentioned 
above, the only international media outlet that 
gained access to the survivors and considered their 
story newsworthy enough for broadcast was 
Al Jazeera. Even on Al Jazeera, the interviewees 
remained nameless and were identified only by 
their age (‘20-year old’; ‘23-year old’). While this 
is a significant communicative aspect of any 
human rights discussion, we consider inequalities 
in media access outside the scope of this chapter 
and will not pursue them further here (see, for 
instance, Baker et al., 2008; Pavarala and Malik, 
2007; Wodak and Van Dijk, 2000 for useful 
overviews).
The fact that lack of proficiency in the majority 
language can be a constituting factor in contempo-
rary slavery was recently recognized in an 
Australian court trial in which the defendant was 
found guilty of holding slaves because ‘while the 
women were not kept under lock and key, they 
could not run away as they had no money, 
no passport, limited English and were told to 
avoid immigration authorities’ (AAP, 2006, our 
emphasis).
Humans are social creatures and being able to 
communicate with one’s fellow humans is clearly 
a basic human right – even if it is one that has 
largely gone unnoticed by scholars and activists 
alike, perhaps because it usually goes hand in 
hand with more obvious human rights violations. 
In the examples of slaves and boat people quoted 
above, their inability to comprehend what was 
done to them – and to communicate – is an aspect 
of a much larger atrocity. In such cases, it is prob-
ably strategically ineffective to point to communi-
cation as a human right because it is likely to be 
perceived as a minor infringement compared to 
the fear for one’s life, the brutality and the starva-
tion. However, communication needs to be recog-
nized as a human right to campaign effectively 
against cases such as the following, which occurred 
in Australia and the UK – countries committed to 
upholding human rights – in their endeavour 
to deal with asylum seekers who have made it into 
the country: ‘unauthorized arrivals’ in the bureau-
cratic terminology of Australia. For instance, 
Aladdin Sisalem, a Kuwait-born Palestinian who 
tried to reach Australia via Indonesia in order 
to seek asylum there, got stuck in an ‘off-
shore processing centre’ in Papua New Guinea. 
In July 2003, when Sisalem had been in the deten-
tion centre for about a year, the Australian author-
ities were preparing to close down the centre and 
all other inmates were resettled, either in Australia 
or New Zealand. However, Sisalem’s case was 
not yet resolved at the time and he was left 
behind as the only inmate for another 10 months 
before he was finally granted an Australian visa 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
590
(http://www.safecom.org.au/sisalem.htm; 
last 
accessed 2009–03–01). When he was finally 
released, he had this to say about the company he 
had kept for 10 months: ‘Honey, a stray cat […] 
was the only company I had since I was left alone 
in detention ten months ago’ (Jackson, 2004). 
Even in cases where other detainees were present 
in detention centres, detainees from different lan-
guage and national backgrounds may not necessar-
ily have been able to communicate. The violation 
entailed in detention without communication is 
most powerfully symbolized by detainees sewing 
up their own lips in a desperate bid to draw atten-
tion to their plight (Cox and Minahan, 2004). 
It is not only detention that may make it impos-
sible to communicate with others around you, as 
can be seen in the UK’s policy of regionalization, 
which is an attempt to disperse asylum seekers 
away from London. For instance, Suleiman Dialo, 
an asylum seeker from Guinea, was sent to 
Newcastle in 2000, while his claim for asylum 
was being assessed. One-and-a-half years later his 
application was refused and he was awaiting 
deportation back to Guinea when he committed 
suicide. In the book Human Cargo, the journalist 
Caroline Moorehead (Moorehead, 2006: 129) 
describes Dialo’s case as follows:
This is not a plaintive tale about a cruel bureauc-
racy condemning a vulnerable young man to 
death; rather, it is a story about the loneliness and 
fear which are common to asylum-seekers every-
where, made worse perhaps in Dialo’s case by the 
fact that his native language was Fula, which is 
spoken across parts of West Africa, and that there 
were no other known Fula speakers in the whole 
of north-east England; that his French was very 
poor and that he spoke scarcely a sentence of 
English; and that, in all his childhood in Guinea, he 
had never learnt to read or write. Signposts, let-
ters, instructions, telephone calls, the television 
and radio, ordinary, daily conversation – none of 
this meant much to him in England; and his sense 
of aloneness was both overwhelming and shock-
ing to him. […] ‘He didn’t ever really understand 
what was happening to him. […] The world about 
him had shrunk to almost nothing.’
In sum, finding oneself in a situation where one 
cannot communicate is maybe not particularly 
uncommon for transnational migrants and particu-
larly for refugees. Even so, it has yet to be recog-
nized as a human rights issue. The only way to 
address some of the loneliness of refugees – as 
involuntary migrants – is to recognize the grave 
consequences of the inability to communicate in a 
situation that has many other characteristics of 
instability and exclusion and to consider family 
and community resettlement. Of the few countries 
in the world that have an official refugee resettle-
ment programme – Australia, Canada, Finland, 
New Zealand, Norway, Sweden and the USA – the 
programmes of some of these countries (Australia, 
Canada, the USA) are large and flexible enough 
that those accepted for resettlement can, in most 
cases, find a community of their own language 
background if they so wish. However, others have 
had to be more deliberate in their attempt to avoid 
isolating newly-resettled refugees (Moorehead, 
2006: 266–80). We will describe one such reset-
tlement programme – of Dinka from the Sudan in 
the Finnish city of Oulu – in the next section, 
where it also serves to launch our discussion of 
the role of language in transnational migrants’ 
access to employment.
38.5 EMPLOYMENT
In her discussion of community resettlement men-
tioned above, Moorehead (2006: 266–80) describes 
a community of 71 Dinka from Southern Sudan 
resettled in Oulu, a city of 123,000 inhabitants in 
Finland. The Finnish resettlement programme is 
generous and the Dinka felt blessed to be safe and 
to be assisted generously. At the same time, their 
dependence on welfare and their inability to find 
employment was a constant topic. 
As they know well, as they tell each other every 
day, of the 250 refugees who were resettled in 
Oulu before them – Iraqis and Iranians, Bosnians 
and Somalis, Afghans and Burmese – only two 
have found work, and both as interpreters for 
social workers. Among the 71 Sudanese are teach-
ers, electricians, nurses, farmers and university 
students. Talking about their lives, they say that 
they had simply assumed that resettlement would 
bring education, and with education would come 
work and a future. Now, it seemed, they would 
learn Finnish but not much else. They had never 
imagined, never conceived it possible, that there 
might be a life without an occupation. “We watch 
television, we eat, we sleep,” said Malish. “We 
visit people. And we sit. This is really useless for 
me. I had a dream. It was about how I would work, 
and learn things, and become someone. If I don’t 
succeed in my dream, I don’t know how my life 
will be. My dream is dead. […]’ (Moorehead, 
2006: 274).
The experience of the Dinka in Oulu – the 
death of dreams and the waste of human potential 
– is not uncommon for transnational migrants 
across the world: many transnational migrants 
have a hard time finding employment, and partic-
ularly employment at their level. The experience 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
591
of unemployment and underemployment tends to 
be more common for transnational migrants than 
for the native-born. In Australia, for instance, even 
during the period of low unemployment and 
labour and skills shortages that characterized 
much of the first decade of the twenty-first cen-
tury, the unemployment rate of recent migrants 
(5.5%) was considerably higher than that of the 
Australian-born population (4.1%) (Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, 2008). Furthermore, these 
statistics only reflect unemployment – not under-
employment. The experience of un- and underem-
ployment affects different groups of migrants 
differently. Within the group of recent migrants to 
Australia, there are stark differences according to 
visa class: while the unemployment for skilled 
migrants is 4.7%, the one for family reunion 
migrants is 7.5%, and the one for humanitarian 
entrants (i.e. refugees accepted for resettlement 
from UNHCR camps) is not published (Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, 2008).
The Report on the Labour Force Status and other 
Characteristics of Recent Migrants (Australian 
Bureau of Statistics, 2008) also provides evidence 
for the role of proficiency in English in finding 
employment. Table 38.1 lists the unemployment 
rates for four levels of self-reported English 
proficiency. As can be seen, as proficiency in 
English goes down, the unemployment rate 
goes up.
Another indicator of the role of proficiency in 
English can be gleaned from the fact that, of 
recent migrants, those born in an English-speaking 
country were more likely to employed (88%) than 
those from non-English-speaking countries (76%) 
(Australian Bureau of Statistics, 2008). Finally, 
35% of recent migrants reported that language 
difficulties were the main obstacle they experi-
enced in finding work. In sum, numerous reports 
from around the world suggest that transnational 
migrants face significant social exclusion through 
their difficulties in finding employment or employ-
ment at their level – the human right to work 
(Article 23). In this section, we ask how language 
mediates access to employment for transnational 
migrants and focus on two aspects: namely, 
lack of proficiency in the majority language and 
‘accent-ceiling’.
Limited proficiency in the majority language is 
one of the main barriers to employment faced by 
transnational migrants (see, for instance, Adib and 
Guerrier, 2003; Alcorso, 2003; Colic-Peisker, 
2002, 2005; Dávila, 2008; Masterman-Smith and 
Pocock, 2008). A migrant fitter and turner in 
Australia, interviewed by Masterman-Smith and 
Pocock (2008), describes his experience:
I have tried to apply for many jobs in that field of 
fitter and turner but the requirements are with the 
English. They have to be like high standard of 
English [sic] … and this is the difficulty I have had 
in the past. I’ve been to (over 20) interviews with 
different companies regarding a job but I haven’t 
been successful and I think the main problem 
would have been the English. 
However, even if migrants acquire a functional 
or even advanced level of proficiency in the local 
language, they are often still discriminated against 
on the basis of their accent. For example, Dávila 
(2008) reports how the accent of Latino immi-
grant workers is constantly problematized by 
native speakers of English in US workplaces, 
sometimes causing enormous emotional stress. 
Although the migrants in her study were highly 
educated and spoke English well, they experienced 
downward occupational mobility. Furthermore, 
they felt they were constantly harassed for their 
accent, as described by a university graduate from 
the Dominican Republic: 
My boss, she’s the wife of the owner. She’s always 
complaining around me because she can’t under-
stand me. She says ‘I don’t know what you are 
talking about!’ Or, ‘Say it again’ (3 times). It’s so 
rude. Because she doesn’t try to understand me 
either. (Dávila, 2008: 365)
In spite of gaining fluency in English, migrants’ 
accents seem perpetually to hinder their ability to 
attain the professional positions they seek. As we 
have pointed out elsewhere (Piller and Takahashi, 
in press), in a context where racism has largely 
become invisible and a majority of White people 
consider themselves and their societies to be non-
racist or post-racist (Hill, 2008), linguistic dis-
crimination can sometimes substitute for racial or 
ethnic discrimination. (See Krzyzanowski and 
Wodak (2008) for an insightful study of institu-
tional and everyday racism in the Austrian con-
text.) Racial and/or ethnic discrimination are often 
illegal and individual employers may genuinely 
feel themselves to be non-racists. Linguistic dis-
crimination, however, is often a commonsense prop-
osition, and it ‘just so happens’ that non-standard 
Table 38.1 Self-reported English 
proficiency and unemployment rates 
(adapted from Australian Bureau of 
Statistics, 2008)
Self-reported level of proficiency 
in English
Unemployment rate
English spoken very well
7.0
English spoken well
8.7
English not spoken well
4.9
English not spoken
23.1

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
592
speakers – people ‘whose English isn’t good 
enough’ – usually happen to be minority mem-
bers, and, even more importantly for our discus-
sion, transnational migrants. (See Lippi-Green 
(1997) for an excellent overview of linguistic 
discrimination in the USA.) ‘English has a colour’, 
as Creese and Kambere (2003) put it in their 
exploration of the settlement experiences of 
female migrants from Africa in Canada.
A good example of how language discrimina-
tion can work at the micro level of everyday 
workplace interactions comes from Barrett’s 
(2006) workplace ethnography in a Mexican res-
taurant in Texas. To begin with, the researcher 
found that, in that restaurant, jobs that required 
interactions with customers (who are predomi-
nantly Anglo-Americans), such as wait staff and 
managers, were overwhelmingly taken up by 
Anglo-American staff. By contrast, backstage 
roles in the kitchen were predominantly filled with 
Spanish-speaking migrants from Mexico or 
Guatemala. In addition to the obvious segregation 
of roles on the basis of status as migrant or native-
born, Anglo managers frequently gave directives 
to Spanish speakers in what they thought was 
Spanish but was really ‘Mock Spanish’ 
(Hill, 1999) – an invented language that sounds 
Spanish to English speakers. Unsurprisingly, 
Mock Spanish was mostly incomprehensible to 
the real Spanish speakers and directives delivered 
in Mock Spanish tended to be misinterpreted. 
However, when a directive failed, Anglo managers 
never considered their limited use of Spanish as 
the cause of miscommunication but ‘almost 
always interpreted [the miscommunication] on the 
basis of racist stereotypes of Spanish speakers as 
lazy, indignant, uncooperative, illiterate, or unin-
telligent’ (Barrett, 2006: 163–4). The researcher 
argues that because Mock Spanish does not serve 
as an effective communication mode, it mainly 
functions to achieve the racial subordination of 
Latino workers. Nevertheless, managers do not 
consider the restaurant as a racist place, and Anglo 
employees often regard their use of any Spanish as 
‘an index of egalitarian attitudes towards Latinos 
and by extension, general sympathy with minority 
groups’ (p. 165).
The issue of accent as a discriminatory tool in 
the workplace is not only relevant to migrants who 
are racially marked but also among those who 
may be ‘invisible’ migrants (Farrell, 2008). For 
instance, Colic-Peisker (2005) found that, in 
Australia, migrants from the former Yugoslavia 
were not subjected to ‘prejudicial gazes’ in public 
spaces because of their European backgrounds. 
Being White in anglophone but multi-ethnic 
Australia meant being invisible as a migrant and 
could be an advantage in social interactions, as 
this Yugoslavia-born cab driver explains:
One day a mature lady entered my cab in South 
Perth and said: ‘I always only call “Black and White 
Taxis” [a smaller taxi company in Perth] because 
“Swan Taxis” they’re all strangers, Arabs, who-
ever. … You cannot talk to them, they speak poor 
English’. I said, ‘Well, my English is not the 
best either.’ She gave me a look sideways and said: 
‘At least you’re the right colour.’ (Colic-Peisker, 
2005: 620) 
The search for employment and economic 
opportunities has always held first place among 
the many reasons why humans choose to migrate, 
and many migrants measure the success of their 
migration in economic terms (see, for example 
Ong, 1998). Likewise, receiving societies tend to 
measure successful settlement largely in economic 
terms. Indeed, employment can be considered key 
to social inclusion as economic well-being power-
fully impacts all other dimensions of human life 
including health, as we will discuss in the next 
section. As we have seen in this section, while 
limited proficiency dramatically limits access to 
employment, increased fluency of non-native 
speakers in the local language does not automati-
cally lead to access to careers consistent with quali-
fications and experience, as such access tends to 
be mediated by a range of factors including accent 
and race.
38.6 HEALTH
Being discriminated against in the workplace, as 
in the cases discussed in the previous section, 
makes migrants sick, as, for instance, Vahedi 
(1996) demonstrated in his study of Turkish blue-
collar workers in Germany. As a general back-
ground remark, it is important to note that – despite 
popular images of healthy, happy ‘guest workers’ 
– the health of migrants has been found to be 
worse than that of the native-born population in a 
wide range of international contexts (Solé-Auró 
and Crimmins, 2008). This is true despite the fact 
that good health tends to be an access criterion for 
most forms of legal transnational migration and 
health screenings tend to be used to control migra-
tion at the entry level (e.g. Hilsdon, 2006; Wolffers, 
Verghis and Marin, 2003).
The relatively poorer health of migrants than of 
the native born is the result of a range of issues 
that may or may not be related to language and 
communication. Among the reasons that are not 
language- and communication-related are the fact 
that relatively more migrants are employed in 
workplaces where occupational health and safety 
violations are of concern. A prime example would 
be the abattoirs of the Western world, the harsh 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
593
working conditions of which have been the focus 
of labour and immigrant rights activists from 
Sinclair’s (1906) novel about the plight of 
Lithuanian workers in the stockyards of Chicago 
to Schlosser’s (2002) documentation of the harsh 
conditions and frequent workplace injuries in 
contemporary meat-processing plants in rural 
America. Even under less gruelling conditions, 
workplace discrimination can make migrant 
workers sick, as demonstrated by Vahedi (1996). 
Furthermore, refugees are one group of transna-
tional migrants who may suffer from a larger 
number of preexisting conditions, often resulting 
from torture and/or trauma. In sum, there are some 
significant aspects that make it more likely that 
migrants have higher health needs than the native-
born population and there may be non-linguistic 
reasons, related to visa status or economic status, 
that may mediate their access to appropriate 
health care. However, there is also a range of 
linguistic reasons that mediate migrants’ access 
to health care. These include lower health 
literacy and language difficulties in interactions in 
medical contexts. We provide examples for each 
in turn.
‘Health literacy’ refers to ‘[t]he ability to 
access, understand, evaluate and communicate 
information as a way to promote, maintain and 
improve health in a variety of settings across the 
life-course’ (Rootman and Gordon-El-Bihbety, 
2008: 11). The authors of a 2008 report into health 
literacy in Canada found that being a recent immi-
grant and having a mother tongue other than 
English or French had a strong negative impact on 
health literacy (Rootman and Gordon-El-Bihbety, 
2008). Enhancing the health literacy of migrant 
populations needs significant effort, as Griffiths, 
Quan and Procter (2005) describe. They report on 
a project to improve access to mental health 
services for asylum seekers from Afghanistan 
living in rural Australia. This is a group with a 
high prevalence of depression and other mental 
health issues and, at the same time, a group 
unlikely to have much access to mental health 
services. The ‘no more mualagh’ project – 
mualagh is a Dari word for ‘deep sad feeling like 
being suspended in the air’ – aimed to enhance 
mental health outcomes for this population, and, 
at the same time: 
to pilot, evaluate and report on a model of devel-
oping multilingual information on depression and 
the safe use of antidepressant medication with 
isolated and vulnerable communities (Griffiths 
et al., 2005: 7).
The intervention model adopted by the research 
team from Multicultural Mental Health Australia 
was based on the assumptions that:
• healthcare workers needed to learn from Afghan 
consumers about their perspectives on mental 
health
• Afghan consumers needed to learn from each 
other about practical issues in coping with 
mental health issues
• Afghan consumers also needed to learn from 
healthcare workers about the role of health pro-
viders in Australia, general and specific aspects 
of the healthcare system and the availability and 
use of interpreters.
On the basis of these reciprocal engagements, the 
research team eventually produced three resources: 
(1) a factsheet in Dari about mental health aimed 
at Afghan consumers, (2) a factsheet about the 
specific needs and expectations of Afghan patients 
aimed at healthcare providers, and (3) an audio-
tape in Dari about mental health issues (the latter 
to address the relatively low literacy rate, even in 
the first language, among this population). 
Griffiths, Quan and Procter (2005) provided a 
useful checklist on how to develop health literacy 
materials for and with linguistically- and culturally-
diverse populations. It is particularly the recipro-
cal nature of this project that made it effective in 
contrast to some other multilingual resources used 
internationally. (See, for instance, Collins and 
Slembrouck (2006) for a detailed analysis of the 
limited effectiveness of multilingual consultation 
manuals in a Belgium clinic.)
Even where second language speakers have 
access to appropriate healthcare services, the 
quality of the interaction may be such that they are 
not receiving adequate care. Roberts et al. (2005) 
analysed interactions between linguistically-
diverse patients and GPs in 19 surgeries in the 
London area and found that 20% of all the 
recorded interactions contained misunderstand-
ings. These misunderstandings resulted from four 
different linguistic areas: (1) pronunciation and 
word stress; (2) intonation and speech delivery; 
(3) grammar, vocabulary and lack of contextual 
information; and (4) style of presentation. Style of 
presentation problems included patients who said 
very little about what their problem was or 
patients who overloaded the interaction with 
numerous topics, which seemed unconnected to 
the GP. The authors recommend awareness-raising 
for GPs and training in identifying miscommuni-
cation resulting from different ways of using 
language.
38.7 ENHANCING ACCESS
In this chapter we have sketched out how language 
mediates access to human rights in some key 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
594
transnational arenas. In this final section, we pro-
vide applied perspectives on the ways in which the 
language and communication needs of transna-
tional migrants can be addressed. We start with a 
discussion of language-teaching options for 
migrants and then move on to a more holistic 
provision of multilingual services.
‘Migrants need to learn the local language’ is a 
commonsense proposition in many international 
contexts. States differ, though, in the degree to 
which they place the burden for language learning 
on the shoulders of migrants or take on some of 
that burden. Over recent decades, most states have 
assumed that it is the migrants’ own responsibility 
to learn the new language and very few countries 
have adopted a national strategy for migrant 
language learning. Australia is probably the only 
country in the world that has had a national 
language learning programme for migrants for 
60 years now (Lo Bianco, 2008; Martin, 1998). 
English tuition for non-English-speaking migrants 
to Australia has been provided through the Adult 
Migrant English Program (AMEP) since 1948. In 
contrast to most other countries around the world 
that have seen significant immigration, Australia 
has for a long time chosen to take a pragmatic 
approach to the language needs of non-English-
speaking migrants. Instead of ignoring the lan-
guage needs of migrants or making language 
learning an individual responsibility, Australia 
recognized, with the introduction of the AMEP, a 
federally-funded language learning programme, 
that a society must assist newcomers in learning a 
new language if it wants to avoid the development 
of groups permanently excluded from the main-
stream. Free English tuition to new arrivals as a 
way to facilitate their social inclusion as well as 
their economic productivity was, for a long time, 
an internationally unique feature of Australian 
immigration policy.
The AMEP started out in the immediate after-
math of World War II as a relatively small English 
tuition programme on board ships during the long 
voyage from Europe to Australia and, on-shore, as 
a language programme in a large migrant recep-
tion centre of the time, Bonegilla in Victoria. 
From these humble beginnings, AMEP has devel-
oped into a nationwide programme that, at the 
beginning of the twenty-first century, provides 
English tuition to over 30,000 new migrants per 
year. The language-learning needs of adults and 
their workplaces resulted in a number of early 
innovations in language teaching that have since 
been adopted around the world. The AMEP devel-
oped the ‘Australian Situational Method’, which 
consisted of three focal points for instruction: 
namely, social phrases, grammatical structures 
and Australian culture. Delivery options were 
quickly expanded beyond the classroom and have 
come to include workplace language training, 
home-tutor schemes and distance education provi-
sions. Flexible delivery options and responsive-
ness to the changing language needs of changing 
migrant groups have become a hallmark of 
AMEP.
AMEP is nowadays delivered in about 
250 locations around the country and, in order to 
ensure consistency across the country, AMEP 
adopted a national curriculum, the Certificates in 
Written and Spoken English (CSWE), in the early 
1990s. The CSWE was specifically developed for 
AMEP and is based on a functional description of 
English. The CSWE recognizes four proficiency 
levels and a learner is deemed to have mastered 
functional English once they have successfully 
passed CSWE III. Only a limited number of learn-
ers exit the AMEP after completing CSWE III, as 
the language-learning entitlement of new migrants 
has been limited to 510 hours since the early 
1990s. Humanitarian entrants who have experi-
enced torture or trauma may be granted an addi-
tional 400 hours. While the purpose of the AMEP 
is to provide learners with access to English 
instruction, it is not the purpose of the AMEP to 
ensure that each learner achieves functional profi-
ciency. Indeed, 510 and even 910 hours have been 
found to be insufficient for learners with no exist-
ing proficiency in English to reach CSWE Level 
III. Since the late 1990s, learner groups who not 
only had hardly any proficiency in English but 
also no or very limited education and literacy in 
their first language or languages have presented a 
particular challenge for the AMEP.
There can be no doubt that the AMEP is an 
excellent language-teaching programme and simi-
lar national programmes, which are starting to 
develop in other countries, are an important step 
to the social inclusion of migrants. At the same 
time, it needs to be recognized that, even under 
excellent language-learning conditions, not all 
adults will learn a new language to the high stand-
ards of proficiency needed to negotiate some of 
the complex contexts sketched out above – nor 
will they do so fast (Collier, 1989; Watts and 
Lake, 2004). There are many entrants who are 
likely to fall through the cracks – from temporary 
sojourners via rural residents to women with 
family obligations – and a national language-
teaching strategy on its own is therefore insuffi-
cient to meet the language needs of non-speakers 
of the majority language.
A comprehensive language and communication 
strategy for linguistically- and culturally-diverse 
societies will therefore also need to comprise sub-
stantial multilingual provision in home languages. 
To begin with, comprehensive language strategies 
need to be based on the recognition of language 
communities and the provision of services in 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
595
community languages. Programmes that aim at 
hiring community liaison officers in education, 
health care or the judicial system are a good start 
but it is also important to ‘mainstream’ bilingualism 
through considering proficiency in community lan-
guages as a selection criterion for employment in 
all these sectors. Secondly, the availability of mate-
rials and resources in community languages is 
important (Aspinall, 2007), and there are many 
exciting projects that have developed best-practice 
strategies on how to create and disseminate such 
materials (e.g. Griffiths et al., 2005 described 
above); applied sociolinguists have an important 
role to play in disseminating such practices and 
strategies and making them more widely recog-
nized. At present, most analyses of the provision of 
services in community languages note a dire lack of 
such materials, even in contexts where the impor-
tance of such provision has been recognized or even 
mandated, as the following report by the UK Office 
of the Deputy Prime Minister (2005: 46) reports:
One in seven people from ethnic minorities 
face language barriers when accessing and using 
public services, yet translated materials are often 
unavailable. A recent report on local authority 
compliance with the Race Relations Act, for exam-
ple, found that only one in ten benefit depart-
ments had produced leaflets in ethnic minority 
languages. Translating leaflets does not always 
solve the problem, however, as they may be poor 
quality or inappropriate for people who cannot 
read their mother tongue or have a culture of oral 
communication.
As the quote points out, the provision of mate-
rials in home languages is not always feasible 
and the provision of materials in plain English – 
or a plain version of whatever the national 
language is – also needs to be an important part 
of the language strategy for linguistically- and 
culturally-diverse societies.
In this chapter, we have shown that transna-
tional migration poses significant challenges for 
societies committed to upholding human rights 
and to achieving social inclusion of all groups in 
societies. Many of these challenges are related to 
language, which crucially mediates access to key 
sites where human rights and social inclusion are 
produced. For such societies, a coherent language 
strategy – which aims at both language learning 
and multilingual, multimodal and plain language 
provision – is crucial to achieving equal opportu-
nities for all. Unfortunately, most such initiatives 
are fragmented, leading to frequent breaks and 
inconsistencies in provisions. Most transnational 
migrants around the world have experienced 
‘language issues’ of one kind or another and, in 
the absence of the recognition of the importance 
of language and communication and coherent 
language strategies, they often blame themselves 
for their social exclusion and internalize their 
communication difficulties (Garrett, Dickson, 
Young and Whelan, 2008; Shemirani and 
O’Connor, 2006). We need to recognize that in 
language and communication ‘it takes two to 
tango’ and adopt strategies that serve to share the 
communicative burden.
REFERENCES
AAP (2006, June 9) Sex slavery: first woman jailed. Sydney 
Morning Herald. Retrieved 16 February 2009 from: http://
www.smh.com.au/news/national/sex-slavery-first-woman-
jailed/2006/06/09/1149815296540.html
Adib, A. and Guerrier, Y. (2003) ‘The interlocking of gender 
with nationality, race, ethnicity and class: the narratives of 
women in hotel work’, Gender, Work and Organization, 
10(4): 413–32.
Alcorso, C. (2003) ‘Immigrant employees in hotels’, Labour 
and Industry, 14(1): 17–40.
Aspinall, P. J. (2007) ‘Language ability: a neglected dimension 
in the profiling of populations and health service users’, 
Health Education Journal, 66(1): 90–106.
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2008) Labour Force Status and 
other Characteristics of Recent Migrants. Canberra: 
Australia Bureau of Statistics.
Baker, P., Gabrielatos, C., Khosravinik, M., Krzyzanowski, M., 
et al., (2008) ‘A useful methodological synergy? Combining 
critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to examine 
discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press’, 
Discourse and Society, 19(3): 273–306.
Barrett, R. (2006) ‘Language ideology and racial inequality: 
competing functions of Spanish in an Anglo-owned 
Mexican restaurant’, Language in Society, 35: 163–204.
Blommaert, J. (2001a) ‘The Asmara Declaration as a sociolin-
guistic problem: reflections on scholarship and linguistic 
rights’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 5(1): 131–55.
Blommaert, J. (2001b) ‘Investigating narrative inequality: 
African asylum seekers’ stories in Belgium’, Discourse and 
Society, 12(4): 413–49.
Bourdieu, P. (1991) Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: 
Polity Press.
Castles, S. and Vasta, E. (2004) ‘Australia: new conflicts 
around old dilemmas’, in W. Cornelius, T. Tsuda, P. Martin 
and J. Hollifield (eds), Controlling Immigration: A Global 
Perspective. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
CBC News (2008, May 4) Inquiry examining Taser use, 
Dziekanski’s death begins Monday. Retrieved 15 April 
2009 from: http://www.cbc.ca/canada/british-columbia/
story/2008/05/04/bc-dziekanski-taser-inquiry.html.
Colic-Peisker, V. (2002) ‘The process of community and 
identity building among recently arrived Bosnian Muslim 
refugees in Western Australia’, Mots Pluriel: 21.
Colic-Peisker, V. (2005) “At least you’re the right colour”: 
identity and social Inclusion of Bosnian refugees in 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
596
Australia’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 31(4): 
615–38.
Collier, V. P. (1989) ‘How long? A synthesis of research on 
academic achievement in a second language’, TESOL 
Quarterly, 23(3): 509–31.
Collins, J. and Slembrouck, S. (2006) ‘“You don’t know what 
they translate”: language contact, institutional procedure, 
and literacy practice in neighborhood health clinics in 
urban Flanders’, Journal of Linguistic Anthropology, 16(2): 
249–68.
Cox, J. W. and Minahan, S. (2004) ‘Unravelling Woomera: lip 
sewing, morphology and dystopia’, Journal of Organizational 
Change Management, 17(3): 292–301.
Creese, G. and Kambere, E. N. (2003) ‘What colour is your 
English?’, Canadian Review of Sociology and Anthropology, 
40(5): 565–73.
Dávila, L. T. (2008) ‘Language and opportunity in the “land of 
opportunity”: Latina immigrants’ reflections on language 
learning and professional mobility’, Journal of Hispanic 
Higher Education, 7(4): 356–70.
Dei, G. J. S. and Asgharzadeh, A. (2003) ‘Language, education 
and development: case studies from the Southern 
contexts’, Language and Education, 17(6): 421–49.
Delanty, G., Wodak, R. and Jones, P. (eds) (2008) Migration, 
Identity, and Belonging. Liverpool: University of Liverpool 
Press.
Duchêne, A. and Heller, M. (eds) (2007) Discourses of 
Endangerment: Ideology and Interest in the Defence of 
Languages. London: Continuum.
Eades, D. (2000) ‘“I don’t think it’s an answer to the ques-
tion”: silencing Aboriginal witnesses in court’, Language in 
Society, 29: 161–95.
Eades, D. (2006) ‘Lexical struggle in court: Aboriginal 
Australians versus the state’, Journal of Sociolinguistics, 
10(2): 153–80.
Farrell, E. (2008) ‘Negotiating identity: discourses of migration 
and belonging’. Doctoral thesis, Macquarie University, 
Sydney.
Follow-up Committee (1998) Universal Declaration of 
Linguistic Rights. Barcelona: Institut d’Edicions de la 
Diputació de Barcelona.
Garrett, P. W., Dickson, H. G., Young, L. and Whelan, K. A. 
(2008) ‘ ‘’The happy migrant effect’’: perceptions of 
negative experiences of healthcare by patients with little 
or no English: a qualitative study across seven 
language groups’, Quality and Safety in Health Care, 17(2): 
101–3.
Griffiths, M., Quan, D. and Procter, N. G. (2005) Beyond 
Words: Lessons on Translation, Trust and Meaning. 
Canberra: Multicultural Mental Health Australia, Australian 
Department of Health and Ageing.
Heller, M. (2007) ‘Bilingualism as ideology and practice’, in 
M. Heller (ed.), Bilingualism: A Social Approach. 
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave. pp. 1–22.
Hill, J. H. (1999) ‘Language, race, and white public space’, 
American Anthropologist, 100(3): 680–9.
Hill, J. H. (2008) The Everyday Language of White Racism. 
Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Hilsdon, A.-M. (2006) ‘Migration and human rights: the case 
of Filipino Muslim women in Sabah, Malaysia’, Women’s 
Studies International Forum, 29(4): 405–16.
Hooks, B. (1994) Teaching to Transgress: Education as the 
Practice of Freedom. New York: Routledge.
Hussein, J. W. (2008) ‘The politics of language, power and 
pedagogy in ethiopia: addressing the past and present 
conditions of the Oromo language’, Australian Journal of 
Linguistics, 28(1): 31–57.
Hyland, T. (2008, February 10) ‘The ballad of Chika Honda’, 
The Age. Retrieved 22 September 2008 from: http://www.
theage.com.au/articles/2008/02/09/1202234230100.html
?page=fullpage#contentSwap2.
Jackson, A. (1 June 2004) ‘Aladdin Sisalem released from 
Manus Island’, The Age. Retrieved 15 June 2009, from: 
http://www.theage.com.au/articles/2004/05/31/10858554
99159.html.
Jupp, J. (2007) From White Australia to Woomera: The Story 
of Australian Immigration. Port Melbourne, VIC: Cambridge 
University Press.
Kamali, M. (2008) Racial Discrimination: Institutional Patterns 
and Politics. New York: Routledge.
Kooner, B. (2007) RCMP Taser Incident at Vancouver 
International Airport. Vancouver: Canada Border Services 
Agency.
Krzyzanowski, M. and Wodak, R. (2008) The Politics of 
Exclusion: Debating Migration in Austria. New Brunswick, 
NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Lippi-Green, R. (1997) English with an Accent. London: 
Routledge.
Lo Bianco, J. (ed.) (2008) Encyclopedia of Language and 
Education. Vol. 1, Language Policy and Political Issues in 
Education. New York: Springer.
Maher, K. H. (2002) ‘Who has a right to rights? Citizenship’s 
exclusions in an age of migration’, in A. Brysk (ed.), 
Globalization and Human Rights. Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press. pp. 19–43.
Martin, S. (1998) New Life, New Language: The History of the 
Adult Migrant English Program. Sydney: NCELTR Publications.
Masterman-Smith, H. and Pocock, B. (2008) Living Low Paid: 
The Dark Side of Prosperous Australia. Sydney: Allen and 
Unwin.
May, S. (2005) ‘Language rights: moving the debate forward’, 
Journal of Sociolinguistics, 9(3): 319–47.
Moorehead, C. (2006) Human Cargo: A Journey Among 
Refugees. London: Vintage.
Nakane, I. (2007) ‘Problems in communicating the suspect’s 
rights in interpreted police interviews’, Applied Linguistics, 
28(1): 87–112.
Office of the Deputy Prime Minister (2005) Improving Services, 
Improving Lives: Evidence and Key Themes. London: 
A Social Exclusion Unit Interim Report.
Ong, A. (1998) Flexible Citizenship: The Cultural Logics of 
Transnationality. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Pavarala, V. and Malik, K. K. (2007) Other Voices: The 
Struggle for Community Radio in India. Los Angeles: Sage.
Piller, I. and Takahashi, K. (in press, 2010) ‘At the 
intersection of gender, language and transnationalism’, in 

LANGUAGE, MIGRATION AND HUMAN RIGHTS
597
N. Coupland (ed.), The Handbook of Language and 
Globalization 540–54. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Piper, M. (2009) Regional Humanitarian Settlement Pilot. 
Ballarat: Department of Immigration and Citizenship.
Pousada, A. (2008) ‘The mandatory use of English in the Federal 
Court of Puerto Rico’, Centro Journal, 20(1): 136–55.
Roberts, C., Moss, B., Wass, V., Sarangi, S. and Jones, R. 
(2005) ‘Misunderstandings: a qualitative study of primary 
care consultations in multilingual settings, and educational 
implications’, Medical Education, 39: 465–75.
Rootman, I. and Gordon-El-Bihbety, D. (2008) A Vision for a 
Health Literate Canada: Report of the Expert Panel on 
Health Literacy. Ontario, CA: Canadian Public Health 
Assocation.
Rottman, A. J., Fariss, C. J. and Poe, S. C. (2009) ‘The path to 
asylum in the US and the determinants for who gets in and 
why’, International Migration Review, 43(1): 3–34.
Schlosser, E. (2002) Fast Food Nation: What the All-American 
Meal is Doing to the World. London: Penguin.
Shemirani, F. S. and O’Connor, D. L. (2006) ‘Aging in a foreign 
country: voices of Iranian women aging in Canada’, Journal 
of Women and Aging, 18(2): 73–89.
Sinclair, U. (1906) The Jungle. New York: Doubleday.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2000) Linguistic Genocide in Education 
or Worldwide Diversity and Human Rights. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2001) ‘The globalisation of (educa-
tional) language rights’, International Review of Education, 
47(3, 4): 201–19.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2003) ‘Linguistic diversity and biodiversity: 
the threat from killer languages’, in C. Mair (ed.), The Politics 
of English as a World Language: New Horizons in Postcolonial 
Cultural Studies. Amsterdam: Rodopi. pp. 31–52.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and Phillipson, R. (eds) (1994) Linguistic 
Human Rights: Overcoming Linguistic Discrimination. 
Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. and Phillipson, R. (1998) ‘Language in 
human rights’, The International Communication Gazette, 
60(1): 27–46.
Solé-Auró, A. and Crimmins, E. M. (2008) ‘Health of immi-
grants in European countries’, International Migration 
Review, 42(4): 861–76.
Trinch, S. (2006) ‘Bilingualism and representation: locating 
Spanish–English contact in legal institutional memory’, 
Language in Society, 35(4): 559–93.
Trinch, S. and S. Berk-Seligson (2002) ‘Narrating in protective 
order interviews: a source of interactional trouble’, 
Language in Society, 31(3): 383–418.
United Nations (1948) Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights.
UNESCO (2005) Literacy for life. Education for all: Global 
Monitoring Report 2006. Paris: UNESCO. http://www.
unesco.org/education/GMR2006/full/headline.pdf;last 
accessed on February 06, 2009.
Vahedi, N. (1996) Diskriminierung, gesundheitliche 
Beschwerden und Arbeitszufriedenheit: eine Studie zur 
Situation türkischer Industriearbeitnehmer in der 
Bundesrepublik Deutschland. [Discrimination, Health and 
Employment Satisfaction: A Study of the Situation of 
Turkish 
Workers 
in 
Germany.] 
Ulm, 
Germany: 
Universitätsverlag Ulm.
Watts, D. L. E. and Lake, D. M. (2004) Benchmarking Adult 
Rates of Second Language Acquisition and Integration: 
How Long and How Fast? Final report 2004.
Wee, L. (2007) ‘Linguistic human rights and mobility’, Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 28(4): 
325–38.
Wodak, R. and Van Dijk, T. A. (eds) (2000) Racism at the Top: 
Parliamentary Discourses on Ethnic Issues in Six European 
States. Klagenfurt, Austria: Drava-Verlag.
Wolffers, I., Verghis, S. and Marin, M. (2003) ‘Migration, 
human rights, and health’, Lancet, 362: 2019.

39
39.1  A TEXTUALLY-MEDIATED 
SOCIAL WORLD
People today are constantly encountering written 
texts. Imagine the amount of reading and writing 
people might come across in a Western-style café 
such as Starbucks: walking towards the counter, 
they might go through the menu, which might 
appear in the form of colourful handwriting on a 
chalkboard; someone might order a cup of decaf-
feinated cappuccino and be given a receipt by the 
shop assistant, who then marks ‘decaf’ with a pen 
on a paper cup. Around the place, people might be 
doing different things while enjoying their coffee: 
a group of students might be sitting together and 
discussing a school project with a few reference 
books lying on the table; at another table, a couple 
might be talking about current affairs and refer-
ring to a newspaper in front of them; some other 
people might be surfing the Web or reading their 
email by connecting their laptop computers to the 
free wireless network in the café. 
As another example, we can think about the 
range of literacy-related activities in a university 
lecture theatre: before the lecture begins, some 
students might be reviewing notes from the previ-
ous lecture, while others might be talking about 
their assignments. The lecturer then comes in and 
sets up a PowerPoint presentation on the screen, 
and talks about the bullet points on each slide 
based on a set of notes which he or she had written 
before the lecture. Students might be taking notes 
as they are listening to the lecturer – some might 
prefer writing notes on their laptop computers, 
while others might scribble handwritten notes in a 
notepad. At the same time, some students might 
not be paying attention to the lecture at all – they 
might be checking mobile phone messages under 
the desk or surfing the Web. 
These two scenes demonstrate that reading and 
writing activities are tied up with the particular 
details of a situation and that literacy activities are 
particular to a specific community at a specific 
point in history. Using these everyday activities as 
a starting point provides a distinct view of literacy. 
The two scenes further illustrate several other 
points. The first point to be made is that literacy 
impinges on people in their daily lives, whether or 
not they regularly read books or do much writing. 
Literacy is embedded in these activities of ordi-
nary life. It is not just a set of skills which are 
learnt or taught in school. They are carried out in 
a wide variety of settings or domains. As seen in 
the above examples, much of the literacy in a café 
may be quite unlike that encountered in a lecture 
theatre. In addition, several people can be involved 
in reading or in writing, and they may participate 
in various ways, each treating the written word 
differently. There are many ways of reading in a 
particular situation with a particular text. The 
various texts are recognized as distinct and are 
read in different ways – there are many ways of 
taking meaning from the text. Reading a menu, 
taking notes in a lecture and writing text messages 
on a mobile phone may all involve different 
participants acting in different ways. 
The central argument of our approach to 
literacy is that we live in a textually-mediated 
social world, where texts are part of the glue of 
social life. Texts are central to social interaction 
and much spoken language is performed in the 
context of written language and takes into account 
this textual context. Understanding what people 
do with texts, including both page-based and 
screen-based texts, and what texts do to people 
is an essential part of understanding contemporary 
social change. Language and literacy are at 
the heart of much of current social change 
Literacy Studies
D a v i d  B a r t o n  a n d  C a r m e n  L e e

LITERACY STUDIES
599
because it is language and literacy which structure 
knowledge and enable communication. The field 
of Literacy Studies, or New Literacy Studies, pro-
vides a powerful lens for examining the changing 
nature of texts and discourses in our contemporary 
society. 
In the rest of the chapter, we provide an over-
view of this distinct approach to literacy. We first 
review various definitions of literacy and outline 
the central ideas in the social practice view of lit-
eracy. In particular, we describe the two major 
units of analysis in Literacy Studies – literacy 
practices and literacy events. We then consider 
ways of researching literacy by reviewing studies 
in different traditions and areas of interest in the 
field. We also discuss some recent issues in 
Literacy Studies, concentrating on the materiality 
of texts, the relationship between globalization and 
literacies, as well as the impact of new technolo-
gies on literacy practices. The chapter concludes 
by discussing the importance of studying both texts 
and practices and how we can combine methods 
of discourse analysis with the ethnographic 
approaches of literacy studies to understand the 
textually-mediated social world. 
Defining literacy
Looking for a precise dictionary definition of 
a complex concept such as literacy may be an 
impossible task. We are using the term to cover 
new broader views of reading and writing, and 
that is how it is being used in several disciplines, 
and in phrases like emergent literacy, used in 
education. As already pointed out, it is extended in 
another way to mean competent and knowledgeable 
in specialized areas, with terms like computer 
literacy, economic literacy and political literacy. 
People talk of different literacies, so that different 
media can be discussed and, for example, film 
literacy can then be contrasted with print literacy. 
Other dictionary examples of the terms include 
emotional literacy, cultural illiteracy and a house 
being described as having an illiterate design.
In other languages of the world, there also exist 
words that are equivalent to ‘literacy’, ‘illiteracy’, or 
‘literate’. However, translation of these terms often 
brings confusions and contradictions. For example, 
the word ‘literacy’ does not easily translate into 
French, while there is no easy English equivalent 
of the French sense of écriture as writings, nor of 
illetrisme as unlettered. Analphabetisme is also 
used in French for illiterate and words equivalent 
to unalphabetized exist in other languages, includ-
ing Spanish, Italian, Greek and Danish. Note 
that it is a partisan word: in its make-up there is 
the idea that an alphabetic writing system is nec-
essary in order to be literate. In languages where 
the writing system is not based on an alphabet, 
such as Chinese and Japanese, literacy is often 
broadly associated with the ability to read and 
write, or knowledge of words; illiteracy in both 
Chinese and Japanese has negative connotations: 
wen mang in Chinese and man mou in Japanese 
both 
literally 
mean 
‘sentence-blindness’. 
Nevertheless, in English ‘literacy’ has become a 
unifying term across a range of disciplines for 
new views of reading and writing; there has been 
such a growth of study in the area that it is now 
referred to as ‘Literacy Studies’ or ‘New Literacy 
Studies’. 
39.2  A SOCIAL PRACTICE VIEW
OF LITERACY
The field of Literacy Studies has come into being 
in the past 20 years. In many ways, Literacy 
Studies grew out of a dissatisfaction with concep-
tions of reading and writing which were prevalent 
in education in all areas, from early childhood 
reading to adult literacy programmes: these were 
conceptions of reading and writing which were 
based on oversimplistic psychological models. 
The critique has been made from a range of disci-
plinary vantage points and in a range of ways: it 
can be found in Baynham (1995), Barton (2007), 
Bloome and Green (1992), Gee (1996), Giroux 
(1983) and Willinsky (1990), as well as in the 
work of Heath (1983), Scribner and Cole (1981) 
and Street (1984), which have become classic 
studies in the field. Willinsky talked of the ‘New 
Literacy’ and Gee (1996) first referred to the ‘New 
Literacy Studies’. The critique of earlier views of 
literacy, or ‘autonomous’ approaches to literacy 
(Street, 1984), has been well rehearsed in these 
publications, opposing psychological approaches 
to language which fail to take account of social 
phenomena and critiquing inadequate educational 
views of literacy which do not look beyond peda-
gogy and the classroom. 
A key to new views of literacy is situating 
reading and writing in its social context. Literacy 
Studies starts from people’s uses of literacy, 
not from their formal learning of literacy. It also 
starts from everyday life and from the everyday 
activities which people are involved in. It is 
important to stress that education has not been 
used as a starting point and by the time the discus-
sion gets to schools and learning there will be 
a different view of what literacy is and what 
learning is.
The social approach to literacy starts out 
from three areas of inquiry: the social, the psycho-
logical and the historical. Barton (2007) has 
outlined the characteristics of such an integrated 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
600
theory of literacy, grouped under a set of eight 
headings: 
1 Literacy is a social activity and can best be 
described in terms of people’s literacy practices 
which they draw upon in literacy events.
2 People have different literacies which they make 
use of, associated with different domains of life. 
Examining different cultures or historical periods 
reveals more literacies.
3 People’s literacy practices are situated in broader 
social relations. This makes it necessary to 
describe the social settings of literacy events, 
including the ways in which social institutions 
support particular literacies. 
4 Literacy is based upon a system of symbols. It is 
a symbolic system used for communication and 
as such exists in relation to other systems of 
information exchange. It is a way of representing 
the world to others. 
A literacy event is also embedded in our mental 
life; it forms and is formed by our awareness, 
intentions and actions. Thus, we need a psycho-
logical view of literacy:
5 Literacy is a symbolic system used for represent-
ing the world to ourselves. Literacy is part of 
our thinking. It is part of the technology of 
thought.
6 We have awareness, attitudes and values with 
respect to literacy and these attitudes and values 
guide our actions.
Any literacy event has a history, both at the 
personal and at the cultural level:
7 Literacy has a history. Our individual life histories 
contain many literacy events from early child-
hood onwards which the present is built upon. 
We change and as children and adults are con-
stantly learning about literacy. 
8 A literacy event also has a social history. Current 
practices are created out of the past.
Detailed elaboration of these eight propositions 
can be found in Barton (2007). In the following, 
we focus on three major issues which we believe 
are essential in the understanding of a social view 
of literacy.
Units of analysis: literacy events 
and literacy practices 
The first important point to be made about the 
social approach to literacy is that literacy is a 
social activity and can best be described in terms 
of people’s literacy practices; these practices are 
drawn upon in literacy events which are mediated 
by written texts. 
The two terms ‘literacy practices’ and ‘literacy 
events’ need to be explained. The first basic unit of 
analysis is that of event; there are all sorts of occa-
sions in everyday life where the written word has 
a role. We can refer to these as ‘literacy events’. 
Talking in terms of literacy events is necessary to 
describe how literacy is actually used in people’s 
everyday lives. An obvious example of a literacy 
event is when an adult reads a story to a child at 
bedtime. The bedtime story is an interesting liter-
acy event in that it is often a regular event with 
repeated patterns of interaction. The term is 
broader than this though and includes any activity 
which involves the written word; for some events, 
especially within education, the explicit purpose 
is learning, but for most literacy events this is not 
so. In their everyday lives, people can be involved 
in a wide range of literacy events. On a typical 
morning at work, for example, we might check 
our email, listen to phone messages, and write 
notes in our diary while talking to a colleague 
about a meeting agenda. These quite different lit-
eracy events are nested within each other with 
micro and macro events; they are chained together 
in sequences and they are networked across con-
texts. Even in less text-based jobs such as those of 
cleaners and security guards, people often have to 
keep records of their activities; they follow written 
instructions and deal with written issues of health 
and safety as well as records of their pay. 
The notion of literacy event has its roots in the 
sociolinguistic idea of speech events, which goes 
back at least to the work of Dell Hymes (1962). It 
is used in relation to literacy by Anderson et al. 
(1980) in a study of young children at home. They 
define a literacy event as being an occasion when 
a person ‘attempts to comprehend or produce 
graphic signs’, either alone or with others. Heath 
develops this, referring to literacy events generally 
as being ‘when talk revolves around a piece of 
writing’ (1983: 386). Elsewhere, she defines lit-
eracy events as ‘any occasion in which a piece of 
writing is integral to the nature of the participants’ 
interactions and their interpretative processes’ 
(Heath, 1982: 50). This is important in demon-
strating that literacy has a role in so many 
communicative activities. In raising children at 
home and teaching them in school there are often 
regular repeated events involving the written word 
and it is useful to focus on these literacy events in 
order to understand more about how children 
learn to read and write. 
The second central concept in Literacy Studies 
is ‘literacy practices’. There are common patterns 
in using reading and writing in a particular situa-
tion where people bring their cultural knowledge 
to an activity. It is useful to refer to these ways of 

LITERACY STUDIES
601
using literacy as literacy practices. The term prac-
tices is used in different disciplines, and several 
researchers have applied the term directly to lit-
eracy, including the studies by Scribner and Cole 
(1981) and by Street (1984) which have been 
mentioned already. Scribner and Cole see the idea 
as central and they discuss how practices can be 
seen as ways of using literacy which are carried 
from one particular situation to another similar 
situation (1981: 234–8). Another way of thinking 
about it is to start from more general notions of 
social practices and to view literacy practices as 
being the social practices associated with the writ-
ten word. This can be done in order to see how 
social institutions and the power relations they 
support structure our uses of written language. For 
example, critical discourse analysts explore the 
notion of language as a set of social practices, in 
order to reveal how social institutions and power 
relations structure our uses of language, both 
spoken and written, as in Fairclough (2003) and 
Wodak and Meyer (2009).
Together, events and practices are the two basic 
units of analysis of the social activity of literacy. 
Literacy events are the particular activities where 
literacy has a role; they may be regular repeated 
activities. Literacy practices are the general cul-
tural ways of utilizing literacy which people draw 
upon in a literacy event. Examples of literacy 
events and practices can be found in many areas in 
life. For example, writing a letter is a ‘literacy 
event’. In deciding where and when to write 
the letter, how to write it, whether it should be 
typewritten or handwritten, whether it should 
be delivered by post or by email, along with the 
associated ways of writing, the letter writer makes 
use of various ‘literacy practices’.
What counts as literate activity and what counts 
as a literacy event or a literacy practice is not 
straightforward; defining the limits and bounda-
ries of these concepts is particularly difficult for 
those carrying out empirical research. First of all, 
in many situations text and talk are mixed up, 
especially with new technologies, and all activi-
ties are very multimodal with language and images 
intertwined. Nevertheless, often a good starting 
point for research into literacy practices is to 
identify and examine literacy events. 
Domains of literacies
There are many ways of reading and writing, and 
thus there is not one set of literacy practices. 
An adult at home may engage in very different 
practices at the same time: this person may be 
helping a child with homework, looking up an 
entry in a diary, trying to fill out a tax form, read-
ing food labels, and searching the Internet. To take 
a particular example from the Local Literacies 
research reported in Barton and Hamilton (1998), 
a man is involved in a range of different sorts of 
literacy: he writes shopping lists and telephone 
messages; he uses the local library; he reads and 
discusses the newspaper. At the library he partici-
pates in many different events and draws on a 
range of practices: as well as reading books he 
flicks quickly through the newspapers, sometimes 
renews books for friends he has recommended the 
books to, but claims never to read the notices in 
the library. He sometimes looks up old newspa-
pers to read about himself and people he knows. 
In his home he has few books but he does have a 
collection of books on local history, which he 
seems to use regularly. Involving quite different 
practices from a different domain of life, he is 
asked to write the occasional letter of reference 
for former work colleagues in the fire service.
Where these different practices cluster into 
coherent groups, it is very useful to talk in terms 
of them as being different literacies. A literacy is 
a stable, coherent, identifiable configuration of 
practices such as legal literacy, or the literacy of 
specific workplaces. Literacies are identified cul-
turally. Different literacies are associated with 
different domains of life such as home, school and 
work. There are different places in life where 
people act differently and use language differ-
ently. The social rules underlying people’s actions 
in these three places are different. The physical 
space – the buildings and the layout of rooms – is 
typically different and time is broken up differently. 
These are different domains and they give rise to 
different social practices – meaning both the gen-
eral ways of acting and how people individually 
act on particular occasions. 
The starting point for detailed examination of 
literacy practices is to realize that literacy may be 
different in different domains and that school, for 
example, is but one domain of literacy activity. 
Other domains may be just as significant. The 
home is a particularly important domain in that it 
is the site for a wide range of activities and it is 
where children typically first encounter literacy 
events. The home is ‘the centre from which indi-
viduals venture out into other domains’ (Klassen, 
1991: 43). Within a domain such as the home, one 
can look in more detail and examine a wide range 
of activities involving different literacies. 
Having been precise about identifying distinct 
domains of activity, the reality is more fluid. 
When starting out, it may be useful to name home, 
school and work as separate domains with their 
own distinctive practices and discourse communi-
ties giving rise to particular literacies. In fact the 
home is a site, a physical location, for all sorts of 
activities. Different sorts of reading and writing 
from many sources, including school and work, 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
602
are carried out in the home. The practices leak 
from one domain to the other and there is much 
overlap. Nevertheless, home and school remain 
separate domains where certain literacy practices 
are sustained, nurtured and legitimized while 
others are not. The same event might be valued 
very differently in the two domains and have very 
different meaning to the participants. 
Literacy as communication
Literacy is part of communication and of reporting 
the world to others. The relationship of reading 
and writing to other forms of communication 
needs to be examined. First, there is the relation to 
spoken language. Ideas about written language 
have moved on considerably from viewing it as 
speech which is written down. Written language 
has different functions from spoken language and 
any choice between written and spoken usually 
has other implications beyond a simple choice of 
medium. Writing enables us to go much further 
than with spoken language. Writing results in 
texts, where we are able to fix things in space and 
time. Because it often is reproducible and open to 
inspection, written language can be a powerful 
form of language; we need to understand the ways 
in which writing extends the possibilities of lan-
guage. It should be clear then that any view of 
literacy is part of a theory of language and it is 
necessary here to clarify the relation between 
written and spoken language.
Although they have different properties, written 
and spoken language are not easy to separate in 
actual use. In fact they are closely entwined, and 
in daily life people participate in literacy events 
where reading and writing are mixed in with 
spoken language and with other means of com-
munication. Literacy events typically involve a 
written text and talk around the text and spoken 
language typically is supported by written texts. In 
many ways, written and spoken language are not 
separable in literacy events and some researchers 
would go so far as to blur any distinction between 
the written and the spoken and call all forms of 
public communication literate activities. Writing 
is based on speech in some very real ways: spoken 
language is the basis for most people’s learning of 
written language, for instance, and the very form of 
written language gets its inspiration from spoken 
language. Still, it is important to stress that the roots 
of written language lie only partly with spoken 
language. Written language has a life of its own. 
Other aspects of communication come into 
play with written language. Most significantly, it 
is visual; it is laid out in some way and displayed. 
The importance of the role of design, layout and 
other aspects of the physical context should be 
self-evident, and they form part of what is meant 
by writing. A social approach to literacy offers a 
different view of communication from traditional 
functional models which see it in terms of trans-
mitters and receivers of messages, with writing 
and other technologies simply amplifying what 
spoken language can do. The point is that, with 
written language, we can do things we cannot do 
with spoken. It does not just amplify spoken lan-
guage. It extends the functions of language, and 
enables us to do different things. 
39.3  RESEARCHING LITERACY 
PRACTICES
The view of literacy as being part of social prac-
tices which are inferred from events and mediated 
by texts requires a certain methodology. In this 
section we first describe some methods that can 
be employed to research literacy practices, and 
outline some examples of studies which have 
done this.
Research methods
Researching literacy practices relies on a method-
ology of attention to detail which draws heavily 
on ethnographic approaches. It involves the exam-
ination of particular events in order to understand 
broader practices. Researchers integrate a variety 
of methods, including observation, interviews, 
the analysis of texts and the use of photography. 
Researchers have been innovative in developing 
methods which are ethical, responsive and col-
laborative. As with all research, there is a close 
link between theory and methodology and each 
informs and constrains the other. 
Larger-scale empirical studies like Local 
Literacies (Barton and Hamilton, 1998) often 
involve researchers spending time in particular 
communities, using a multi-method approach to 
develop as complete a picture as possible of the 
detail of people’s lives and the place of literacy 
practices within them, effectively carrying out an 
ethnography of literacy. Data collection in ethnog-
raphy may include some or all of the following: 
observation of and participation in literacy events, 
which are documented using notes, audio recording 
and video recording; formal and informal inter-
views and conversations, which might again be 
recorded in a variety of ways; the collection of 
texts and artefacts created within the community, 
and of externally-produced documents about the 
community where these exist; the use of photo-
graphs both as data in themselves and as a spur for 
interview discussions (Hodge and Jones, 2000); 

LITERACY STUDIES
603
historical methods, including oral history inter-
views and working with archive material. It may 
involve methods such as questionnaires, used as 
one method among others to develop an overall 
picture. Researchers are constantly developing 
and pushing at the edges of research methods and 
now work with what is called virtual ethnography 
(Hine, 2005), using email, discussion forums, or 
chat rooms to interact with research participants 
and collect data. 
Smaller-scale studies of literacy practices are 
also valuable. One of the best ways to conduct 
smaller-scale literacy research is to reflect on our 
own practices and the practices around us by 
focusing on a particular area of everyday life. This 
would start with the identification of a particular 
topic – a place, an activity, or a group. This could 
be something very familiar, or something com-
pletely new. This method is a good way for people 
to increase their understanding of literacy. In 
Lancaster, students have studied literacy practices 
as diverse as those involved in celebrating Chinese 
New Year, buying a lottery ticket, using a shared 
college kitchen or going to church (see also Barton, 
2000). After identifying a topic, the next step is to 
observe elements of the visual or physical environ-
ment such as the participants and the activities in 
which they engage, as well as the objects around 
them. Getting down to detail is important here. 
Taking photographs is useful and can prove a very 
revealing part of the research. Having observed the 
visual environment, the focus shifts to identifying 
and documenting particular literacy events and the 
texts used within them. This might involve collect-
ing or photocopying examples of texts. The next 
important step is to interview people engaged in 
the literacy events. Talking to the participants can 
help make their cultural knowledge clear and make 
sense of the observations. 
As a methodology, Literacy Studies provides 
powerful ways of researching texts and practices. 
The concept of literacy events provides a starting 
point for analysing interactions, whereas the con-
cept of literacy practices provides a way of bring-
ing in broader structural aspects. Concentrating on 
specific domains of life, multi-method, collabora-
tive and responsive methodologies provide ways 
of carrying out research that pay close attention to 
details. Juxtaposed with methods in discourse 
analysis, the ethnographic approaches of literacy 
research are also powerful in understanding 
language use in context.
Literacy studies in a range of contexts
To further illustrate the methodologies we 
described, we first provide an overview of some 
studies which have been carried out in the 
UK. The Local Literacies research (Barton and 
Hamilton, 1998) studied the role of reading and 
writing in the local community of Lancaster, in 
England. The study identified key areas of everyday 
life where reading and writing were significant for 
people and it contrasted these vernacular litera-
cies, which were often voluntary, self-generated 
and learned informally, with more dominant lit-
eracies which were often more formalized and 
defined in terms of the needs of institutions.
Further examples of local and community 
literacy research can be found in the later edited 
volume Situated Literacies (Barton, Hamilton and 
Ivanicˇ, 2000), which brought together a number 
of studies of reading and writing in a variety of 
different local contexts, informed by the same 
theoretical perspective outlined above. Many of 
the studies in this collection show how qualitative 
methods and detailed local studies can deepen a 
theoretical understanding of literacy. For instance, 
a study of literacy in prisons by Anita Wilson 
demonstrated the role of literacies in the struggle 
against institutionalization and the importance of 
literacy in maintaining individual identity within a 
bureaucratic institution, and how people used lit-
eracy to construct a ‘third space’ between prison 
and outside (see also Wilson, 2007). This resistant 
use of literacy contrasts with work by Kathryn 
Jones with bilingual Welsh farmers at an auction 
market, where literacy inscribed the people’s lives 
into a broader social order.
Literacy Studies research in the field of educa-
tion has also provided significant insights. 
Extensive research in Further Education (FE) col-
leges in the UK takes our understanding forward 
in a distinct way: this Literacies for Learning 
research has identified the different literacies 
being drawn upon in these vocational colleges and 
helped disentangle the dynamics of the different 
literacies in educational contexts. Students are 
learning the reading and writing demands of the 
vocations they are training for – literacies for 
particular workplaces, such as catering, construc-
tion, or hairdressing. At the same time, there are 
particular ways of reading and writing which 
help students in their learning – the literacies for 
learning. These literacies for work and literacies 
for learning exist alongside other distinct forms of 
reading and writing associated with assessment 
and, increasingly, with accountability, as in the 
record-keeping they have to do. This work demon-
strates the different literacies which students have 
to grapple with simultaneously, and identifies a 
phenomenon which is significant in other domains 
(see Ivanicˇ et al., 2008). 
Studies of the literacy practices of everyday 
life can provide data, methods and theories for 
educational practice. A study of adult learners by 
Barton et al. (2007) provides details of how and 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
604
what people read and write in their everyday lives 
which can inform the educational curriculum. 
The theory of literacy as social practice offers 
educational practitioners a language to talk in 
when discussing literacy issues and can be used to 
develop a social practice pedagogy. For example, 
the range of studies of adult language, literacy and 
numeracy provision in England (e.g. Appleby and 
Barton, 2007; Tett, Hamilton and Hillier, 2006) 
enables us to move towards developing principles 
of a social practice pedagogy, i.e. ways of teach-
ing adults which are based upon a social practice 
view of literacy. Other work in educational con-
texts has been concerned with the development of 
writing and identity in educational contexts 
(Ivanicˇ, 1998, 2006), work applying a social prac-
tice view to understanding learning and people’s 
lives in adult literacy education (Papen, 2005), 
and in the area of English for Speakers of Other 
Languages (ESOL) (Pitt, 2005).
Across the world, there has now been a broad 
range of studies across different domains of activ-
ity and it is possible to draw out common themes 
from the research. People have been carrying out 
research utilizing the theories and methodologies 
of literacy studies and complementing these with 
different frameworks, including discourse analy-
sis, textual analysis, narrative analysis and aspects 
of social theory. They work in different contexts, 
including all areas of education, specific work-
places and particular communities, and may focus 
on childhood, teenagers, gender, multilingualism, 
new technologies or other issues. Many studies 
focus on the links between home communities 
and schools. Purcell-Gates (2007), for example, 
provides a useful set of case studies that cover 
home, school, young people, across cultures and 
immigrant experiences – ways in which literacy is 
multiple and is looking for ‘new pedagogies for 
new literacies’ (p. 179), meaning in this case new 
social practices from a range of cultures and not 
particularly new technologies. The studies in 
Street (2005) also cover many educational sites. 
To give an example of a study outside of educa-
tion, there is a tradition of South American 
research on the centrality of the written word in 
indigenous cultures and Wogan (2003) brings a 
social practice approach to this work. He sees the 
value of literacy studies being that it now provides
‘A well established tradition of ethnographic 
research.[…] Twenty years ago, in the absence of 
such research, a study like mine would have not 
been conceived.[…] I focus on identity categories 
and state and church documentation.[…] Other 
studies do not fully explore the perspectives of 
ordinary non-elite groups’
(p. 66).
Community literacies have also been studied in 
Australia (Breen et al., 1994) and South Africa 
(Prinsloo and Breier, 1996). The personal letter-
writing practices of Pacific islanders are examined 
in Besnier (1993). Wagner studied Arabic speak-
ers in Morocco (1993). American studies such as 
those by Moss (1994), Perez (2004) and Reder 
(1987, 1994) have often been carried out on the 
literacies of minority communities. Other studies 
that share a similar starting point include Hull 
and Schultz (2001), and Gonzalez, Moll and 
Amanti (2005). Merrifield et al. (1996) studied 
two distinct communities, urban Appalachians 
and Californian immigrant Americans, exploring 
their literacies and learning in different contexts. 
In France, there is a growing body of research in 
the area of l’Anthropologie de l’Écriture (the 
Anthropology of Writing); although from a differ-
ent theoretical tradition, studies within this 
approach share a great deal of similarities in meth-
ods and themes of research with the British tradi-
tion of Literacy Studies. For example, the concept 
of actes d’écriture (writing acts) that the French 
scholars work with (e.g. Fraenkel, 2007) broadens 
our notion of literacy events. 
Such research tends to involve detailed studies 
of particular groups of people at particular sites: 
the references so far give a hint of their range and 
diversity. There has now been such a wealth of 
studies that it is possible to look across them and 
see common themes and repeated findings and at 
the same time to see how the meaning of reading 
and writing is tied to specific practices. This is all 
leading to new understandings of the nature of 
literacy. 
Language and literacy in society
As mentioned earlier, nearly all everyday activi-
ties in the contemporary world are mediated by 
literacy and people act within a textually-mediated 
social world. It is this textually-mediated social 
world which Literacy Studies itself can continue 
to investigate, linking culture and cognition and 
analysing the dynamics of textually-mediated 
communities of practice. The critique this pro-
vides of dominant sociolinguistics research is 
similar to the critique which Dorothy Smith has 
made of sociology. She accuses sociology of 
being extraordinarily blind to
the phenomenon of textually mediated communi-
cation, action and social relations.[…] Our lives 
are infused with a process of inscription, produc-
ing written or printed traces or working from 
them. 
(Smith, 1990: 209). 

LITERACY STUDIES
605
She continues
The appearance of meaning as a text detaches 
meaning from the lived processes of its transitory 
construction, made and remade at each moment 
of people’s talk. The vesting of meaning in such 
permanent or semi-permanent forms is routine 
and commonplace, and has transformed our rela-
tions to language, meaning and each other. 
(Smith, 1990: 210–11; 
see also Smith, 1999: 219–20).
By investigating practices, our approach to 
literacy complements other work in linguistics, 
especially in areas which focus on the analysis of 
texts. The study of everyday literacy practices 
pays close attention to the texts of everyday and 
personal life. It starts from people’s social prac-
tices, noting that many of these involve texts of 
some sort, and that in carrying out many activities 
in life people use texts. There is a strand of work 
within Literacy Studies which has drawn inspira-
tion from sociolinguistics, including Heath’s work, 
mentioned above, as well as Baynham (1993), 
Blommaert (2008), Collins and Blot (2003), Gee 
(1996) and Tabouret-Keller et al. (1997). Such 
studies link Literacy Studies to sociolinguistic 
issues such as language choice, code-switching, 
and language and power. Barton (1998) has also 
discussed the potential inter-animation of Literacy 
Studies and sociolinguistics. A strength of Literacy 
Studies is that it combines a very strong empirical 
tradition with attention to theory, and that it can 
draw upon a broader range of areas of social 
theory than just critical theory. To address its 
social aims, the study of language needs to utilize 
theories about topics such as
• how the media works
• the relationship between local detail and global 
activity
• notions of self and identity
• social and technological change
• the shift from modern to postmodern.
An additional task is to link up, in a motivated 
way, research which starts with the analysis of 
texts with research which sets out from the analy-
sis of practices. These have been quite different 
traditions of research: discourse analysis studies 
have analysed texts and much Literacy Studies 
research has been of practices. The difficulty is to 
link these up in a way which shows the mutual 
influences of the texts and the practices. 
Cruickshank (2006) is a good example of a study 
which mixes the ethnographic approaches of 
Literacy Studies with discourse analysis, focusing 
on a mixture of home, school, teenagers and 
technology, and emphasizing the importance of 
networks, mediation and roles. Contributors to 
Cope and Kalantzis (2000) also linked up texts 
and practices, as did Ormerod and Ivanicˇ (2000). 
Texts and practices come together where Williams 
(1998) and Leander and Prior (2004) talk of 
textual practices, referring to the processes of 
reading and writing; here textual practices are one 
element of social practices, complemented by the 
practices associated with the creation and use of 
texts. Scollon and Scollon’s (2003) Discourses in 
Place explores the meaning-making process of 
public texts and considers the ways in which such 
a process is shaped by the physical world where 
the texts are situated. 
Literacy Studies also broadens the notion of 
interaction by focusing on the importance of texts 
and examining the various roles that texts have in 
interaction. Sociolinguistic research on interaction 
has primarily been of spoken language and of 
face-to-face-interaction. In literacy research, the 
concept of literacy events provides a way of study-
ing interaction between texts and talk. An example 
of such research is Pitkanen-Huhta (2003), which 
examines in detail the conventional structure of 
literacy events in EFL (English as a Foreign 
Language) classroom interaction in Finland. 
However, there are other sorts of literacy event, 
where texts are present but are not read in a con-
ventional sense; there are events where texts have 
symbolic functions; and there are various ways in 
which texts which may or may not be present are 
invoked. Events vary in the role of text: the text 
can be central, as in the act of reading instructions 
from a manual; the text can be symbolic, as when 
swearing on the Bible; and the text can be implicit, 
as when talking about texts which are not present. 
Consequently, within Literacy Studies, there has 
been a broadening of the notion of literacy event; 
the concept can be expanded from one which 
focuses on talk around a text, such as the mother 
and child story-time, to one that includes talk 
about a text, such as a discussion of a previously-
read magazine, to an event not containing talk, 
such as browsing a web page. Similarly, there are 
many relations between events: events can be 
serial, coordinated and chained; they can be 
embedded or subordinated; they can be fuzzy. 
Such interrelationships between different events 
are also noted in a number of recent studies, such 
as Leander (2003), Barton and Hamilton (2005) 
and Kell (2005).
Alongside these broadening definitions there is 
evidence that the existence of texts in events 
changes things: interaction around a text is differ-
ent. First, talk around texts is important in several 
ways. To give a range of examples, with children’s 
book reading, there is evidence that talk around 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
606
texts can be much richer for learning (Snow, 
1983). Baynham (1993) has examined the way 
people go back and forth between text and talk, 
which he refers to as mode-switching. There is 
also research on the importance of bilingual talk 
around monolingual texts in the community and in 
the classroom (Martin-Jones and Jones, 2000). 
Secondly, even when there are no texts physically 
present in the event, texts can be the subject of the 
talk: people talk about texts. As the work of 
Maybin and Moss (1993) and Kathryn Jones 
(2000) demonstrates, much talk is about texts. 
Much of the ‘language as spoken by ordinary 
people in their everyday lives’, the focus of most 
sociolinguistics research, is in fact talk about 
texts. It can be revealing then to move to the posi-
tion that most speech events in contemporary 
society are, in a broad sense, literacy events.
In addition to supplementing linguistics 
research with new theoretical and methodological 
perspectives, Literacy Studies offers new views 
about configurations or modes of language. 
Traditional formulations of sociolinguistics have 
focused primarily on spoken language (see Barton, 
1998). A social practice approach to literacy 
expands existing views of speech and writing. In 
this approach, writing is more than just the spoken 
language written down. For example, a number of 
literacy scholars look into the physical presence of 
texts and trace how their functions and meanings 
change over time and contexts (see ‘The material-
ity of texts’ section). From another viewpoint, for 
some, written language is language made visible. 
Here the visual characteristics of language are 
investigated. The work of Kress and colleagues 
(e.g. Kress and van Leeuwen, 1996; Kress, 2003) 
has focused largely on the visual characteristics of 
texts. They prefer a narrow definition of literacy in 
order to distinguish writing from other semiotic 
systems such as the visual. Linking different 
semiotic systems, Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) 
have developed an analysis of visual images 
which develops out of language analysis. Kress 
and van Leeuwen (2001) also talk of multimodal 
meaning-making and their work, along with 
Hamilton (2000) and Stenglin and Iedema (2001), 
demonstrates the practical value of applying 
concepts developed in the study of language to 
visuals. This body of work not only provides new 
meanings of writing but also broadens the scope 
of language data.
There are parallels and overlaps among the 
different traditions of Literacy Studies that we 
have presented in this section. They all start from 
everyday life and what people read and write. 
They look at particular societies in detail, examin-
ing separate groups within a society and how they 
use literacy. They observe closely and they are 
willing to make use of a wide range of evidence. 
Each study makes comparisons between groups in 
a society, teasing out differences, but they avoid 
making grand generalizations. Rather, they make 
points about the particular situations they have 
studied. They provide ideas for other people look-
ing at specific situations. Equally importantly, 
they raise more general questions about what is 
meant by literacy, about the role of texts in peo-
ple’s lives, and about the fact that much of our 
current understanding of literacy is not obvious, 
thus leading to new definitions of literacy. 
39.4  LITERACY STUDIES IN 
A CHANGING WORLD
One of the most obvious aspects of contemporary 
life is change. As society is changing, so language 
and the associated ways of using language are also 
changing. Understanding the future is about 
understanding literacies and texts and their shift-
ing role in people’s everyday lives. This section 
provides an overview of three recent directions of 
research within the field of Literacy Studies: the 
materiality of texts, the impact of new technolo-
gies, and the relationship between globalization 
and multilingual literacies.
The materiality of texts
In order to understand the changing nature of 
literacy practices in the contemporary world, we 
need first to understand some properties of texts 
which enable them to travel across contexts, and 
then to see how texts fare in the changing world. 
There is now greater understanding of texts and 
how they function, and how a written text is dif-
ferent from other artefacts. First, texts are things 
and this ‘thingness’ is important as we investigate 
and come to understand the virtual world and its 
relation to the physical world. Wenger (1998) 
identifies four characteristics of ‘things’ (or reifi-
cations in his terms):
• their succinctness and power to evoke meanings
• their portability across time, physical space and 
context
• their potential for physical persistence or durability
• their focusing effect, drawing attention to spe-
cific features or distinctions within social reality.
It is useful to think of texts in these terms and, in 
fact, when Wenger and others (such as Latour, 
1987) focus on things, they are often talking 
primarily about language-laden texts (Barton 
and Hamilton, 2005). Texts are a special sort of 
reification and, compared with other objects, are 

LITERACY STUDIES
607
generally strong on all four of these characteris-
tics. The significance of the material existence of 
written language was apparent in the Local 
Literacies research, where such disparate things 
as the physical existence of books on shelves, the 
displays on notice-boards and texts on clothing 
were all acts of meaning-making. In addition, 
Ormerod and Ivanicˇ (2000), studying children’s 
homework projects, and Wilson (2007), studying 
prisoners’ literacy practices, have drawn attention 
to the importance of the materiality of texts in 
very different situations. The physical nature of 
the text is one aspect of this materiality. 
Another salient aspect of materiality is the 
existence of the range of cultural artefacts associ-
ated with literacy (see Graddol, 1994; Hall, 2000). 
(Of course, spoken language has a materiality; 
what is important is the changing materiality in 
different forms of language.) One significant 
aspect is that because of its materiality, written 
language has a different relationship to context 
from much spoken language, and often its impor-
tance is in how it is contextualized and recontex-
tualized; which is particularly relevant within the 
sphere of education. Materiality has also been 
investigated from a different viewpoint by those 
interested in the book as an object, considering its 
importance as a material object and the contribu-
tion of materiality to processes of reading and 
understanding (as in Moylan and Stiles, 1996; 
Nunberg, 1999; Pahl, 2001).
Literacies and new technologies
The contemporary interest in materiality arises, 
and perhaps even originates, in studies of screen-
based technologies where, compared with paper, 
the materiality of texts changes to a large extent 
(Baron, 2000; Haas, 1996; Kress, 2003; Snyder, 
1998). The new configurations of language use, 
developing with technologies, render impossible 
the simplistic distinctions between written and 
spoken language. Understanding the language of 
Internet chat, for example, or mobile phone use, or 
text messaging is more complex than analysing 
the language and attempting to classify it on a 
scale from spoken to written. These are new forms 
of communication, with new forms of language 
and literacy practices. The practices around the 
texts and the technologies are an integral part of 
the language. 
Theories have been developed to account for 
such changes in literacy practices under the influ-
ence of new media. These new views do not start 
with the acquisition of computer skills, but with 
the culture-specific literate activities associated 
with new technologies. Literacies of technology 
are seen as emerging social practices embedded in 
the larger cultural ecology (Hawisher and Selfe, 
2000; Selfe and Hawisher, 2004). The development 
of new technologies also offers new affordances 
for textual representations and meaning-making 
(see, for example, Kress, 2003; Kress and van 
Leeuwen, 1996; 2001; Lee, 2007). Carrington 
(2005) also explores various new ‘textual land-
scapes’ in young people’s lives, including SMS 
texting and computer games.
Some studies place more emphasis on the role 
of communication technologies in education (e.g. 
Freebody and Hornibrook, 2005; Knobel and 
Lankshear, 2007; Snyder and Prinsloo, 2007), 
while a growing number of literacy researchers 
are interested in particular types of computer-
mediated communication in out-of-school con-
texts, such as writing personal emails (Yates, 
2000), using chatrooms at home (Merchant, 2001), 
and private Instant Messaging (Jacobs, 2008; 
Lee, 2007; Lewis and Fabos 2005). In his studies 
of video gaming, Gee (2004, 2007) develops 
new ideas of learning in what he calls ‘affinity 
spaces’.
More recently, a group of literacy researchers 
has started to explore newer forms of literacy in 
the second generation of the world wide web, or 
what is known as web 2.0. These new literacies 
are characterized by new practices involving col-
laborative writing, new notions of authorship and 
participation, and multimodality (Knobel and 
Lankshear, 2007). Examples of such technologies 
are blogging (Davies and Merchant 2007; 
Mortensen, 2008), online fan fiction (Thomas, 
2007), and Flickr (Lee and Barton, to appear; 
Davies, 2006).
Studies of literacies in times of technological 
change provide strong evidence for the fact that 
literacy practices have a social history, and that 
new literacy practices are generated out of exist-
ing ones (Barton, 2007; Barton and Hamilton, 
1998). These new literacies or digital literacies, as 
with other forms of literacy, are situated in differ-
ent points in history (Sugimoto and Levin 2000; 
Yates, 2000). They present new possibilities and 
constraints for communication. Some of these 
changes increase literacy demands, while some 
reduce literacy demands. In general, these possi-
bilities are all changing the basis of communica-
tion in human relationships. To account for such 
changes we need new definitions of language, and 
of speech and writing.
Globalization and multilingual 
literacies
In relation to globalization, the examination of 
literacy practices provides a way of interrogating 
the complex changes in specific sites, and tracing 

THE SAGE HANDBOOK OF SOCIOLINGUISTICS
608
links between local and global practices, and 
documenting local forms of appropriation and 
resistance. Drawing on Actor Network Theory, 
Brandt and Clinton (2002) refer to literacy artefacts 
as a type of stable mobile which have a particu-
larly important role to play in linking local 
and global practices because they serve to build 
and sustain long, stable connections and thus 
networks across time and space. Literacy arte-
facts, in other words, are particularly effective 
social agents in terms of making links across 
contexts. Papen (2007) explores the impact of 
globalization on reading and writing in times 
of social change in Namibia. The study shows 
the ways in which literacy practices are patterned 
in terms of power and equality, as well as the 
ways in which local people develop practices in 
the face of global issues such as the dominance 
of English and tourism. A more recent study 
by Blommaert (2008) also considers the relation-
ship between grassroots literacies and globaliza-
tion by analysing handwritten documents in 
Africa.
The global–local link is reinforced in studies in 
multilingual literacies. Work by Kathryn Jones 
(2000) with bilingual Welsh farmers at an auction 
market, where literacy inscribed the people’s lives 
into a broader social order, showed how the local 
and the global are linked by textual activity. Jones 
focuses on the process of filling in a particular 
form, showing how the individual farmers are 
incorporated into the agricultural bureaucratic 
system through a complex process of locally-
situated talk around texts and the interweaving of 
spoken Welsh with written English. In the USA, 
studies of literacies in multilingual settings are 
often related to improving the education of stu-
dents from linguistically and culturally diverse 
backgrounds. The goal is to use ethnographic 
methods to understand better the different ‘funds 
of knowledge’ students bring from their homes 
and communities. Schools and teachers can 
then draw on this knowledge by relating school 
learning to home and community practices in 
more meaningful ways (Ferdman, Weber and 
Ramirez, 1994; Gonzalez, Moll and Amanti, 
2005; Pérez, 2004).
A wide range of further studies in multilingual 
literacies are reported in Martin-Jones and Jones 
(2000). In one study, Blackledge (2000) shows 
how unequal relations of power between domi-
nant-culture schools and minority-culture families 
dictated that Bangladeshi mothers of six-year-old 
children were unable to use their own literacies in 
the home-school learning context, constructing 
them as ‘illiterate’ despite the majority being liter-
ate in Bengali. Other studies of minority bilingual 
communities in Britain include Baynham (1993), 
Bhatt et al. (1996), Gregory (1996) and Saxena 
(1994). Multilingual literacies have also been 
extended to screen-based settings. Globalization of 
the Internet presents opportunities for multilingual 
literacy practices in online spaces. Lee (2007), for 
example, explores the ways in which Hong Kong 
people deploy multilingual resources in instant 
messaging.
Other recent directions in the field include 
making links with work on communities of prac-
tice (Barton and Tusting, 2005). Another direction 
has been work on spelling and orthography as 
social practices (Johnson, 2005; Sebba, 2007). 
Research on literacy and creativity (Papen and 
Tusting, 2006) again shows the value of Literacy 
Studies, showing individual creativity in literacy 
practices and how people combine resources to 
act within social structuring. 
39.5 CONCLUSIONS
The fact that people live and act in a textually-
mediated world is the issue which makes the theo-
retical and methodological frameworks provided 
by Literacy Studies so essential for the more gen-
eral study of language. Writing is not just speech 
written down, it is a different form of language 
and a distinct form of meaning-making. This is 
one of the original starting points of Literacy 
Studies as part of sociolinguistics (see Stubbs, 
1980). Sociolinguistic research which sets out 
from face-to-face spoken language interaction has 
difficulty in addressing other aspects of social life 
which are mediated by written texts. The social 
view of literacy introduced in this chapter is espe-
cially important in understanding and analysing 
contemporary changes in language use and inter-
action, including areas such as globalization and 
new technologies. Whether it is change in tech-
nologies, education, the nature of learning, the 
relation of language to poverty and social exclu-
sion, or language in the workplace, an analysis 
which starts from literacies is central to under-
standing language use in social life. Studies 
restricted to spoken language cannot adequately 
account for these crucial areas of contemporary 
language use.
The body of work within Literacy Studies also 
provides new methods of researching texts in con-
temporary social life. These include combining 
discourse analytic approaches of text analysis 
with ethnographic approaches of Literacy Studies 
and concentrating on the role of texts in specific 
domains of life. It is also essential to be explicit 
about such detailed, multi-method, collaborative 
and responsive methodologies. More broadly, 
Literacy Studies redefines the scope of linguistics 
and sociolinguistics and provides a paradigm 

LITERACY STUDIES
609
which is essential in the study of contemporary 
language use and how it is changing in the 
textually-mediated social world we inhabit.
