 

The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics is a useful resource 
for novices and experts alike. It provides a comprehensive compilation of expert reviews of up-
to-date academic research on theoretical and methodological aspects of SLA at the intersection of 
neurocognition and neurolinguistics.
Professor Viorica Marian, Northwestern University, USA
This volume is an invaluable, one-of-a-kind, one-stop resource for anyone interested in the neuro-
biological and neurocognitive bases of the acquisition of additional languages. The editors have 
made a titanic effort to include a wide range of methods, levels of linguistic analysis, languages, and 
populations, as motivated by cross-disciplinary perspectives.
Professor Cristina Sanz, Georgetown University, USA
This impressive handbook provides an authoritative in-depth overview of how cognitive neurosci-
ence has expanded our understanding of how the brain supports the acquisition and processing of a 
second or third language. It is a highly recommended resource for students and scholars—and for 
anyone interested in how a bilingual brain works.
Professor Karsten Steinhauer, McGill University, Canada
 
 

 

THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF 
SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 
AND NEUROLINGUISTICS
The Routledge Handbook of Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics provides a compre-
hensive discussion of a wide range of neurocognitive and neurobiological scientific research about 
learning second or additional languages. It is a one-of-a-kind centralized resource that brings together 
research that is typically found in disperse publication venues.
Eminent global scholars from various disciplines synthesize and cross-fertilize current and past 
neural research about second language through systematic, in-depth, and timely chapters that discuss 
core issues for understanding the neurocognition of second language learning, representation, and 
processing. Handbook sections provide overviews of extant and emerging neuroscience methods, 
syntheses of neurocognitive research on second language syntax, morphosyntax, lexicon, phonology, 
and pragmatics, and up-to-date descriptions of theoretical approaches of the neural basis of second 
language learning. The volume provides additional sections that synthesize research on a variety of 
topics including factors that affect the neurocognition of second language, the neural mechanisms 
underlying second language learning, individual differences in the neurocognition of second lan-
guage, as well as research on understudied languages and populations, such as sign language, child 
second language learners, and individuals with aphasia.
This handbook will be an indispensable resource to scholars and students across a wide range 
of disciplines, including those interested in second language acquisition, applied linguistics, cogni-
tive science, psychology, neuroscience, and research methodology. It should facilitate transformative 
connections between ideas and disciplines and lead to informative and productive paths for future 
research.
Kara Morgan-Short is Professor of Hispanic Linguistics and Psychology at the University of Illinois 
Chicago, USA. She directs the Cognition of Second Language Acquisition laboratory, has served 
as Associate Editor of the journal Language Learning, and has won undergraduate and graduate 
teaching and mentoring awards.
Janet G. van Hell is Distinguished Professor of Psychology and Linguistics and Director of the 
Center for Language Science at the Pennsylvania State University, USA. She has served as Editor of 
the Journal of Cognitive Psychology, and has received excellence in graduate student and postdoc 
mentoring awards.
 
 

ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOKS IN SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION
Susan M. Gass and Alison Mackey, Series Editors
Kimberly L. Geeslin, Associate Editor
The Routledge Handbooks in Second Language Acquisition are a comprehensive, must-have survey 
of this core sub-discipline of applied linguistics. With a truly global reach and featuring diverse con-
tributing voices, each handbook provides an overview of both the fundamentals and new directions 
for each topic.
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND WRITING
Edited by Rosa M. Manchón and Charlene Polio
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND SPEAKING
Edited by Tracey M. Derwing, Murray J. Munro and Ron I. Thomson
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND SOCIOLINGUISTICS
Edited by Kimberly Geeslin
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES
Edited by Shaofeng Li, Phil Hiver and Mostafa Papi
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND PSYCHOLINGUISTICS
Edited by Aline Godfroid and Holger Hopp
THE ROUTLEDGE HANDBOOK OF SECOND LANGUAGE ACQUISITION  
AND NEUROLINGUISTICS
Edited by Kara Morgan-Short and Janet G. van Hell
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/The-Routledge-Handbooks-
in-Second-Language-Acquisition/book-series/RHSLA
 
 

THE ROUTLEDGE 
HANDBOOK OF SECOND 
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION 
AND NEUROLINGUISTICS
Edited by Kara Morgan-Short and Janet G. van Hell
 
 

Designed cover image: © Getty Images | synthetick
First published 2023
by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
and by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2023 selection and editorial matter, Kara Morgan-Short and Janet G. van Hell;  
individual chapters, the contributors
The right of Kara Morgan-Short and Janet G. van Hell to be identified as the authors of the  
editorial material, and of the authors for their individual chapters, has been asserted in  
accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised  
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or  
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information  
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks,  
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-04202-2 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-04205-3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-19091-2 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Newgen Publishing UK
 
 

vii
CONTENTS
List of Contributors
xi
Overview	
1
	1	
Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics: A Synthesis of Perspectives	
3
Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
PART I 
Methodological Approaches for Neurolinguistic Examination of  
Second Language	
15
	2	
Using Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language	
17
Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
	3	
Using Quantitative Electroencephalography (qEEG) to Investigate  
Second Language Learning	
31
Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
	4	
Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization	
46
Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
	5	
Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language	
59
Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
	6	
Using Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language	
72
Nick B. Pandža
 
 

Contents
viii
PART II
The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Learning, Representation, and 
Processing	
85
	 7	 The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology: A View of Phonemic 
Contrast Learning	
87
Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
	 8	 The Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System	
101
Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
	 9	 The Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System: The 
Role of Grammar-Related and Speaker-Related Factors	
115
Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
	10	 The Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System	
133
José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
	11	 The Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System	
148
Francesca M. M. Citron
PART III
Neurolinguistic Theories and Models of Second Language	
163
	12	 How the Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits Support 
Second Language: Electrophysiological, Neuroimaging, and Neurological 
Evidence	
165
Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
	13	 Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches to Second Language 
Acquisition	
177
David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
	14	 Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity: Insights from the 
Dynamic Restructuring Model	
191
Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
	15	 Linguistic Relativity and Second Language: How Learning a Second 
Language May Reshape Cognition	
204
Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
	16	 Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language: How Can Second 
Language be Learned as First Language?	
217
Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
 

Contents
ix
PART IV
Underlying Factors and Individual Differences in the Neurocognition of 
Second Language	
231
	17	 Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition	
233
Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
	18	 Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition	
247
Lauren A. Fromont
	19	 De-generacy as an Organizing Principle of Bilingual Language 
Processing: Evidence from Brain and Behavior	
260
Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
	20	 Factors Accounting for Individual Differences in Second Language 
Neurocognition	
274
Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
PART V
Second Language in Relation to the Neurocognition of First Language and 
Additional Languages	
287
	21	 Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition	
289
Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
	22	 Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition	
302
Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
	23	 First Language/Second Language Crosslinguistic Influence on Third 
Language Acquisition via Neurocognitive Memory Systems	
314
Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
PART VI
The Neurocognition of Second Language Learning: Mechanisms and Contexts	
327
	24	 The Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing and Learning	
329
Edith Kaan
	25	 Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition	
341
Sybrine Bultena
	26	 Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition	
353
Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
 

Contents
x
	27	 Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition	
368
Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
	28	 Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning from a 
Neurocognitive Perspective	
381
Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
PART VII
Selective Topics in the Neurocognition of Second Language 	
395
	29	 The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception	
397
Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
	30	 Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition	
412
Alice Foucart
	31	 Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition	
424
Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
	32	 The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development	
436
Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
	33	 The Neurocognition of Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual 
Modality	
448
Gabriela Meade
	34	 Aphasia, Rehabilitation, and Second Language Neurocognition	
461
Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
Index
475
 

xi
CONTRIBUTORS
José Alemán Bañón is Associate Professor at the Centre for Research on Bilingualism, which is part 
of the Department for Swedish Language and Multilingualism at Stockholm University (Sweden). 
He has a PhD in linguistics from the University of Kansas. Alemán Bañón’s research, which has been 
funded by Riksbankens Jubileumsfond (The Bank of Sweden Tercentenary Foundation), examines 
the linguistic and cognitive factors that impact morphosyntactic processing in both native speakers 
and adult second language learners, in addition to the mechanisms that guide processing in both 
populations.
Anne L. Beatty-Martínez is Assistant Professor in the Department of Cognitive Science at the 
University of California, San Diego (USA), where she directs the Bilingualism in Context Lab. Her 
research has two intertwined strands: one that examines how cognition supports language use and 
another that asks how language use impacts cognition itself. In her work, she capitalizes on the diver-
sity and variability in people’s experiences to better understand how the mind and brain adapt to the 
demands of more than one language.
Nicoletta Biondo obtained a PhD in psychological sciences and education at the University of 
Trento (Italy) and then worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and 
Language (BCBL, Spain) and at the University of Siena (Italy). She is currently a Marie Skłodowska-
Curie fellow at University of California, Berkeley (USA), and at the BCBL. Her research combines 
theoretical linguistics and cognitive neuroscience to investigate the mechanisms involved during real-
time language comprehension. Her specialty is the study of time in language. She has investigated 
monolingual and bilingual adult sentence comprehension with eye-tracking and event-related 
potentials. Currently, she is investigating comprehension in aphasia with structural neuroimaging 
(lesion-symptom mapping).
Harriet Wood Bowden (PhD, Georgetown University) is Associate Professor of Spanish Linguistics 
in the Deparment of Spanish and Linguistics at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville (USA). Her 
research examines first, second, and heritage language acquisition and neurocognition. She is par-
ticularly interested in understanding the interaction of multiple learner-internal and external factors 
influencing language learning and neurocognition, including cognitive, pedagogical, and contextual 
(including study abroad vs. foreign language learning contexts).
 
 

List of Contributors
xii
Sybrine Bultena obtained her PhD from Radboud University (Nijmegen, The Netherlands), where 
she currently works as Assistant Professor in the Department of Modern Language and Cultures and 
Centre for Language Studies. She is also affiliated with the Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour (The Netherlands). Using behavioral techniques and EEG, she has published on lexical 
processing in bilinguals, as well as error monitoring, and feedback processing in L2 learners.
Sendy Caffarra is Assistant Professor in the Department of Biomedical, Metabolic and Neural 
Sciences at the University of Modena and Reggio Emilia (Italy) and a visiting scholar in the Graduate 
School of Education at Stanford University (USA). Her work is focused on how functional and struc-
tural properties of our brain change as a result of linguistic experience. Her research is placed at the 
intersection between neuroscience, psycholinguistics, and education.
Erin Carpenter is completing her PhD in speech-language pathology in the Center for Brain 
Recovery in the Department of Speech, Language & Hearing Sciences at Boston University, Sargent 
College of Health and Rehabilitation (USA). Following her undergraduate studies at Pennsylvania 
State University she was admitted into the combined MS/PhD program at Boston University, where 
she completed clinical training in speech-language pathology. Her research focuses on investigating 
the behavioral and neural correlates of language and cognition in bilingual aphasia to develop theoret-
ically motivated and clinically robust rehabilitation outcomes for bilingual individuals with aphasia.
Aina Casaponsa is Lecturer in the Department of Linguistics and English Language at Lancaster 
University (UK). She studies multilingual language comprehension and production with specific 
focus on cross-language interactions using behavioral and electrophysiological measures. She has 
investigated language-selective modulators of lexical access in same- and cross-script bilinguals 
across the lifespan and the cognitive factors underpinning successful second language learning. 
Funded by the British Academy, she is also investigating the impact of language(s) in visual percep-
tion and other non-linguistic cognitive processes.
Francesca M. M. Citron is Senior Lecturer in the Department of Psychology, Lancaster University 
(UK). She is a a psycholinguist and cognitive neuroscientist. Her main research interests include 
the effects of emotive content on language processing and its neural correlates; figurative language 
comprehension; multilingualism, i.e., how different languages are processed by multilinguals, but 
also a new focus on the effects of culture and cultural identity. More recently, she has developed 
an interest in literary reception an appreciation, i.e., affective, cognitive, and aesthetic responses 
to literary texts. She uses a range of methods, from ratings and behavioral measures, to pupil dila-
tion, electrophysiology, and neuroimaging. She is currently developing new research projects on 
intercultural pragmatics.
Lauren Covey is Assistant Professor in the Department of Linguistics at Montclair State University 
(USA). Her research interests center on sentence processing in second language learners and bilingual 
speakers, using psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic approaches. Her work additionally investigates 
how individual differences in a variety of linguistic and cognitive abilities, such as vocabulary know-
ledge, proficiency, working memory, and attentional resources, impact language processing.
Vincent DeLuca is Associate Professor of the Neurocognition of Bilingualism in the Department of 
Language and Culture at UiT The Arctic University of Norway. His research focuses primarily on 
how different aspects of bilingual experience affect brain structure, function, and several cognitive 
processes. His work focuses on how these neural and cognitive adaptations dynamically shift over 
 

List of Contributors
xiii
time and with changes to patterns of language use. He uses a combination of neuroimaging (e.g., 
EEG, MRI) and behavioral methods to examine this.
Danielle S. Dickson received her PhD in psychology from the University of Illinois at Urbana-
Champaign where she utilized EEG/ERPs to study a variety of cognitive processes, including arith-
metic comprehension and language processing. She continued this work in her postdoctoral studies 
at The University of Texas at San Antonio and expanded her research to incorporate creative thinking 
and bilingualism at The Pennsylvania State University. She is currently Senior Researcher at Sandia 
National Laboratories (USA).
Clara Ekerdt studied psychology at American University as well as Maastricht University 
and received her PhD from Leipzig University, having completed her doctoral training at the 
Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences. She is currently a postdoctoral 
researcher at the Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition, and Behaviour at Radboud University 
(The Netherlands) investigating the neural mechanisms that underlie age-related differences in 
L2 word learning.
Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg (PhD, University of Illinois at Chicago) is Associate Professor of 
Spanish Linguistics in the Department of World Languages and Cultures at Northern Illinois 
University (USA). Her research explores the role of individual differences in learner characteristics 
in explaining variability in linguistic development (behavioral and neurocognitive) for learners in 
various learning contexts, such as study abroad, domestic immersion, classroom instruction, and 
various laboratory settings.
Robert Fiorentino is Professor in the Department of Linguistics and Director of the Neurolinguistics 
& Language Processing Laboratory at the University of Kansas (USA). He has a PhD in linguistics 
from the University of Maryland. Fiorentino’s research, which has been supported by the National 
Science Foundation and National Institutes of Health, utilizes psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
approaches to examine the nature of linguistic representations, the mechanisms subserving language 
processing, and the acquisition of language in adult second language learners, with a primary focus 
on the domains of morphology, syntax, and semantics/pragmatics.
Alice Foucart is a full-time researcher at the Research Centre in Cognition at Nebrija University, 
Madrid (Spain). She obtained her PhD in psycholinguistics from the University of Edinburgh 
(UK) and Université de Provence (France). She worked as a post-doctorate in the UK (Heriot-Watt 
University, the University of Edinburgh, and the University of Bangor), Spain (Universitat Pompeu 
Fabra), and Belgium (Ghent University). Her research focuses on language processing in first and 
second language. She also investigates how language influences other cognitive aspects such as 
decision-making, emotion processing, and social cognition. Her research involves behavioral and 
(electro-)physiological methodologies.
Cheryl Frenck-Mestre is Senior Researcher at the French National Center for Scientific Research 
(CNRS) and is currently at the University of Aix-Marseille (France). From a psycholinguistic per-
spective, her research centers around bilingualism and first- and second language processing, with 
specific areas of interest ranging from phonetics to semantics, to syntax. She investigates the neural 
correlates of both L2 learning and processing, including cross-language influence, using electroen-
cephalography (event-related potentials and time-frequency analysis), eye movements, and, more 
recently, virtual reality.
 

List of Contributors
xiv
Lauren A. Fromont obtained her PhD in biomedical sciences in 2019. She worked at University 
of Montreal and McGill on characterizing the neurocognitive processes underlying sentence pro-
cessing in native and second language speakers. She now is the Scientific Programme Manager of the 
European Genome-Phenome Archive in the Centre for Genomic Regulation at the Barcelona Institute 
of Science and Technology (Spain). She focuses on data management in the mental health domain, 
as well as making data discoverable while preserving the participants privacy. She is also leading her 
own project to support institutions in adopting a gender perspective in health research.
Pamela Fuhrmeister is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Potsdam (Germany). 
She completed her PhD in 2020 at the University of Connecticut in the USA and was supervised by 
Emily Myers. Her research focuses on the cognitive and neural processes that help us perceive and 
produce speech, as well as learn new speech sounds. She is also interested in individual differences 
in speech perception and production.
Alison Gabriele is Professor in the Department of Linguistics and Director of the Second Language 
Acquisition Laboratory in the Department of Linguistics at the University of Kansas (USA). She 
has a PhD in linguistics from the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. Gabriele’s 
research, which has been supported by the National Science Foundation, focuses on the acquisition 
and processing of syntax and semantics in adult second language learners, focusing on the cognitive 
and linguistic factors that impact development.
Leah Gosselin is a PhD candidate in the Department of Linguistics at the University of Ottawa 
(Canada). She specializes in psycholinguistics, neurolinguistics, and bilingualism, and is currently 
investigating the link between code-switching and cognition. Leah was a visiting student at the Basque 
Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (Spain), where she completed research on accented-speech 
processing.
Taomei Guo is currently Professor in the State Key Laboratory for Cognitive Neuroscience 
and Learning at Beijing Normal University (P. R. China). Her research mainly focuses on the 
cognitive and neural mechanisms of bilingual language processing. She received her PhD from 
Beijing Normal University in 2004 and has been working there since then. She also worked at 
the Pennsylvania State University during 2007–2008, at the University of California (Riverside) 
during 2016–2017, and at the University of California (Los Angeles) during 2019–2020 as a 
visiting scholar.
Arturo E. Hernandez is currently Professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of 
Houston (USA). His main research interest is in the neural bases of bilingualism with a particular 
emphasis on a developmental perspective. His research has been funded by the National Institutes 
of Health and the National Science Foundation. Recent work has looked at the role of genetics and 
bilingualism on the ability to flexibly adapt to different cognitive tasks. His work is also informed by 
his own language experience. He is a simultaneous Spanish–English bilingual who became proficient 
in Portuguese and German as an adult.
Hyeonjeong Jeong is Professor in the Graduate School of International Cultural Studies &  
Department of Human Brain Science, IDAC, at Tohoku University (Japan). Her research focuses 
on the brain mechanisms involved in language acquisition and communication in both native (L1)  
and second (L2) language contexts. Jeong is currently Associate Editor of the Journal of 
Neurolinguistics.
 

List of Contributors
xv
Edith Kaan received her PhD in linguistics from the University of Groningen (The Netherlands). She 
is currently Professor at the Linguistics Department at the University of Florida, where she co-directs 
the Bilingualism, Language and Brain Lab. Edith Kaan pioneered the use of event-related brain 
potentials to study syntactic aspects of sentence processing. Her current research interests include 
predictive processing and adaptation in sentence-level processing. She uses various techniques (self-
paced reading, priming, eye-tracking, EEG) in various populations (late second language learners, 
early bilinguals, functional monolinguals) to answer her research questions. Her research has been 
supported by the National Science Foundation, National Institutes of Health, and the Dutch Research 
Council.
Merel Keijzer is Professor of English Linguistics & English as a Second Language at the University 
of Groningen (The Netherlands). She is the PI of the Bilingualism and Aging Lab (BALAB) and 
works on the interfaces of multilingualism (including attrition), and cognition as well as wellbeing 
across the lifespan.
Swathi Kiran, PhD, CCC-SLP, is the James and Cecilia Tse Ying Professor of Neurorehabilitation in 
the Department of Speech, Language & Hearing Sciences at Boston University (USA). Her previous 
research has utilized behavioral, psycholinguistic, and neuroimaging methods to answer clinically 
relevant questions in aphasia rehabilitation. Additionally, she has published extensively on topics 
in bilingual aphasia including measuring poststroke language impairment and predicting language 
treatment outcomes.
Denise Klein is Scientist and Neuropsychologist in the Cognitive Neuroscience Unit at the Montreal 
Neurological Institute (MNI), and Professor in the Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery at 
McGill University (Canada). She is the Director of the Centre for Research on Brain, Language, and 
Music (CRBLM). She obtained her PhD at the University of Witwatersrand in Johannesburg, South 
Africa. Klein came to the MNI in 1992 as a postdoctoral fellow to work with Brenda Milner. Klein’s 
current research program aims to understand how language experience influences and shapes brain 
organization.
Michal Korenar is Assistant Professor at the Department of Dutch Studies within the Amsterdam 
Center for Language and Communication at the University of Amsterdam, and he works at the 
Amsterdam University Medical Centers (The Netherlands). He seeks to understand how and whether 
the transformative experience of multilingualism can serve our societies in, for example, delaying 
neural and cognitive decline or boosting creative potential. Being awarded several personal and col-
laborative grants, Michal Korenar investigated the neuroscience of creativity and multilingualism in 
research labs worldwide.
Shanna Kousaie is Assistant Professor in the School of Psychology at the University of Ottawa, 
where she is the Director of the Cognitive Neuroscience of Bilingualism Laboratory. She obtained her 
PhD from Concordia University and pursued postdoctoral training at the Bruyère Research Institute 
and the MNI. Kousaie’s research aims to understand the interaction between language experience 
and cognition using a multi-method approach that includes behavioral, electrophysiological, and 
neuroimaging measures.
Ioulia Kovelman is Professor of Psychology at the University of Michigan. As a developmental 
cognitive neuroscientist, Kovelman uses behavioral and neuroimaging methods, especially optical 
fNIRS neuroimaging, to understand the effects of bilingualism on children’s language, literacy, and 
 

List of Contributors
xvi
brain development. Her research focuses on bilinguals learning typologically distinct languages, 
Spanish, English, and Chinese. Through this work, Kovelman addresses questions about the uni-
versal, language-specific, and bilingual influences on child language and reading development in 
neurotypical and at-risk learners.
Ping Li is Sin Wai Kin Professor in Humanities and Technology, Chair Professor of Neurolinguistics 
and Bilingual Studies, and Dean of the Faculty of Humanities at the Hong Kong Polytechnic 
University. His research uses cognitive neuroscience and computational methods to study language 
acquisition, bilingualism, and reading comprehension in both children and adults. Li is currently 
Editor-in-Chief of Brain and Language and Senior Editor of Cognitive Science. He is a fellow of the 
American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS).
Alicia Luque is Associate Professor of Applied Linguistics in the Department of Applied Language 
Studies at Nebrija University as well as a full-time researcher at Nebrija’s Research Center in Cognition 
(CINC) in Madrid (Spain). She obtained her PhD in Hispanic linguistics at the University of Illinois 
at Chicago (USA). Before joining Nebrija University, she worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in 
psycho/neurolinguistics of bi/multilingualism at UiT The Arctic University of Norway (Norway). Her 
research interests center on examining the various individual factors that contribute to proficient adult 
language learning and gaining a deeper understanding of how diverse bi/multilingual experiences 
impact linguistic, socio-affective, and neurocognitive function. Luque’s work primarily investigates 
adult second/third language acquisition and heritage speaker bilingualism, utilizing psycholinguistic 
and neurolinguistic theories and methods to explore the underlying mechanisms supporting bilin-
gual language processing, as well as the universality and diversity behind adult language learning 
outcomes across the continuum of bi/multilingualism.
Fengyang Ma is Associate Professor–Educator in the School of Education at the University of 
Cincinnati. Her research interests center on the investigation of bilingualism from psycholinguistic 
and neurolinguistic perspectives. She received her PhD from Tsinghua University. Then, she worked 
at the Pennsylvania State University as a postdoctoral visiting scholar and research assistant in the 
Center for Language Science and the Social, Life, and Engineering Sciences Imaging Center. From 
2015 till now, she has been working in the Center for English as a Second Language at the University 
of Cincinnati.
Simona Mancini obtained her PhD in cognitive science from the University of Siena (Italy). She is 
a Ramón y Cajal fellow and leads the Neurolinguistics and Aphasia Group at the Basque Center on 
Cognition, Brain and Language. Her work lies at the intersection between theoretical linguistics and 
cognitive neuroscience, with the goal of unveiling language architectural principles and its neurobio-
logical foundations using a wide range of experimental techniques (eye tracking, EEG, and fMRI) 
and populations (adult monolingual but also second-language and language-impaired speakers).
Gabrielle Manning is a PhD candidate in the Department of Linguistics at the University of Ottawa. 
She specializes in psycholinguistic research on bilingualism and second language acquisition. 
Specifically, she focuses on grammatical gender processing in second language French speakers. 
Emphasis is placed on the way speakers learn their second language and the age at which they are 
immersed in it.
Clara D. Martin is Ikerbasque Research Professor and the Leader of the ‘Speech and Bilingualism’ 
research group at the Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language (Spain). Her research group’s 
main objective is to explore the relationship between speech perception and production as well as 
 

List of Contributors
xvii
study language interactions in the bilingual mind. The research group investigates factors that impact 
multilingual speech processing, and how to influence and optimize second language sound and 
word learning. The group also explores bilingual language control, assessing language interference 
in multilinguals on the sound, word and sentence level in speech perception and production. The 
research group also focuses on the impact of orthographic systems on speech sounds and words on 
perception and production across modalities, languages, and populations. 
James M. McQueen studied experimental psychology at the University of Oxford and obtained his 
PhD from the University of Cambridge. He has held appointments at the MRC Applied Psychology 
Unit, Cambridge, and the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics, Nijmegen. He is currently 
Professor of Speech and Learning at Radboud University and Principal Investigator at the Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour (The Netherlands). He is a member of the Academia 
Europaea. His research is focused on how the building blocks of spoken language—its sounds and 
words—are used in communication, primarily in speech recognition, and on how they are learned, 
in L1 and L2.
Gabriela Meade is Assistant Professor in Speech Pathology and Research Associate in the 
Department of Neurology at the Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota (USA). She has a strong 
interest in the neural representation of languages, as revealed by studying second language learning, 
signed languages, and neurodegenerative speech and language disorders. 
David Miller is Assistant Professor of Spanish in the Department of Hispanic and Italian Studies at 
the University of Illinois at Chicago (USA). His research interests include language acquisition and 
processing, psycholinguistics, the psychology of multilingualism, and the effects of bi- and multi-
lingualism on behavior. His recent work has been published in Journal of Neurolinguistics, Applied 
Psycholinguistics, and Bilingualism: Language and Cognition.
Nicola Molinaro completed his PhD in cognitive science in 2007 at the University of Padova (Italy), 
and then moved to the University of La Laguna (Tenerife, Spain) and later to Basque Center on 
Cognition, Brain and Language (Spain) as a postdoc. In 2014, he was granted with a five-years 
Ikerbasque Fellowship being promoted to Ikerbasque Research Professor in 2023. He is now group 
leader of the Brain Rhythms and Cognition research group. The group explores how the brain encodes 
visual, auditory, and linguistic rhythms by focusing on neural oscillatory activity. Based on this 
approach we investigate predictive processing in language comprehension, music processing, and 
visual and attentional processes. These research lines merge into the more general goal of detecting 
oscillatory neural components that lead to the development of language disorders across the lifespan.
Kara Morgan-Short is Professor in the Department of Hispanic and Italian Studies and the Department 
of Psychology at the University of Illinois Chicago (USA) where she directs the Cognition of Second 
Language Acquisition Laboratory. Informed by the fields of linguistics, cognitive psychology, and 
neuroscience, her research aims to elucidate the neurocognitive processes underlying adult-learned 
language acquisition and use. Her work is published in a range of journals from Language Learning 
to Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. She has served as Associate Editor for Language Learning, 
currently serves on various editorial boards, and is the recipient of awards for teaching and mentoring 
undergraduate and graduate students.
Malayka Mottarella is a doctoral candidate in the Department of Cognitive Psychology at the 
University of Washington (USA). She received her BA in psychology from Willamette University 
 

List of Contributors
xviii
and her MS in psychology from the University of Washington. Her research uses neuroscience 
techniques, including EEG and MRI, to understand the factors driving individual differences in com-
plex skill performance and acquisition among healthy adults.
Emily Myers is Professor in the Department of Speech, Language, and Hearing Science and the 
Department of Psychological Sciences at the University of Connecticut (USA). Her work focuses on a 
fundamental question in human behavior: How do listeners perceive the speech signal in order to map 
it to meaning? Using neuroimaging methods (fMRI, ERP) together with standard psycholinguistic 
measures, work in her lab aims to understand the neural and behavioral mechanisms that underlie 
this process.
Anushka Oak completed her undergraduate career at the University of Houston with a BS in biology 
and a BA in Spanish. She is currently a fulbright scholar doing predoctoral cognitive neuroscience 
research in Spain and upon return will begin her doctorate at Georgetown University’s Interdisciplinary 
Program in Neuroscience (USA).
Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos is a PhD student in the Combined Program in Education and Psychology at 
the University of Michigan (USA). As an educational psychologist, she studies language and literacy 
development in young bilinguals, with a special emphasis on Spanish-speaking children, including 
heritage Spanish speakers in the USA. She is also interested in the role of the home language and 
literacy environment in shaping children’s school readiness. She collaborates with Kovelman and 
Satterfield in research related to the understanding of language representations in the bilingual brain 
in early childhood.
Nick B. Pandža is Assistant Research Scientist at the University of Maryland Applied Research 
Laboratory for Intelligence and Security (USA) and affiliated with the Program in Second Language 
Acquisition and the Language Science Center. He has also served as Lecturer in Brain and  
Language at the George Washington University and MRI Technician at the University of Maryland 
Neuroimaging Center. His work has primarily focused on the impact of individual differences on 
language processing and learning outcomes using advanced statistical methods with behavioral, psy-
chophysiological, and neurocognitive data.
Eric Pelzl earned his PhD at the University of Maryland and completed a postdoctoral fellowship 
in the Center for Language Science at The Pennsylvania State University. He recently started a pos-
ition as Assistant Professor in the Department of Chinese and Bilingual Studies at the Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University. His research utilizes psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic (ERP) methods to 
investigate first and second language speech perception and comprehension.
Christos Pliatsikas is Associate Professor in Psycholinguistics in Bi-/Multilinguals at the School of 
Psychology and Clinical Language Sciences, University of Reading (United Kingdom), and the Chair 
of the International Symposium on Bilingualism (ISB). He is on the Editorial Board of Bilingualism, 
Language and Cognition, and of Frontiers in Language Sciences, section Bilingualism. His work 
focuses on experience-based neuroplasticity, with a primary interest on the effects of bi-/multilin-
gualism on brain structure and function, including in brain development and ageing.
Chantel S. Prat is Professor at the University of Washington (USA) with appointments in the 
Departments of Psychology, Neuroscience, and Linguistics, and at the Institute for Learning and 
Brain Sciences, the Center for Neurotechnology, and the Institute for Neuroengineering. She earned 
 

List of Contributors
xix
her PhD at U.C. Davis and completed her postdoctoral work at Carnegie Mellon. Her interdisciplinary 
research investigates the biological basis of individual differences in cognition, with an emphasis 
on understanding the shared neural mechanisms underpinning language and higher-level executive 
functions.
Eleonora Rossi is Assistant Professor in the Departments of Linguistics and Psychology at the 
University of Florida (USA). The overarching goal of her work is to understand the earliest neuro-
cognitive markers of second language acquisition and the long-lasting neuroplasticity induced by 
bilingualism. Her work encompasses behavioral, cognitive, and neuroimaging techniques such as 
EEG (TFRs, ERPs, RS-EEG) and magnetic resonance imaging methodologies.
Jason Rothman is Professor of Linguistics in the Department of Language and Culture and UiT 
The Arctic University of Norway, and Adjunct Professor at Universidad Nebrija (Spain). His 
research deals with language acquisition and processing across the life span, especially in various 
types of bilingualism and multilingualism. He researches the mutually beneficial, bi-directional rela-
tionship between formal linguistic theory and experimental methods/evidence from psycho- and 
neurolinguistics. His recent work has been published in International Journal of Bilingualism, Brain 
Sciences, and Frontiers in Psychology.
Laura Sabourin is Associate Professor in Linguistics at the University of Ottawa (Canada) and 
the Director of the ERP Linguistics (ERPLing) Lab. She received her PhD from the University of 
Groningen. She specializes in the psycholinguistics of second language acquisition with a focus 
on grammatical gender, executive functioning skills, lexical access, and language transfer. In her 
research she investigates the roles that age of immersion and manner of acquisition play in second 
language use and processing.
Teresa Satterfield is Professor of Romance Linguistics, Linguistics and Combined Program of 
Education and Psychology at the University of Michigan (USA). She is a psycholinguist and part of 
the En Nuestra Lengua research group. Her areas of investigation include morphosyntactic devel-
opment in bilingual children, language representations in the bilingual brain, and (socio)linguistic 
questions concerning heritage (Spanish) language development. Extensions of her research program 
include heritage language literacy and advocacy for heritage language speakers. She is Founder and 
Director of the heritage Spanish academic program “En Nuestra Lengua Literacy and Culture Project 
(ENL)” for Spanish-speaking students in Southeastern Michigan.
Michael Scimeca is a PhD candidate in the Department of Speech, Language & Hearing Sciences at 
Boston University (USA). While completing his clinical training in speech-language pathology, he 
developed an interest in aphasia rehabilitation after providing clinical care to bilingual adults with 
language impairment. His research incorporates both behavioral and psycholinguistic perspectives to 
improve rehabilitation outcomes for bilinguals with aphasia.
Bregtje Seton is a PhD student in the Department of English Language and Culture at the University 
of Groningen and Psychometric Researcher at Cito in The Netherlands. She has done research on 
bilingualism, attrition, psycholinguistics, and neurolinguistics, and has taught courses on these topics 
as well as on statistics. She is co-author of the course book Essential Statistics for Applied Linguistics.
Kyle Swanson (PhD) Department of Second Language Studies, Indiana University Bloomington) 
is Continuing Lecturer in the Oral English Proficiency Program at Purdue University (USA). His 
 

List of Contributors
xx
research leverages generative approaches to language alongside psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
methods to characterize how adult L2 learners apply their grammatical knowledge to understand 
sentences in real time. His recent work has been published in the proceedings of BUCLD 46, Journal 
of Neurolinguistics, and PLOS ONE.
Atsuko Takashima studied medicine at Tsukuba University and worked as Psychiatrist at Tokyo 
Metropolitan Hiroo General Hospital. At the same time, she followed a clinical research program 
at Tokyo Medical and Dental University and obtained her PhD in medical sciences. She is currently 
a postdoctoral researcher at the Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour at Radboud 
University (The Netherlands) investigating memory consolidation using neuroimaging techniques 
with a focus on word acquisition.
Guillaume Thierry is Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience in the School of Human and  
Behavioural Sciences, Bangor University (UK), and Faculty of English, Adam Mickiewicz  
University (Poland). He studies auditory and visual language comprehension and production. Funded 
by the BBSRC, the ESRC, the AHRC, the ERC, and the British Academy, he has investigated 
meaning integration in infants and adults at lexical, syntactic, and conceptual levels, using behavioral 
measurements, ERPs, eye-tracking, and fMRI, in different sensory modalities, different languages, 
and different coding systems (verbal / nonverbal). Thierry’s core research question is how the human 
brain crystallizes knowledge and builds up a meaningful representation of the world around it. 
He now focuses on linguistic relativity and language–emotion interactions in communication and 
decision-making.
Trisha Thomas is a PhD student at the Basque Center on Cognition, Brain and Language and the 
University of the Basque Country (Spain), approaching PhD in cognitive neuroscience. Her research 
focuses on how interlocutor identity affects information processing and memory.
Debra A. Titone is Professor of Psychology and Canada Research Chair in Language & 
Multilingualism at McGill University (Canada). She is an active member of the Centre for Research 
in Brain, Language and Music, and the current leader of the Montréal Bilingualism Initiative. Her 
work investigates a variety of questions pertaining to language use: How people comprehend and 
produce the languages that they know and how they read, learn novel linguistic forms, or use for-
mulaic or metaphoric language. She examines these questions across different domains and uses 
varied methods, most notably eye-tracking studies of reading but also neuroscience and computa-
tional methods.
Victoria Tkacikova received a BA in psychology and English from Binghamton University. She 
earned an MS in cognitive psychology from the University of Pittsburgh. She is currently pursuing 
her PhD in cognitive psychology in the Department of Psychology and the Learning Research 
and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh (USA). Her research examines individual 
differences in adult second language learning and the effectiveness of second language instructional 
methods.
Natasha Tokowicz received a BA in psychology with a minor in Spanish from the University of 
Massachusetts at Amherst. She earned an MS and PhD in cognitive psychology from The Pennsylvania 
State University. She completed postdoctoral fellowships at Carnegie Mellon University and the 
University of Pittsburgh prior to beginning a faculty appointment at the University of Pittsburgh in 
2004. She is currently Associate Dean for Equity, Faculty Development, and Community Engagement 
 

List of Contributors
xxi
in the Dietrich School of Arts and Sciences, and Professor of Psychology and Linguistics and Senior 
Scientist at the Learning Research and Development Center at the University of Pittsburgh (USA), 
with an appointment in the Center for the Neural Basis of Cognition. Her research combines behav-
ioral and cognitive neuroscientific methodologies to address questions about adult second language 
learning and bilingualism. Her book Lexical Processing and Second Language Acquisition was 
published by Routledge.
Michael T. Ullman is Professor in the Department of Neuroscience at Georgetown University (USA), 
with secondary appointments in the Departments of Neurology and Psychology. He is the Director 
of the Brain and Language Laboratory and the Director of Medical Neuroscience at Georgetown 
University Medical School. He teaches undergraduate, masters, PhD, and medical students. His 
research examines the neurocognition of first and second language, math, reading, and memory; 
how these domains are affected in various disorders (e.g., autism, dyslexia, developmental lan-
guage disorder, aphasia, Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s diseases); and how they may be 
modulated by factors such as genetic variability, sex, handedness, and aging.
Janet G. van Hell is Distinguished Professor of Psychology and Linguistics at the Pennsylvania 
State University (USA) and also serves as the Director of the Center for Language Science. Funded 
(mainly) by the National Science Foundation, her research focuses on the neural and cognitive 
processes related to diversity and variability in language use and experience in L2 learners and 
monolingual, bilingual, and bidialectal speakers. She combines neuropsychological and behavioral 
techniques to study patterns of L2 learning, cross-language interaction, codeswitching, creative lan-
guage use, and accented-speech processing.
Kelly A. Vaughn is Assistant Professor in the Department of Pediatrics at the Children’s Learning 
Institute, part of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (USA). She received her 
graduate training in the neural bases of bilingualism under the mentorship of Arturo Hernandez. Now, 
her research uses neuroimaging to understand and support early language and cognitive develop-
ment, particularly for bilingual children. Her current research, focused on bilingual development in 
toddlers who were born preterm, is funded by the National Institutes of Health Office of the Director’s 
Tackling Acquisition of Language in Kids (TALK) initiative (2023–2025).
Toms Voits is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Gothenburg (Sweden) and UiT The Arctic 
University of Norway. His research interests lie at the intersection of linguistics, language sciences, 
and cognitive neuroscience. He is most interested in understanding the neurocognitive effects of bi-/
multilingualism (among other types of learning and lifestyle experiences), especially in the later years 
of life and on clinical neurodegeneration. His research employs a combination of behavioral and 
neuroimaging (EEG/MRI) methods.
Patrick Chun Man Wong is Professor of Cognitive Neuroscience and Linguistics and Founding 
Director of Brain and Mind Institute at The Chinese University of Hong Kong. He received his 
degrees in linguistics and cognitive psychology from the University of Texas at Austin and completed 
postdoctoral training in neuroscience at the University of Chicago. Wong conducts interdisciplinary 
research on cultural and biological factors that influence language and cognition, utilizing methods 
ranging from brain imaging to field research. A Guggenheim fellow, Wong, has published over 100 
research papers with media reports in outlets such as The New York Times and Scientific American.
 

List of Contributors
xxii
Emily Shimeng Xu is a postdoctoral associate of the Division of Pediatric Otolaryngology at Ann 
& Robert H. Lurie Children’s Hospital of Chicago (USA). Xu received her Master of Science degree  
in education with a focus on educational linguistics from the University of Pennsylvania and 
her Master of Arts degree in linguistics from The Chinese University of Hong Kong, where she  
completed her doctoral study on neurolinguistics and received her PhD degree in 2022. Xu’s research 
is focused on investigating the neurocognitive mechanisms of language acquisition and processing 
using complementary behavioral methods and neuroimaging techniques such as EEG and fNIRS.
Ana Zappa is a Marie Sklodowska-Curie fellow at the Department of Cognition, Development and 
Educational Psychology at the University of Barcelona (Spain). Her research focuses on the role of 
embodied semantics and social interaction in second language learning. She is particularly interested 
in examining the neural correlates of such using EEG, combined with virtual reality, as a means of 
providing learners with more ecologically valid environments.
 
newgenprepdf

Overview
 
 

 

3
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-2
1
SECOND LANGUAGE 
ACQUISITION AND 
NEUROLINGUISTICS
A Synthesis of Perspectives
Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
Introduction
Learning a second or additional language (L2) is arguably one of the most complex learning tasks 
for the human mind. Research that examines how human brains and minds learn, process, and use 
languages brings us closer to a comprehensive understanding not only of language learning, but also 
of how our minds and brains learn complex information more generally. The Routledge Handbook 
on Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics presents a current, comprehensive account of 
state-of-the-art knowledge on neural approaches to L2 learning, processing, and use. This handbook 
provides thorough overviews of theoretical and methodological L2 neurolinguistic approaches and 
in-depth considerations of a range of linguistic and cognitive topics related to the neurocognition 
of L2 learning. The brain-based focus on L2 learning and processing uniquely positions this 
handbook among preceding works published in the series of Routledge Handbooks in Second 
Language Acquisition, including the Routledge Handbook on Second Language Acquisition and 
Psycholinguistics, the Routledge Handbook on Second Language Acquisition and Sociolinguistics, 
and the Routledge Handbook on Second Language Acquisition and Individual Differences.
Since the mid to late 1990s, brain-based research addressing the question of how individuals 
learn, process, and use L2 has grown exponentially. An interesting aspect of brain-based research 
on L2 learning, processing, and use is that it is pursued by researchers working in a wide range 
of scientific disciplines, including neuroscience, psychology, applied linguistics, linguistics, and 
modern languages. These researchers often attend and present their research at different profes-
sional conferences and publish their research across a wide range of outlets that range from journals 
in (applied) linguistics to neuroscience journals. However, there are not centralized resources and 
venues that aggregate brain-based research on L2. We believe that the Handbook of Second Language 
Acquisition and Neurolinguistics will serve as a resource that brings together state-of-the-art know-
ledge about the brain and L2 from across a range of disciplines and research topics. By bringing 
together outstanding scholars working at the forefront of brain-based research on L2, we aim to 
offer readers a centralized, comprehensive resource about L2 neurolinguistic research that serves 
the purpose of (a) revealing the range of L2 neurolinguistic research; (b) providing state-of-the-art 
overviews of extant L2 neurolinguistic topics; (c) establishing future directions for neurolinguistic 
research on these topics; and (d) facilitating transformative connections between ideas and between 
researchers.
 
 
 
 

Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
4
Acknowledging disciplinary differences in terminology, and embracing an inclusive approach, in 
our role as editors we respected authors’ preferred terminology and did not impose a uniform vocabu-
lary in the handbook. Consequently, terms like acquisition, learning, and development may be used 
interchangeably or differently across the chapters, as is true for neurolinguistics, neurocognition, 
cognitive neuroscience, neuropsychology, and neurobiology. Additionally, we allowed the internal 
organization of the chapters to vary to some extent so that our expert authors could most effectively 
structure the information that they wanted to convey for their topic. Thus, although core methodo-
logical, theoretical, and empirical research is always provided, there is some variability among the 
chapters within each section, for example, whether historical information or applied implications are 
presented. At the same time, we made a concerted effort to consistently optimize accessibility to the 
specific topics discussed in each chapter, with the underlying goal being to maximize the scope of 
the handbook’s readership. Inevitably, background knowledge may be needed to fully comprehend a 
given chapter, and readers are encouraged to consult resources provided as references in the text or in 
the further readings section at the end of each chapter.
Research Themes and Perspectives Within Neurolinguistic  
Research on L2 Learning, Processing, and Use
Historically, our initial insights into the neural basis of using two languages were provided by 
experiments of nature: individuals whose language use was affected by a stroke or other acquired-
brain injury, known as aphasia. In their pioneering work on language loss in bilingual aphasia, 
Ribot and Pitres argued that language loss does not manifest itself in the same degree of severity in 
both languages, but rather occurs asymmetrically, with one language more affected than the other. 
According to Ribot’s (1887) law, the earlier acquired language (native language, L1) is preserved 
better after acquired brain injury. In contrast, Pitres’s (1895) law states that the individual’s dominant 
language before the injury is less affected by brain injury, whether or not this is the individual’s L1. 
Such asymmetry also emerges in recovery patterns following brain injury, which led Paradis (1977) 
to identify six different recovery patterns. (For more details on historical and current clinical and the-
oretical perspectives on bilingual aphasia, see Scimeca, Carpenter, & Kiran, this volume.)
Over time, the development of neurocognitive techniques to study the intact brain, such as func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and electroencephalography (EEG), led to significant 
advances in brain-based research on language processing. Here we highlight several main research 
themes that have guided empirical studies that used neurocognitive methods to examine L2 learning, 
processing, and use, published since the mid to late 1990s: (a) the neural basis for critical periods 
in L2 learning and variability in other learner-related individual difference variables; (b) the neural 
organization of the bilingual brain; (c) patterns of crosslinguistic interaction and transfer in the 
bilingual mind and brain; (d) how language learning experience and learning context impact the 
neurocognitive basis of L2 processing; (e) whether and how L2 learning induces changes in cognitive 
processing and neural structures; (f) whether and how the neural underpinnings and mechanisms of 
L2 processing differ from those of L1 processing.
Whether there is a critical period for language learning is a longstanding and fundamental question 
in human development and learning in general (Penfield & Roberts, 1959) and for L2 learning in 
particular (e.g., Lenneberg, 1967). In fact, Science identified the question “Why are there critical 
periods for language learning?” as one of the 125 critical questions for the next 25 years (Kennedy 
& Norman, 2005). In the context of the critical period hypothesis for L2 learning, neurocognitive 
studies sought to identify the existence of a biologically constrained critical period for L2 learning, 
after which learners are unable to acquire and process their L2 in a way that is qualitatively similar to 
L1 native speakers. Questions that guided this research included whether patterns of L2 learning and 
processing are driven by age of L2 acquisition or L2 proficiency, using the native-speaker benchmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics
5
to interpret L2 learners’ neural organization (for a review, see Van Hell, 2023). These questions con-
tinue to inspire current research (see, for example, the handbook chapters by Fromont, this volume; 
Myers & Fuhrmeister, this volume; as well as Alemán Bañón, Fiorentino, & Gabriele, this volume; 
Biondo, Molinaro, & Mancini, this volume; Miller, DeLuca, Swanson, & Rothman, this volume), but 
have also evolved in more nuanced approaches the past decades. For example, researchers acknow-
ledge that patterns of L2 learning and processing are affected by many other factors beyond age of 
acquisition and L2 proficiency, such as L2 learning experience (e.g., see Beatty-Martínez & Titone, 
this volume; Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume; Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume) and indi-
vidual variability in genetic factors (Vaughn, Oak, & Hernandez, this volume) as well as cognitive 
functions, language learning aptitude, and motivation (see Grey, Fox, Serafini & Sanz, 2015; Ekerdt, 
Takashima, & McQueen, this volume; Luque & Covey, this volume; Mottarella & Prat, this volume). 
These insights have also inspired researchers to acknowledge that L2 learning trajectories are multi-
faceted, and that their complexity should be embraced rather than narrowed down to an idealized 
native speaker benchmark (cf. Van Hell, in press, and associated commentaries).
A second major field of inquiry inspired by early studies on the neural basis of L2 learning and 
processing pertains to the neural organization of languages in the bilingual brain (Kousaie & Klein, 
this volume). Decades of research have been summarized in recently published meta-analyses on 
the neural areas that are associated with bilinguals’ processing of phonology, lexico-semantics, and 
grammar in L1 and L2 (Sulpizio et al., 2020), the impact of AoA and L2 proficiency on language 
representation in the bilingual brain (Cargnelutti et al., 2019), and the neural correlates of lexical 
and grammatical learning in experimentally controlled language training studies (Tagarelli et al., 
2019). For example, Sulpizio et al.’s (2020) meta-analysis concluded that bilinguals’ lexico-semantic 
processing in L1, as compared to L2, is associated with a widespread activation pattern of cortico-
subcortical regions (largely overlapping with the semantic network identified for monolingual lan-
guage processing), whereas lexico-semantic processing in L2, as compared to L1, is more constrained 
and involves activation of regions associated with cognitive control-related functions (see also 
Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume). In contrast, the neural regions involved in bilinguals’ grammar 
processing overlapped to some extent in the L1 and L2 comparisons and mainly engaged frontal/
basal ganglia networks that have been associated with procedural-related circuits (see also Ullman & 
Morgan-Short, this volume). Neural structures involved in bilinguals’ phonological processing in L1 
and L2 also overlapped to some extent, and involved frontal regions (more widespread for L2) that 
are key components of the dorsal pathway in dual-stream models of speech processing (e.g., Hickok 
& Poeppel, 2007; Saur et al., 2008). Tagarelli et al.’s meta-analysis synthesized the neuroimaging lit-
erature on lexical and grammar learning in experimentally controlled language training studies. They 
found that lexical and grammar learning yielded overlapping activation in frontal and posterior par-
ietal regions. They further found that only lexical learning showed ventral occipitotemporal activa-
tion (ventral pathway in dual-stream models of speech processing), whereas only grammar learning 
showed basal ganglia activation (associated with procedural learning functions; see also Ullman & 
Morgan-Short, this volume).
Another central question in neurocognitive and psycholinguistic research on L2 learning, pro-
cessing, and use is the impact of the native language, or L1. Such crosslinguistic influences and 
transfer are pervasive at all levels of language processing, including phonology, lexico-semantics, 
morphology, syntax, and pragmatics. Dissimilarities and similarities between L1 and L2 systems 
are at the root of negative and positive transfer effects (for reviews, see Caffarra et al., 2015; Kroll 
et al., 2015; McManus, 2021). Furthermore, crosslinguistic influences surface across a wide range 
of L2 learners and bilinguals, including dual language learners (see Ortiz-Villalobos, Kovelman, 
& Satterfield, this volume), heritage speakers, early and late L2 learners at different levels of L2 
proficiency, as well as individuals who experience attrition (Keijzer & Seton, this volume; see also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
6
Bergmann et al., 2015; Steinhauer & Kasparian, 2020). Crosslinguistic influences also surface across 
languages in different modalities (e.g., Lee et al., 2019; Meade, this volume), from L1/L2 to third 
language (L3) and subsequent languages (Cabrelli et al., 2023; Xu & Wong, this volume), and from 
the weaker to the stronger language and vice versa (Sabourin & Manning, this volume). This hand-
book highlights brain-based research that seeks to understand the neural basis of, and mechanism 
associated with, crosslinguistic interaction and transfer in L2 learning, processing, and use; this theme 
emerges in the aforementioned chapters and in many others, including chapters discussing foreign-
accented speech comprehension (Caffarra, Gosselin, Thomas, & Martin, this volume), phonological 
(Myers & Fuhrmeister, this volume; Marian et al., 2017), lexico-semantic (Tokowicz & Tkacikova, 
this volume), morphological (Biondo, Molinaro, & Mancini, this volume), syntactic (Alemán Bañón, 
Fiorentino, & Gabriele, this volume), and pragmatic (Citron, this volume) processing, as well as in 
child L2 learning (Ortiz-Villalobos, Kovelman, & Satterfield, this volume).
An additional critical question in L2 learning and bilingualism behavioral research that is now 
being addressed by brain-based approaches is how the varied contexts in which additional languages 
are learned and used (e.g., classroom, study abroad, immersion, and contexts with different patterns 
of bilingual and multilingual use) shape how they may be represented and processed on a neural 
level. In regard to learning additional languages, an instructed context that provides metalinguistic 
information about the L2 may lead to learning that is supported by different neural substrates and 
processes as compared to uninstructed contexts such as immersion (see Jeong & Li, this volume). 
The growing empirical literature on this topic will certainly have implications for theoretical 
perspectives of the neural basis of L2, as not all theories have fully accounted for context (see 
more in Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume). Even more specifically, within any particular 
learning context, learners are likely to receive different types of L2 feedback, which is minimally 
understood from a neurolinguistic perspective. Leveraging the vast body of EEG literature on the 
neural mechanisms of feedback in domains other than language, along with the substantial body 
of behavioral research about L2 feedback, promises to reveal new insights into the specific neural 
mechanisms that contribute to feedback-driven L2 learning (Bultena, this volume). More broadly 
speaking, adapting a framework, such as de-generacy (Beatty-Martínez & Titone, this volume), 
to understand the complex experiences of learning and using additional languages should provide 
a greater understanding of variability in language use and language control among individuals in 
different contexts.
A fifth question that has gained considerable research interest in the past decades is whether and 
how L2 learning induces changes in cognitive processing and neural structures. Moving beyond 
the heated “bilingual advantage” debate—the contested notion that bilingualism improves perform-
ance in other cognitive domains, in particular executive functioning (e.g., Antoniou, 2019; De Bruin 
et al., 2021; Kroll & Bialystok, 2013; Paap et al., 2015, and commentaries), brain-based research 
has sought to unravel how L2 learning experience and the frequent use of two or more languages 
impact the neural underpinnings and mechanisms of language control and domain-general cognitive 
tasks (Bialystok & Craik, 2022; Guo & Ma, this volume; Tao et al., 2021; Zirnstein et al., 2018), 
induce structural changes in the brain (Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume), or reshape the L2 learner’s 
conceptualization of the world (Casaponsa & Thierry, this volume; Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this 
volume).
A final question highlighted here pertains to the ways in which the neural underpinnings and 
mechanisms of language processing are different for L2 processing as compared to L1 processing. 
More specifically, there is an emergent literature, as reviewed by Kaan (this volume) that observed 
that predictive processing in L2 sentence processing is different from that in L1 sentence processing 
(see also Alemán Bañón, Fiorentino, & Gabriele, this volume; Beatty-Martínez & Titone, this volume; 
Sabourin & Manning, this volume). Relatedly, anticipatory affective processing, that is, how the brain 
prepares for an upcoming emotional event, also seems contingent upon the language of operation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics
7
in bilinguals (Jonczyk et al., 2019). In addition, neurocognitive studies exploring embodied lan-
guage processing and learning have found that sensorimotor networks are less involved in L2 than 
in L1 processing (Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume), possibly because L2 learning is often more 
decontextualized than L1 acquisition (see also Jeong & Li, this volume). The emergent literature on 
the so-called foreign-language effect in decision making observed that using the L2 rather than the L1 
can modulate bilinguals’ economic decisions and moral judgements (Foucart, this volume).
Finally, technological advancements in research methods and analyses that characterize the field 
of neuroscience in general have also found their way in neurolinguistic research on L2 learning, 
processing, and use (see, for example, Pandža, this volume; Rossi, Voits, & DeLuca, this volume). 
These technological advancements have generated more reliable research outcomes, but have also 
paved the way for future studies to address new avenues of inquiry (see, for example, Dickson & 
Pelzl, this volume). Throughout the handbook, when considering the various research themes and 
perspectives, most chapters include a section describing the history of their specific field of research, 
how the research has changed over time, and how our understanding of the neurocognition of L2 has 
accumulated over the past decades. 
Topics and Themes of the Handbook
To cover the multifaceted field of neurocognitive and neurobiological scientific research about 
learning second or additional languages, we structured the handbook in seven sections:
Part I	
Methodological Approaches for Neurolinguistic Examination of Second Language
Part II	
The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Learning, Representation, and Processing
Part III	
Neurolinguistic Theories and Models of Second Language
Part IV	
Underlying Factors and Individual Differences in the Neurocognition of Second Language
Part V	
Second Language in Relation to the Neurocognition of First Language and Additional 
Languages
Part VI	
The Neurocognition of Second Language Learning: Mechanisms and Contexts
Part VII	
Selective Topics in the Neurocognition of Second Language
To make the handbook accessible to a wide audience, including readers with little prior know-
ledge on a (particular) neurolinguistic method, Part I provides readers with an introduction to the 
neurolinguistic methodological approaches that have been used to examine L2 learning, representa-
tion, and processing. This includes both well-established neurolinguistic methods that are continu-
ously evolving, such as EEG and fMRI, as well as emerging methods that have been more recently 
introduced to L2 research, such as transcranial magnetic stimulation. The scope of these methods is 
broad in that they provide time-based (e.g., event related-potentials, ERP), frequency-based (e.g., 
EEG oscillations), space-based (e.g., fMRI), and matter-based (e.g., diffusion tensor imaging) data 
regarding the neurocognition of language processing. The chapters in Part I thus establish a founda-
tion for a full understanding of subsequent chapters on topics that are informed by these methodo-
logical approaches. These chapters will also provide a basis for graduate students and researchers 
who endeavor to adopt these methods into their own research. The first two chapters in Part 1 focus on 
EEG approaches. Chapter 2 familiarizes readers with the fundamental principles of the EEG method, 
in particular the ERP technique, and its application in L2 research (Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). 
Chapter 3 discusses frequency-based, or quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG), an approach 
in which EEG signals are decomposed into different oscillatory frequencies, and how this approach 
has been used to study individual differences in neural processing associated with L2 learning and 
use. This chapter specifically focuses on how intrinsic (task-free) and dynamic (task-based) qEEG 
measures predict L2 learning success and how these measures are modulated by past L2 experiences 
 
 
 

Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
8
(Mottarella & Prat, this volume). Chapters 4 and 5 focus on neuroimaging methods. Chapter 4 discusses 
the use of functional neuroimaging to investigate L2 brain organization, and reviews research that 
has used positron emission tomography (PET) and fMRI to study language processing in L2 users 
and bilinguals. This chapter also discusses more recent methods that have been developed in the 
field, reflecting the gradual shift of focus from identifying the function of specific brain regions to 
characterizing the spatial and temporal dynamics of functional networks that connect different brain 
regions (Kousaie & Klein, this volume). Chapter 5 reviews how structural neuroimaging methods 
are used in L2 research to examine structural neural changes that occur in response to L2 acquisition 
and bilingualism. This chapter discusses techniques (including voxel-based morphometry, cortical 
thickness, vertex-based analysis, and diffusion tensor imaging) to study the brain’s gray and white 
matter structure adaptations to L2 learning and bilingual engagement, and exemplifies each technique 
by discussing key research articles (Rossi, Voits, & DeLuca, this volume). Chapter 6, the final chapter 
in Part I, discusses how methods of non-invasive brain stimulation—methods that modulate neural 
activity (including transcranial magnetic stimulation, transcranial electrical stimulation, and transcu-
taneous peripheral nerve stimulation)—have and can be used to investigate and enhance L2 learning 
and processing (Pandža, this volume).
Part II provides an overview of the extant knowledge regarding how L2s are learned, represented, 
and processed in the brain. Part II is structured by different linguistic domains: phonology, lexico-
semantics, morphology, syntax, and pragmatics. Each chapter provides an empirical review and 
synthesis of our understanding of L2 learning, representation, and processing within the specific lin-
guistic domain, as informed by the relevant methods described in Part 1. In Chapter 7, the first chapter 
of Part II, Myers and Fuhrmeister discuss one of the most difficult challenges for the (late) L2 learner, 
the learning of speech sounds. After describing the neurobiology of novel speech sound learning, the 
chapter reviews empirical evidence for multiple neural systems that support speech sound learning 
and describes individual differences in brain structure and function that predict individual variability 
in learning success (Myers & Fuhrmeister, this volume). Chapter 8 focuses on the lexico-semantic 
system, and reviews studies that have used various neurolinguistic methods to examine key questions 
in this field of inquiry: patterns of cross-language interaction during bilingual word recognition and 
word production, how the L2 lexico-semantic system relies on inhibitory and cognitive control of 
the L1 and L2, and how the structure and function of the L2 lexico-semantic system changes with 
increasing proficiency (Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume). In Chapter 9, Biondo, Molinaro, and 
Mancini focus on the L2 morphological system, and provide a comprehensive review of research 
on the neural correlates related to L2 morphological processing, highlighting the role that grammar-
related factors (e.g., L1–L2 similarity) and speaker-related factors (e.g., L2 immersion, age of acqui-
sition) have in shaping the L2 morphological system and its neurocognitive underpinnings (Biondo, 
Molinaro, & Mancini, this volume). In Chapter 10, Alemán Bañón, Fiorentino, and Gabriele also 
highlight the roles of grammar-related and speaker-related factors, here as they describe the neural 
basis of L2 syntactic processing, in particular basic phrase structure, word order, and wh-dependencies 
(Alemán Bañón, Fiorentino, & Gabriele, this volume). Part II concludes with Chapter 11 on the L2 
pragmatic system, the study of language as used in context and going beyond linguistic knowledge 
per se to incorporate social context, speaker intention, and listener background. As pragmatics is 
an understudied topic in the field of L2 neurocognition, Citron builds on the emergent literature on 
L2 pragmatic routines (figurative expressions) and discourse comprehension, and provides valuable 
suggestions for promising future avenues of neurolinguistic research on L2 pragmatics (Citron, this 
volume).
Part III focuses on domain-general and domain-specific theoretical neurolinguistic accounts 
of L2 in order to present explanatory accounts of the neurocognition of L2 learning, processing, 
and use. In Chapter 12, Ullman and Morgan-Short discuss how the declarative/procedural (DP) 
model accounts for L2 neurocognition. After describing the declarative and procedural learning and 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics
9
memory brain circuits and ensuing predictions for language, the authors outline how this model 
aligns with evidence from electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological (lesion) studies on 
L2 learning and processing (Ullman & Morgan-Short, this volume). In Chapter 13, L2 neurocognition 
is discussed from a generative approach to L2 acquisition. In this chapter, Miller, DeLuca, Swanson, 
and Rothman discuss how, from a generative second language acquisition (GenSLA) perspec-
tive, neurocognitive methods can address key GenSLA questions including L2 learners’ ultimate 
attainment and the tenability of a critical period for L2 acquisition (Miller, DeLuca, Swanson, & 
Rothman, this volume). A different theoretical perspective is taken in Chapter 14 by Korenar and 
Pliatsikas who, through the lens of experience-dependent neuroplasticity in various groups of L2 
learners, discuss how the framework of the dynamic restructuring model aligns with the available 
evidence on the structural brain changes induced by L2 learning and use (Korenar & Pliatsikas, this 
volume). In Chapter 15, Casaponsa and Thierry synthesize perspectives from linguistic relativity, 
embodiment, and functional plasticity of the human brain, and present an account of how learning 
words and grammatical constructs in L2 can affect non-verbal cognition and may shift and reshape 
the L2 learner’s perception and conceptualization of the world (Casaponsa & Thierry, this volume). 
Part III concludes with Chapter 16 discussing a social L2 learning (SL2) perspective, postulated by 
Jeong and Li, stating that L2 learning, especially beyond the sensitive period, benefits from social 
interaction and enriched exposure in real life, as in L1 learning. Their chapter highlights the social 
and affective dimensions of SL2, along with the underlying cognitive and neural correlates, and 
reviews neural evidence that supports the SL2 perspective in showing that different brain networks 
may be implicated in SL2-based learning than in traditional classroom-based L2 learning (Jeong & 
Li, this volume).
Parts IV–VII are topic oriented and provide overviews of neurolinguistic work on factors and 
mechanisms that affect L2 learning, processing, and use. The topics cover a broad range of factors 
in order to provide a comprehensive view of the state-of-art work on the neurocognition of L2. Part 
IV entails four chapters that each highlight specific topics within the overarching theme of under-
lying factors and individual differences in the neurocognition of L2. This part opens with Chapter 17 
by Vaughn, Oak, and Hernandez on genetic factors in L2 neurocognition that provides an overview 
of theoretical perspectives and empirical work on the interplay between genetics and environment, 
that is, nature and nurture, related to L2 learning and processing. An as of yet understudied topic in 
the L2 literature, Vaughn and colleagues exploit the extant literature to postulate a foundation for 
large-scale, genome-wide research on genetic differences in L2 acquisition, and future directions for 
research on genetics and L2 acquisition (Vaughn, Oak, & Hernandez, this volume). In Chapter 18, 
Fromont reviews theoretical perspectives and neurocognitive evidence on how L2 age of acquisi-
tion and L2 proficiency shape the L2 learner’s mind and brain, and outlines novel approaches to 
examine inter-individual variability in these prominent factors (Fromont, this volume). In Chapter 19, 
Beatty-Martínez and Titone introduce de-generacy, a term adopted from systems biology, that is taken 
to reflect how different elements (e.g., linguistic forms, cognitive processes, or brain regions) are 
functionally interchangeable under certain conditions but can perform different functions under other 
conditions. They describe how de-generacy can serve as a valuable explanatory tool to better under-
stand behavioral and neurocognitive variability in language learning and processing in monolingual 
and bilingual speakers (Beatty-Martínez & Titone, this volume). Part IV concludes with Chapter 20 
by Luque and Covey who review neurocognitive evidence on individual variability in L2 learning to 
better understand the underlying factors that account for individual differences in L2 neurocognition, 
including learners’ background characteristics, linguistic and cognitive abilities, as well as contextual 
and instructional factors (Luque & Covey, this volume).
L2 in relation to the neurocognition of L1 and additional languages is the focus of Part V, which 
covers the key question of cross-language interaction and transfer in L2 processing in the bilingual 
mind and brain. Part V opens with Chapter 21 that reviews theoretical perspectives and empirical 
 

Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
10
evidence on the neural basis of crosslinguistic transfer at three linguistic levels: phonological, lexical, 
and syntactic (Sabourin & Manning, this volume). Next, in Chapter 22, Keijzer and Seton explore L1 
attrition (language loss) from a neurocognitive perspective, and discuss how the dynamic interplay 
between the first and second or additional languages (related to radical changes in language use or 
more subtle changes as a function of learning new languages while still residing in an L1 environ-
ment) may induce changes to L1 processing (Keijzer & Seton, this volume). Part V concludes with 
Chapter 23 focusing on L1–L2 crosslinguistic influences on L3 acquisition, and reviews empirical 
work that has examined the neurocognitive mechanisms of facilitative or inhibitory crosslinguistic 
influences of known languages (e.g., L1/L2) on the acquisition of a to-be-known language (e.g., L3/
Ln), with a specific focus on the (morpho)syntactic system (Xu & Wong, this volume).
Part VI presents five chapters that focus on processing mechanisms and learning contexts associated 
with the neurocognition of L2 learning and processing. Chapter 24, the first chapter in Part VI, reviews 
theoretical approaches and empirical research on predictive processing in L2 sentence processing and 
learning, focusing on research using ERPs (Kaan, this volume). Chapter 25 focuses on the role of 
feedback in L2 learning, and integrates insights from studies using behavioral measures with the 
scarce neurocognitive literature investigating feedback learning, in order to highlight the relevance 
of understanding the neural basis of feedback in L2 learning (in particular the value of time sensitive 
techniques such as EEG/ERP) and to identify promising avenues for future research (Bultena, this 
volume). In Chapter 26, Ekerdt, Takashima, and McQueen discuss theoretical foundations and empir-
ical studies on the neural mechanisms associated with the consolidation and integration of newly 
learned L2 vocabulary into the language network, with a specific focus on the complementary learning 
systems model (Ekerdt, Takashima, & McQueen, this volume). In Chapter 27, Bowden and Faretta-
Stutenberg take the predictions of each of the theoretical perspectives presented in Part III regarding 
the role of learning context in L2 learning as a starting point, and review how these predictions align 
with the relevant evidence from neurolinguistic studies, including research involving L2 learners in 
laboratory-based settings (e.g., implicit/explicit, instructed/uninstructed learning conditions), study 
abroad, long-term immersion, and classroom settings (Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume). 
Part VI concludes with Chapter 28 by Zappa and Frenck-Mestre who discuss embodied learning and 
processing as it relates to embodied semantics, the notion that cognition is grounded in multimodal 
representations originating in human experience and that motor processes play a critical role in lan-
guage processing. Focusing on neurocognitive processes underlying embodied learning, they review 
behavioral and neurocognitive evidence on embodied language learning and processing in L1 and L2 
(Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume).
The final part, Part VII, encompasses a selection of timely research topics in the neurocognition of 
L2 learning, processing, and use. In Chapter 29, the first chapter in this section, Caffarra, Gosselin, 
Thomas, and Martin review theoretical perspectives and empirical evidence on the neural and cog-
nitive mechanisms involved in foreign-accent perception, with a specific focus on semantic and syn-
tactic processing, and how these mechanisms differ from native-accented speech processing (Caffarra, 
Gosselin, Thomas, & Martin, this volume). In Chapter 30, Foucart discusses the foreign language 
effect in decision making, the phenomenon that using a foreign language can modulate our economic 
decisions and moral judgments, among others. A relatively new research topic in L2 neurocognition, 
Foucart reviews behavioral and neurophysiological studies that have examined the factors underlying 
the foreign language effect in decision making and outlines future directions for research (Foucart, 
this volume). Next, Chapter 31 by Guo and Ma discusses cognitive control mechanisms that are 
recruited to resolve cross-language interference, with a specific focus on the relationship between 
domain-general cognitive control and bilingual language control as informed by behavioral and 
neurocognitive empirical evidence (Guo & Ma, this volume). Changing gears in Chapter 32 to child 
L2 learning and processing, Ortiz-Villalobos, Kovelman, and Satterfield review neurodevelopmental 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics
11
processes that support dual language acquisition, with a particular focus on what child L2 learning 
experiences tell us about the plasticity of the human mind and brain. Reviewing available evidence 
and identifying gaps in our current knowledge on neural mechanisms underlying child L2 devel-
opment and processing, the authors posit that a cohesive framework of childhood bilingualism and 
L2 development is needed to better understand the developing mind and brain (Ortiz-Villalobos, 
Kovelman, & Satterfield, this volume). In Chapter 33, Meade reviews the developing literature on 
the acquisition of a visual-manual phonological system and spatial syntax in adult learners of signed 
languages who have a native spoken language. To enhance our understanding of neural changes that 
support the acquisition of signed languages, Meade also outlines specific avenues for future research 
(Meade, this volume). The final chapter of this handbook, Chapter 34 by Scimeca, Carpenter, and 
Kiran, focuses on bilingual aphasia, a field of inquiry that—as discussed above—provided the very 
first insights into the neural basis of using two languages. Scimeca, Carpenter, and Kiran review clin-
ical and theoretical perspectives on bilingual aphasia, discuss the importance of pre-morbid language 
proficiency especially in the L2, and highlight rehabilitation by reviewing treatment approaches for 
bilingual language impairment (Scimeca, Carpenter, & Kiran, this volume).
Notes for Readers and Instructors
This handbook is primarily intended as a resource for researchers, graduate students, and upper-
level undergraduate students to serve as a centralized resource that synthesizes a wide-range of 
neurocognitive scientific research about learning second or additional languages. For established 
researchers, the chapters should serve as concise reviews of a wide range of topics on the 
neurolinguistics of L2 that ideally inspire future research directions and/or serve as an entryway into 
a specific topic that the researcher may want to integrate into their current research. For students, 
we anticipate that the handbook could be used as a course textbook within any graduate program 
that teaches the neuroscience of L2 and bilingual processing. Alternatively, instructors may opt to 
select specific chapters as core readings or as overview readings in their courses on, for example, 
neurocognitive methods, language processing and the brain, L2 acquisition, L2 pedagogy, or theoret-
ical models of L2 learning and bilingualism.
Therefore, to maximize the scope of the handbook’s readership, we tried to optimize accessibility 
to the topics discussed in each chapter. As the goal of Part I is to provide readers with an intro-
duction to the neurolinguistic methodological approaches, the chapters provide a description of the 
method along some example studies that have utilized the method. For readers who are new to the 
methods, the historical development of the method is often described and all chapters carefully con-
sider the benefits and challenges in using the method. For researchers experienced with the methods, 
suggestions for future, advanced methodological directions are provided. The chapters in Parts II–VII 
are also structured both for accessibility and for moving the field in new directions. Although the 
sections in these chapter vary to some extent based on the topic of the chapter, among the chapters 
readers will find sections that outline the history of a specific field of research and how research 
themes and approaches have changed over time, provide a state-of-the-art review of theories and 
empirical knowledge of a particular topic, discuss pedagogical, societal, or clinical implications, and 
identify gaps in our current knowledge in order to outline avenues for future research. Each chapter 
also includes a further readings section that lists key publications and accessible readings in a par-
ticular domain. We have also added cross-references in each chapter to help readers navigate through 
the handbook and to provide sources for further explanation or elaboration.
We hope the handbook will be a valuable source to scholars and students across a wide range 
of disciplines, including readers interested in L2 acquisition, applied linguistics, cognitive science, 
psychology, neuroscience, and research methodology. We also hope that the handbook will facilitate 
 
 

Janet G. van Hell and Kara Morgan-Short
12
transformative connections between ideas and disciplines and lead to exciting new avenues of 
research in this fascinating field of inquiry.
Acknowledgments
We genuinely and deeply enjoyed working on this handbook! We felt privileged to be working with 
expert scholars who thrive at the forefront of brain-based L2 research, and whose brilliance and vision 
is reflected in thorough and timely reviews of theoretical foundations, methodological approaches, 
and empirical research on the neurocognition of L2 learning, processing, and use. We are deeply 
grateful for their excellent contributions and their commitment to establishing what we hope will be 
valuable resource to all interested in neurolinguistic approaches to L2 learning, processing, and use. 
We are also grateful to the series editors Susan Gass, Alison Mackey, and Kimberly Geeslin who 
entrusted us with editing this ambitious project, to Holger Hopp, Aline Godfroid, and Paula Winke for 
their indispensable advice and kind sharing of online editing resources, and to the editorial assistants 
at Routledge, Ze’ev Sudry and Bex Hume, for their skillful guidance. A special thank you goes to the 
internal and external reviewers for their excellent and thoughtful reviews and suggestions, as well as 
to Viorica Marian, Cristina Sanz, and Karsten Steinhauer for their generous endorsements that grace 
the back cover of this handbook.
This final paragraph is dedicated to our wonderful mentors and colleagues who inspired and 
fostered our thinking at numerous points throughout our careers, our postdocs and students whose 
brilliance continues to inspire us and for whom we hope this handbook will be valuable in further 
shaping their passion, and to our beloved families who share many of our other passions in life.
References
Antoniou, M. (2019). The advantages of bilingualism debate. Annual Review of Linguistics, 5, 395–415. 
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-011718-011820
Bergmann, C., Meulman, N., Stowe, L.A., Sprenger, S.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Prolonged L2 immersion 
engenders little change in morphosyntactic processing of bilingual natives. NeuroReport, 26, 1065–1070. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/wnr.0000000000000469
Bialystok, E., & Craik, F.I.M. (2022). How does bilingualism modify cognitive function? Attention to the mech-
anism. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 29, 1246–1269. https://doi: 10.3758/s13423-022-02057-5
Cabrelli, J., Chaouch-Orozco, A., Alonso, J.G., Soares, S.M.P., Puig-Mayenco, E., & Rothman, J. (Eds.). (2023). 
Cambridge handbook of third language acquisition. Cambridge University Press.
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: An empirical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
Cargnelutti, E., Tomasino, B., & Fabbro, F. (2019). Language brain representation in bilinguals with different 
age of appropriation and proficiency of the second language: A meta-analysis of functional imaging studies. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 154. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00154
De Bruin, A., Dick, A.S., & Carreiras, M. (2021). Clear theories are needed to interpret differences: Perspectives 
on the bilingual advantage debate. Neurobiology of Language, 2(4), 433–451. https://doi.org/10.1162/
nol_a_00038
Grey, S., Fox, J.G., Serafini, E.J., & Sanz, C. (2015). The role of individual differences in the study abroad con-
text: Cognitive capacity and language development during short-term intensive language exposure. Modern 
Language Journal, 99(1), 137–157. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12190
Hickok, G., & Poeppel, D. (2007). The cortical organization of speech processing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
8, 393–402. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2113
Jonczyk, R., Korolczuk, I., Balatsou, E., & Thierry, G. (2019). Keep calm and carry on: Electrophysiological 
evaluation of emotional anticipation in the second language. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 
14(8), 885–898. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsz066
Kennedy, D., & Norman, C. (2005). What don’t we know. Science, 309(5731). https://doi.org/10.1126/scie
nce.309.5731.75
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neurolinguistics
13
Kroll, J.F., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Understanding the consequences of bilingualism for language processing and 
cognition. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 497–514. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.799170
Kroll, J.F., Dussias, P.E., Bice, K., & Perrotti, L. (2015). Bilingualism, mind, and brain. Annual Review of 
Linguistics, 1, 377–394. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-linguist-030514-124937
Lee, B., Meade, G., Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Emmorey, K. (2019). ERP evidence for co-activation of 
English words during recognition of American Sign Language signs. Brain Sciences, 9(148), 1–17. https://
doi.org/10.3390/brainsci9060148
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1080/21548331.  
1967.11707799
Marian, V., Bartolotti, J., Rochanavibhata, S., Bradley, K., & Hernandez, A. (2017). Bilingual cortical control of 
between- and within-language competition. Nature Scientific Reports, 7(1), 11763. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-017-12116-w
McManus, K. (2021). Crosslinguistic influence and second language learning. Routledge. https://doi.org/
10.4324/9780429341663
Paap, K.R., Johnson, H.A., & Sawi, O. (2015). Bilingual advantages in executive functioning either do not 
exist or are restricted to very specific and undetermined circumstances. Cortex, 69, 265–278. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2015.04.014
Paradis, M. (1977). Bilingualism and aphasia. In H. Whitaker & H.A. Whitaker (Eds), Studies in neurolinguistics 
(pp. 65–121). Academic Press.
Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and Brain-Mechanisms. Princeton University Press.
Pitres, A. (1895). Aphasia in polyglots. In M. Paradis (Ed.), Readings on aphasia in bilinguals and polyglots  
(pp. 26–49). Marcel Didier.
Ribot, T. (1887). Diseases of memory: An essay in the positive psychology. Appleton.
Saur, D., Kreher, B.W., Schnell, S., & Weiller, C. (2008). Ventral and dorsal pathways for language. PNAS, 105, 
18035–18040. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0805234105
Steinhauer, K., & Kasparian, K. (2020). Brain plasticity in adulthood–ERP evidence for L1-attrition in lexicon 
and morphosyntax after predominant L2 use. Language Learning, 70(S2), 171–193. https://doi.org/10.1111/
lang.12391
Sulpizio, S., Del Maschio, N., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Bilingual language processing: A meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 108, 834–853. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.014
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
Tao, L., Wang, G., Zhu, M., & Cai, Q. (2021). Bilingualism and domain-general cognitive functions from a 
neural perspective: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 125, 264–295. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.029
Van Hell, J.G. (2023). The neurocognitive underpinnings of second language processing: Knowledge gains from 
the past and future outlook. Language Learning. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12601
Zirnstein, M., Van Hell, J.G., & Kroll, J.F. (2018). Cognitive control ability mediates prediction costs in 
monolinguals and bilinguals. Cognition, 176, 87–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

PART I
Methodological Approaches 
for Neurolinguistic Examination 
of Second Language
 
 

 

17
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-4
2
USING TIME-BASED 
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
TO INVESTIGATE SECOND 
LANGUAGE
Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
Introduction and Critical Definitions: What Is EEG?
Electroencephalography (EEG) is the measurement of ongoing electrical activity in the brain (Cohen, 
2017, Kirschstein & Köhling, 2009). This signal can be recorded directly in the brain, but in typical 
laboratory studies involving healthy participants, the EEG signal is measured with sensors placed at 
the scalp (Luck, 2014). In this chapter, we will be focusing on the time-domain signal of the EEG, 
meaning the positive and negative-going waveform that unfolds over time (for more on the frequency 
domain of the same signal, see Mottarella and Prat, this volume).
EEG Data Collection Procedures and Practical Considerations
The procedure for acquiring EEG data entails placing an elastic cap with electrodes embedded in 
fixed locations on a participant’s head. This approach is considered non-invasive as no chemicals or 
exterior electromagnetic currents need to be applied. Electrical potentials that are naturally produced 
by the brain are passively recorded as the person performs tasks and takes in stimuli (Luck & 
Kappenman, 2012). In order for the signal to be high quality, the impedance between the surface of 
the scalp and the surface of the electrode sensors must be kept low, typically achieved via application 
of saline gel-based solutions and gently moving hair out of the way to create a bridge between the 
scalp and the recording electrodes (Luck, 2014).
Data recorded at the scalp ideally would only include brain activity and no other signal, but that is 
typically not the case. Instead, external electrical activity from monitors and other electrical equipment 
can also be unintentionally included in the recorded signal in addition to biological activity unrelated 
to the neural activity of interest. These irrelevant data signals are considered noise, which researchers 
mitigate through different strategies (for more on technical recording procedures, see Luck, 2014).
Biological noise includes muscle activity from clenching the jaw, furrowing the brow, or tensing 
scalp/facial muscles, as well as eye movements and blinks. For this reason, after the electrode cap 
is on a participant’s head, but before the experiment begins, investigators usually allow participants 
to look at their brainwaves and then demonstrate the effects of muscle activity (e.g., jaw clenching) 
on the data. This real-time feedback enables participants to understand how to reduce those signals 
during recording by staying still, fixating centrally during critical recording periods, and blinking 
according to instructions. EEG experiments often designate periods of time in the experiment when 
blinks/movement are permitted.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
18
Neurobiological Basis of the EEG Signal
Although it is not necessary to be an expert in neurobiology in order to use EEG methods, a basic 
understanding of where the EEG signal comes from can be helpful. What the EEG signal captures is 
a direct reflection of neural activity, typically thought to be dominated not by any individual neuron 
firing (action potentials), but rather for the most part by the summations of synchronous inhibitory 
and excitatory activity (postsynaptic potentials) across large populations of neurons close to the scalp 
(primarily from cortical pyramidal cells) due to their particular arrangement and physical orientation 
(Kirschstein & Köhling, 2009; Nunez et al., 2016). EEG measures electrical potential, which is a rela-
tive comparison of electrically charged activity across locations (e.g., extracellular negativities vs. 
positivities). Thus, EEG always requires at least two sensors, one of which serves as a comparative 
reference (and ground for the amplifier) and the other(s) as active/recording electrode(s) whose data 
is reported (Nunez et al., 2016).
The recorded signal is very small and usually measured in microvolts (μV, one millionth of a 
volt). For this reason, the signal must be amplified during the recording process, prior to digitiza-
tion on a computer. The absolute voltage reported at a given sensor at any time point is not typic-
ally of interest because it is dependent on what reference electrode is selected. For example, if the 
reference is right next to the electrode of interest, the voltage measured at that site will likely be 
small, as the voltage of the reference electrode is essentially subtracted from the voltage of the elec-
trode of interest—but this does not tell us anything about the amount of brain activity there. When 
interpreting brainwaves, which are dynamic plots of EEG signal across time (see Figure 2.1, right), 
the shape, or morphology, of the waves themselves and their relative positioning compared to one 
another is what matters.
Event-Related Potentials
Even when a participant is sitting still and not doing anything in particular, the continuous EEG signal  
can carry valuable information (see Mottarella & Prat, this volume). However, many researchers  
examining language processing are interested in the brain response to their experimental stimuli.  
These stimuli are the “events” of the event-related potential (ERP) method. Figure 2.1 displays how  
a typical study moves from continuous EEG to analysis of ERPs. Continuous EEG is measured at the  
scalp across an array of electrodes (left panel). Within this continuous signal, time windows around  
events of interest are marked (middle panel). The time-locked brain response to these events is then  
extracted and plotted, averaging across all the instances of particular events of interest. The outcome  
Figure 2.1  Steps in EEG Data Acquisition and Processing.
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
19
of this process is the ERP, which is often displayed as a waveform (right panel). With sufficient trials,  
noise and brain activity unrelated to the experimental event should largely average out, leaving the  
ERP to reflect the neural processing associated with the experimental stimuli (Luck, 2014).
ERPs provide information about the timing, magnitude, and distribution of neural activity that 
is tied to specific experimental events. For instance, when a participant sees a word, their neural 
response to that word will be captured as it unfolds over time, moving in either a positive or 
negative direction relative to the baseline where it began. ERP waveforms illustrate change in 
amplitude (measured in microvolts) across time (measured in milliseconds). ERPs also allow 
us to assess the distribution of that activity across the electrodes positioned on a person’s scalp. 
For instance, we might see that differences in ERP amplitudes at 400 milliseconds are larger at 
electrodes on the front of the head compared to electrodes at the back of the head. When responses 
are elicited under similar conditions and share a similar distribution, it might suggest that they 
share similar neural generators (though localization of those sources is not a strength of EEG, see 
the section Pros and Cons/Limitations of the ERP Method below). In this way, across locations on 
the scalp, we can compare when and how ERPs differ among participant groups and/or stimulus 
conditions. Across experiments, common patterns are recognized and identified as particular ERP 
components.
ERP Paradigms and Components
In this section, we summarize experimental paradigms and the related ERP components that are 
most commonly used in second language (L2) research. In some cases, we also identify additional 
ERP components that have been used infrequently, but hold promise for further investigation in L2 
research. For more technical and in-depth discussions of these components, we refer readers to Luck 
and Kappenman (2012).
Note that components names have come about in a variety of ways, leading to sometimes con-
fusing taxonomies. In general, ERP components are labeled according to their polarity as either N 
(negative) or P (positive) and then assigned an additional label that indicates either its place in the 
order of components (e.g., the N1 is the first negative-doing component, the N2 is the second), the 
timing of its peak (e.g., the N400 peaks at approximately 400ms after stimulus onset), or some-
times a general description (e.g., the mismatch negativity, or the late positive component). Confusion 
can arise because the same component is sometimes associated with multiple names (e.g., the N1 
and N170), or what was originally thought of as a single component may come to be seen as a 
family of components (e.g., the P3a and P3b). There is no simple solution for understanding naming 
conventions besides becoming familiar with the relevant literature for each component.
Paradigms and Components for Investigating Linguistic Processes
Investigating L2 Speech Perception with the Mismatch Negativity
For ERP research of L2 speech perception, the mismatch negativity (MMN) has proven to be an 
extremely useful component. The MMN is a measure of auditory change detection (Näätänen et al., 
2019). It occurs as a negative-going deflection approximately 100–200ms after the onset of a detect-
able difference between auditory stimuli and is typically largest at frontocentral electrodes. As the 
name implies, the MMN is elicited by a mismatch; its measurement entails comparison between 
responses to frequent standard and infrequent deviant stimuli. For instance, the MMN might 
be elicited by comparing responses to frequently occurring high tones and infrequent low tones. The 
size of the MMN reflects the perceived distance between standard and deviant stimuli. Because the 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
20
MMN reflects perceived differences, it can be used both as a measure of the perception of acoustic 
differences and also to target perception of more abstract differences, such as phonetic categories. The 
targeted differences can be determined entirely by experimental context or can draw on assumptions 
about participants’ experience outside the lab, for example, as speakers of specific languages. It is this 
latter possibility that allows for investigation of participants sensitivity to spoken features of an L2.
The MMN has been used to investigate listeners’ sensitivity to a wide array of phonological 
features, including, but not limited to, voice-onset time (Brandmeyer et al., 2012), vowel quality 
(Peltola et al., 2003), and tone (Chandrasekaran et al., 2007). The MMN can be elicited in tasks that 
require an active response from participants or, in contrast, while participants’ attention is focused 
elsewhere (e.g., while watching a silent movie or reading).
When designing MMN studies, it is important to keep in mind that the onset of the MMN will be 
determined by the point when the difference between standard and deviant stimuli becomes detect-
able. For instance, if the contrast is between sounds that occur at the onset of the stimulus (e.g., /ba/ 
vs. /pa/), the MMN will occur immediately when that difference is detectable. If instead the contrast 
was between vowel length (e.g., /ba/ vs. /baa/), the MMN would occur at the point where the dur-
ational difference becomes apparent.
Investigating Sentence and Word Processing
Language researchers are often interested in how individuals process sentences and words. Figure 2.1 
shows how ERPs time-locked to the onset individual words of interest can be generated. Several 
experimental paradigms can be used to probe research questions related to the cognitive processing of 
individual words (e.g., measuring vocabulary or orthographic sensitivity), such as go/no-go, lexical 
decision, or semantic/visual priming tasks, which are easily adaptable for ERP studies (for example 
L2 studies, see Pu et al., 2016; Wu & Thierry, 2010).
The typical method for examining how readers process sentences involves presenting a sentence 
word-by-word, a technique called Rapid Serial Visual Presentation (RSVP, with a typical stimulus 
onset asynchrony of 500ms). Although most fluent readers can process individual words faster, 
significantly speeding the rate of presentation can lead to different cognitive outcomes (Wlotko & 
Federmeier, 2015) as well as slower temporal onsets of critical components (Kutas, 1987). A key 
feature of this design is that presenting words individually allows researchers to tap into cognitive 
processing at each word. This enables the examination of stages of processing as they occur, instead 
of relying on end-stage behavioral measures as a window into prior sentential processing.
In auditory paradigms, speech is typically presented with a more natural flow rather than word-
by-word. This means that ERPs for individual words reflect brain responses that are continuously 
changing based on the ongoing speech signal, in contrast to the more discrete responses that result 
from the time-controlled pacing typical of ERP studies of written language processing. This natural 
variation in the way spoken words and sentences unfold over time, in addition to the recruitment of 
auditory rather than visual processing mechanisms, may result in observable differences in the qual-
ities of ERPs to spoken language relative to visual word stimuli (for a comparison across modalities, 
see Holcomb & Neville, 1990).
In order to more tightly control the temporal alignment of spoken stimuli, efforts have occasion-
ally been made to empirically pre-identify each critical word’s isolation point, that is, the precise 
time within a spoken syllable when the word becomes recognizable (e.g., Van Petten et al., 1999). 
Hypothetically, each critical word’s isolation point would be the most appropriate event for ERP 
time-locking, but in practice the benefits of time-locking to isolation points has not been found to 
offset the costs for the amount of work involved. Instead, researchers will usually mark a particular 
event’s onset at the beginning of the critical word or syllable.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
21
Semantic Processing as Measured by the N400
The specific ERP component most famously utilized in sentence processing studies is the N400, due 
to its power for revealing lexical/semantic processing. It manifests in response to any potentially 
meaningful stimulus regardless of modality. That is, N400s have been reported in response not just to 
words, but also to pictures, gestures, environmental smells—any stimuli that might convey meaning 
(e.g., Federmeier & Kutas, 2001; for review, see Federmeier, 2022; Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). 
When looking at an ERP waveform, the N400 appears as a negative deflection around 400ms after 
the stimulus occurred (see Figure 2.2). By comparing the size of the N400 in response to different 
conditions (e.g., a target word after high or low constraint context), we can compute the N400 effect.
In the context of sentence processing experiments, it is important to recognize that the N400 
manifests as part of the standard response to a word. Given no contextual support, the default amp-
litude of the N400 is large. Critically, the amplitude of the N400 reduces when provided with sup-
portive context (e.g., Kutas & Hillyard, 1980; Szewczyk & Federmeier, 2022). For example, if a 
reader is provided the sentential context of, The children went outside to fly a…, the context builds 
an expectation for the word kite, and the N400 is reduced in amplitude for that contextually con-
gruent word relative to a word that had not been supported by the preceding context, like sock (see 
Figure 2.2). N400 responses are also studied in other types of word processing paradigms (e.g., in 
priming, with a reduction in amplitude for a semantically primed or repeated word).
In L2 research, the N400 has been used to investigate a wide array of linguistic processes. It has  
been harnessed to examine questions related to vocabulary acquisition and development (e.g., Pu  
et al., 2016), the influence of proficiency on semantic processing (e.g., Moreno & Kutas, 2005), the  
effects of L2 learning on first language (e.g., Bice & Kroll, 2015), sensitivity to L2 phonology (e.g.,  
Sebastian-Gallés et al., 2006), predictive processing (see Kaan, this volume), and many other topics.
Figure 2.2  The N400 Effect.
Note: Idealized waveforms illustrate the N400 effect for the critical word (kite/sock) in a hypothetical pair of sentence 
stimuli. Y-axis indicates amplitude in microvolts with negative plotted up; x-axis indicates time in milliseconds.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
22
The P600
The N400 and its connection to semantic processing of information is often contrasted with 
another ERP component identified in language processing studies, the P600. This component 
is positive-going and is typically reported around 600ms. It is utilized by language researchers 
due to its sensitivity to syntactic properties of sentence/phrase processing. Namely, when a word 
is encountered that poses challenges to syntactic processing, a P600 often results (Osterhout & 
Holcomb, 1992). The challenge might be a syntactic violation (e.g., The cat was/were purring), or 
it might be brought about by other syntactic difficulties, such as a so-called garden path sentence 
(Osterhout et al., 1994).
The functional significance of the P600 is an active area of research (see Sassenhagen & 
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, 2015; Sassenhagen et al., 2014). Although originally identified as an index 
specifically of syntactic processing, there is substantial evidence that it has a more general functional 
significance and falls under an umbrella of effects, including the late positive component (LPC) and/
or the P3 (see below), which is related to updating of context in memory and is particularly sensitive 
to probability (for review, see Leckey & Federmeier, 2020).
The P600 has been used frequently in L2 work to test the syntactic knowledge and sensitivity of 
multilinguals in their languages (for reviews, see Alemán Bañon et al., this volume; Biondo et al., this 
volume). A core question of interest in L2 research is how learners process syntax in their L2, and the 
P600 has proven very informative at testing hypotheses in this domain. Some influential work in this 
space has used ERPs and the P600 to demonstrate that there are substantial individual differences in 
L2 grammatical processing across individuals (Tanner et al., 2012; Tanner & Van Hell, 2014). In add-
ition to the P600, a component called the left anterior negativity (LAN), has been more specifically 
associated with morphosyntactic processing (e.g., verb agreement) and is sometimes also reported 
(e.g., Dowens et al., 2010) but is not considered further here.
Paradigms and Components for Investigating General Cognitive Processes
In addition to the language-related components reviewed above, there are also ERP components 
that can be leveraged to explore other aspects of L2 learning and bilingual processing. The list of 
components that might be mentioned here is long. Thus, we focus on just three components that have 
been used effectively in L2 research: the N2, the P300, and the error-related negativity (ERN).
The N2
The N2 is so-named because it is the second negative peak in the ERP waveform, occurring after an 
earlier N1. It is sometimes called the N200, as its peak is typically observed anywhere between 200 
and 350ms after stimulus onset. The N2 can be categorized into various subtypes according to its 
distribution and the conditions under which it is elicited (for a thorough review, see Folstein & Van 
Petten, 2007). In bilingual and L2 research, it is typically the anterior N2 (or N2b) that is of primacy 
interest. In this case, the N2 effect is a negative-going deflection that is larger when participants 
withhold a response compared to when they provide a response during go/no-go tasks.
The N2’s utility in go/no-go tasks is a natural fit for many techniques used to investigate execu-
tive function and language switching in bilingual research (e.g., oddball, flanker, or Stroop tasks; 
see Moreno et al., 2014, for an example study). By comparing N2 effects between conditions or 
groups, researchers can make inferences about the effects of bilingualism on executive function 
during language selection or other cognitively demanding tasks (for more on cognitive control in L2 
neurocognition, see Guo & Ma, this volume).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
23
The P300
The N2 is often followed by a P300 (P3b).1 The P300 is a positive-going deflection that is largest over 
parietal electrodes and is elicited during active stimulus evaluation and categorization processes. The 
nature of a task and its stimuli play a large role in determining the latency of the P300 (see discussion 
in Luck, 2014, ­chapter 3). So, despite the P300 label, it is not necessarily the case that its peak will be 
centered at 300ms. One of its most important properties for consideration in experimental design is 
that the P300 is sensitive to the probability of task-relevant features of a stimulus such that it will be 
larger for rare (less probable) stimuli than for frequent (more probable) stimuli (Polich, 2007). Thus, 
critical stimuli are often carefully controlled to occur with equal frequency rather than risk contamin-
ation from P300-related brain responses to differences in probability of occurrence.
Although the P300 is among the most studied of ERP components, its specific functional signifi-
cance remains a matter of debate (for reviews, see Polich, 2007, 2012). However, the wealth of P300 
studies has provided a detailed understanding of the circumstances under which the P300 will be 
elicited and the manipulations that typically modulate its latency (e.g., slower when categorization is 
challenging and amplitude (e.g., larger when evaluation is easier and full attention is captured). Thus, 
for L2 questions related to categorization or evaluation speed and/or difficulty, the P300 is a strong 
candidate measure as its sensitivities are well-documented across domains. In L2 research, the P300 
has not been used to its full potential in this regard, and its utilization has been mostly limited to the 
context of go/no-go tasks in conjunction with the N2 (e.g., Moreno et al., 2014).
The Error-Related Negativity (ERN)
The ERN is a negative-going deflection that peaks approximately 50ms after the onset of a response 
and is larger for incorrect than correct responses (Falkenstein et al., 1991; Gehring et al., 1993). The 
ERN is maximal at frontocentral electrodes. An important difference between the ERN and other 
components reviewed so far is that the ERN is tied to the onset of a participant’s response, rather than 
to stimulus onset. This introduces some additional considerations during processing and analysis.
While the ERN has not been used often in L2 research, it has potential to shed light on many 
processes that are otherwise difficult to assess. For example, Sebastian-Gallés et al. (2006) examined 
the ERN in native Spanish-speaking learners of L2 Catalan who performed with low accuracy on a 
lexical decision task that required them to detect Catalan-specific vowels (in order to correctly reject 
pseudowords). Examination of the ERN indicated that participants were not just inaccurate on these 
decisions but also were insensitive to their own inaccuracy. That is, there was no ERN despite their 
errors. This suggested participants did not reliably detect the critical Catalan vowel changes at all. 
Other L2 studies have used the ERN to measure aspects of bilingual cognitive control (Morales et al., 
2015) or learners’ certainty about grammatical gender in their L2 (Bultena et al., 2020; Bultena, this 
volume).
Example Studies
Using the MMN to Examine Individual Differences in L2
Diaz et al. (2008) illustrates how the MMN might be utilized in L2 research. The authors asked 
whether differences in how well people perceived novel L2 sounds was related to either their basic 
psychoacoustic perceptual abilities or to their speech-specific perceptual abilities. Participants were 
first-language Spanish speakers who had previously been classified as “good” or “poor” L2 perceivers. 
This designation was based on their performance on a set of three behavioral tasks targeting Catalan 
vowel contrasts that were difficult for Spanish speakers to perceive. To test this, EEG was recorded 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
24
from participants in both groups as they completed a passive oddball listening task, and, at the same 
time, watched a silent movie. In three acoustic blocks, participants heard simple pure tones with 
deviants that varied in either pitch, duration, or the order of tones in a two-tone sequence. In the 
phonetic blocks, they heard vowels that contrasted with a familiar Spanish vowel (/o/). In the first 
language block, deviant stimuli were another Spanish vowel (/e/); in the L2 block, deviants were a 
Finnish vowel (/ö/). Results suggested that for all acoustic contrasts—even the difficult ones—both 
good and poor perceivers had comparable MMN responses. However, for the phonetic contrasts, 
good perceivers had stronger MMNs for both Spanish and Finnish contrasts. The authors interpreted 
these results as evidence that individual differences in phonetic (rather than acoustic) perception abil-
ities were likely responsible for different outcomes when learning difficult L2 contrasts.
Using the N400 to Detect Early Stages of Lexical Learning
McLaughlin et al. (2004) illustrates how the N400 can be used to measure developing L2 sensitivity 
for new words. Students in a beginning L2 French class, and a control group of participants who were 
not learning French, completed a lexical decision task with priming. Targets were either real words 
or pronounceable nonwords; for real word targets, primes were either semantically related (chien 
dog–chat cat) or unrelated (maison home–soif thirst). Typically, larger N400 responses would be 
expected when people read nonwords compared to real words, or when a target is unrelated rather 
than related to a semantic prime. All participants completed the task at three separate times during 
the French course, with EEG recorded during each session. Across testing times, control participants’ 
neural and behavioral data never showed any effect of lexicality nor of target relatedness. In con-
trast, in their initial testing session after only 14 hours of French classes, L2 French learners began 
to display N400 effects to pseudowords even though their behavioral judgements were essentially at 
chance. In later testing sessions, French learners’ N400 effects for lexicality and target relatedness 
grew, suggesting a development of semantic sensitivity to the words in French as they learned it. This 
study demonstrates the potential for ERPs to capture L2 sensitivity that behavioral methods might 
miss and also their potential utility for tracking lexical development longitudinally.
Pros and Cons/Limitations of the ERP Method
Advantages of the ERP Method
While both ERPs and typical reaction time measures can provide millisecond-level information, 
ERPs provide several major benefits to the researcher over and above reaction times. Because they 
pair high temporal resolution with information about changes in amplitude, ERPs allow us to evaluate 
participant responses at multiple points in time. For instance, changes in amplitude during the first 
few hundred milliseconds may give us insight into early perceptual processes, while later portions of 
the response might reflect more controlled decisions. Furthermore, by leveraging accumulated know-
ledge about the functional significance of specific ERP components, we can make interpretations that 
link responses to specific cognitive processes. Finally, another major benefit of ERPs is that they can 
often capture responses that would be impossible to observe behaviorally. Many components (e.g., 
the MMN, the N400—see above) can be elicited with tasks that require no overt response.
Constraints on the Use of the ERP Method
Although ERPs have much to offer L2 researchers, they do come with their own set of constraints 
and challenges. One practical constraint is that clean measurement of EEG requires participants to 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
25
remain relatively motionless. The constraints on physical movement naturally make research on lan-
guage production more difficult, though studies have examined pre- or post-utterance processes (e.g., 
in a delayed reading aloud paradigm, Fischer-Baum et al., 2014), or even unverbalized responses. 
Similarly, paradigms that require large amounts of eye-movement (e.g., visual world) will be more 
difficult to analyze (though some methods are now incorporating simultaneous use of EEG and eye-
tracking, which allows for the recovery of the neural signal, e.g., Plöchl et al., 2012).
As alluded to earlier, ERPs are not the typical method of choice for those who want to under-
stand the neural localization of cognitive processes. Because of the interference of physical matter 
in the brain and skull, pinpointing the origins of electrical activity in the brain is not straightforward 
(Kirschstein & Köhling, 2009). This is known as the inverse problem (Cohen, 2017). For instance, 
just because electrophysiological activity is detected on the left side of the scalp does not mean that 
the neural generators of that activity were necessarily on the left side of the brain. With effort and the 
right equipment (high-density electrode systems), it is possible to improve upon the source localiza-
tion capabilities of typical EEG systems. In general, researchers who want to identify the sources of 
brain activity use other methods, such as MEG or MRI (see Kousaie & Klein, this volume, and Rossi 
et al., this volume), which provide much better spatial precision.
While the rich multi-dimensional data generated by ERP experiments is one of its strengths, it 
also poses challenges. The various stages of data processing and statistical analysis require many 
decisions on the part of the researcher (e.g., What events should be used for time-locking? What 
electrodes should be included/excluded? And many more). The choices researchers make are not neu-
tral and can lead to unintentional biases in results (Luck & Gaspelin, 2017). This makes standards for 
processing and reporting EEG studies particularly important (Keil et al., 2014).
Finally, despite our enthusiasm for ERPs in L2 research, we also want to offer a word of caution. 
In an ideal world, ERPs would form a direct link between participant responses and the linguistic or 
cognitive processes that L2 researchers want to measure. It would be great if we could use specific 
components to measure phonology, semantics, syntax, and pragmatics, or to cleanly differentiate 
between implicit and explicit knowledge. But although it is attractive to think about components 
in this way, it is not accurate. For instance, although the N400 has great utility for investigating 
many linguistic phenomena, it is not a language response per se (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). By 
constructing experiments with care, we can make compelling inferences about linguistic knowledge 
based on ERPs, but we cannot (as of yet) directly measure that knowledge. The “ERPology” of deter-
mining what components are linked to which cognitive processes is a field of research on its own, 
and debates about the nature of most components of interest to L2 researchers are far from settled.
Innovations and Future Directions
ERP methods are always evolving, especially as availability of equipment and increases in computing 
power make the technique more accessible and available. Here we briefly note some of the recent 
innovations that could be applied in L2 research.
Statistical Advances
As noted earlier, a major challenge in ERP research is controlling all the small decisions researchers 
can make which ultimately can lead to different outcomes and increase the likelihood of finding 
spurious statistically significant effects. For ERP data analysis, mass univariate tests may provide 
a solution that takes some of the decisions out of researcher hands and also allows for discovery of 
effects outside pre-defined windows of interest (Fields & Kuperberg, 2020; Groppe et al., 2011a, 
2011b; for pitfalls to avoid, see Sassenhagen & Draschkow, 2019). For mixed-effects regression 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
26
modeling of ERPs, new tools and tutorials are regularly being developed for a variety of platforms 
(e.g., R: Tremblay & Newman, 2015; MATLAB: Ehinger & Dimigen, 2019; Python: Urbach & 
Portnoy, 2021).
EEG for Naturalistic Speech
ERP methods have typically used isolated sentences or words to investigate language processing. 
The application of modern statistical and computational techniques to continuous EEG (and MEG) 
signals has opened the possibility of using narrative stories (e.g., audio books) and other forms of nat-
urally occurring speech (Alday, 2019; Hamilton & Huth, 2020). The ability to use more ecologically 
valid stimuli could open up new avenues for research of L2 speech comprehension.
Visual Half-field Approach to Hemispheric Processing
Although researchers interested in localizing brain function during cognitive activities most fre-
quently use fMRI, there is a technique of potential interest for L2 research with ERPs that does 
permit for inferences about localized functions to be made. When items are presented to only one 
visual field, and the eyes are kept centered, then the visual information is first passed to the contra-
lateral hemisphere. The receptive hemisphere is afforded not just earlier access to the information 
but also better-quality representation of the stimulus than can be gained through the brain’s delayed 
and incomplete interhemispheric communication mechanisms. This lateralized presentation design 
enables researchers to examine left-hemisphere and right-hemisphere biased processing of informa-
tion (e.g., Wlotko & Federmeier, 2013). For example, instead of presenting critical words of interest 
to the center of the screen when recording ERPs, researchers can present them a few centimeters to 
the right or left, and then they can learn if the right hemisphere processes these L2 words differently 
than the left hemisphere (for a behavioral example, see Cieślicka & Heredia, 2011).
Note
1	 Here, we use P300 to refer to the P3b, not the frontally distributed P3a component that is elicited under 
different conditions and has its own response properties (Polich, 2007).
Further Readings
In addition to the relevant chapters in the present volume, this article provides a general review of ERPs in L2 
research.
Steinhauer, K. (2014). Event-related potentials (ERPs) in second language research: A brief introduction to the 
technique, a selected review, and an invitation to reconsider critical periods in L2. Applied Linguistics, 35(4), 
393–417. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu028
Steve Luck’s book is an authoritative but also very approachable guide to understanding and conducting ERP 
research.
Luck, S.J. (2014). An Introduction to the Event-Related Potential Technique (2nd ed.). MIT Press.
The ERP CORE (Compendium of Open Resources and Experiments) provides free access to data and code for 
use in training and honing ERP methods.
Kappenman, E.S., Farrens, J.L., Zhang, W., Stewart, A.X., & Luck, S.J. (2021). ERP CORE: An open resource 
for human event-related potential research. NeuroImage, 225, 117465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2020.117465
These authors provide authoritative guidelines for reporting of ERPs in publications.
Keil, A., Debener, S., Gratton, G., Junghöfer, M., Kappenman, E.S., Luck, S.J., Luu, P., Miller, G.A., & 
Yee, C.M. (2014). Committee report: Publication guidelines and recommendations for studies using 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
27
electroencephalography and magnetoencephalography: Guidelines for EEG and MEG. Psychophysiology, 
51(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12147
Acknowledgments
Eric Pelzl’s contribution to this chapter was made possible in part by the National Science Foundation under NSF 
SBE fellowship 2004279. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this 
material are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation.
References
Alday, P.M. (2019). M/EEG analysis of naturalistic stories: A review from speech to language processing. 
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 34(4), 457–473. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1546882
Alemán Bañon, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language 
syntactic system. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2015). Native language change during early stages of second language learning. 
NeuroReport, 26(16), 966. https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000000453
Biondo, N., Molinaro, N., & Mancini, S. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language morpho-
logical system: The role of grammar-related and speaker-related factors. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van 
Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Brandmeyer, A., Desain, P.W.M., & McQueen, J.M. (2012). Effects of native language on perceptual sensitivity 
to phonetic cues. NeuroReport, 23(11), 653–657. https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0b013e32835542cd
Bultena, S. (this volume). Feedback in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Bultena, S., Danielmeier, C., Bekkering, H., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). The Role of conflicting representations and 
uncertainty in internal error detection during L2 learning. Language Learning, 70(S2), 75–103. https://doi.
org/10.1111/lang.12401
Cieślicka, A.B., & Heredia, R.R. (2011). Hemispheric asymmetries in processing L1 and L2 idioms: Effects 
of salience and context. Brain and Language, 116(3), 136–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2010.09.007
Chandrasekaran, B., Krishnan, A., & Gandour, J.T. (2007). Mismatch negativity to pitch contours is influence by 
language experience. Brain Research, 1128, 148–156. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2006.10.064
Cohen, M.X. (2017). Where does EEG come from and what does it mean? Trends in Neurosciences, 40(4), 208–
218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2017.02.004
Diaz, B., Baus, C., Escera, C., Costa, A., & Sebastian-Gallés, N. (2008). Brain potentials to native phoneme 
discrimination reveal the origin of individual differences in learning the sounds of a second language. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(42), 16083–16088. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.080
5022105
Dowens, M.G., Vergara, M., Barber, H.A., & Carreiras, M. (2010). Morphosyntactic processing in late 
second-language learners. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22(8), 1870–1887. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2009.21304
Ehinger, B.V., & Dimigen, O. (2019). Unfold: An integrated toolbox for overlap correction, non-linear modeling, 
and regression-based EEG analysis. PeerJ, 7, e7838. https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.7838
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J., & Blanke, L. (1991). Effects of crossmodal divided attention on 
late ERP components. II. Error processing in choice reaction tasks. Electroencephalography and Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 78(6), 447–455. https://doi.org/10.1016/0013-4694(91)90062-9
Federmeier, K.D. (2022). Connecting and considering: Electrophysiology provides insights into comprehension. 
Psychophysiology, 59(1). https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13940
Federmeier, K.D., & Kutas, M. (2001). Meaning and modality: Influences of context, semantic memory organ-
ization, and perceptual predictability on picture processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 27(1), 202–224. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.27.1.202
Fields, E.C., & Kuperberg, G.R. (2020). Having your cake and eating it too: Flexibility and power with mass 
univariate statistics for ERP data. Psychophysiology, 57(2). https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13468
Fischer-Baum, S., Dickson, D.S., & Federmeier, K.D. (2014). Frequency and regularity effects in reading are 
task dependent: evidence from ERPs. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 29(10), 1342–1355. https://
doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.927067
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
28
Folstein, J.R., & Van Petten, C. (2007). Influence of cognitive control and mismatch on the N2 component of the 
ERP: A review. Psychophysiology, 45(1), 152–170. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2007.00602.x
Gehring, W.J., Goss, B., Coles, M.G.H., Meyer, D.E., & Donchin, E. (1993). A neural system for error detec-
tion and compensation. Psychological Science, 4(6), 385–390. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1993.
tb00586.x
Groppe, D.M., Urbach, T.P., & Kutas, M. (2011a). Mass univariate analysis of event-related brain potentials/
fields I: A critical tutorial review. Psychophysiology, 48(12), 1711–1725. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-8986.2011.01273.x
Groppe, D.M., Urbach, T.P., & Kutas, M. (2011b). Mass univariate analysis of event-related brain potentials/
fields II: Simulation studies. Psychophysiology, 48(12), 1726–1737. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2011.  
01272.x
Guo, M., & Ma, F. (this volume). Cognitive control in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Hamilton, L.S., & Huth, A.G. (2020). The revolution will not be controlled: Natural stimuli in speech neuroscience. 
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(5), 573–582. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1499946
Holcomb, P.J., & Neville, H.J. (1990). Auditory and visual semantic priming in lexical decision: A comparison 
using event-related brain potentials. Language and Cognitive Processes, 5(4), 281–312. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01690969008407065
Kaan, E. (this volume). The neurocognition of prediction in second language processing and learning. In K. 
Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kappenman, E.S., Farrens, J.L., Zhang, W., Stewart, A.X., & Luck, S.J. (2021). ERP CORE: An open resource 
for human event-related potential research. NeuroImage, 225, 117465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2020.117465
Keil, A., Debener, S., Gratton, G., Junghöfer, M., Kappenman, E.S., Luck, S.J., Luu, P., Miller, G.A., & Yee, 
C.M. (2014). Committee report: Publication guidelines and recommendations for studies using electroen-
cephalography and magnetoencephalography. Psychophysiology, 51(1), 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.  
12147
Kirschstein, T., & Köhling, R. (2009). What is the source of the EEG? Clinical EEG and Neuroscience, 40(3), 
146–149. https://doi.org/10.1177/155005940904000305
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kutas, M. (1987). Event-related brain potentials (ERPs) elicited during rapid serial visual presentation of con-
gruous and incongruous sentences. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, 40(Supplement), 
406–411.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component of 
the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 621–647. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.psych.093008.131123
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences: Brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity. 
Science, 207, 203–205. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7350657
Leckey, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2020). The P3b and P600(s): Positive contributions to language comprehen-
sion. Psychophysiology, 57, e13351. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13351
Luck, S.J. (2014). An Introduction to the Event-Related Potential Technique (2nd ed.). MIT Press.
Luck, S.J., & Gaspelin, N. (2017). How to get statistically significant effects in any ERP experiment (and why 
you shouldn’t): How to get significant effects. Psychophysiology, 54(1), 146–157. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psyp.12639
Luck, S.J., & Kappenman, E.S. (Eds.). (2012). The Oxford handbook of event-related potential components. 
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195374148.001.000
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of second-language word learning: Minimal 
instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience, 7(7), 703–704. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1264
Morales, J., Yudes, C., Gómez-Ariza, C. J., & Bajo, M.T. (2015). Bilingualism modulates dual mechanisms of 
cognitive control: Evidence from ERPs. Neuropsychologia, 66, 157–169. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2014.11.014
Moreno, E.M., & Kutas, M. (2005). Processing semantic anomalies in two languages: An electrophysiological 
exploration in both languages of Spanish–English bilinguals. Cognitive Brain Research, 22(2), 205–220. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.08.010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Time-Based Electroencephalography to Investigate Second Language
29
Moreno, S., Wodniecka, Z., Tays, W., Alain, C., & Bialystok, E. (2014). Inhibitory control in bilinguals and 
musicians: Event related potential (ERP) evidence for experience-specific effects. PloS One, 9(4), e94169. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094169
Mottarella, M. & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Näätänen, R., Kujala, T., & Light, G. (2019). The mismatch negativity (MMN): An introduction. In R. Näätänen, 
T. Kujala, & G. Light (Eds.), The mismatch negativity (pp. 1–40). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/
10.1093/oso/9780198705079.003.0001
Nunez, M.D., Nunez, P.L., & Srinivasan, R. (2016). Electroencephalography (EEG): neurophysics, experi-
mental methods, and signal processing. In H. Ombao, M. Linquist, W. Thompson, & J. Aston (Eds.), 
Handbook of neuroimaging data analysis (pp. 175–197), Chapman & Hall/CRC. https://doi.org/10.13140/
rg.2.2.12706.63687
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P.J. (1992). Event-related brain potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 31, 785–806. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(92)90039-Z
Osterhout, L., Holcomb, P.J., & Swinney, D.A. (1994). Brain potentials elicited by garden-path sentences: Evidence 
of the application of verb information during parsing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 20(4), 786. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.20.4.786
Peltola, M. (2003). Native and foreign vowel discrimination as indexed by the mismatch negativity (MMN) 
response. Neuroscience Letters, 352(1), 25–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0304-3940(03)00997-2
Plöchl, M., Ossandón, J.P., & König, P. (2012). Combining EEG and eye tracking: Identification, character-
ization, and correction of eye movement artifacts in electroencephalographic data. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00278
Polich, J. (2007). Updating P300: An integrative theory of P3a and P3b. Clinical Neurophysiology, 118(10), 
2128–2148. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2007.04.019
Polich, J. (2012). Neuropsychology of P300. In S.J. Luck & E.S. Kappenman (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of 
event-related potential components (pp. 159–188). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfor
dhb/9780195374148.001.000
Pu, H., Holcomb, P.J., & Midgley, K.J. (2016). Neural changes underlying early stages of L2 vocabulary acqui-
sition. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 40, 55–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2016.05.002
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural neuroimaging to investigate second language. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Sassenhagen, J., & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I. (2015). The P600 as a correlate of ventral attention network 
reorientation. Cortex, 66, A3–A20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.12.019
Sassenhagen, J., & Draschkow, D. (2019). Cluster-based permutation tests of MEG/EEG data do not estab-
lish significance of effect latency or location. Psychophysiology, 56(6), e13335. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psyp.13335
Sassenhagen, J., Schlesewsky, M., & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I. (2014). The P600-as-P3 hypothesis 
revisited: Single-trial analyses reveal that the late EEG positivity following linguistically deviant material is 
reaction time aligned. Brain and Language, 137, 29–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.07.010
Sebastian-Gallés, N., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., de Diego-Balaguer, R., & Díaz, B. (2006). First- and second-
language phonological representations in the mental lexicon. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(8), 
1277–1291. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.8.1277
Steinhauer, K. (2014). Event-related potentials (ERPs) in second language research: A brief introduction to the 
technique, a selected review, and an invitation to reconsider critical periods in L2. Applied Linguistics, 35(4), 
393–417. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu028
Szewczyk, J.M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2022). Context-based facilitation of semantic access follows both loga-
rithmic and linear functions of stimulus probability. Journal of Memory and Language, 123, 104311. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2021.104311
Tanner, D., Mclaughlin, J., Herschensohn, J., & Osterhout, L. (2012). Individual differences reveal stages of L2 
grammatical acquisition: ERP evidence. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(02), 367–382. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S1366728912000302
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J.G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 56, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.002
Tremblay, A., & Newman, A.J. (2015). Modeling nonlinear relationships in ERP data using mixed-effects regres-
sion with R examples: Modeling using mixed-effects regression. Psychophysiology, 52(1), 124–139. https://
doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12299
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Danielle S. Dickson and Eric Pelzl
30
Urbach, T., & Portnoy, A. (2021). fitgrid: A Python package for multi-channel event-related time series regres-
sion modeling. Journal of Open Source Software, 6(63), 3293. https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.03293
Van Petten, C., Coulson, S., Rubin, S., Plante, E., & Parks, M. (1999). Time course of word identification and 
semantic integration in spoken language. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 25(2), 394–417. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.25.2.394
Wlotko, E.W., & Federmeier, K.D. (2013). Two sides of meaning: The scalp-recorded N400 reflects distinct 
contributions from the cerebral hemispheres. Frontiers in Psychology, 4, 181. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2013.00181
Wlotko, E.W., & Federmeier, K.D. (2015). Time for prediction? The effect of presentation rate on predictive 
sentence comprehension during word-by-word reading. Cortex, 68, 20–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2015.03.014
Wu, Y. J., & Thierry, G. (2010). Chinese–English bilinguals reading English hear Chinese. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 30(22), 7646–7651. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1602-10.2010
 
 
 
 
 
 

31
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-5
3
USING QUANTITATIVE 
ELECTROENCEPHALOGRAPHY 
(qEEG) TO INVESTIGATE  
SECOND LANGUAGE LEARNING
Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
Introduction
Successful performance in school and the workforce is often tied to the ability to speak a second 
language (L2). Thankfully, an increasing amount of research has been devoted to understanding 
why, and for whom, learning an L2 is difficult. One major challenge to answering these questions 
is that language is incredibly complex—requiring the deployment and coordination of multiple 
subcomponent processes (e.g., phonology, semantics, syntax) largely in parallel. One consequence 
of this complexity is that two learners may arrive at similar L2 proficiency levels through distinct 
learning pathways (Prat, 2011). This also highlights a second challenge—the fact that multilingual 
language use is dynamic (e.g., Stocco et al., 2014). To comprehend or produce utterances in an L2, 
individuals must use top-down, contextual information along with bottom-up linguistic features to 
manage interference between co-activated linguistic representations. Moreover, the timescales over 
which the neural mechanisms that support these processes change can vary from milliseconds (e.g., 
as the linguistic input being processed changes) to months (e.g., as L2 proficiency increases).
Each of the neuroscience methods discussed in this book provides an opportunity to “peek under 
the hood” and examine the mechanisms of the mind that give rise to L2 learning and use; quantitative 
electroencephalography (qEEG), a method for examining the electrical activity of the brain, is par-
ticularly well-suited for addressing the identified challenges. With respect to complexity, the qEEG 
methods described in this chapter allow researchers to separate overlapping neural signals into dis-
tinct processing streams based on their frequency. These frequencies can be used to make inferences 
about the nature of information processing happening in dynamic, task-based contexts (e.g., when 
qEEG is time locked to a particular task) or on a longer, more stable timescale (e.g., when task-free 
qEEG is used as a measure of the intrinsic information processing tendencies of an individual’s 
brain). For example, task-based recordings time-locked to online language processing can be used 
to disentangle the simultaneous influences of bottom-up sensory and top-down goal information, 
which occur over faster and slower frequencies respectively (e.g., Lewis et al., 2016). Whereas task-
free recordings provide insights about an individual’s characteristic information processing style 
(e.g., Klimesch, 2007), and how this may influence (e.g., Prat et al., 2016; Prat et al., 2019) and be 
influenced by (e.g., Bice et al., 2020; Pereira Soares et al., 2021) L2 learning. Critically, because both 
methods assess neural communication across frequencies that begin around two signals per second (2 
Hz) and can extend upwards of one hundred signals per second (100 Hz), they allow researchers to 
make inferences about information processing that align with the temporal dynamics of language. In 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
32
the sections that follow, we briefly describe how these fluctuations are measured and what we know 
about their underlying generators.
What Is Quantitative EEG (qEEG) and What Can We Learn From It?
The input to qEEG analysis is the electroencephalogram (EEG), recordings of changes in electrical 
polarity measured non-invasively by electrodes placed on the scalp. This is the same signal that is 
analyzed using different methods to create event-related potentials (i.e., ERPs; for more on ERPs see 
Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). This electrical activity reflects the combined outputs of populations 
of neurons firing rhythmically, or oscillating, at different frequencies, and allows for coordinated 
activity over ensembles of neurons across the brain. qEEG analyses rely on methods like Fast Fourier 
Transform (FFT) to decompose EEG recordings (see Figure 3.1A) into different frequencies (see 
Figure 3.1B).
The result of these analyses is typically a spectrogram, or a graph depicting the power (i.e., the 
proportion of the signal accounted for by one or more frequency bands) or coherence (i.e., the func-
tional coupling of two or more signals), at one or more scalp locations (see Figure 3.1C where the 
y-axis denotes power, and the x-axis denotes frequency).
Notably, coherence can be computed based on changes in power in a particular frequency band  
(i.e., spectral coherence) or based on oscillation phase (i.e., phase coherence). Both coherence  
measures broadly index functional cooperation across neural networks, though they are typically  
computed at different time scales (see Figure 3.2 for a depiction of wave properties). Although other  
Figure 3.1  Schematic of qEEG Method.
Note: This schematic of the qEEG method depicts the following: a) the raw EEG signal; b) canonical frequency band 
decomposition; c) a power spectrogram from channel O1 of a participant with a fast individualized alpha frequency (IAF; 
gray diamond).
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
33
signal properties can also be extracted from qEEG analyses (see Lui et al., 2021 for an example), we  
focus here on power and coherence as these measures are most frequently employed in L2 research.
Before discussing how qEEG has advanced our understanding of L2 learning, it’s important to 
consider the limitations of conclusions that can be drawn from this method. In doing so, we differ-
entiate between functions (i.e., the common associations observed between frequency bands and 
cognitive demands), and computations (i.e., the theorized mechanisms by which networks of neurons 
communicating over different frequencies contribute to these functions). This distinction serves as a 
preface to the sections that follow, which provide overviews of results associating cognitive functions 
with different frequencies of neuronal communication. The main point we hope to communicate here 
is that oscillatory mechanisms do not neatly map in a one-on-one manner to cognitive functions, 
though some frequencies have been more frequently implicated in L2 learning than others.
Toward the ambitious goal of identifying the mechanisms underlying the observed relations 
between frequencies and cognitive functions, we offer two interrelated thoughts. First, there is con-
siderable evidence that short-range communication among focal networks occurs over faster frequen-
cies, while, slower frequencies support longer-range communication across distributed networks (e.g., 
von Stein & Sarnthein, 2000). Second, and relatedly, faster frequencies tend to carry “bottom-up” 
sensory information, whereas, slower frequencies represent internally driven “top-down” goal infor-
mation (e.g., Lewis et al., 2016). Although untangling the mechanisms underlying EEG oscillations 
remains outside the scope of this chapter, we hope these theories provide broad insights to anchor 
the correlational work discussed subsequently (for a more detailed discussion see Buzsáki, 2006; 
Cohen, 2017).
Figure 3.2  Schematic Depicting Signal Properties of a Wave.
Notes: This schematic depicts signal properties of a wave where amplitude (power) is depicted on the y-axis and time is 
depicted on the x-axis. The distance from peak-to-peak is known as the wavelength (frequency) and indexes the speed of the 
wave. The degree of offset between two waves (i.e., solid and dashed lines) depicts the phase, the more similar the waves 
are at a given time point the greater phase coherence between the waves. Spectral coherence can be conceptualized as the 
degree of similarity in amplitude between two waves.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
34
Relating qEEG to Language and General Cognitive Processes
Since its advent in the early twentieth century, qEEG has been used to study mental processes by 
associating signal properties (e.g., power, coherence) in one or more frequency bands with cogni-
tive functions. These frequency bands are approximately defined as: delta (1.5–3.5 Hz), theta (4–7.5 
Hz), alpha (8–12.5 Hz), beta (13–29.5 Hz), and low gamma (30–40 Hz).1 In this section, we provide 
a non-exhaustive review of some of the cognitive functions relevant for L2 learning that have been 
associated with each frequency band.2
Alpha oscillations are the predominant frequency in which the human brain communicates when 
awake, but not engaged in any externally driven task. Though originally considered to be an “idling” 
state, alpha communication increases when participants engage in tasks that require inhibition of 
external information. For example, first language (L1) readers show increases in alpha power when 
reading under conditions that require inhibiting irrelevant information (e.g., Prystauka & Lewis, 
2019). Of particular relevance to the study of L2 aptitude, task-free characterizations of alpha cor-
relate with individual differences in general cognitive abilities such as working memory (e.g., Clark 
et al., 2004) and intelligence (e.g., Doppelmayr et al., 2002). These findings suggest that certain 
task-free qEEG measures reflect intrinsic information processing capabilities of an individual that are 
predictive of cognitive performance. Two indices of alpha have been frequently related to cognitive 
capacities. The first is a measure of power, computed either as an average across the alpha range, or 
as the maximum, or peak power within that range (indicated by the diamond in Figure 3.1 C). Greater 
task-free alpha power has been associated with better cognitive performance whereas this pattern can 
reverse in task-based paradigms (e.g., Klimesch, 1999). The second is a measure of the frequency at 
which an individual’s peak alpha power occurs. This individualized alpha frequency (IAF) changes 
over the course of a lifespan and is correlated with working memory capacity (e.g., Clark et al., 2004).
The beta frequency band, which has most frequently been associated with L2 learning, has been 
implicated in cognitive functions ranging from motor control to working memory. Put simply, many 
researchers theorize that beta rhythms maintain information about one’s current cognitive, or goal 
state (e.g., Engel & Fries, 2010). With respect to language specifically, beta has been proposed to 
reflect top-down predictions and the errors associated with violations of these predictions (e.g., Lewis 
et al., 2016; Weiss & Mueller, 2012).
The gamma frequency band is also implicated in language processing and has been shown to be 
sensitive to both syntactic and semantic complexity of sentences (e.g., Prystauka & Lewis, 2019). 
Broadly, gamma oscillations provide a mechanism to take in sensory information from the environ-
ment and are known to interact dynamically with slower frequencies signaling top-down information 
(e.g., Miller et al., 2018).
Oscillations in the theta frequency band are commonly observed during memory-related tasks. 
For example, theta power increases with working memory load (e.g., Jensen & Tesche, 2002). With 
respect to language, theta oscillations have been shown to increase as the working memory demands 
of sentence reading increase (e.g., Prystauka & Lewis, 2019). Considering the importance of working 
memory in predicting successful L2 learning, it follows that theta rhythms also underpin L2 learning 
to some degree.
Methodological Considerations
Frequency Band Determination
The qEEG approach is rooted in decomposing the raw composite EEG signal into component 
frequency bands (see Figure 3.1 B), but determining where to draw the bounds of each band can 
prove challenging. The most common approach is to use fixed or canonical ranges to define each 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
35
band. However, the exact boundaries used vary and are largely based on literature conventions, not 
underlying computational differences. Additionally, if a participant has a very slow or fast IAF, 
alpha activity can “spill-over” to neighboring bands and artificially inflate power (see Figure 3.1 
C for an example). Thus, it is common practice to either visually inspect each participant’s data 
and make sure their IAF falls within the alpha band used (e.g., Kepinska et al., 2017), or to titrate 
frequency bands around each participant’s IAF (e.g., Bice et al., 2020). However, even when fre-
quency bands are individually titrated around IAF, deciding how wide each band should be is still 
somewhat arbitrary. It also becomes unclear what to do with participants who do not show an 
alpha peak or who show multiple alpha peaks. In such cases, it is common to revert to canonically 
defined bands.
Data Collection Paradigms
Task-free qEEG can be collected with either the eyes closed or the eyes open. If one’s goal is to 
measure intrinsic information processing, eyes-closed approaches may be best. Doing so reduces eye 
artifacts and increases the robustness with which alpha activity is detected. Alternatively, if the goal 
is to use task-free qEEG as a baseline to compare task-based qEEG against, eyes-open protocols pro-
vide more comparable measures.
Task-based qEEG can be collected during a wide range of tasks and analyzed in several ways. 
One common way is to use time-frequency analysis to examine event-related changes in neural syn-
chronization (e.g., Kielar et al., 2018). This method is event-related such that multiple samples of 
oscillatory responses are time-locked to a certain type of event and averaged together. The resulting 
output is typically displayed as a graph showing how a signal property (e.g., power) changes across 
frequencies in response to a particular event (for more details and an example plot see Rossi et al., 
2023). An alternate approach is to examine how signal properties change over the course of a task to 
probe learning-related changes (e.g., Kepinska et al., 2017).
Benefits and Limitations of the qEEG Method
The main benefit of using qEEG is that it allows for the detection of neural communication on a 
millisecond-level timescale. Additionally, qEEG offers practical advantages over other neurosci-
ence methods, by being both more cost-effective and portable than other neuroimaging methods. 
A major limitation of qEEG, however, is that it is difficult to understand where the signals measured 
over the scalp originate from. Although source localization techniques attempt to interpolate signal 
sources (e.g., Michel & He, 2019), understanding the origin of signals at a specific frequency remains 
challenging.
Studying L2 Learning with qEEG
Despite its potential for uncovering the neural mechanisms that support successful L2 learning and 
use, relatively few studies to date have employed qEEG to directly investigate L2 processes. In 
the text below and in the provided tables, we briefly summarize some of the overarching findings 
pertaining to L2 learning gleaned from the qEEG method (see Table 3.1 for studies using task-free 
methods and Table 3.2 for studies using task-based methods).
What Can Task-Free qEEG Tell Us About L2 Aptitude?
In 2016, our lab published the first paper suggesting that power indices obtained from task-free qEEG 
could predict individual differences in L2 learning in adulthood. That original study contained two 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
36
Table 3.1  Summary of Studies Relating Task-free qEEG to L2 Learning
Study
Population (N)
L1 / L2
Frequency band 
(location)
L2 Outcome
Direction
(A) Power results
Prat et al.  
(2016)
Monolingual YA 
(16)
English / 
French
Beta & gamma  
(right 
frontotemporal)
Learning rate
Positive
Theta (left posterior)
Learning rate
Negative
Küssner et al. 
(2016)
Monolingual 
YA (E1: 33; 
E2: 38)
Dutch / 
Artificial
Beta (whole-head)
Vocabulary
Positive
Prat et al.  
(2019)
Monolingual YA 
(41)
English / 
French
Beta (bilateral 
frontotemporal);
Gamma (right 
hemisphere)
Voluntary  
speech 
attempts
Negative
Beta (right 
hemisphere)
Learning rate
Positive+
Kliesch et al.  
(2021)
Monolingual OA 
(10)
German / 
English
Beta (whole-head)
Proficiency 
composite
Positive
Ogunniyi et al. 
(2021)
Intermediate L2 
learners YA 
(49)
English / 
Spanish
n.s.
Proficiency & 
grammaticality
n.s.
Bice et al.  
(2020)
Bilingual (106) 
& Monolingual 
(91) YA
Mixed / 
Mixed
Alpha, beta,
& gamma+ (right 
posterior)
Language 
classification
Bilinguals > 
Monolinguals
Theta (left 
frontotemporal)
Language 
classification
Monolinguals > 
Bilinguals
Alpha (medial  
frontal & bilateral 
posterior)
L2 usage
Positive
Alpha (medial frontal 
& right posterior)
L2 age of 
acquisition
Negative
Pereira Soares  
et al. (2021)
Bilingual YA 
(103)
German & 
Norwegian /  
Italian & 
English
High-beta & gamma 
(whole-head)
L2 age of 
acquisition
Negative
(B) Coherence Results
Prat et al.  
(2019)
Monolingual YA 
(41)
English / 
French
All frequencies  
(right hemisphere)
Learning rate & 
vocabulary
Positive
Ogunniyi et al. 
(2021)
Intermediate L2 
learners YA 
(49)
English / 
Spanish
Theta (right 
hemisphere)
Proficiency
Negative
Bice et al.  
(2020)
Bilingual (106) 
& Monolingual 
(91) YA
Mixed / 
Mixed
Alpha & beta (right 
posterior)
Language 
classification
Bilinguals > 
Monolinguals
Pereira Soares  
et al. (2021)
Bilingual YA 
(103)
German & 
Norwegian 
/ Italian & 
English
Beta (whole-head) 
& gamma (right 
posterior)
L2 age of 
acquisition
Negative
Note: + denotes marginal significance. YA = younger adults. OA = older adults.
 
 
 
 
 
 

37
Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
Table 3.2  Summary of Studies Relating Task-based qEEG to L2 Learning
Study—Task
Population 
(N)
L1 / L2
Frequency band 
(location)
L2 Outcome
Direction
(A) Power results
de Diego-Balaguer 
et al. (2011)—AG
YA (E1: 24; 
E2:32)
Not provided 
/ Artificial
Gamma (bilateral 
frontotemporal)
AG rule learning 
classification
Poor learners 
> good 
learners
Kepinska et al. 
(2017)—AG
Monolingual 
YA (45)
Dutch / 
Artificial
Alpha (posterior)
Language 
aptitude 
cla8ssification
High aptitude 
> average 
aptitude 
at end of 
learning
Reiterer 
et al. (2009)—
L1 & L2 auditory 
processing
Bilingual YA 
(44)
German / 
English
Gamma (right 
temporal)
L2 proficiency
Negative 
(during L2 
processing)
Gamma (bilateral 
frontal)
L2 proficiency
Positive 
(during L1 
processing)
(B) Coherence Results
de Diego-Balaguer 
et al. (2011)—AG
YA (E1: 24; 
E2:32)
Not provided 
/ Artificial
Theta (between 
temporal/parietal & 
frontal/parietal)
AG rule learning 
classification
Poor learners 
> good 
learners
Beta & gamma (widely 
distributed)
AG rule learning 
classification
Good learners 
> poor 
learners
Kepinska et al. 
(2017)—AG
Monolingual 
YA (45)
Dutch / 
Artificial
Theta & Alpha
AG rule 
learning
Decrease from 
early-to-late 
learning
Beta & Gamma
AG rule 
learning
Increase from 
early-to-late 
learning
Beta (whole-head)
AG rule 
learning
Positive
Reiterer et al. 
(2005a/2005b)—
L1 & L2 auditory 
processing
Bilingual YA 
(46)
German / 
English
Alpha & beta (broadly 
distributed)
L2 proficiency
Negative 
(during 
L1/L2 
processing)
Reiterer 
et al. (2009)—
L1 & L2 auditory 
processing
Bilingual YA 
(44)
German / 
English
Gamma (right 
hemisphere)
L2 proficiency
Negative 
(during L2 
processing)
Reiterer 
et al. (2011)—
L1 & L2 auditory 
processing
Bilingual YA 
(44)
Austrian / 
English
Gamma (broadly 
distributed)
L2 proficiency
Negative 
(during L2 
processing)
Note: YA = younger adults.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
38
novel findings: (1) that beta power was strongly correlated with individual differences in early L2 
learning; and (2) that qEEG recordings over the right and left hemispheres were differentially pre-
dictive of L2 learning outcomes. This work builds upon behavioral research by identifying intrinsic 
information processing characteristics that promote successful L2 learning (for more on L2 aptitude, 
see Luque & Covey, this volume). Subsequent studies have extended this work to show that greater 
task-free beta power also predicts higher ultimate L2 proficiency (Kliesch et al., 2021; Küssner et al., 
2016). Notably, studies demonstrating this pattern have varied in both the nature of the learning 
paradigms (e.g., natural versus artificial language learning) and the participants included (younger 
versus older adults; see Table 3.1).
However, there are a few exceptions to this pattern. For example, Ogunniyi and colleagues 
(2021) found that among intermediate language learners enrolled in a university-level course, 
there was no relation between task-free qEEG power in any of the frequency bands and L2 
learning outcomes. A possible explanation for this seemingly inconsistent result is that the pre-
dictive utility of task-free beta power may depend on the stage of L2 learning one is engaged in. 
In Ogunniyi and colleagues’ experiment, participants already had 3–4 semesters of L2 instruction; 
whereas participants in the other studies above had no previous experience with the language 
being tested.
Another exception comes from our most recent L2 aptitude paper (Prat et al., 2019), which found 
that lower task-free beta power recorded over bilateral frontal networks correlated with a higher 
number of voluntary speech attempts during learning. Unfortunately, because our training employed 
a virtual language and cultural immersion software, it is difficult to understand how well the “number 
of speech attempts” variable maps onto concepts like “willingness to communicate” that have been 
measured in live speaking environments (e.g., MacIntyre & Legatto, 2011). If one assumes that the 
learners that engaged more frequently with the software were more willing to communicate in their 
L2, it raises the possibility that distinct (and potentially opposing) intrinsic information processing 
characteristics underpin different L2 learning outcomes.
The topographies of the correlations between task-free beta power and L2 learning outcomes also 
vary across studies. In both of our experiments on young adults, the relation between beta power 
and rate of L2 learning was largest over the right hemisphere (Prat et al., 2016; Prat et al., 2019). 
Although the relation between the scalp topography where an effect emerges and the underlying 
brain regions that drive these effects is complex and very plausibly nonlinear, the relation between 
right hemisphere functioning and early L2 learning in young adults is consistent with other well-
documented findings. For instance, early stages of language learning have been shown to recruit more 
distributed bilateral neural resources, which become more focal and lateralized to the left hemisphere 
with experience (e.g., Reiterer et al., 2009). However, another study examining this effect in older 
adults found it to be widely distributed across the scalp (Kliesch et al., 2021). This difference in top-
ography may reflect differences in the way the two hemispheres contribute to language processes as a 
function of aging (e.g., Reuter-Lorenz & Cappell, 2008). Ultimately, source localization studies may 
help us to better understand the extent to which the different topographies of these effects relate to 
different underlying neural generators.
Consistent with the idea of differences in the size of network configurations driving differences 
in L2 learning results, a subset of the previously mentioned task-free studies investigated the rela-
tion between L2 learning outcomes and spectral coherence. In accordance with the idea that early 
L2 learning in younger adults may rely heavily on large-scale networks in the right hemisphere, 
work from our lab has found that greater right hemisphere coherence across frequency bands was 
predictive of both faster and more accurate L2 learning in novices (Prat et al., 2019). In contrast, 
Ogunniyi and colleagues’ (2021) study of intermediate L2 learners found that lower task-free theta 
coherence across right hemisphere channels was predictive of better L2 learning.
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
39
These seemingly contradictory results may be explained by the idea that the distribution of neur-
onal communication underlying successful L2 learning changes with increasing L2 experience. 
Specifically, greater coherence in the right hemisphere may be advantageous during initial learning, 
when learners are first starting to map out the general scaffolding of a new language, but disad-
vantageous in later stages of learning, when processing is expected to become more focal and left 
lateralized. Taken together, the body of work relating task-free qEEG to subsequent L2 learning shows 
considerable promise in advancing our understanding of L2 aptitude by uncovering the intrinsic 
information processing mechanisms that support different aspects of facile L2 learning.
What Can Task-Free qEEG Tell Us About How L2 Experience Shapes Cognition?
The fact that the brain is shaped by language experience (e.g., structural connectivity and grey matter 
indices) has been well documented (for a review see Luk et al., 2020; see also Korenar & Pliatsikas, 
this volume); however, task-free qEEG has only recently been leveraged to explore how language 
experience shapes the oscillatory dynamics of the bilingual brain (see Rossi et al., 2023 for a recent 
review). This nascent body of research suggests that experience with multiple languages is associated 
with changes in task-free qEEG power and coherence (see Table 3.1).
With respect to power, L2 experience has been associated with increased power in the alpha, beta, 
and gamma frequency bands. For example, in a study of individuals with varying language experi-
ence, Bice and colleagues (2020) found that bilinguals, compared to monolinguals, had significantly 
greater task-free power in the alpha and beta frequency bands, and marginally greater power in the 
gamma band, over right posterior regions. Notably, the location of these effects over right hemisphere 
channels is consistent with the topography of task-free beta power metrics associated with higher L2 
aptitude in monolinguals (Prat et al., 2016; Prat et al., 2019).
Individual differences analyses among the bilingual participants further revealed that the increase 
in task-free alpha power was correlated with a range of language experience factors that may drive 
competition between languages including earlier age of L2 acquisition and more frequent L2 use 
(Bice et al., 2020). Pereira Soares and colleagues (2021) also found that bilinguals with earlier L2 
acquisition showed greater task-free beta and gamma, but not alpha, power. It is, as of yet, unclear 
why the power findings across these two studies did not converge in the alpha frequency band.
Spectral coherence measures have also been shown to vary with L2 experience. Bice and colleagues 
(2020) observed that bilinguals, compared to monolinguals, had greater and more broadly distributed 
task-free alpha and beta coherence. Periera Soares and colleagues’ (2021) also found that L2 experi-
ence was associated with increased coherence, such that bilinguals with earlier ages of L2 acquisition 
showed greater coherence in the beta and gamma frequency bands (Periera Soares et al., 2021).
Together the findings of these studies suggest that L2 experience is associated with greater task-
free power and coherence in faster frequency bands (Bice et al., 2020; Periera Soares et al., 2021). 
Specifically, task-free power and spectral coherence in the beta—and less consistently in the alpha 
and gamma—frequency bands, relates to both group-level differences between monolinguals and 
bilinguals and bilingual language experience factors such as age of L2 acquisition.
What Can Task-Based qEEG Tell Us About L2 Aptitude?
Studies using task-based qEEG methods to assess L2 aptitude have primarily used artificial grammar 
(AG) learning as a proxy for L2 learning. This body of research has linked task-based measures of 
both power and phase coherence with individual differences in rule-learning success (see Table 3.2).
The relation between task-based spectral power and AG learning has been investigated in several 
studies. For example, Kepinska and colleagues (2017) found that individuals with high, compared to 
average, language aptitude showed better learning of fixed-order AG rules accompanied by greater 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
40
alpha power over posterior regions in later learning blocks. The finding that this alpha power diffe-
rence emerged only at the end of learning might suggest that the high-aptitude individuals learned 
the AG rules earlier and therefore exerted less mental effort towards the end of the task. Work exam-
ining faster frequencies has shown the opposite pattern, such that greater gamma power over bilat-
eral frontotemporal areas is associated with worse AG learning (de Diego-Balaguer et al., 2011). 
Taken together, these results suggest that stronger reliance on internally guided goal information is 
associated with better AG rule learning; whereas higher reliance on stimulus-driven information pro-
cessing is associated with poorer learning.
Investigations of phase coherence, which allow researchers to make inferences about the dynamic 
formation of neural networks communicating over different frequencies, extend these results. For 
example, Kepinska and colleagues’ (2017) investigation of fixed-order rules found that while success 
on earlier AG learning blocks was characterized by greater coherence in slower frequencies (i.e., 
theta and alpha), success in later learning blocks was associated with greater coherence in faster 
frequencies (i.e., beta and gamma). In de Diego-Balaguer and colleagues’ study (2011) examining 
flexible-order rules, greater theta coherence throughout learning was associated with poorer learning. 
In contrast, better learning was characterized by greater coherence in a frequency range that included 
faster beta (20–29 Hz) and slower gamma (30–40 Hz) rhythms (de Diego-Balaguer et al., 2011). 
Similarly, in Kepinska and colleagues’ study (2017) successful learning was characterized by greater 
whole-head beta band (13–29 Hz) coherence, with this relation being particularly robust for high, 
compared to average, language aptitude individuals. Thus, the results of these studies do not perfectly 
converge. Greater coherence in faster frequencies is predictive of better AG rule-learning across both 
studies. However, the directionality of the theta coherence results is somewhat contradictory.
One interpretation of these results is that the relation between theta coherence and rule learning 
differs based on both the type of rule learned and the stage of learning. Considering that theta 
oscillations have been shown to increase with working memory load (e.g., Jensen & Tesche, 2002), 
greater theta coherence during an AG task could be indicative of participants using a declarative 
learning strategy focused on remembering surface-level features. For fixed-order rules (Kepinska 
et al., 2017), early stages of learning require declarative memory to compare non-words and extract 
the underlying grammatical rule, whereas successful long-term performance should be characterized 
by a shift to a proceduralized strategy. Theta oscillations that persist throughout learning could indi-
cate a failure to make such a shift. For flexible-order rules (de Diego-Balaguer et al., 2011), successful 
learning should be characterized by a procedural strategy throughout learning and thus any fixation 
on surface-level features, signaled by theta oscillations, would be disadvantageous to rule learning.
What Can Task-Based qEEG Tell Us About L2 Proficiency?
Another series of studies, conducted primarily by Reiterer and colleagues (2005a, 2005b, 2009, 2011) 
used qEEG to examine the demands of using an L2 by exploring proficiency-based differences (see 
Table 3.2; for more on L2 proficiency, see Fromont, this volume). These studies employed similar 
designs in which task-based EEG metrics were recorded while low- and high-proficiency bilinguals, 
assessed via an oral fluency-test and self-report measures, processed language stimuli in their L1 or 
L2. In contrast to studies assessing L2 aptitude in monolinguals, where greater task-based coherence 
is generally predictive of better L2 learning, in bilinguals, greater coherence during language pro-
cessing has been associated with lower L2 proficiency. This general pattern of results is consistent 
with the idea that with higher levels of proficiency language processing centers become more focal 
(e.g., Goldberg & Costa, 1981).
The extent to which differences in coherence relate to language processing in general or specific-
ally to L2 processing depends on the frequency band under investigation. For example, relative to a 
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
41
task-free baseline, lower-proficiency bilinguals show broadly distributed increases in alpha and beta 
spectral coherence compared to higher-proficiency bilinguals who show more focal increases when 
processing language in both their L1 and L2 (Reiterer et al., 2005a; Reiterer et al., 2005b). These 
results suggest that differences in information processing abilities underpinning bilingual language 
control at different L2 proficiency levels are reflected in network configuration dynamics over alpha 
and beta frequencies. Considering that these frequencies are often linked to inhibitory control (e.g., 
Doppelmayr et al., 2002; Klimesch et al., 2007), one interpretation of these findings is that greater L2 
proficiency hones neurocomputations supporting cognitive control, which then propagate to general 
(i.e., L1 and L2) language processing abilities.
A different pattern emerges when L2 proficiency is related to network configuration over faster, 
gamma frequencies. For example, Reiterer and colleagues (2011) found that lower-proficiency 
bilinguals had greater gamma phase coherence than higher-proficiency bilinguals during L2, but not 
L1, processing. This result is consistent with the idea that higher language proficiency is supported 
by more focal information processing centers in the brain. Converging with our earlier discussion of 
L2 aptitude, lower, compared to higher, L2-proficiency bilinguals showed greater gamma coherence 
over the right hemisphere (Reiterer et al., 2009). Taken together, this body of work demonstrates that 
task-based qEEG metrics obtained during language processing are sensitive to differences in infor-
mation processing that underlie variability in L2 proficiency.
Innovations and Future Directions
In recent years, qEEG methods have been harnessed to answer questions pertaining to L2 learning. 
However, this area of work is still in its infancy, and many important questions have yet to be 
answered. Here we identify several areas that we see as being important avenues for future research.
First, while qEEG has been used to study both task-free and task-based dynamics, little work has 
systematically examined how these measures relate within an individual. Past work on the alpha 
and theta frequencies has suggested a trade-off such that, during task-free paradigms, greater alpha 
power and lower theta power is predictive of better behavioral performance, whereas this pattern 
reverses during task-based paradigms (e.g., Klimesch, 1999). To the best of our knowledge, similar 
comparisons for the beta frequency band, which has been repeatedly associated with L2 learning, 
have not been made. Based on the studies reviewed herein, it seems that greater beta power and 
coherence is predictive of better early-stage L2 learning across task-free and task-based measures. 
Thus, the observed trade-off seen at slower frequency ranges may not hold true for beta. A systematic 
investigation of how beta oscillations change across task-free and task-based paradigms within an 
individual is necessary to gain traction on this question.
Second, future work should investigate how task-free qEEG differentially relates to aptitude at 
different L2 proficiency levels. Prior work has either focused on monolinguals with no prior L2 
experience or on bilinguals who are already proficient in two languages. Comparisons of studies 
examining these populations suggest that qEEG markers of L2 success look different depending 
on L2 proficiency level. These findings raise the question of when in L2 learning these shifts occur, 
and, what change they reflect in underlying information processing. Notably, the results of the only 
study reviewed herein which looked at intermediate-level L2 learners diverged with respect to both 
power and spectral coherence compared to studies examining novices (Ogunniyi et al., 2021). These 
findings suggest qEEG indices of L2 aptitude may begin to shift with relatively little L2 exposure. 
Future longitudinal work should investigate this question by examining how qEEG metrics associated 
with greater L2 skill change as a function of L2 learning.
Third, further investigation is needed to understand how much L2 experience is needed to modu-
late task-free qEEG metrics, and how robust these learning-related changes are to time. In their 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
42
study of older adults, Kliesch and colleagues (2021) found that task-free beta power decreased from 
pre-to-post L2 learning. Preliminary work from our research group has also shown evidence of 
learning-related task-free changes in the beta frequency band (Mottarella & Prat, 2022). Together this 
emerging line of work suggests that even acute L2 training can modulate task-free qEEG. Although 
further investigation on this topic is needed, the possibility that brief L2 training can change task-free 
EEG raises the related open question of how robust these learning-related changes are to time.
Finally, although most work to date has focused solely on the periodic (or oscillatory) proper-
ties of the EEG signal, recent work suggests that the aperiodic component of the signal (or the 1/f 
slope of the spectrogram) may also be important to examine. Historically thought of as noise, recent 
investigations have demonstrated that properties of the aperiodic signal can both independently pre-
dict individual differences in behavior and modulate how the periodic properties of the signal relate 
to behavior (see Cross et al., 2022 for a recent example).
Although many open questions remain, the results reviewed herein converge to demonstrate 
qEEG’s utility in studying L2 learning. With respect to L2 aptitude, individual differences in both 
beta power and coherence during both task-free and task-based paradigms predict L2 learning 
success in novices. Considering that beta oscillations have been linked both to top-down, goal-
directed processes and to working memory maintenance (e.g., Lewis et al., 2016; Miller et al., 
2018), one interpretation of this pattern is that beta oscillations reflect domain general cognitive 
control processes that facilitate successful L2 learning. An alternate explanation is that beta-
frequency bands reflect several different processes that occur in medium- to long-distance neural 
networks (e.g., those connecting Wernicke’s area in the temporo-parietal junction to Broca’s area 
at the back of the frontal lobe). Many of the places where language processes interface with 
semantics and memory more broadly rely on such networks and may be underpinned by beta 
oscillations (e.g., Mueller & Weiss, 2012).
Another key theme that emerges from the results discussed herein is that the spatial topography 
of qEEG predictors shifts with L2 experience. For example, in monolinguals, greater power and 
coherence over the right hemisphere is indicative of higher L2 aptitude, whereas in bilinguals, greater 
right hemisphere recruitment is associated with lower L2 proficiency. This pattern of results is con-
sistent with theories suggesting that early stages of language acquisition rely more heavily on the 
large-world networks in the right hemisphere, whereas more proficient language processing becomes 
increasingly more focal and left-lateralized (e.g., Goldberg & Costa, 1981). Though there are many 
dots that have yet to be connected, the research reviewed herein shows that qEEG is a promising 
method for understanding the dynamic, network-level information processing characteristics that 
underlie L2 learning.
Notes
1	 Some studies further subdivide these frequency ranges. Most commonly this is done in the beta and alpha 
frequency ranges.
2	 Discussion of the delta band is omitted due to low measurement reliability and less implications in L2 
research.
Further Readings
These resources provide more information about EEG measures at the mechanistic level.
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Cohen, M.X. (2017). Where does EEG come from and what does it mean? Trends in Neurosciences, 40(4), 208–
218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2017.02.004
These resources provide more detailed information on EEG cleaning, artifact removal, and processing tools.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
43
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open-source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics 
including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9–21. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Jiang, X., Bian, G.-B., & Tian, Z. (2019). Removal of artifacts from EEG signals: A review. Sensors, 19(5), 
987.https://doi.org/10.3390/s19050987
For more extensive reviews on how the qEEG method has been used to study language.
Prystauka, Y., & Lewis, A.G. (2019). The power of neural oscillations to inform sentence comprehension: A lin-
guistic perspective. Language and Linguistics Compass, 13(9), e12347. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12347
Rossi, E., Pereira Soares, S.M., Prystauka, Y., Nakamura, M., & Rothman, J. (2023). Riding the (brain) waves! 
Using neural oscillations to inform bilingualism research. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 26(1), 
202–215. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728922000451
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by a grant from the Office of Naval Research (N00014-20-1-2393) awarded to Chantel 
Prat. We gratefully acknowledge Brianna Yamasaki and Chu-Hsuan Kuo for their feedback on the content of 
this chapter.
References
Bice, K., Yamasaki, B.L., & Prat, C.S. (2020). Bilingual language experience shapes resting-state brain rhythms. 
Neurobiology of Language, 1(3), 288–318. https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00014
Buzsáki, G. (2006). Rhythms of the brain. Oxford University Press.
Clark, C.R., Veltmeyer, M.D., Hamilton, R.J., Simms, E., Paul, R., Hermens, D., & Gordon, E. (2004). 
Spontaneous alpha peak frequency predicts working memory performance across the age span. International 
Journal of Psychophysiology, 53(1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2003.12.011
Cohen, M.X. (2017). Where does EEG come from and what does it mean? Trends in Neurosciences, 40(4), 208–
218. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2017.02.004
Cross, Z.R., Corcoran, A.W., Schlesewsky, M., Kohler, M.J., & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I. (2022). Oscillatory 
and aperiodic neural activity jointly predict language learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 34(9), 
1630–1649. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01878
de Diego-Balaguer, R., Fuentemilla, L., & Rodriguez-Fornells, A. (2011). Brain dynamics sustaining rapid rule 
extraction from speech. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(10), 3105–3120. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2011.21636
Delorme, A., & Makeig, S. (2004). EEGLAB: An open-source toolbox for analysis of single-trial EEG dynamics 
including independent component analysis. Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 134(1), 9–21. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2003.10.009
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Doppelmayr, M., Klimesch, W., Stadler, W., Pöllhuber, D., & Heine, C. (2002). EEG alpha power and intelli-
gence. Intelligence, 30(3), 289–302. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0160-2896(01)00101-5
Engel, A.K., & Fries, P. (2010). Beta-band oscillations–signaling the status quo? Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 
20(2), 156–165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2010.02.015
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Goldberg, E., & Costa, L.D. (1981). Hemisphere differences in the acquisition and use of descriptive systems. 
Brain and Language, 14(1), 144–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/0093-934X(81)90072-9
Jensen, O. & Tesche, C.D. (2002). Frontal theta activity in humans increases with memory load in a 
working memory task. European Journal of Neuroscience, 15(8), 1395–1399. https://doi.org/10.1046/
j.1460-9568.2002.01975.x
Jiang, X., Bian, G.-B., & Tian, Z. (2019). Removal of artifacts from EEG signals: A review. Sensors, 19(5), 
987.https://doi.org/10.3390/s19050987
Kepinska, O., Pereda, E., Caspers, J., & Schiller, N.O. (2017). Neural oscillatory mechanisms during novel 
grammar learning underlying language analytical abilities. Brain and Language, 175, 99–110. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandl.2017.10.003
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Malayka Mottarella and Chantel S. Prat
44
Kielar, A. Deschamps, T., Jokel, R., & Meltzer, J.A. (2018). Abnormal language-related oscillatory responses in 
primary progressive aphasia. NeuroImage: Clinical, 18, 560–574. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2018.02.028
Kliesch, M., Giroud, N., & Meyer, M. (2021). EEG resting-state and event-related potentials as markers of 
learning success in older adults following second language training: A pilot study. Brain Plasticity, 7(2), 
143–162. https://doi.org/10.3233/BPL-200117
Klimesch, W. (1999). EEG alpha and theta oscillations reflect cognitive and memory performance: A review and 
analysis. Brain Research Reviews, 29(2), 169–195. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0165-0173(98)00056-3
Klimesch, W., Sauseng, P., & Hanslmayr, S. (2007). EEG alpha oscillations: The inhibition–timing hypothesis. 
Brain Research Reviews, 53(1), 63–88. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainresrev.2006.06.003
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from the 
Dynamic Restructuring Model. In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Küssner, M.B., De Groot, A.M.B., Hofman, W.F., & Hillen, M.A. (2016). EEG beta power but not background 
music predicts the recall scores in a foreign-vocabulary learning task. PLOS ONE, 11(8), e0161387. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0161387
Lewis, A.G., Schoffelen, J., Schriefers, H., & Bastiaansen, M. (2016). A predictive coding perspective on beta 
oscillations during sentence-level language comprehension. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10, 85. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2016.00085
Lui, K.F.H., Lo, J.C.M., Ho, C.S.-H., McBride, C., & Maurer, U. (2021). Resting state EEG network modularity 
predicts literacy skills in L1 Chinese but not in L2 English. Brain and Language, 220, 104984. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.104984
Luk, G., Pliatsikas, C., & Rossi, E. (2020). Brain changes associated with language development and learning: A 
primer on methodology and applications. System, 89, 102209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102209
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
MacIntyre, P.D., & Legatto, J.J. (2011). A dynamic system approach to willingness to communicate: Developing 
an idiographic method to capture rapidly changing affect. Applied Linguistics, 32(2), 149–171. https://doi.
org/10.1093/APPLIN/AMQ037
Michel, C.M., & He, B. (2019). EEG source localization. In K.H. Levin & P. Chauvel (Eds.) Handbook of clin-
ical neurology (Vol. 160, pp. 85–101). Elsevier.
Miller, E.K., Lundqvist, M., & Bastos, A.M. (2018). Working memory 2.0. Neuron, 100(2), 463–475. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2018.09.023
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (2022, March). Examining training-related changes in resting-state EEG following 
second-language learning in adults [Poster presentation]. Cognitive Neuroscience Society, San Francisco, CA
Ogunniyi, V., Abugaber, D., Finestrat, I., Luque, A., & Morgan-Short, K. (2021). Predicting second language 
proficiency with resting-state brain rhythms. Columbia Undergraduate Science Journal, 15, 39–54. https://
doi.org/10.7916/z6v3-2n20
Pereira Soares, S.M., Kubota, M., Rossi, E., & Rothman, J. (2021). Determinants of bilingualism predict 
dynamic changes in resting state EEG oscillations. Brain and Language, 223, 105030. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105030
Prat, C.S. (2011). The brain basis of individual differences in language comprehension abilities. Language and 
Linguistics Compass, 5(9), 635–649. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818X.2011.00303.x
Prat, C.S., Yamasaki, B.L., Kluender, R.A., & Stocco, A. (2016). Resting-state qEEG predicts rate of second lan-
guage learning in adults. Brain and Language, 157–158, 44–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.04.007
Prat, C.S., Yamasaki, B.L., & Peterson, E.R. (2019). Individual differences in resting-state brain rhythms 
uniquely predict second language learning rate and willingness to communicate in adults. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 31(1), 78–94. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01337
Prystauka, Y., & Lewis, A.G. (2019). The power of neural oscillations to inform sentence comprehension: A lin-
guistic perspective. Language and Linguistics Compass, 13(9), e12347. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12347
Reiterer, S., Berger, M.L., Hemmelmann, C., & Rappelsberger, P. (2005a). Decreased EEG coherence between 
prefrontal electrodes: A correlate of high language proficiency? Experimental Brain Research, 163(1), 109–
113. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-005-2215-z
Reiterer, S., Hemmelmann, C., Rappelsberger, P., & Berger, M.L. (2005b). Characteristic functional networks in 
high–versus low-proficiency second language speakers detected also during native language processing: An 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using qEEG to Investigate Second Language Learning
45
explorative EEG coherence study in 6 frequency bands. Cognitive Brain Research, 25(2), 566–578. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.COGBRAINRES.2005.08.010
Reiterer, S., Pereda, E., & Bhattacharya, J. (2009). Measuring second language proficiency with EEG synchron-
ization: How functional cortical networks and hemispheric involvement differ as a function of proficiency 
level in second language speakers. Second Language Research, 25(1), 77–106. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676
58308098997
Reiterer, S., Pereda, E., & Bhattacharya, J. (2011). On a possible relationship between linguistic expertise and eeg 
gamma band phase synchrony. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 334. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00334
Reuter-Lorenz, P.A., & Cappell, K.A. (2008). Neurocognitive aging and the compensation hypothesis. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 17(3), 177–182. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00570.x
Rossi, E., Pereira Soares, S.M., Prystauka, Y., Nakamura, M., & Rothman, J. (2023). Riding the (brain) waves! 
Using neural oscillations to inform bilingualism research. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 26(1), 
202–215. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728922000451
Stocco, A., Yamasaki, B., Natalenko, R., & Prat, C.S. (2014). Bilingual brain training: A neurobiological frame-
work of how bilingual experience improves executive function. International Journal of Bilingualism, 18(1), 
67–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/13670069124566
von Stein, A., & Sarnthein, J. (2000). Different frequencies for different scales of cortical integration: From 
local gamma to long range alpha/theta synchronization. International Journal of Psychophysiology, 38(3), 
301–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0167-8760(00)00172-0
Weiss, S., & Mueller, H.M. (2012). “Too many betas do not spoil the broth”: The role of beta brain oscillations in 
language processing. Frontiers in Psychology, 3(201), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00201
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

46
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-6
4
USING FUNCTIONAL 
NEUROIMAGING TO  
INVESTIGATE SECOND 
LANGUAGE ORGANIZATION
Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
Introduction and Critical Definitions
In the early 1990s it became possible to look inside the human brain while healthy participants 
performed language tasks using non-invasive brain imaging. The advent of methods such as posi-
tron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) led to a 
blossoming of the field of the cognitive neuroscience of language (see Rossi et al., this volume, 
for detailed information on structural MRI, sMRI; and Pandža, this volume, for detailed informa-
tion on neurostimulation techniques). PET activation studies involve injecting a substance with a 
fast-decaying radioactive label into the bloodstream (water-bolus oxygen 15 molecule) to reveal the 
brain areas in which there is increased blood flow or metabolism, reflecting increased brain activity. 
Specifically, the labelled substance becomes concentrated in active brain regions and the positrons 
that are emitted during decay are detected by the PET scanner (Berger, 2003). fMRI also measures 
brain activity, but without the use of radioactive tracers. The Blood-Oxygenation Level Dependant 
(BOLD) signal measured in fMRI arises from the different effects of oxygenated and de-oxygenated 
hemoglobin on the magnetic field in an MRI scanner, and increases in blood flow to active parts of 
the brain are measured (Glover, 2011). While these two brain imaging techniques are sensitive to 
different signals, they both allow insights into in vivo brain activity related to brain organization for 
language in first and subsequently learned languages. Figure 4.1 provides sample images from each 
technique, showing the visualization of active brain regions during task performance in different 
types of language learners.
For the most part, the studies to date have largely examined the impact of early experience 
on the already developed adult system by looking back at language learning experiences that 
occurred earlier in development. The studies combine behavioral methods with neuroimaging to 
investigate in what way brain organization may be influenced by the age of acquisition of a lan-
guage, attained language proficiency, the distinctive characteristics of languages, and the specific 
language learning and usage environments. Over time, the dynamic nature of the human brain has 
been emphasized, with neuroimaging studies of language showing the brain’s ability to be shaped 
and re-shaped by experience over the course of the life span. This chapter explores some of the 
early seminal studies in this field, then introduces more recent work, and ends with some thoughts 
about the future of functional neuroimaging for investigating the neurocognition of language and 
bilingualism.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
47
Historical Perspectives
People who speak more than one language can differentiate, process, and produce the different 
languages that they speak, and they can control or inhibit production of a non-selected language, 
often without conscious effort. This leads to the question as to whether the two languages of the 
bilingual are represented in distinct or overlapping areas of the brain. Pitres (1895) originally 
posed this question in 1895, after observing differential recovery patterns of the languages of bilin-
gual aphasic patients. Since then, the organization of multiple languages in the brain has been 
investigated by electrical stimulation of the cerebral cortex in conscious patients undergoing brain 
surgery (see Giussani et al., 2007), by examining bilingual aphasic patients (e.g., Paradis, 1977; 
Paradis et al., 1982), and with experimental studies in normal bilingual participants (e.g., Albert 
& Obler, 1978). Still, it has proven difficult to determine conclusively whether different languages 
share the same neural substrate. Penfield denied that separate neuronal mechanisms existed for each 
language in bilinguals (Penfield, 1953), while others proposed that partially distinct cerebral areas 
may be involved, especially when the second language is learned after the normal period of lan-
guage acquisition (Ojemann & Whitaker, 1978; Paradis, 1997). Over the decades, there has also been 
much debate about whether bilinguals might have greater right hemisphere involvement for lan-
guage processing than monolinguals (e.g., Hull & Vaid, 2007). The use of functional neuroimaging 
methods has proven invaluable in these investigations because, unlike lesion studies that depend on 
experiments of nature, neuroimaging methods make it possible to conduct controlled experiments in 
healthy individuals.
Early neuroimaging studies examined task-related brain activity to identify the effect of different 
language experiences on the bilingual brain. In these studies, participants performed cognitive tasks 
in the PET or MRI scanner and brain activity was identified either by the detection of an increase 
in concentration of the radioactive tracer in active brain regions in the case of PET or by measuring 
increased oxygen-rich blood flow to active brain regions in the case of fMRI. Of paramount import-
ance in these studies was experimental task design to permit the identification of the brain regions 
implicated in specific cognitive processes. Given that multiple cognitive processes are involved in 
language processing (e.g., attention, perception of sensory stimuli, access to semantic/conceptual 
information), an appropriate comparison condition is required to differentiate and isolate the brain 
regions implicated in the specific cognitive process of interest (see Soares et al., 2016).
Figure 4.1  Sample Images from PET and fMRI.
Notes: Panel A: Image adapted from Klein et al. (1995) showing similar regions of activation in the left inferior frontal 
gyrus during semantic search in the L1 and the L2 of bilinguals using PET. Panel B: Image adapted from Pierce et al. (2015) 
showing regions of activation during a phonological working memory task in monolinguals and bilinguals using fMRI.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
48
The early neuroimaging work in the 1990s looked at first (L1) and second language (L2) organ-
ization using PET scanning. Klein et al. (1995) used semantic search tasks within and across L1 
and L2 to investigate whether language processing in L2 involves the same neural substrates as 
that of L1 in healthy bilingual adults who learned their L2 after age five years. English–French 
bilingual participants performed semantic search tasks (synonym generation) in both their L1 (e.g., 
weep–cry) and in their L2 (e.g., breuvage–boisson) and translation tasks from their L1 into their L2 
(e.g., house–maison) and vice-versa (e.g., arbre–tree). Baseline control tasks required word repeti-
tion in each language. Sensory-input and motor-output demands were thus similar in all conditions, 
given that they involved listening to and producing a single spoken response. Klein et al. observed 
increased activity in the left inferior frontal cortex in each generation task compared to the repetition 
baseline, irrespective of whether the search took place in the L1 or L2 or whether the search was 
within or across language(s). There was no evidence that the L2 was represented differently than the 
L1, keeping with the view that components of language that are represented in the left hemisphere in 
monolinguals are no less lateralized in bilingual speakers (e.g., Paradis, 1992). What was striking and 
unpredicted was the increased activation in the left basal ganglia whenever native English speakers 
produced a response in their L2, French (Klein et al., 1995); this was evident when participants 
performed a translation into their L2, but not when they were translating from their L2 into L1. 
Activity in the left putamen was also observed when participants repeated words in their L2, but not 
in their L1. This finding was interpreted as reflecting the role of the left basal ganglia in the complex 
motor timing involved in speaking a language that has been acquired later in life. Another set of early 
work emphasized the role of the left caudate nucleus in monitoring and controlling the language in 
use (Crinion et al., 2006). Crinion and colleagues used PET and fMRI in groups of highly proficient 
German–English and Japanese–English bilinguals and found evidence for increased neuronal firing 
in the left caudate nucleus when there was change in language, suggesting a possible role for the left 
caudate nucleus as a regulator of language output control. Results from neuropsychological studies 
of bilingual patients also pointed to the left caudate nucleus as being involved in language control 
(Abutalebi et al., 2000). It has been argued that anatomically the left caudate nucleus plays a critical 
role in controlling and selecting automatic motor sequences, such as those necessary for articulation 
(Crinion et al., 2006; Jueptner & Weiller, 1998).
Despite the advantage that neuroimaging studies confer for more controlled studying of bilin-
gual brain organization, the results remain equivocal. Some studies have argued that different neural 
substrates are involved in a bilingual’s two languages (e.g., Dehaene et al., 1997; Kim et al., 1997; Xu 
et al., 2017), whereas others support the claim for a similar representation across languages in bilin-
gual individuals (e.g., Chee et al., 1999; Perani et al., 2003). It is now becoming increasingly clear 
that the degree to which brain regions are involved in bilingual language processing is modulated 
by many factors, such as age of L2 acquisition and language proficiency (e.g., Chee et al., 2004; Oh 
et al., 2019; Perani et al., 1998), as well as by the type of language processing skills engaged or by 
the particular language under investigation (e.g., Frenck-Mestre et al., 2005; Tan et al., 2003; Van de 
Putte et al., 2017; Van de Putte et al., 2018; Wartenburger et al., 2003). Recent meta-analyses have 
focused on the influences of age of L2 acquisition and L2 proficiency on language representation in 
the bilingual brain (Cargnelutti et al., 2019), as well as the different brain regions that underlie lan-
guage processing in L1 and L2 (Sulpizio et al., 2020), and the neural substrates of language learning 
in the adult brain (Tagarelli et al., 2019).
Early studies were important in demonstrating how advances in functional neuroimaging could 
provide a window into the brain, whereby researchers could make inferences about the neural 
underpinnings of L1 and L2 processing in healthy participants (Section 7 suggests further reading for 
additional details about the methods and analysis in functional neuroimaging). More recent advances 
in methods and analysis techniques have now led to research that is beginning to address some of the 
inconsistencies highlighted in the earlier research.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
49
Newer Methods and Paradigms
Recently there has been a gradual shift of focus from describing the function of specific brain regions 
to characterizing the spatial and temporal dynamics of functional networks that connect different 
brain regions. Researchers have identified reliable resting-state brain networks that show correlated 
spontaneous low frequency (<0.1 Hz) fluctuations in the BOLD signal over time while the brain is not 
engaged in an external task (i.e., at rest; e.g., Biswal et al., 1995; Cordes et al., 2001; Hampson et al., 
2002; Smith et al., 2009). Resting-state connectivity has been correlated with individual differences 
in behavior (e.g., Baldassarre et al., 2012; Fox & Raichle, 2007) and is thought to reflect intrinsic 
functional organization of the brain (e.g., Fox & Raichle, 2007).
Examining resting-state functional connectivity (RSFC) has been seen as a powerful method to char-
acterize neural networks (Fox & Raichle, 2007; Smith et al., 2013). Networks of activity are often iden-
tified using a seed-to-voxel approach. This approach first identifies a brain region that is part of the 
network of interest (e.g., a seed in the language network) and correlations between the mean time-series 
of the BOLD signal in this seed and all other voxels of the brain are identified. Brain regions showing 
correlated activity form networks, with stronger correlations between brain regions indicating stronger 
intrinsic functional connectivity. A number of networks showing specific patterns of synchronous activity 
have been consistently identified in healthy individuals (Lee et al., 2013), with one in particular that is 
spatially congruent with the language network that is typically evoked during linguistic tasks. Two other 
relevant resting-state networks have been found to oppose each other, or are anti-correlated with each 
other, and include the default mode, or task-negative network, which is maximally active when individ-
uals are not engaged in an external task, and the task-positive network, which is maximally active when 
individuals are engaged in a cognitive task (Fox et al., 2005). In the case of the default mode network and 
the task-positive network, the observed anti-correlation (i.e., negative correlation) of these two networks 
demonstrates that as activity in one network increases the activity in the other decreases. Figure 4.2 
depicts the spatial pattern of selected resting-state networks.
The identification of resting-state networks has led to resting-state functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (rs-fMRI) investigations to identify the effects of language experience on intrinsic functional 
brain connectivity. For example, Berken et al. (2016) compared simultaneous and sequential bilinguals 
using a rs-fMRI approach. Stronger functional connectivity between the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) in 
the left and right hemispheres, as well as between the IFG and brain areas involved in language control, 
including the dorsolateral prefrontal cortex, inferior parietal lobule, and cerebellum, was observed in 
simultaneous compared to sequential bilinguals. Functional connectivity between the left and right IFG 
and right inferior parietal lobule was also significantly correlated with age of acquisition in sequential 
bilinguals—the earlier the second language was acquired, the stronger the functional connectivity. In 
addition, greater functional connectivity between homologous regions of the IFG was associated with 
reduced neural activation in the left IFG during speech production. The increased connectivity at rest and 
reduced neural activation during task performance suggests enhanced neural efficiency in this important 
brain area that is involved in both speech production and domain-general cognitive processing. This 
study demonstrates both the utility of using a rs-fMRI approach in studies of bilingual brain function and 
the combination of rs-fMRI with traditional task-based fMRI to support interpretation of the findings.
RSFC paradigms can also reveal patterns of change longitudinally in relation to language learning  
or identify brain connectivity patterns that predict better learning outcomes. Such studies have found  
positive associations between RSFC in the language network and the learning of non-native phonetic  
contrasts (Ventura-Campos et al., 2013) and novel word learning (Veroude et al., 2010) by measuring 
RSFC pre-training and relating it to learning outcomes over a short timescale (e.g., six sessions  
lasting one hour over a two-week period). More recently, studies have considered whether RSFC  
can predict individual differences in L2 learning outcomes following longer and more naturalistic  
training situations. For example, Chai et al. (2016) examined pretraining RSFC in a group of English  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
50
monolinguals who completed a twelve-week, six hours per day intensive French training course  
using a seed-to-voxel approach with two a priori seeds, the left anterior insula/frontal operculum (AI/ 
FO; previously implicated in lexical retrieval (Price, 2012)) and the visual word form area (VWFA;  
previously implicated in reading (Price, 2012)). They found that stronger pretraining RSFC of the  
left AI/FO with the left posterior superior temporal gyrus (pSTG) and with the dorsal anterior cingu-
late cortex (dACC) was associated with greater improvements in L2 lexical retrieval. Additionally,  
stronger RSFC between the VWFA and the left mid-STG was associated with greater improvements  
in L2 reading ability. By associating RSFC measures with behavioral outcomes, these findings pro-
vide persuasive evidence for the utility of measures of RSFC strength within the language network as  
a predictor of individual differences in L2 learning ability and may be an important neural signature  
for predicting L2 attainment.
Figure 4.2  Spatial Pattern of Selected Resting-State Networks.
Notes: Panel A: Language network identified in rs-fMRI data from 51 bilingual participants using the left IFG as a seed in 
a seed-to-voxel analysis approach. Regions in which the time course of the BOLD signal is positively correlated with the 
seed are depicted p(FWE)<.001; k>1000). Panels B & C: The default mode/task-negative network and anti-correlated task-
positive network identified in rs-fMRI data from 51 bilingual participants using the medial prefrontal cortex (a core region 
in the default mode network) as a seed in a seed-to-voxel analysis approach. Regions in Panel B are those in which the time 
course of the BOLD signal is positively correlated with the signal in the seed and represent the default mode/task-negative 
network; regions in Panel C are those in which the time course of the BOLD signal is negatively correlated with the seed 
and represent the task-positive network (p(FWE)<.001; k>1000). p(FWE) = familywise error corrected; k = cluster extent 
threshold (i.e., minimum number of contiguous voxels showing significant activation).
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
51
Another approach to analyzing RSFC data takes advantage of data-driven graph-theoretical 
analyses that do not rely on a priori seeds/ROIs. Graph theoretical analysis uses the mathematical 
foundations of graph theory to study the functional networks of the brain and makes it possible to 
study the networks of the brain at different levels of organization. For example, it is possible to iden-
tify hubs (i.e., a brain region that has a central role in a network), communities (i.e., the organization 
of brain regions in networks), or global efficiency (i.e., ability for quick and efficient communica-
tion across the network as a whole) (see Medaglia, 2017 for a detailed introduction). Using graph-
theoretical analysis, a recent study investigating individual differences in L2 word-to-sound learning 
in adults found that the degree and local efficiency (i.e., connectedness with local neighbors in the 
network) of the left STG were positively correlated with learning outcomes (Deng et al., 2016). These 
results suggest that RSFC can account for individual differences in L2 learning success in the absence 
of a priori hypotheses guiding the analysis. Data-driven approaches to analyzing RSFC provide an 
objective method for examining individual differences in L2 learning ability and outcomes.
Examining the relation between different resting-state networks outside of the language net-
work has also provided insight into the effects of bilingual language experience on intrinsic func-
tional connectivity. Previous research has shown that the strength of the anti-correlation between the 
default mode network, which is related to self-referential thinking, and the task-positive network, 
which is related to external cognitively demanding tasks, is positively related with cognitive con-
trol (Hampson et al., 2010; Keller et al., 2015; Kelly et al., 2008). This suggests that an increase in 
externally directed processes and a corresponding decrease in internally directed processes supports 
tasks that are cognitively demanding. Using rs-fMRI in combination with behavioral measures of 
cognitive control, Kousaie et al. (2017) examined the effect of the timing of L2 learning on cognitive 
control. High proficiency bilinguals who differed in the timing of L2 learning were compared on a 
behavioral cognitive control task and rs-fMRI was recorded. Kousaie et al. showed that simultan-
eous bilinguals, who learned their two languages at the same time from birth, performed better than 
sequential bilinguals, who learned their L2 following mastery of their L1, in terms if suppressing 
interfering information, and showed significantly stronger anti-correlation between specific ROIs 
in the two, opposing resting-state networks. Furthermore, there was a positive relation between per-
formance and the strength of the anti-correlation (i.e., stronger anti-correlation was associated with 
better performance) in the sequential bilinguals. These findings demonstrate the value of RSFC for 
investigating the implications of bilingualism on non-linguistic cognitive processes.
It is also possible to examine effective connectivity, the influence that one neural system exerts 
over another during task performance, and, importantly, to identify changes in connectivity across 
task conditions. This type of analysis differs from seed-to-voxel RSFC analysis in that it identi-
fies correlations in the BOLD time-series between a seed and all other voxels in the brain across 
different task conditions and can therefore identify changes in patterns of functional connectivity 
during task performance. This method of identifying psychophysiological interaction (PPI) provides 
information about the effect of psychophysiological variables on the functional connectivity of the 
brain (Friston, 2011). One study (Pierce et al., 2015) used a PPI approach to identify all the brain 
regions that were co-activated with a seed in the left insula during phonological working memory 
performance. This study showed that monolingual speakers relied on a network of more “language-
specific” brain regions when processing phonological units in their single language compared to 
sequential bilinguals performing the task in their L2. More recently, differences in the connectivity 
patterns associated with forward (i.e., L1 to L2) and backward (i.e., L2 to L1) translation have been 
identified. Greater coupling between left hemisphere brain regions involved in semantic and atten-
tional processes was identified for forward compared to backward translation, suggesting asymmet-
ries in the interaction between linguistic and attentional systems (Zheng et al., 2020). The findings 
from these studies demonstrate the utility of PPI methods for examining the interaction between 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
52
brain regions during task performance to identify the involvement of networks of regions, instead of 
focusing on distinct and individual brain regions.
Given the great variability in the language experience of bilinguals, one of the challenges in studies 
of bilingualism is quantifying this variability, with differences in how bilingualism is measured 
potentially contributing to inconsistencies across studies. Similarly, there is individual variability 
in brain anatomy, which has been argued to underlie inconsistencies in the literature in terms of the 
functional specificity of brain regions found to be associated with different aspects of linguistic pro-
cessing (Fedorenko et al., 2010). In recent years, a method to functionally characterize (i.e., localize) 
language regions in the brain on an individual level has been developed and validated (Blank et al., 
2016; Fedorenko, 2014; Fedorenko et al., 2010; Mahowald & Fedorenko, 2016; Scott et al., 2017), 
and has recently been used to identify the language network on an individual basis in multilinguals 
(Jouravlev et al., 2021). The concept of localizer tasks is similar to other task-based fMRI approaches 
in that different conditions are contrasted to identify the neural substrates underlying the function 
of interest. For language localizers, generally two conditions (sentences and lists of pronounceable 
nonwords) have been used (see Fedorenko et al., 2010 for details). For the localizer analysis, brain 
regions that support high-level language comprehension are isolated by subtracting the nonword list 
condition from the sentence condition. In general, the localizer task requires less than 20 minutes 
in the MRI scanner to identify functional language regions in individual participants. The language 
localizer has been found to reliably identify brain regions associated with language processing within 
and across individuals (Fedorenko et al., 2010) and it has since been used in studies investigating 
syntactic processing (Blank et al., 2016), predictive coding in language processing (i.e., the predic-
tion of upcoming words during sentence processing; Shain et al., 2020), and in an examination of the 
language network in polyglots (Jouravlev et al., 2021).
Another example of recent innovations in fMRI methods for studying language is the use of 
data-driven analyses of fMRI in naturalistic comprehension paradigms, which renders experimental 
results more ecologically valid. Although previous work has used naturalistic language comprehen-
sion paradigms, newer methods use a data-driven approach to examine specific aspects of language 
comprehension, for example, predictive coding (Shain et al., 2020). One of the difficulties with using 
naturalistic stimuli in neuroimaging is that the stimuli are not controlled in terms of space and time 
in relation to data acquisition by the MRI scanner, thus modelling the hemodynamic response is chal-
lenging. To overcome this, Shain et al. used continuous-time deconvolutional regression (CDR) to 
model the hemodynamic response. The CDR method is data-driven and can accurately infer impulse 
response functions in continuous time from the arbitrary time series of the BOLD signal, which 
makes it suitable for analyzing neural responses to naturalistic stimuli. One of the questions in the 
language processing literature is whether linguistic prediction (e.g., prediction of upcoming words or 
structures during language comprehension) is supported by the language network or by the domain 
general multiple demand network, which is associated with executive functions across both linguistic 
and non-linguistic domains (e.g., Fedorenko, 2014; Fedorenko et al., 2013; Stiers et al., 2010). In 
a recent study, Shain et al. (2020) used naturalistic stimuli (i.e., listening to stories) in addition to 
participant-specific language network localization to address this question. Using CDR, Shain et al. 
concluded that linguistic prediction is supported by the functional fronto-temporal language network, 
including left lateral frontal, temporal, and parietal cortices. Although CDR has not been applied to 
the bilingual context, it holds promise as a data-driven approach for the study of naturalistic language 
processing in L1 and L2 and may help to determine if the same or different functional networks 
support language processing and predictive coding across a bilingual’s two languages.
These newer innovative methods hold promise for studies examining language processing, net-
work organization, and language localization in bilingualism. The application of these methods to 
studies of bilingualism provide exciting avenues for future research.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
53
Pros and Cons/Limitations of Functional Neuroimaging
This chapter has illustrated some of the complexities of studying bilingualism using functional 
neuroimaging. However, additional advantages, disadvantages, and methodological advances that 
can potentially overcome the difficulties associated with using functional neuroimaging in studies of 
bilingualism deserve consideration.
Obvious shortcomings include the resources required to conduct a neuroimaging study, potential 
participant contraindications, acoustic noise in the MRI scanner, the invasive nature of radioactive 
tracers in PET, and poor temporal resolution of functional neuroimaging methods.
The processing and analysis of MRI data is time consuming and requires specific expertise, soft-
ware, and data storage and backup systems. Combined with the high cost of user fees associated with 
MRI data collection, functional neuroimaging is resource intensive.
Another disadvantage is the participant contraindications that can make participant recruitment 
challenging. A common challenge to recruitment is that participants cannot be exposed to the strong 
magnetic fields of the MRI scanner if they have a pacemaker, cochlear implant, or any other type of 
non-removeable ferrous metal in or on their body. The presence of non-ferrous metal (e.g., ortho-
dontic devices) can also cause substantial artifact and distortion in the signal.
Other common factors that may limit participant recruitment include pregnancy (pregnant women 
are generally excluded from MRI studies) and claustrophobia. In studies of bilingualism, where 
researchers are often trying to recruit a very specific group of individuals, these constraints can prove 
challenging and result in studies with relatively small sample sizes.
Unlike PET, MRI is non-invasive; however, the gradient magnetic field in the MRI scanner causes 
a substantial amount of acoustic noise, which can be particularly problematic when studying lan-
guage/bilingualism and speech, and motion artefacts need to be taken into account when trying to 
record vocal responses. Fortunately, sparse sampling techniques can mitigate this by introducing a 
delay between image acquisitions, during which the scanner environment is quiet and acoustic stimuli 
can be presented or vocal responses recorded (e.g., Gracco et al., 2005). PET is relatively quiet 
compared to MRI, but the use of a radioactive tracer exposes participants to radiation and is therefore 
more invasive, and the rapid decay of the radioactive isotope limits the tasks that can be used.
One disadvantage that is common to both PET and MRI is their poor temporal resolution. Although 
these methods can identify the brain regions implicated in underlying cognitive processes, they are 
not able to delineate the precise time course of the neural response given that they measure the rela-
tively slow (i.e., a few seconds) hemodynamic changes induced by regional changes in cerebral 
blood flow. Electroencephalography (EEG), on the other hand, has excellent temporal resolution, on 
the order of milliseconds, but poor spatial resolution (see Dickson and Pelzl, this volume, for more 
details on Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) and Mottarella and Prat, this volume, for more details on 
Quantitative Electroencephalography (qEEG). In some cases, these methods have been used together 
in different studies to capitalize on their respective strengths. More recent technological advances 
make it possible to simultaneously record MRI and EEG, allowing researchers to design experiments 
that capitalize on the strengths of each method in single studies. In addition, magnetoencephalography 
(MEG), which records the magnetic fields produced by the electrical activity in the brain, is a func-
tional neuroimaging technique that offers both high spatial and temporal resolution. Although an 
in-depth discussion of MEG is beyond the scope of this chapter, it is noteworthy that this method has 
been used to investigate language production and comprehension in bilinguals (e.g., Blanco-Elorrieta 
et al., 2018; Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkänen, 2016).
Despite the limitations of functional neuroimaging outlined above, the advantages often outweigh 
the obstacles. With a well-designed study, functional neuroimaging techniques offer researchers and 
clinicians an unprecedented view of brain activity as it is happening, and the ability to identify the 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
54
neural underpinnings of cognitive and language processes that, at one time, could only be examined 
in patients with brain damage.
Innovations and Future Directions
Using functional neuroimaging techniques, our work and that of others indicate that the brain changes 
as a result of language learning and that this learning and plasticity can occur across the lifespan. 
However, the evidence suggests that learning occurs differently in early life and that the consequent 
brain changes are both qualitatively and quantitatively different from later learning. Important future 
directions include bridging the developmental and adult literature, enabling researchers to tease 
apart how different language experiences impact the ongoing development of the brain. Functional 
neuroimaging techniques and recent innovations in analysis techniques provide the means to examine 
the healthy bilingual brain at different stages of development to investigate these questions in 
greater depth.
Our own experience using functional neuroimaging in studies of bilingualism also support the 
need for better descriptors and quantification of bilingualism, as well as better control of variables 
such as proficiency, experience, environment, etc., across groups. As we move forward it is important 
to standardize the characterization of language background and proficiency, as well as promote open 
access to analysis techniques so that greater strides can be made in advancing our understanding of 
language organization and representation in the bilingual brain.
Further Readings
For a review of resting-state fMRI methods and analysis techniques:
Lee, M.H., Smyser, C.D., & Shimony, J.S. (2013). Resting-state fMRI: a review of methods and clinical 
applications. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 34(10), 1866–1872. https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.A3263
For a review of the theoretical basis of graph theoretical analysis of resting-state fMRI:
Medaglia, J.D. (2017). Graph theoretic analysis of resting state functional MR imaging. Neuroimaging clinics of 
North America, 27(4), 593–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nic.2017.06.008
For a comprehensive guide to fMRI data analysis:
Poldrack, R.A., Mumford, J.A., & Nichols, T.E. (2011). Handbook of Functional MRI Data Analysis. Cambridge 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511895029
For a brief guide to the fMRI technique accessible to beginners:
Soares, J.M., Magalhães, R., Moreira, P.S., Sousa, A., Ganz, E., Sampaio, A., Alves, V., Marques, P., & Sousa, 
N. (2016). A hitchhiker’s guide to functional magnetic resonance imaging. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 10, 
515–515. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00515
Acknowledments
Supported by grants from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) (RGPIN-
201405371) and the Blema and Arnold Steinberg Family Foundation.
References
Abutalebi, J., Miozzo, A., & Cappa, S.F. (2000). Do subcortical structures control “language selection” in 
polyglots? evidence from pathological language mixing. Neurocase, 6(1), 51–56. https://doi.org/10.1080/
13554790008402757
Albert, M.L., & Obler, L.K. (1978). The bilingual brain: Neuropsychological and neurolinguistic aspects of 
bilingualism. Academic Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
55
Baldassarre, A., Lewis, C.M., Committeri, G., Snyder, A.Z., Romani, G.L., & Corbetta, M. (2012). Individual 
variability in functional connectivity predicts performance of a perceptual task. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 109(9), 3516–3521. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1113148109
Berger, A. (2003). How does it work? Positron emission tomography. BMJ (Clinical research ed.), 326(7404), 
1449–1449. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.326.7404.1449
Berken, J.A., Chai, X., Chen, J.K., Gracco, V.L., & Klein, D. (2016). Effects of early and late bilingualism 
on resting-state functional connectivity. The Journal of Neuroscience, 36(4), 1165–1172. https://doi.org/
10.1523/jneurosci.1960-15.2016
Biswal, B., Zerrin Yetkin, F., Haughton, V.M., & Hyde, J.S. (1995). Functional connectivity in the motor cortex 
of resting human brain using echo-planar mri. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 34(4), 537–541. https://doi.
org/10.1002/mrm.1910340409
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., Emmorey, K., & Pylkkänen, L. (2018). Language switching decomposed through MEG and 
evidence from bimodal bilinguals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(39), 9708–9713. 
https://doi.org/doi:10.1073/pnas.1809779115
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., & Pylkkänen, L. (2016). Bilingual language control in perception versus action: MEG 
reveals comprehension control mechanisms in anterior cingulate cortex and domain-general control of pro-
duction in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. The Journal of Neuroscience, 36(2), 290–301. https://doi.org/
10.1523/jneurosci.2597-15.2016
Blank, I., Balewski, Z., Mahowald, K., & Fedorenko, E. (2016). Syntactic processing is distributed across the lan-
guage system. NeuroImage, 127, 307–323. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.11.069
Cargnelutti, E., Tomasino, B., & Fabbro, F. (2019). Language brain representation in bilinguals with different 
age of appropriation and proficiency of the second language: A meta-analysis of functional imaging studies. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 154–154. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00154
Chai, X.J., Berken, J.A., Barbeau, E.B., Soles, J., Callahan, M., Chen, J. K., & Klein, D. (2016). Intrinsic func-
tional connectivity in the adult brain and success in second-language learning. The Journal of Neuroscience, 
36(3), 755–761. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.2234-15.2016
Chee, M.W., Soon, C.S., Lee, H.L., & Pallier, C. (2004). Left insula activation: a marker for language attainment 
in bilinguals. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 101(42), 
15265–15270. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0403703101
Chee, M.W., Tan, E.W., & Thiel, T. (1999). Mandarin and English single word processing studied with func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging. Journal of Neuroscience, 19(8), 3050–3056. https://doi.org/10.1523/
jneurosci.19-08-03050.1999
Cordes, D., Haughton, V.M., Arfanakis, K., Carew, J.D., Turski, P.A., Moritz, C.H., Quigley, M.A., & Meyerand, 
M.E. (2001). Frequencies contributing to functional connectivity in the cerebral cortex in “resting-state” data. 
American Journal of Neuroradiology, 22(7), 1326–1333. www.ajnr.org/content/22/7/1326.abstract
Crinion, J., Turner, R., Grogan, A., Hanakawa, T., Noppeney, U., Devlin, J.T., Aso, T., Urayama, S., Fukuyama, 
H., Stockton, K., Usui, K., Green, D.W., & Price, C.J. (2006). Language control in the bilingual brain. 
Science, 312(5779), 1537–1540. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1127761
Dehaene, S., Dupoux, E., Mehler, J., Cohen, L., Paulesu, E., Perani, D., van de Moortele, P.F., Lehéricy, S., 
& Le Bihan, D. (1997). Anatomical variability in the cortical representation of first and second language. 
NeuroReport, 8(17), 3809–3815. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-199712010-00030
Deng, Z., Chandrasekaran, B., Wang, S., & Wong, P.C.M. (2016). Resting-state low-frequency fluctuations 
reflect individual differences in spoken language learning. Cortex, 76, 63–78. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2015.11.020
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Fedorenko, E. (2014). The role of domain-general cognitive control in language comprehension [Hypothesis & 
Theory]. Frontiers in Psychology, 5. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00335
Fedorenko, E., Duncan, J., & Kanwisher, N. (2013). Broad domain generality in focal regions of frontal and 
parietal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 110(41), 16616–16621. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.1315235110
Fedorenko, E., Hsieh, P.-J., Nieto-Castañón, A., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., & Kanwisher, N. (2010). New method 
for fMRI investigations of language: Defining ROIs functionally in individual subjects. Journal of 
Neurophysiology, 104(2), 1177–1194. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00032.2010
Fox, M.D., & Raichle, M.E. (2007). Spontaneous fluctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 8(9), 700–711. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2201
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
56
Fox, M.D., Snyder, A.Z., Vincent, J.L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D.C., & Raichle, M.E. (2005). The human 
brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 102(27), 9673–9678. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Frenck-Mestre, C., Anton, J.L., Roth, M., Vaid, J., & Viallet, F. (2005). Articulation in early and late bilinguals’ 
two languages: evidence from functional magnetic resonance imaging. NeuroReport, 16(7), 761–765. https://
doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200505120-00021
Friston, K. J. (2011). Functional and effective connectivity: a review. Brain Connect, 1(1), 13–36. https://doi.org/
10.1089/brain.2011.0008
Giussani, C., Roux, F.E., Lubrano, V., Gaini, S.M., & Bello, L. (2007). Review of language organisation in 
bilingual patients: what can we learn from direct brain mapping? Acta Neurochirurgica, 149(11), 1109–1116. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00701-007-1266-2
Glover, G.H. (2011). Overview of functional magnetic resonance imaging. Neurosurgery clinics of North 
America, 22(2), 133–139. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nec.2010.11.001
Gracco, V.L., Tremblay, P., & Pike, B. (2005). Imaging speech production using fMRI. NeuroImage, 26(1), 294–
301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2005.01.033
Hampson, M., Driesen, N., Roth, J.K., Gore, J.C., & Constable, R.T. (2010). Functional connectivity between 
task-positive and task-negative brain areas and its relation to working memory performance. Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging, 28(8), 1051–1057. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mri.2010.03.021
Hampson, M., Peterson, B.S., Skudlarski, P., Gatenby, J.C., & Gore, J.C. (2002). Detection of functional con-
nectivity using temporal correlations in MR images. Human Brain Mapping, 15(4), 247–262. https://doi.org/
10.1002/hbm.10022
Hull, R., & Vaid, J. (2007). Bilingual language lateralization: A meta-analytic tale of two hemispheres. 
Neuropsychologia, 45(9), 1987–2008. https://doi.org//10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.03.002
Jouravlev, O., Mineroff, Z., Blank, I.A., & Fedorenko, E. (2021). The small and efficient language network of 
polyglots and hyper-polyglots. Cerebral Cortex, 31(1), 62–76. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhaa205
Jueptner, M., & Weiller, C. (1998). A review of differences between basal ganglia and cerebellar control of 
movements as revealed by functional imaging studies. Brain, 121 (Pt 8), 1437–1449. https://doi.org/10.1093/
brain/121.8.1437
Keller, J.B., Hedden, T., Thompson, T.W., Anteraper, S.A., Gabrieli, J.D., & Whitfield-Gabrieli, S. (2015). 
Resting-state anticorrelations between medial and lateral prefrontal cortex: association with working memory, 
aging, and individual differences. Cortex, 64, 271–280. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.12.001
Kelly, A.M.C., Uddin, L.Q., Biswal, B.B., Castellanos, F.X., & Milham, M.P. (2008). Competition between 
functional brain networks mediates behavioral variability. NeuroImage, 39(1), 527–537. https://doi.org/http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2007.08.008
Kim, K.H., Relkin, N.R., Lee, K.M., & Hirsch, J. (1997). Distinct cortical areas associated with native and 
second languages. Nature, 388(6638), 171–174. https://doi.org/10.1038/40623
Klein, D., Milner, B., Zatorre, R.J., Meyer, E., & Evans, A.C. (1995). The neural substrates underlying word gen-
eration: a bilingual functional-imaging study. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United 
States of America, 92(7), 2899–2903. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.92.7.2899
Kousaie, S., Chai, X.J., Sander, K.M., & Klein, D. (2017). Simultaneous learning of two languages from birth 
positively impacts intrinsic functional connectivity and cognitive control. Brain and Cognition, 117, 49–56. 
https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2017.06.003
Lee, M.H., Smyser, C.D., & Shimony, J.S. (2013). Resting-state fMRI: a review of methods and clinical 
applications. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 34(10), 1866–1872. https://doi.org/10.3174/ajnr.  
A3263
Mahowald, K., & Fedorenko, E. (2016). Reliable individual-level neural markers of high-level language pro-
cessing: A necessary precursor for relating neural variability to behavioral and genetic variability. NeuroImage, 
139, 74–93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.05.073
Medaglia, J.D. (2017). Graph theoretic analysis of resting state functional MR imaging. Neuroimaging Clinics of 
North America, 27(4), 593–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nic.2017.06.008
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Oh, T.M., Graham, S., Ng, P., Yeh, I.B., Chan, B.P.L., & Edwards, A.M. (2019). Age and proficiency in the bilin-
gual brain revisited: Activation patterns across different L2-learner types. Frontiers in Communication, 4(39). 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2019.00039
Ojemann, G.A., & Whitaker, H.A. (1978). The bilingual brain. Archives of Neurology, 35(7), 409–412. https://
doi.org/10.1001/archneur.1978.00500310011002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Functional Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language Organization
57
Pandža, N. B. (this volume). Using non-invasive brain stimulation to investigate second language. In K. Morgan-
Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Paradis, M. (1977). Bilingualism and Aphasia. In H. Whitaker & H.A. Whitaker (Eds.), Studies in neurolinguistics 
(pp. 65–121). Academic Press. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-746303-2.50008-7
Paradis, M. (1992). The Loch Ness Monster approach to bilingual language lateralization: A response to 
Berquier and Ashton. Brain and Language, 43(3), 534–537. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
0093-934X(92)90118-X
Paradis, M. (1997). The cognitive neuropsychology of bilingualism. In A.M.B. de Groot & J.F. Kroll (Eds.), 
Tutorials in bilingualism: Psycholinguistic perspectives (pp. 331–354). Psychology Press.
Paradis, M., Goldblum, M.C., & Abidi, R. (1982). Alternate antagonism with paradoxical translation 
behavior in two bilingual aphasic patients. Brain and Language, 15(1), 55–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/
0093-934x(82)90046-3
Penfield, W. (1953). A consideration of the neurophysiological mechanisms of speech and some educational 
consequences. Proceedings of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 82, 199–214.
Perani, D., Abutalebi, J., Paulesu, E., Brambati, S., Scifo, P., Cappa, S.F., & Fazio, F. (2003). The role of age 
of acquisition and language usage in early, high-proficient bilinguals: an fMRI study during verbal fluency. 
Human Brain Mapping, 19(3), 170–182. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.10110
Perani, D., Paulesu, E., Galles, N.S., Dupoux, E., Dehaene, S., Bettinardi, V., Cappa, S.F., Fazio, F., & Mehler, 
J. (1998). The bilingual brain. Proficiency and age of acquisition of the second language. Brain, 121, 1841–
1852. htpps://doi.org/10.1093/brain/121.10.1841
Pierce, L.J., Chen, J.K., Delcenserie, A., Genesee, F., & Klein, D. (2015). Past experience shapes ongoing neural 
patterns for language. Nature Communications, 6, 10073. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms10073
Pitres, A. (1895). Etude sur l’aphasie chez les polyglottes. Revue de Médecine, 15, 873–899.
Price, C.J. (2012). A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken 
language and reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), 816–847. http://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.062
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural imaging to investigate second language. In 
K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Scott, T.L., Gallée, J., & Fedorenko, E. (2017). A new fun and robust version of an fMRI localizer for the 
frontotemporal language system. Cognitive Neuroscience, 8(3), 167–176. https://doi.org/10.1080/17588
928.2016.1201466
Shain, C., Blank, I.A., van Schijndel, M., Schuler, W., & Fedorenko, E. (2020). fMRI reveals language-specific 
predictive coding during naturalistic sentence comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 138, 107307. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107307
Smith, S.M., Fox, P.T., Miller, K.L., Glahn, D.C., Fox, P.M., Mackay, C.E., Filippini, N., Watkins, K.E., Toro, 
R., Laird, A.R., & Beckmann, C.F. (2009). Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during acti-
vation and rest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(31), 13040–13045. https://doi.org/
10.1073/pnas.0905267106
Smith, S.M., Vidaurre, D., Beckmann, C.F., Glasser, M.F., Jenkinson, M., Miller, K.L., Nichols, T.E., Robinson, 
E.C., Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Woolrich, M.W., Barch, D.M., Uğurbil, K., & Van Essen, D.C. (2013). Functional 
connectomics from resting-state fMRI. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(12), 666–682. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tics.2013.09.016
Soares, J.M., Magalhães, R., Moreira, P.S., Sousa, A., Ganz, E., Sampaio, A., Alves, V., Marques, P., & Sousa, 
N. (2016). A hitchhiker’s guide to functional magnetic resonance imaging. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 10, 
515–515. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2016.00515
Stiers, P., Mennes, M., & Sunaert, S. (2010). Distributed task coding throughout the multiple demand net-
work of the human frontal-insular cortex. NeuroImage, 52(1), 252–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2010.03.078
Sulpizio, S., Del Maschio, N., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Bilingual language processing: A meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies. Neurosci Biobehav Rev, 108, 834–853. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubio
rev.2019.12.014
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
Tan, L.H., Spinks, J.A., Feng, C.M., Siok, W.T., Perfetti, C.A., Xiong, J., Fox, P.T., & Gao, J.H. (2003). Neural 
systems of second language reading are shaped by native language. Human Brain Mapping, 18(3), 158–166. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.10089
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Shanna Kousaie and Denise Klein
58
Van de Putte, E., De Baene, W., Brass, M., & Duyck, W. (2017). Neural overlap of L1 and L2 semantic 
representations in speech: A decoding approach. NeuroImage, 162, 106–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu
roimage.2017.08.082
Van de Putte, E., De Baene, W., Price, C.J., & Duyck, W. (2018). Neural overlap of L1 and L2 semantic 
representations across visual and auditory modalities: a decoding approach. Neuropsychologia, 113, 68–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.03.037
Ventura-Campos, N., Sanjuán, A., González, J., Palomar-García, M.-Á., Rodríguez-Pujadas, A., Sebastián-
Gallés, N., Deco, G., & Ávila, C. (2013). Spontaneous brain activity predicts learning ability of foreign 
sounds. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(22), 9295–9305. https://doi.org/10.1523/jneurosci.4655-12.2013
Veroude, K., Norris, D.G., Shumskaya, E., Gullberg, M., & Indefrey, P. (2010). Functional connectivity between 
brain regions involved in learning words of a new language. Brain and Language, 113(1), 21–27. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2009.12.005
Wartenburger, I., Heekeren, H.R., Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S.F., Villringer, A., & Perani, D. (2003). Early 
setting of grammatical processing in the bilingual brain. Neuron, 37(1), 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
s0896-6273(02)01150-9
Xu, M., Baldauf, D., Chang, C.Q., Desimone, R., & Tan, L.H. (2017). Distinct distributed patterns of neural 
activity are associated with two languages in the bilingual brain. Science Advances, 3(7), e1603309. https://
doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1603309
Zheng, B., Báez, S., Su, L., Xiang, X., Weis, S., Ibáñez, A., & García, A.M. (2020). Semantic and attentional 
networks in bilingual processing: fMRI connectivity signatures of translation directionality. Brain and 
Cognition, 143, 105584. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2020.105584
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

59
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-7
5
USING STRUCTURAL 
NEUROIMAGING TO  
INVESTIGATE SECOND 
LANGUAGE
Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
Introduction
Despite the past belief that the brain is static, and that it reaches its peak performance in young 
adulthood and then steadily declines as age progresses, early seminal research on neuroplasticity in 
animal models (Rosenzweig et al., 1962) demonstrated that the brain is quickly pliable, as a conse-
quence of enriched environmental conditions, different task demands, and different life experiences. 
Those key animal models’ findings were based on invasive histological methodologies, involving 
slicing and analyzing rats’ brains. Despite the high informativity of those results, this invasive type 
of experiments would clearly not be ethical in healthy human subjects. However, with the relatively 
recent advent and development of neuroimaging methods such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
scientists in the field have been able to study the neuroplasticity of the human brain non-invasively, 
at a relatively large scale, and with increasing replicability across laboratories.
The emergence of neuroimaging methods has enabled collecting neural data non-invasively, and 
in-real time, and has revealed that the same neuroplasticity observed in early animal models applies 
to the human brain. In the last two decades, research has shown that the human brain changes rapidly 
and adapts greatly depending on one’s environment and life experiences. For example, neuroplastic 
changes in the brain’s grey matter (primarily composed by neurons’ cell bodies composing the most 
superficial part of the brain’s cortex) and white matter (primarily composed by the neurons’ axons) 
have been demonstrated to occur as a result of long-term engagement in cognitively demanding tasks, 
including motor learning (Bengtsson et al., 2005), visual memory (Maguire et al., 2000), and even 
higher-level meditation practices (Hernández et al., 2016). Learning any new cognitively demanding 
skill places demands on the cognitive/neural systems that are implicated by it. In response, the brain 
is thought to both form new dendritic spines, the formation of which facilitates new neural pathways, 
and prune existing ones to handle the cognitive demands associated with the new skill more optimally 
and efficiently (Fuchs & Flügge, 2014; see Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume for a theoretical per-
spective of brain plasticity and second language).
Bilingualism and second language (L2) learning are key examples of such a cognitively demanding 
and enriching skill. The data on the effects of L2 learning and bilingualism has been shown to have 
consequences for (both) language(s) at the linguistic level (e.g., Leivada et al., 2021), but critically 
also for brain structure, brain connectivity, and recruitment patterns (Abutalebi et al., 2012; Li et al., 
2015; Pliatsikas, 2019; Rossi, et al., 2017). Substantial evidence in the field supports the hypothesis 
that the observed linguistic and structural effects stem from the underlying language competition 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
60
and the cognitive demands to manage two (or more) languages (see Kroll et al., 2013; Rothman 
et al., 2019). The study of the structure of the human brain, and especially the investigation of neural 
adaptations that may occur in response to L2 learning, and/or bilingualism more generally, has been 
increasingly studied in the last two decades (e.g., DeLuca et al., 2020; Li et al., 2014), especially due 
to the availability of MRI and other neuroimaging methods that have catalyzed the study of the struc-
ture and function of the human brain. The description of these methodologies and their applications 
to the bilingual brain will be the focus of this chapter.
Bilingualism is still too often assumed to be a constant or a perfectly dichotomous variable at 
best. However, recent research in the field is increasingly highlighting how bilingualism exists on 
a rather vast continuum of contextual factors that come together to form different individual bilin-
gual profiles. For example, variables such as (a) age-of-acquisition; (b) duration of bilingualism; 
(c) patterns of using both languages (separately and/or how they are interspersed in the same dis-
course) across an array of domains; (d) size and nature of the speech communities; (e) density of an 
individual’s linguistic social networks; (f) expected/normative choice and prestige of the languages in 
the society, and many more factors influence the degree of domain general neurocognitive adaptation. 
Even though first steps have been taken to unveil how this multi-level variability modulates struc-
tural and functional brain changes (e.g., Gullifer et al., 2018), this question(s) is still very much open 
and will most likely represent the next scientific challenge for the bilingualism scientific community.
The goal of this chapter is to describe (a) the major neuroimaging methods that have been utilized 
to date to track structural brain changes that occur in response to L2 learning and bilingualism. We 
will then exemplify how data from these methodologies have revealed (b) that the brain changes and 
adapts to handle the control and processing demands associated with L2 learning and bilingualism, 
and (c) that these adaptations continue to facilitate the handling of these demands in the most efficient 
way possible. We will then also highlight the strengths and weaknesses of these methodologies, and 
discuss future directions for the research in the field.
Structural Neuroimaging: Critical Concepts and Definitions
The human brain is a highly complex organ. It is beyond the scope of this chapter to thoroughly 
describe the human neural central system, but we will provide general concepts that will be important 
to understand the basic functioning of the neuroimaging methods that we will describe. For an in-
depth description of the neuroanatomy of the human brain we refer the reader to classic neuroanatomy 
textbooks (i.e., Kandel et al., 2000).
The brain is composed of individual nerve cells or neurons. A neuron is considered to be the 
basic building block of the brain and characteristically consists of the cell nucleus, multiple smaller 
processes called dendrites and a (typically) single longer, more prominent process called the axon. 
The dendrites link to other nerve cells via synapses and transmit the information to the cell nucleus. 
The cell nucleus fires small impulses called action potentials transmitting them to the effector via 
the axon. Unlike dendrites and cell bodies, axons are typically covered in myelin—a fatty tissue that 
wraps around the axon forming a sheath, which has the function of facilitating electrical conduction in 
axons. Clusters of cell nuclei, which are not covered in a myelin sheath, form what is known as grey 
matter, due to its pinkish-grey appearance. Grey matter forms the folded outermost layer of the brain 
(the cortex), as well as some subcortical structures deep inside the brain, and consists of cell bodies 
and dendrites. Myelinated axon fibers, on the other hand, form what is known as white matter, due to 
the whitish appearance of myelin. The white matter consists of bundles of axons that, in turn, form 
tracts and is primarily responsible for communication of neural signals between different areas of the 
brain. Critically, as we will detail below, grey matter and white matter have different physiological 
and structural properties that can be capitalized on by MRI to disentangle different brain structures.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
61
MRI started to be used in the early 1980s to capture three-dimensional structural images of the 
brain, and has since become the primary neuroimaging technique to study the structure and the 
function of the human brain. MRI is a non-invasive imaging technique that provides measures of 
brain structure (e.g., anatomy, measures of white matter integrity), and brain function (i.e., func-
tional MRI or fMRI) with an excellent spatial resolution (~1-2mm). Even though the vast majority 
of the MRI neuroimaging literature on language processing has capitalized on the functional aspects 
of MRI (see Kousaie & Klein, this volume, for more details on using fMRI to investigate L2), in this 
chapter we will focus on understanding how MRI has been used as a technique in and of itself to 
study the relative structural neuroplastic changes in brain structure associated with bilingualism and 
L2 learning.
MRI relies on the natural magnetic properties of hydrogen atoms in different types of biological 
tissues captured by an induced strong external magnetic field (the MRI scanner, which is essen-
tially a very large magnet), to produce high resolution images of the brain. There is an abundance 
of water molecules in the brain, of which hydrogen is the most common chemical. Under normal 
circumstances, hydrogen protons spin on their axis in a random fashion. However, in the presence 
of a constant strong external magnetic field, such as the MRI scanner, the spin axes line up. The 
MRI scanner consists of a main magnet and set of transmitting and receiving coils. With spins of the 
hydrogen protons lined up to the external magnetic field, a radio frequency (RF) pulse can be emitted 
that causes the spin vectors to deflect and absorb energy. During MR image acquisition, the RF pulses 
are switched on and off. In the absence of RF pulse, protons realign with the external magnetic field 
and, by doing so, release the RF energy that can be picked up by receiver coils in the MRI scanner. 
Critically, as different types of tissues (i.e., bone, cartilage, grey matter, white matter, water, etc.) 
have different relaxation times, they can then be identified separately within the MRI to form a three-
dimensional image of the brain. Moreover, different scanning sequences capitalize on two types of 
relaxation. T1 (or longitudinal) relaxation captures the return of the excited protons to realignment 
with the external magnetic field; T2 (or transverse) relaxation captures the decay of transverse mag-
netization (i.e., when the direction of tissue magnetization is at a 90 degrees angle with respect to 
the direction of the magnetic field, and is thus in the transverse plane). Contrast and brightness of 
different types of tissue in the acquired MRI image will be determined by T1 and T2 relaxation prop-
erties. The images that are acquired with MRI can then be processed to gather measures of structural 
integrity, shape, volume, and density of brain areas and the related structures.
Standard anatomical images (e.g., T1- and/or T2-weighted images) can provide volumetric 
measures of grey matter, white matter, subcortical structures, and fluids, such as cerebrospinal fluid 
(Kandel et al., 2000). These measures are then analyzed via sophisticated analyses that enable add-
itional structural assessments such as measures of grey matter density or cortical thickness and 
gyrification, which we will describe more in depth below. These relatively new types of methods 
are used to quantify changes in brain structures, for example neural adaptations after language 
immersion and/or new language learning. MRI also permits the acquisition of sequences that enable 
the tracking of the structure of white matter. As we will describe, diffusion tensor imaging examines 
white matter integrity by capitalizing on the anisotropy of water flow (i.e., the ability of a substance 
to have differential values when measured in different directions) as an indicator of white matter 
integrity.
In sum, MRI is the primary method that allows the examination of the structure of the human 
brain in a non-invasive manner. It has great spatial resolution and can be easily coupled with other 
neuroimaging methods and with behavioral data obtained outside the scanner, which explains the 
wide adoption of this method to study the structural effects of bilingualism and L2 learning in 
neuroscientific research. In what follows, we first provide a historical excursus of the methods that 
inform the structure and changes that occur in the human brain. Then, we present several current 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
62
neurocognitive methods used in bilingualism/L2 research, and a description of their advantages and 
disadvantages. Finally, we present key studies to exemplify each method, and conclude the chapter 
by identifying perspectives for future research in the field.
Historical Perspectives
The investigation of the neural structure of the brain, its changes, and its connection with language is 
certainly not as recent as one might assume. It dates back millennia, far preceding the development 
of modern neuroimaging techniques. Findings of skulls on which surgeries have been performed on, 
date back to over 5,000 years ago (Finger, 2001). Similarly, an Egyptian papyrus dating from 1700 
BC (Breasted, 1930) contains the description of 48 medical cases written by an Egyptian surgeon 
including the earliest known description of a case of aphasia. This description of an aphasic patient, 
pre-dates the famous work on aphasia by Paul Broca (1861) by thousands of years!
More recently, starting from the nineteenth century, the neuroanatomy of the human brain has been 
investigated mainly through the study of clinical lesions. Abundant anatomo-clinical reports have 
provided fundamental data for the structural localization of various cognitive functions, including a 
“map” of areas dedicated to language processing (for a review, see Luzzatti & Whitaker, 1996). The 
anatomo-clinical method yielded information on what areas of the brain subserve specific linguistic 
functions, including a rich literature on early cases of bilingual aphasia that permitted the mapping 
and theorizing of how multiple languages are represented in the brain (for detailed information on this 
topic, see Scimeca et al., this volume). The early anatomo-pathological models that emerged from 
this work, have been primarily based on post-mortem brain analyses, and have since been enriched 
by years of psycholinguistic research that has investigated the bases of language processing, leading 
to the formulation of foundational psycholinguistic models (e.g., Levelt, 1989). Although behav-
ioral psycholinguistic research thrived, the research on the structure of the brain and its linguistic 
underpinnings was at a halt, mainly due to the lack of technology that enabled researching the struc-
ture (and changes thereof) of the human brain in vivo, beyond the analysis of post-mortem brains.
Even though the idea that blood flow was somehow associated with human brain structure 
and function was already proposed in 1878 by an Italian physiologist (Mosso, 1881), and fur-
ther formalized by Roy and Sherrington (1890), it was only in the 1970s with the invention and 
introduction of x-ray computed tomography and positron emission tomography (PET) that it was 
possible to capture an image of the brain in vivo. In 1982, PET was also used to track changes in 
blood flow during a behavioral task with a relatively good temporal resolution. However, it was 
with the introduction of MRI in 1982, with its ability to track the various structures of the brain 
non-invasively, and later create clear images of the human brain “at work” with fMRI (in the 1990s) 
that the doors to what we know today as modern cognitive neuroscience were opened. Since the 
advent of (f)MRI, and its applications to human neurocognition, the literature in the field of the 
neurocognition of language (including bilingualism) and its structural underpinning have exploded. 
For a detailed account of the various technological advances of human brain mapping, we refer to 
Raichle’s review (2009).
Methods and Paradigms
In this section, we describe the current MRI methodologies that are used to study structural changes 
in the human brain. We start from measures to study grey matter adaptation to language learning 
experience, and we then continue to methodologies used to capture structural white matter changes. 
For each method, we also provide a short section describing benefits and disadvantages. A visual 
summary of the described methods is provided in Figure 5.1.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
63
Structural Neuroimaging: Methods for Studying Grey Matter Adaptation
A variety of techniques currently exist that have been used to study patterns of grey matter struc-
ture adaptations to L2 learning and bilingual engagement (Luk et al., 2020). Herein, we focus on 
describing the bases of three more commonly used techniques in the field.
Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) is one of the primary techniques used to assess neural grey 
matter volume and density. In general terms, VBM compares grey matter concentrations per voxel 
across the brain, either between groups, or across subjects (Ashburner & Friston, 2000). In VBM ana-
lysis, subjects’ brains are first segmented into distinct tissue types, then registered to a study-specific 
template, and then to standard space. The images are then spatially smoothed to increase across-
subject comparability. Regional signal intensities are then used to calculate grey matter density within 
voxels.
Benefits and disadvantages: A primary benefit of VBM is the ability to provide robust measurements 
of grey matter volume and/or density across the whole brain, including the cerebellum and (in prin-
ciple) subcortical structures. This method, however, also carries some limitations. First, the requisite 
registration to a standard space means warping of some brain regions. Furthermore, given that some 
degree of spatial smoothing is required, this technique may be unable to capture some smaller, 
more granular adaptations, for example, shape changes seen within the subcortical structures (e.g., 
Burgaleta et al., 2016; Pliatsikas et al., 2017).
Cortical thickness (CT) is another technique developed for examining regional morphological 
patterns of grey matter (Ad-Dab’bagh et al., 2005; Fischl & Dale, 2000). Differently than VBM, 
which is specific to measure volume density, CT establishes the extent of grey matter as defined 
between the white matter and pial surface (i.e., the surface representing the boundary between grey 
matter and cerebrospinal fluid) within the cortex and uses these boundaries to establish the thickness 
of the cortex at any given point. Akin to VBM, subject brains are also registered to standard space. 
White matter intensity measures are then used to determine the extent of white matter across the 
volume, with values being assigned to (a) white matter or (b) other tissue type. A surface is then 
Figure 5.1  Summary of the key methods that are used to study brain structural changes in L2 acquisition and 
bilingualism.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
64
generated based on this segmentation and refined based on intensity gradients per tissue type. Refined 
white matter and pial surfaces are then laid over the T1 image and distance between these is calculated 
to give thickness values across the cortex.
Benefits and disadvantages: A primary benefit of CT is that it allows for a granular view of specific 
regional fluctuations across the cortex, as it is more sensitive to regional folding patterns within sulci 
and gyri. This said, it also carries some limitations. First, like VBM, whole-brain CT analyses typic-
ally require registration to standard space for individual- or group-level comparisons, which entails 
some degree of warping. Furthermore, as the name implies, the subcortical structures and cerebellum 
cannot be included in this analysis, limiting the scope of examination.
Finally, vertex-based analysis (VBA) was developed specifically for regional shape adaptations 
within several of the subcortical regions including the thalamus, caudate nucleus, putamen, hippo-
campus, amygdala, and others (Patenaude et al., 2011). Via a Bayesian framework of shape, subcor-
tical structures are extracted and registered to standard space. Coordinate maps for each subject are 
then projected onto the standard template for each structure. The resulting spatial maps from this 
projection signify positive and negative displacement values, which are used as a measure of shape 
deviation.
Benefits and disadvantages: The primary advantage of VBA is its degree of granularity in exam-
ining structural patterns and changes. This is particularly useful within the subcortical structures 
where regional patterns of adaptations may be too subtle to be captured in a volumetric analysis 
(like VBM for example). Of course, this technique also carries some limitations. First, like CT and 
VBM, it also requires registration to standard space, which entails a degree of warping. Furthermore, 
depending on the package used, this technique might only be useful in, or realistically applicable to, 
the subcortical structures.
Structural Neuroimaging: Techniques for Studying White Matter Adaptation
MRI can be used to investigate structural changes not only in grey matter, but also in white matter. 
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a MR technique that captures directional water displacements in 
white matter tracts (Le Bihan et al., 2001), and is used to investigate changes in white matter structure 
an integrity. The basic idea behind DTI is that water tends to flow anisotropically (i.e., directionally 
dependent) when it is constrained by a biological “vector,” for example by the myelin sheath, and 
isotropically (not directionally dependent) when it is not constrained. For example, cerebrospinal 
fluid, which is not constrained, flows relatively isotropically in the ventricles within the brain and in 
the spinal cord (Le Bihan et al., 2001).
DTI data is collected using specific MRI recording sequences. The duration of the sequence ranges 
from four to ten minutes, depending on the resolution and scanner characteristics. The statistical 
model that describes the three-dimensional diffusivity direction of each white matter voxel is called 
a tensor. The tensor model in each voxel allows the calculation of levels of diffusivity and anisotropy 
that describe the shape of the white matter tract using water displacement as a measurement. DTI data 
enables calculating common measures of water diffusion in the white matter tracts, such as: (a) axial 
diffusivity, indicating diffusivity parallel to a white matter tract; (b) radial diffusivity, indicating the 
diffusivity of water molecules perpendicular to a white matter tract; (c) mean diffusivity, representing 
the average diffusivity across all directions; and finally (d) fractional anisotropy, indexing whether 
the diffusion is isotropic (when the value is 0, indicating non-directional diffusion) or anisotropic 
(when the value is 1, indicating complete directional diffusion). It is important to remember though, 
that the interpretation of fractional anisotropy values should be combined with the knowledge of the 
anatomical structure of the white matter architecture, given that white matter fibers cross in specific 
directions. Degrees of fractional anisotropy can thus be measured across many directions depending 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
65
on the direction of the white matter fibers to ascertain the directionality of water flow in each voxel 
of the brain (Le Bihan et al., 2001). To date, the standard is to measure mean diffusivity in more than 
six directions (measured in degrees). This type of information from each voxel can then be combined 
with tractography measures to provide an estimate of longer-range directionalities (e.g., tracts), using 
tract-based spatial statistics.
Benefits and disadvantages: A primary benefit of DTI is that it allows for several robust 
measurements of white matter microstructure across the brain. Like the other methods described 
above, however, this method also carries some limitations to its application. First, due to the way 
in which diffusion tensors are calculated, the method is somewhat limited in accuracy in meas-
uring white matter microstructure in areas where fiber tracts cross. Second, it is unable to be used to 
measure structural connectivity between brain regions.
Structural Neuroimaging to Study L2 and Bilingualism: Example Studies
In this section, we discuss one key example for each of the above-described methodologies to show 
how they have been applied to examine the effects of L2 learning and/or bilingual experience on 
the structure of the human brain. Here, we focus on studies that tested young adults. Note, however, 
that the findings might not generalize to the intersection of bilingualism in populations that undergo 
developmental brain changes (e.g., in childhood and in older adulthood). See the Further Readings 
section below for additional, empirical work for each method.
Voxel-Based Morphometry
Mårtensson and colleagues (Mårtensson et al., 2012) used VBM to examine brain plasticity over 
early stages of non-native language learning. In a longitudinal design, participants were tested in 
two separate scan sessions, an initial, baseline scan, and an additional scan after three months of an 
intensive language acquisition program. The participants were young adults in the Swedish mili-
tary training to be interpreters. A control group was also included in the study that was composed 
of university students. The results demonstrated that grey matter volumes in the left superior tem-
poral gyrus, left middle frontal gyrus, and right hippocampus showed significant increases in the 
three months post-learning for the interpreters but crucially not for the control group. Hippocampal 
volumes also increased significantly more over the three-month period for the interpreters relative 
to the controls. Furthermore, within the interpreters, proficiency in language acquisition (measured 
by participants’ course performance) correlated positively to grey matter volume in the left superior 
temporal gyrus and right hippocampus, whereas increased effort to reach language learning goals 
correlated positively with grey matter volume in the left middle frontal gyrus. Altogether, this study 
provides evidence that engaging in L2 learning (in this case assumingly at an intense pace), catalyzes 
rapid neural grey matter volumetric changes, suggesting a general effect of L2 learning in neural 
reshaping.
Cortical Thickness
CT has been utilized as a key measure to study how bilingualism can shape the human brain. Here 
we showcase a recent key example. Klein and colleagues (2014) examined the effects of bilingualism 
and L2 age of acquisition (AoA) on regional cortical thickness. Three groups of participants were 
tested: monolinguals, simultaneous bilinguals, and sequential bilinguals who learned an L2 later in 
childhood (8–13 years). The results revealed that late bilinguals had greater cortical thickness (CT) 
in the left inferior frontal gyrus (specifically, pars triangularis and orbitalis) than monolinguals and 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
66
early bilinguals, accompanied by a reduction in CT in the right inferior frontal gyrus. Interestingly, 
AoA and CT were positively correlated in the left inferior frontal gyrus and negatively correlated in 
the right inferior frontal gyrus. That is, the later the AoA, the thicker the left inferior frontal gyrus 
and thinner the right inferior frontal gyrus. CT in the left superior parietal lobe was also positively 
correlated with AoA. The authors concluded that length of bilingualism has a differential effect on 
changes in measures of CT, and that length of length of L2 use modulates CT.
Vertex-Based Analysis
Pliatsikas and colleagues (2017) assessed the effects of L2 immersion on adaptations within the sub-
cortical structures using a vertex-based analysis, which is not easily addressable via cortical thickness 
analyses. They tested two experimental populations. Both were L2 speakers of English living in the 
UK at the time of testing but differed primarily in their length of residence in the UK. The immersed 
bilingual group had a mean length of residence of 7.6 years, whereas the low-immersion group had 
a mean length of residence of 3.9 years. Both groups were compared to monolingual controls. Two 
effects were examined: (a) group effects (comparing bilinguals to monolinguals); and (b) continuous 
effects of language experience, i.e., proficiency, age of acquisition (years), and immersion time (for 
the bilingual population only). Comparing bilinguals (with both short and long immersion time) to 
the monolinguals, significant shape changes (expansions) were found in the thalamus, globus pal-
lidus, and putamen. Regressions with measures of language experience showed that length of L2 
immersion predicted shape change in the globus pallidus bilaterally. Comparing the low-immersion 
bilinguals to the monolinguals, shape changes (both expansions and contractions) were found in the 
caudate nucleus, but no significant effects for any of the language experiences for this group were 
found. The results indicate that prolonged L2 exposure in an immersive context supports increased 
measurable efficiency.
Diffusion-Tensor Imaging
Kuhl et al. (2016) examined the effects of L2 immersion on white matter integrity. Two groups of 
participants were scanned: young adult Spanish–English bilinguals, and a native-English speaking 
control group. All participants were residing in the United States at time of testing. The bilingual 
participants started learning English upon moving to the United States. Participants completed a lan-
guage background questionnaire and were scanned with a DTI sequence. Fractional anisotropy and 
mean diffusivity values were calculated and compared across participants using the specific dedicated 
pipelines in MRI software packages. Generally, higher fractional anisotropy and lower mean diffu-
sivity values were observed for the bilingual group in frontal tracts, while lower values were seen in 
posterior tracts. In relation to length of immersion in the US, a negative correlation was found for 
all diffusivity values and a positive correlation for fractional anisotropy values, suggesting that the 
longer the immersion in the L2 environment, the greater the change in white matter. Furthermore, 
mean diffusivity in anterior tracts of the left hemisphere was modulated by increased L2 exposure 
(listening), whereas production (speaking) was found to modulate fractional anisotropy values in the 
posterior section of the left hemisphere.
Innovations and Future Directions
Even though there is a sizable body of literature, the literature covering neuroanatomical adaptations 
to L2 (and bilingualism more generally) is still relatively young, and much remains to be explored. 
Indeed, several study designs and methodological innovations could bring novel insights to this 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
67
topic, some of which we address here. Herein, we highlight several directions that could be used 
to better capture variability in L2/bilingualism and structural adaptation, to further methodological 
developments, and to combine structural imaging with other complementary techniques.
Extending Structural Designs to Better Capture Neural Change
As introduced, bilingualism is increasingly recognized as a multifaceted, rather than monolithic phe-
nomenon. For example, key variables such as age of acquisition, proficiency, and immersion in a L2 
environment, the characteristics of that immersive environment, the length of immersion, together 
with other emerging variables, including the size and typology of our social network, might shape the 
magnitude and type of the observable structural brain changes, and require additional investigations. 
One potential strategy to tackle the diversity of these variables and understand how they might shape 
neural structural changes would ideally involve large-scale studies across multiple laboratories around 
the world. This would allow for more direct comparisons across diverse populations and better cap-
ture the dynamic relationship between specific language use patterns and bilingualism-induced neural 
plasticity (Stein et al., 2014).
On a similar note, most work to date comes from group studies looking at a specific type of 
bilinguals/learners at a particular point in time, which, while useful for showing trends across a 
population, only provide a single snapshot in time of individuals’ trajectories of adaptation to L2 
acquisition and use. One key future direction to better understand these effects would be to study this 
trajectory from a long-term (i.e., over multiple years) longitudinal perspective. The key advantage to 
using such designs is that they allow for the use of subjects as their own baselines, and thus more dir-
ectly track the nature and degree of structural adaptations to specific aspects of L2, but crucially how 
these would dynamically shift over time (see, Pliatsikas, 2020; Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume). 
Extending the concept of longer-term longitudinal research, the applications of such study designs 
could be extended to examine the interaction of bilingual experiences with brain development and 
cognitive aging. Such cohort studies already exist, though none have data on bilingualism in detail. 
Adding a bilingualism component to such research should be relatively easy to do.
Future Directions: Methodological Developments
Methodologies have and will continue to evolve and improve. Given some of the limitations of the 
techniques described in this chapter, several methodological advances might prove useful in the fur-
ther study of L2-related neuro-anatomical adaptation. For example, surface-based morphometry 
has been shown to provide a more nuanced measure of grey matter volume across the cortex (e.g., 
Del Maschio et al., 2019). Surface-based morphometry is not constrained to the same degree of 
smoothing as VBM and thus may be able to provide more fine-grained measures of grey matter adap-
tation (Fischl & Dale, 2000; Pantazis et al., 2010).
Similarly, structural connectivity via tractography or connectometry is another potentially useful 
tool for examining adaptations to bilingual experience (for applications of these techniques see Fedeli 
et al., 2021; Rahmani et al, 2017), though relatively few studies to date have used it within the field 
of neurocognition and bilingualism. Tractography can be used to measure the degree of connectivity 
between specific brain regions whereas tract-based spatial statistics provides a metric of white matter 
microstructure but cannot be used to measure specific connection between regions, as discussed 
above (but see Köhncke et al., 2021 for a multimodal study).
Critically, most studies on L2 and the brain investigate structural adaptations at a macroscopic 
level, that is, measuring changes in white matter integrity or grey matter volume/density at a rank of 
individual white matter tracts, cortical areas, or subcortical structures. However, very little is known 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
68
about the molecular underpinnings of structural brain change (which is true for general neurosci-
ence). To this end, few recent studies have used various biomarkers as precursors to changes in 
structural adaptations in response to L2 experience. Only a handful of studies to date have taken this 
approach. Two of these have used magnetic resonance spectroscopy (Pliatsikas et al., 2021; Weekes 
et al., 2018), which allows one to measure the concentration of various brain metabolites. Metabolite 
levels can serve as indicators for underlying processes supporting dendritic branching and neural 
proliferation leading to changes observable on the macroscopic scale. In addition to tapping into 
brain metabolites, one study has investigated the link between bilingualism and Alzheimer’s dis-
ease biomarkers in the cerebrospinal fluid in healthy middle-aged individuals (Estanga et al., 2017). 
The results demonstrated that bilingual experience moderated the relationship between total-tau 
protein concentration and age, such that bilinguals had a more favorable CSF-AD (cerebrospinal 
fluid-Alzheimer’s disease) biomarker profile indicating a lower risk to develop Alzheimer’s dis-
ease. Examining metabolites and biomarkers in combination with structural neuroimaging is a 
viable future research avenue. As the field advances and structural changes linked to bilingualism 
(in its nuance as a set of experiences) become better understood, the underlying mechanisms driving 
these adaptations will become subject to empirical investigation. Studying brain structure provides 
only one of several aspects related to bilingualism-induced neural plasticity. In sum, by combining 
structural, functional, and other methods tapping in the brain, researchers will be able to develop 
a more holistic overview and a better understanding of graded brain adaptations in response to L2 
experience.
Further Readings
This recent VBM study shows the structural adaptation effects of L2 learning on grey matter volume, revealing 
decreased volume in cingulate cortex (ACC) and right inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) after L2 learning for one year. 
Importantly, these modulations are modulated by L2 proficiency.
Liu, C., Jiao, L., Timmer, K., & Wang, R. (2021). Structural brain changes with second language learning: A 
longitudinal voxel-based morphometry study. Brain and Language, 222, Article 105015. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105015
This recent study compared young bilingual and monolingual adolescents and found that bilinguals had thinner 
cortex than monolinguals in several cortical regions. In addition, this study highlights that within bilinguals more 
L2 use is reflected in greater CT.
Vaughn, K.A., Nguyen, M.V., Ronderos, J., & Hernandez, A.E. (2021). Cortical thickness in bilingual and mono-
lingual children: Relationships to language use and language skill. NeuroImage, 243, Article 118560. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118560
This recent CT study evaluates the effects of acquiring an L2 both with regards to oral fluency and written abil-
ities and highlights the roles of Age of Acquisition as a modulator of the observed affects.
Tu, L., Niu, M., Pan, X., Hanakawa, T., Liu, X., Lu, Z., Gao, W., Ouyang, D., Zhang, M., Li, S., Wang, J., Jiang, 
B., & Huang, R. (2021). Age of acquisition of Mandarin modulates cortical thickness in high-proficient 
Cantonese–Mandarin bidialectals. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 50, 723–736. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10936-020-09716-5
This recent DTI study illustrates the effects of bilingualism on white matter structures across the lifespan and 
demonstrates that increased engagement in bilingual language use correlates with a slower decline in white 
matter integrity with age.
DeLuca, V., & Voits, T. (2022). Bilingual experience affects white matter integrity across the lifespan. 
Neuropsychologia, 169, Article 108191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108191
References
Abutalebi, J., Della Rosa, P.A., Green, D.W., Hernandez, M., Scifo, P., Keim, R., Cappa, S.F., & Costa, A. (2012). 
Bilingualism tunes the anterior cingulate cortex for conflict monitoring. Cerebral Cortex, 22(9), 2076–2086. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhr287
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
69
Ad-Dab’bagh, Y., Singh, V., Robbins, S., Lerch, J., Lyttelton, O., Fombonne, E., & Evans, A.C. (2005). Native 
space cortical thickness measurement and the absence of correlation to cerebral volume. In K. Zilles (Ed.), 
Proceedings of the 11th Annual Meeting of the Organization for Human Brain Mapping. Toronto: NeuroImage.
Ashburner, J., & Friston, K.J. (2000). Voxel-based morphometry—the methods. NeuroImage, 11(6 Pt 1), 805–
821. https://doi.org/10.1006/nimg.2000.0582
Bengtsson, S.L., Nagy, Z., Skare, S., Forsman, L., Forssberg, H., & Ullén, F. (2005). Extensive piano practicing 
has regionally specific effects on white matter development. Nature Neuroscience, 8(9), 1148–1150. https://
doi.org/10.1038/nn1516
Breasted J.H. (1930). The Edwin Smith Papyrus: Published in Facsimile and Hieroglyphic Transliteration with 
Translation and Commentary. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Broca, P. (1861). Remarks on the seat of the faculty of articulated language, following an observation of aphemia 
(loss of speech). Bulletin de la Société Anatomique, 6, 330–357.
Burgaleta, M., Sanjuán, A., Ventura-Campos, N., Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Ávila, C. (2016). Bilingualism at the 
core of the brain. Structural differences between bilinguals and monolinguals revealed by subcortical shape 
analysis. NeuroImage, 125, 437–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.073
Del Maschio, N., Fedeli, D., Sulpizio, S., & Abutalebi, J. (2019). The relationship between bilingual experience 
and gyrification in adulthood: A cross-sectional surface-based morphometry study. Brain and Language, 198, 
104680. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104680
DeLuca, V., Segaert, K., Mazaheri, A., & Krott, A. (2020). Understanding bilingual brain function and structure 
changes? U bet! A unified bilingual experience trajectory model. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 56, Article 
100930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100930
DeLuca, V., & Voits, T. (2022). Bilingual experience affects white matter integrity across the lifespan. 
Neuropsychologia, 169, Article 108191. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108191
Estanga, A., Ecay-Torres, M., Ibañez, A., Izagirre, A., Villanua, J., Garcia-Sebastian, M., … & Martinez-Lage, P. 
(2017). Beneficial effect of bilingualism on Alzheimer’s disease CSF biomarkers and cognition. Neurobiology 
of Aging, 50, 144–151. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2016.10.013
Fedeli, D., Del Maschio, N., Sulpizio, S., Rothman, J., & Abutalebi, J. (2021). The bilingual structural 
connectome: Dual-language experiential factors modulate distinct cerebral networks. Brain and Language, 
220, Article 104978. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.104978
Finger, S. (2001). Origins of neuroscience: A history of explorations into brain function. Oxford University 
Press, USA.
Fischl, B., & Dale, A.M. (2000). Measuring the thickness of the human cerebral cortex from magnetic resonance 
images. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 97(20), 11050–11055. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.200033797
Fuchs, E., & Flügge, G. (2014). Adult neuroplasticity: More than 40 years of research. Neural Plasticity, 2014, 
Article 541870. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/541870
Gullifer, J.W., Chai, X.J., Whitford, V., Pivneva, I., Baum, S., Klein, D., & Titone, D. (2018). Bilingual experience 
and resting-state brain connectivity: Impacts of L2 age of acquisition and social diversity of language use on 
control networks. Neuropsychologia, 117, 123–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.04.037
Hernández, S.E., Suero, J., Barros, A., González-Mora, J.L., & Rubia, K. (2016). Increased grey matter associated 
with long-term sahaja yoga meditation: a voxel-based morphometry study. PloS ONE, 11(3), e0150757. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0150757
Kandel, E.R., Schwartz, J.H., Jessell, T.M., Siegelbaum, S., Hudspeth, A.J., & Mack, S. (Eds.). (2000). Principles 
of neural science (vol. 4, pp. 1227–1246). New York: McGraw-hill.
Klein, D., Mok, K., Chen, J.K., & Watkins, K.E. (2014). Age of language learning shapes brain structure: A cor-
tical thickness study of bilingual and monolingual individuals. Brain and Language, 131, 20–24. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandl.2013.05.014
Köhncke, Y., Düzel, S., Sander, M.C., Lindenberger, U., Kühn, S., & Brandmaier, A.M. (2021). Hippocampal 
and parahippocampal gray matter structural integrity assessed by multimodal imaging is associated with epi-
sodic memory in old age. Cerebral Cortex, 31(3), 1464–1477. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhaa287
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from 
the Dynamic Restructuring Model. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., & Bialystok, E. (2013). Understanding the consequences of bilingualism for language processing and 
cognition. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 497–514. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.799170
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Eleonora Rossi, Toms Voits, and Vincent DeLuca
70
Kuhl, P.K., Stevenson, J., Corrigan, N.M., van den Bosch, J.J.F., Can, D.D., & Richards, T.L. (2016). 
Neuroimaging of the bilingual brain: Structural brain correlates of listening and speaking in a second lan-
guage. Brain and Language, 162, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.07.004
Le Bihan, D., Mangin, J.F., Poupon, C., Clark, C.A., Pappata, S., Molko, N., & Chabriat, H. (2001). Diffusion 
tensor imaging: Concepts and applications. Journal of Magnetic Resonance Imaging: An Official Journal 
of the International Society for Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 13(4), 534–546. https://doi.org/10.1002/
jmri.1076
Leivada, E., Westergaard, M., Duñabeitia, J.A., & Rothman, J. (2021). On the phantom-like appearance of bilin-
gualism effects on neurocognition: (How) should we proceed? Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(1), 
197–210. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728920000358
Levelt, W. (1989). Speaking: From intention to articulation. MIT Press.
Levelt, W.J. (1993). Speaking: From intention to articulation. MIT press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
6393.001.0001
Li, L., Abutalebi, J., Zou, L., Yan, X., Liu, L., Feng, X., … & Ding, G. (2015). Bilingualism alters brain func-
tional connectivity between “control” regions and “language” regions: Evidence from bimodal bilinguals. 
Neuropsychologia, 71, 236–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.04.007
Li, P., Legault, J., & Litcofsky, K.A. (2014). Neuroplasticity as a function of second language learning: Anatomical 
changes in the human brain. Cortex, 58, 301–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.05.001
Liu, C., Jiao, L., Timmer, K., & Wang, R. (2021). Structural brain changes with second language learning: A 
longitudinal voxel-based morphometry study. Brain and Language, 222, Article 105015. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105015
Luk, G., Pliatsikas, C., & Rossi, E. (2020). Brain changes associated with language development and 
learning: A primer on methodology and applications. System, 89, Article 102209. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.system.2020.102209
Luzzatti, C., & Whitaker, H. (1996). Johannes Schenck and Johannes Jakob Wepfer: Clinical and anatomical 
observations in the prehistory of neurolinguistics and neuropsychology. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 9(3), 
157–164. https://doi.org/10.1016/0911-6044(96)00009-7
Maguire, E.A., Gadian, D.G., Johnsrude, I.S., Good, C.D., Ashburner, J., Frackowiak, R.S., & Frith, C.D. (2000). 
Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi drivers. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences, 97(8), 4398–4403. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.070039597
Mårtensson, J., Eriksson, J., Bodammer, N.C., Lindgren, M., Johansson, M., Nyberg, L., & Lövdén, M. (2012). 
Growth of language-related brain areas after foreign language learning. NeuroImage, 63(1), 240–244. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.043
Mosso, A. (1881) Ueber den Kreislauf des Blutes im Menschlichen Gehirn. Verlag von Veit & Company. https://
doi.org/10.1515/9783112360606
Pantazis, D., Joshi, A., Jiang, J., Shattuck, D.W., Bernstein, L.E., Damasio, H., & Leahy, R.M. (2010). Comparison 
of landmark-based and automatic methods for cortical surface registration. NeuroImage, 49(3), 2479–2493. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.09.027
Patenaude, B., Smith, S.M., Kennedy, D.N., & Jenkinson, M. (2011). A Bayesian model of shape and appearance 
for subcortical brain segmentation. NeuroImage, 56(3), 907–922. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2011.02.046
Pliatsikas, C. (2019). Multilingualism and brain plasticity. In J.W. Schwieter (Ed.), The handbook of the  
neuroscience of multilingualism (pp. 230–251). Wiley-Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119387
725.ch11
Pliatsikas, C. (2020). Understanding structural plasticity in the bilingual brain: The Dynamic Restructuring 
Model. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(2), 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
9000130
Pliatsikas, C., DeLuca, V., Moschopoulou, E., & Saddy, J.D. (2017). Immersive bilingualism reshapes the core 
of the brain. Brain Structure and Function, 222(4), 1785–1795. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-016-1307-9
Pliatsikas, C., Soares, S.P., Voits, T., DeLuca, V., & Rothman, J. (2021). Bilingualism is a long-term cognitively 
challenging experience that modulates metabolite concentrations in the healthy brain. Scientific reports, 
11(1), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-86443-4
Rahmani, F., Sobhani, S., & Aarabi, M.H. (2017) Sequential language learning and language immersion in bilin-
gualism: Diffusion MRI connectometry reveals microstructural evidence. Experimental Brain Research, 
235(10), 2935–2945. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-017-5029-x
Raichle, M.E. (2009). A brief history of human brain mapping. Trends in neurosciences, 32(2), 118–126. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.tins.2008.11.001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Using Structural Neuroimaging to Investigate Second Language
71
Rosenzweig, M.R., Krech, D., Bennett, E.L., Diamond, M.C. (1962). Effects of environmental complexity 
and training on brain chemistry and anatomy: A replication and extension. Journal of Comparative and 
Physiological Psychology, 55(4), 429–437. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0041137
Rossi, E., Cheng, H., Kroll, J.F., Diaz, M.T., & Newman, S.D. (2017). Changes in white-matter connectivity in 
late second language learners: Evidence from diffusion tensor imaging. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 2040. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02040
Rothman, J., Alonso, J.G., & Puig-Mayenco, E. (2019). Third language acquisition and linguistic transfer 
(Cambridge Studies in Linguistics). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316014660
Roy, C.S., & Sherrington, C.S. (1890) On the regulation of the blood supply of the brain. Journal of Physiology, 
11, 85–108. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphysiol.1890.sp000321
Scimeca, M., Carpenter, E., & Kiran, S. (this volume). Aphasia, rehabilitation and second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Stein, M., Winkler, C., Kaiser, A.C., & Dierks, T. (2014). Structural brain changes related to bilingualism: Does 
immersion make a difference? Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 1–7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01116
Tu, L., Niu, M., Pan, X., Hanakawa, T., Liu, X., Lu, Z., … & Huang, R. (2021). Age of acquisition of Mandarin 
modulates cortical thickness in high-proficient Cantonese–Mandarin bidialectals. Journal of Psycholinguistic 
Research, 50, 723–736. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936-020-09716-5
Vaughn, K.A., Nguyen, M.V., Ronderos, J., & Hernandez, A.E. (2021). Cortical thickness in bilingual and mono-
lingual children: Relationships to language use and language skill. NeuroImage, 243, Article 118560. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118560
Weekes, B.S., Abutalebi, J., Mak, H.K.F., Borsa, V., Soares, S.M.P., Chiu, P.W., & Zhang, L. (2018). Effect of 
monolingualism and bilingualism in the anterior cingulate cortex: a proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
study in two centers. Letras de Hoje, 53, 5–12. https://doi.org/10.15448/1984-7726.2018.1.30954
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-8
6
USING NON-INVASIVE BRAIN 
STIMULATION TO INVESTIGATE 
SECOND LANGUAGE
Nick B. Pandža
Introduction
Learning a second language (L2) is difficult for adults, which is unsurprising due to the cognitive 
demands it places on multiple memory systems, attentional mechanisms, and perceptual abilities. 
These cognitive processes have commonly been targeted with behavioral training paradigms in 
attempts to increase L2 learning rate and retention (e.g., Ingvalson et al., 2014). Stimulation of the 
nervous system, or neurostimulation, is a category of methods that modulate neural activity and, 
with the advent of non-invasive techniques, can also be used to investigate and enhance L2 learning 
and processing. The two primary uses of neurostimulation to investigate L2 are through its ability 
to localize behavior to a particular brain area or function and, in a more applied context, its ability 
to actively modulate brain function to positively affect cognition and behavior, including language 
learning outcomes.
A major distinction between neurostimulation and other methodological approaches addressed in 
this volume (electroencephalography (EEG), see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume, and Mottarella & Prat 
et al., this volume; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), see Kousaie & Klein, this volume, and Rossi 
et al., this volume) is that neurostimulation is inherently a neurocognitive intervention rather than a 
neurocognitive measure. This paradigm shift is a fascinating new direction for neurolinguistics in 
second language acquisition (SLA) as it allows us to leverage what we know about the neurocognition 
of SLA, much of it foundationally built on observational neurocognitive methods, to causally affect 
language learning. Compared to those other neurocognitive methods, neurostimulation research is 
nascent and presently under-represented in research on L2 learning and processing.
Historically, neurostimulation has been a set of invasive and/or sometimes painful techniques 
developed for clinical applications, but painless, non-invasive ways to modulate neural activity have 
been developed in recent decades using electric current and magnetic fields on the outside of the body.
This chapter reviews multiple methods of non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS), including 
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS), transcranial electrical stimulation (tES), and transcutaneous 
peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS). In reality, these three are broad families of methods under which 
differences in, for example, timing, intensity, stimulation pattern, or electrode placement can not 
only affect the strength of any effects but even change the underlying mechanism of action (Polanía 
et al., 2018). Following a brief history of non-invasive neurostimulation methods to examine cogni-
tion, their use and potential in the investigation of L2 learning and processing is discussed, including 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
73
experimental paradigms, example studies, and advantages and disadvantages of specific techniques. 
The chapter ends with a discussion of future directions for neurostimulation methods in the investi-
gation of L2.
Critical Definitions
Neurostimulation involves the application of stimulation (e.g., electrical, magnetic) to modulate the 
activity of the nervous system. There are a variety of non-invasive techniques that target different 
neurocognitive mechanisms, many of which support language learning. TMS and tES, being 
transcranial, involve placing neurostimulators (e.g., electrodes) on or above the surface of the scalp 
in order to affect cortical activity and have been evaluated for improving cognitive and language per-
formance (e.g., Miniussi et al., 2008). PNS, being stimulation of a peripheral cranial nerve, involves 
the placement of electrodes on the surface of the skin in strategic locations such as the ear, neck, or 
even forehead to electrically stimulate branches of cranial nerves to carry the stimulation back to 
nuclei in the brainstem and facilitate the release of neurotransmitters with the intent to affect cogni-
tion and language (e.g., Colzato & Beste, 2020).
TMS uses a strong magnetic field produced by a coil, typically a combination of two circular coils 
to optimize spatial resolution. These magnetic fields penetrate through the scalp and skull under the 
coil’s position to the cortex and induce electrical fields that can stimulate neuronal activity (Sandrini 
et al., 2011). A pulse of current can temporarily disrupt neural activity, and TMS has been used to 
simulate lesions to localize the brain regions necessary for a given task, including several regions 
necessary for language processing (Pascual-Leone et al., 2000). TMS provides a high degree of 
accuracy in identifying where task-critical regions are in the brain (i.e., spatial localization), espe-
cially when combined with structural MRI (see Rossi et al., this volume). TMS pulses can also be 
repeated over an extended period of time (repetitive TMS; rTMS) to facilitate or inhibit neural activity 
(Miniussi et al., 2008). It has been used in people with aphasia to promote better language recovery 
(e.g., Miniussi et al., 2008), and healthy individuals to facilitate picture naming and other language 
tasks (e.g., Mottaghy et al., 1999). The potential mechanisms of action for TMS are still under active 
investigation, and while there is some evidence it can elevate gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
levels to suppress brain activity, the underlying cause of the virtual lesion effect is still unknown: it 
could be the suppression of neural signals or an artifact of adding random noise to an ongoing process 
(Sandrini et al., 2011).
tES uses electrical currents applied at low intensities to positively or negatively affect cortical 
excitability. There are many techniques under the tES umbrella that are hypothesized to be mechan-
istically different based on differences in the stimulation pattern, including transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS), transcranial alternating current stimulation (tACS), and transcranial random 
noise stimulation (tRNS). For example, the most commonly employed method, tDCS, uses con-
stant electrical currents applied at low intensities (~1–2 milliamps (mA)) between electrodes on the 
head such that the current passes through the cortex in between to facilitate or inhibit cortical excit-
ability by affecting resting membrane potentials (DaSilva et al., 2015; Miniussi et al., 2008). tDCS 
has inferior spatial localization to TMS but is able to penetrate somewhat deeper brain structures 
(DaSilva et al., 2015) and is a silent intervention, although it can produce a physical sensation on 
the scalp. Stimulation has been found to facilitate long-term memory for word pairs (Marshall et al., 
2004) and vocabulary learning (e.g., Meinzer et al., 2014).
Rather than targeting specific cortical areas directly, peripheral nerve stimulation (PNS) 
involves stimulating the peripheral branches of a cranial nerve to modulate cortical function more 
broadly. Cranial nerves are sensory and motor neurons that project from the brainstem and supply 
nerves to (i.e., innervate) the body, especially the head and neck. Stimulation of their peripheral 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
74
branches leads to changes in the activity of neuromodulatory systems, which regulate nervous 
system activity via neurotransmitters, such as changes in attention with the release of norepin-
ephrine (NE) throughout many areas of the cortex. While there are several types of cranial nerves 
being targeted with neurostimulation, the most well-studied PNS to date—and thus, the type of 
PNS in focus in this chapter—involves stimulation of the vagus nerve. Transcutaneous vagus 
nerve stimulation (tVNS) is a type of PNS that involves electrical stimulation applied at low 
levels to the skin over branches of the vagus nerve located in the ear (inner ear, tragus, or cymba 
conchae) for transcutaneous auricular VNS (taVNS) or the neck for transcutaneous cervical VNS 
(tcVNS) that carry nerve impulses back to the brain. The most well-studied mechanism underlying 
VNS benefits for memory and cognition (Vonck et al., 2014) involves the nucleus of the solitary 
tract’s innervation of the locus coeruleus (LC) brainstem nucleus, though other mechanisms are 
also under investigation (e.g., George et al., 2008). The LC produces all of the neocortex’s supply 
of the neurotransmitter norepinephrine (NE), and tVNS-related benefits may be due in part to the 
LC-NE system’s role in optimizing behavior by controlling the trade-off between scanning and 
focused states of attention (Colzato & Beste, 2020).
Relevant to the study of language learning, under certain parametrizations, TMS, tES, and PNS 
have been mechanistically associated with long-term potentiation (LTP), or a facilitation of synaptic 
transmission, which is arguably the major cellular mechanism underlying learning and memory for-
mation (Polanía et al., 2018). Longer tDCS stimulation periods have also been associated with LTP 
(Nitsche & Paulus, 2001), rTMS has been associated with LTP (Polanía et al., 2018), and tVNS 
has also been implicated in LTP given that tVNS is believed to indirectly release NE, which in turn 
facilitates cortical LTP (Vonck et al., 2014).
Mechanistically, one of the ways by which LTP occurs is thought to be via modulation of brain-
derived neurotropic factor (BDNF), which is a protein encoded in the BDNF gene which has been 
associated with rTMS-, tDCS-, and VNS-induced LTP (Cheeran, et al., 2008; Follesa et al., 2007; 
Fritsch, et al., 2010) and a potential source of behavioral and physiological variability in NIBS-
facilitated effects (Polanía et al., 2018). However, common to all NIBS methods, their growing popu-
larity continues to generate debates about their mechanisms of action, application techniques, ethics, 
and applied use.
Table 6.1 features a reference list of the critical terms and acronyms related to non-invasive 
neurostimulation research presented in this chapter. Note that this list is far from comprehensive, and 
there is some variation in terminology in the literature.
Historical Perspectives
TMS, tES, and PNS were all first (and still are) investigated in clinical contexts. TMS currently 
has FDA approval for conditions like obsessive-compulsive disorder and major depressive disorder, 
tDCS is still being actively investigated for major depressive disorder, and VNS has FDA approval 
for epilepsy and depression. In addition to these more or less primary uses, each of these methods has 
been investigated for myriad other clinical, applied, and basic research topics.
Historically, TMS’s main use outside of clinical settings has been to disrupt neural activity to make 
causal inferences about specific brain regions and cognitive functions (Sandrini et al., 2011). One of 
the original and more well-known experimental paradigms for TMS is creating a virtual lesion, a safe, 
temporary disruption of brain activity to imitate the effects of an actual brain lesion, such as from 
stroke. For example, in the context of language research, a TMS-induced virtual lesion over Broca’s 
Area would be expected to produce temporary deficits in language production that mimic Broca’s 
Aphasia. TMS’s ability to disrupt brain activity and simulate lesions allow more methodologically 
desirable research designs for localizing brain function than trying to find research participants with 
rare brain lesions of comparable location and size.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
75
While TMS indirectly induces electrical fields in cortex, tES applies weak electrical currents  
directly to the scalp. The concept of tES had its origin as early as the eighteenth century, being  
investigated more seriously in clinical settings starting in the 1960s (Zoefel & Davis, 2017). The  
most common tES technique, tDCS, uses a weak direct current between the electrodes applied to the  
scalp, and the current affects the cortex through which it partially passes. TMS and tES both have  
an extensive research history related to the enhancement of motor learning (Polanía et al., 2018) and  
substantial literature on their utility as a potential treatment for aphasia (Zoefel & Davis, 2017).
Unique among these three methods is PNS, which was first (and is still) an invasive manipula-
tion before non-invasive techniques were developed. VNS has been investigated invasively in clin-
ical populations since the mid-1980s for its efficacy as an antiepileptic and antidepressant (Vonck 
et al., 2014). More recently, its effects on auditory processing, memory, and cognition have also been 
studied (see Colzato & Beste, 2020). The vagus nerve is the tenth cranial nerve and originates from 
the medulla in the brainstem. Stimulation to the vagus nerve projects along nerve fibers to the nucleus 
of the solitary tract in the brainstem. Recent innovations have led to user-friendly, non-invasive tVNS 
technologies that stimulate the vagus by passing electrical current on the skin of the ears or neck 
allowing its use and study with neurotypical populations.
Table 6.1  Reference List of Non-invasive Brain Stimulation Acronyms and Terms Presented in This Chapter
non-invasive 
brain 
stimulation 
(NIBS) 
methods
transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS)
repetitive TMS (rTMS)
high frequency rTMS (HF-rTMS)
low frequency rTMS (LF-rTMS)
theta burst stimulation 
(TBS)
continuous TBS (cTBS)
intermittent TBS (iTBS)
transcranial electrical 
stimulation (tES)
transcranial direct current 
stimulation (tDCS)
anodal tDCS (atDCS)
cathodal tDCS (ctDCS)
transcranial alternating 
current stimulation 
(tACS)
transcranial random noise 
stimulation (tRNS)
peripheral (cranial)  
nerve stimulation 
(PNS)
vagus nerve stimulation 
(VNS)
transcutaneous VNS 
(tVNS)
auricular tVNS 
(taVNS)
cervical tVNS 
(tcVNS)
trigeminal nerve  
stimulation (TNS)
NIBS 
mechanisms 
of action
long-term potentiation 
(LTP)
a proposed mechanism of action for cognitive effects of TMS, tES, 
and PNS
brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF)
a protein through which LTP is thought to occur
locus coeruleus-
norepinephrine  
(LC-NE) system
the LC is a region in the brainstem responsible for producing NE, a 
neurotransmitter implicated in PNS research
gamma-aminobutyric 
acid (GABA)
a neurotransmitter implicated in TMS research
 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
76
Methods and Paradigms
There are multiple ways in which NIBS may be implemented, common ones including priming (i.e., 
conditioning or offline), concurrent (i.e., online), and peristimulus (i.e., stimulus time-locked) stimu-
lation. All three NIBS methods reviewed here can easily be implemented via priming, which involves 
applying stimulation for a specified number of seconds or minutes prior to starting a critical task, 
presumably inducing tonic shifts in arousal and thus cortical excitability that prepare the individual 
to be in an optimal state for learning or performance throughout the task. For example, VNS studies 
have observed an increase in activity in LC and related brain structures (Frangos et al., 2015), and 
concentrations of norepinephrine in the cortex and hippocampus (Follesa et al., 2007). In TMS terms, 
the rTMS technique can be used to prime participants before a task (Klooster et al., 2016). For tES, 
studies have found cathodal tDCS (ctDCS) to have longer-lasting priming effects than anodal tDCS 
(atDCS) (Monte-Silva et al., 2013), although more robust learning effects have been observed for 
atDCS (Simonsmeier et al., 2018).
Peristimulus (peristim) stimulation involves delivering a pulse train of stimulation just prior to 
the presentation of critical stimuli, presumably inducing phasic changes in task-related attention to 
and consolidation of specific to-be-learned information. Work exploring peristim VNS has shown 
effectiveness at improving low-level auditory processing (Engineer et al., 2011), and peristim (or 
paired pulse) TMS is mainly used to assess cortical excitability (Klooster et al., 2016). Both delivery 
methods may engage LTP but, while priming NIBS is possible with TMS, tES, and PNS, peristim 
may be the most practical for language learning protocols with PNS given the noise artifacts of TMS 
and the low temporal resolution of tDCS.
For TMS, there are numerous implementations of the method, although rTMS is perhaps most 
relevant for investigating longer-lasting changes to cognition. Typically, low-frequency rTMS (LF-
rTMS) is administered ≤ 1 Hz while high-frequency rTMS (HF-rTMS) is administered ≥ 1 Hz, and 
this distinction has been found in the motor system to decrease and increase cortical excitability, 
respectively (Sandrini et al., 2011). rTMS can be administered concurrently to a task of interest or 
beforehand, priming the participant before a task.
Another pattern of pulses, theta burst stimulation (TBS) utilizes trains of pulses applied with 
short gaps that can also be used to induce longer-term effects of TMS on cognition. Continuous TBS 
(cTBS) tends to be inhibitory whereas more intermittent TBS (iTBS) is excitatory (see Sandrini et al., 
2011 for a discussion of additional implementations).
Similar to TMS, changing the parameters of tES can create either facilitative or inhibitory effects. 
Among tES techniques, tDCS is the most frequently used. Differences in atDCS and ctDCS refer 
to differences in experimental setup. Both involve an anode (positively charged electrode) and a 
cathode (negatively charged electrode), and so atDCS involves placing the anode near a brain region 
of interest and the cathode at a control region, and ctDCS is the reverse. While tDCS broadly is a con-
stant current applied at about 1–2 mA, tACS is applied at lower intensity (0.2–1 mA) and is a bidir-
ectional/biphasic current that can be applied at different frequencies (Simonsmeier et al., 2018). Even 
lower in intensity is tRNS (-500 to 500 microamps (μA)), which uses alternating current with random 
amplitudes and frequencies (Moreno-Duarte et al., 2014). These are not an exhaustive list of tES 
techniques, but are the most commonly employed, and the types included in a recent meta-analysis 
of tES on language learning in healthy adults (Balboa-Bandeira et al., 2021). While there is a logic 
to both pairing NIBS with learning (e.g., to potentially improve consolidation of new information) 
and assessment (e.g., to potentially improve recall of learned information), a meta-analysis of tES 
recently found a more robust effect when paired with learning than with assessment, and the effect 
was only significant for anodal and not cathodal tDCS (Simonsmeier et al., 2018). Balboa-Bandeira 
et al. (2021) conducted a meta-analysis for the effect of tES on adult language learning (nonwords, 
artificial grammar, and foreign languages) and found a moderate effect of tES. While they did not 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
77
find an effect on follow-up data or response times, there are a number of limitations in the review, 
including the number of studies that could be included (11 in total) and disparate tES protocols, 
as effects are assessed across studies encompassing tRNS, tACS, atDCS, ctDCS, and high density 
tDCS. They rightfully call for further work to tease apart the potentially mechanistically different 
effects of each tES technique, especially with multiple stimulation sessions. In particular they note 
that a majority of the studies are tDCS and show effects with one day of training even though tRNS 
may also have long-lasting effects on language learning processes. A number of studies included in 
the meta-analysis involved continuous stimulation during the process of learning rather than before 
as in a priming paradigm.
VNS can be implemented at the auricular or cervical branches, the former being more exten-
sively implemented to date, especially in language research. For the auricular branch of the vagus 
nerve, there’s still an open question over the optimal location for stimulation. Yakunina et al. (2017) 
compared three different stimulation points on the ear within individuals versus a sham control of 
the earlobe: the outer ear canal, the inner tragus, and the cymba conchae. With confirmation from 
functional MRI (fMRI; see Kousaie & Klein, this volume), they found stimulation of the cymba 
conchae to produce the most reliable activation of the nucleus of the solitary tract and the locus 
coeruleus in the brainstem compared to the other locations. However, in comparing this to other 
research it’s worth noting that participants in this study were all delivered tVNS at 0.1 mA below 
their pain threshold, and results here may reflect a higher tolerable threshold for the cymba conchae 
than other stimulation sites on the ear, and results may have been different if stimulation was kept 
below their sensory thresholds. For example, taVNS applied to the outer ear canal below sensory 
threshold has been successfully implemented for both priming and peristim in the same training 
study and has been found to both show positive effects but on different aspects of testing, reaction 
time and accuracy, respectively (Pandža et al., 2020). These effects provide evidence for potentially 
different mechanisms of action for taVNS on learning based solely on where in the learning process 
NIBS is implemented.
For each of TMS, tES, and PNS, there are many ways for these methods and the techniques under 
each of these umbrellas to be implemented. Care needs to be taken when deciding when, where, how, 
and at what intensity NIBS are implemented so that effects can be reliably detected, the mechanism(s) 
of action can be properly investigated, and the results can be replicated.
Example Studies
TMS
Of the three types of NIBS reviewed here, TMS is the most under-studied for the specific use case of 
language learning. Of the few studies conducted to date, they are focused largely on the investigation 
of neurocognitive mechanisms underlying language learning and/or clinical application. Many report 
interesting uses of rTMS in which it enhanced implicit learning mechanisms in adults. For example, 
Ambrus et al. (2020) disrupted the left and right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex with inhibitory rTMS, 
leading participants to better implicit statistical learning via consolidation of non-adjacent second-
order dependencies in an alternating serial reaction time task. In contrast, Sliwinska et al. (2017) 
found positive effects of rTMS on explicit vocabulary learning and focused on implications for pro-
moting post-aphasia recovery. After first conducting a word learning study with fMRI to identify 
functional networks of interest, the authors conducted a second experiment on a subset of participants 
in which they applied priming rTMS for 10 minutes each day in three training sessions. They found 
both improved accuracy and reaction time in a paired-associates translation judgment task with feed-
back during early stages of word learning, and they posit the potential for rTMS for use in aphasia 
rehabilitation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
78
tES
Perceval et al. (2020) implemented an ambitious atDCS multisession double-blind design in which 
younger and older adults were tasked with learning non-word “names” for “space alien” characters 
and two semantic attributes for each. Active atDCS was administered for 20 minutes during the 
learning phase on each day over the left inferior frontal gyrus to target areas implicated in verbal asso-
ciative learning. Training was administered over five consecutive days with immediate testing and 
day-after testing to assess retention, and follow-up testing done one day, one week, and three months 
after the last day of training. In both younger and older adults, effects for atDCS were only observed 
for those with lower scores of baseline learning ability measured at pretest. This study shows the 
potential for individual differences to interact with neurostimulation to show more nuanced effects, in 
this case a modest learning “boost” for those participants who were a priori disadvantaged. Learning 
facilitated by atDCS was largely immediate and persisted up to three months for the low ability older 
adults, contrasting with younger adults for which there were no immediate stimulation effects (pos-
sibly due to ceiling effects) but retention was enhanced at delayed testing up to three months. While 
the authors conclude uncertainty around the mechanisms of action to explain their results, they pro-
pose that future research focus on the neural mechanisms underlying their novel finding of differen-
tial effectiveness of atDCS according to baseline ability.
In the minority are non-tDCS tES studies like Pasqualotto et al. (2015) looking at tRNS and 
Antonenko et al. (2016) looking at tACS. In comparison to Perceval et al. (2020), Antonenko et al. 
(2016) found increased retrieval accuracy in older adults but not younger adults with tACS during 
implicit language learning, also finding an advantage for older adults with tES that is worth further 
mechanistic exploration. Pasqualotto et al. (2015) was the first to investigate the potential of tRNS on 
language learning and found a potential memory consolidation advantage for active tRNS delivered 
over posterior parietal areas during learning at a one-week delayed posttest.
PNS
While PNS is a broad category of techniques, there is a rapidly growing L2 literature using a spe-
cific subtype of PNS and VNS: taVNS. Pandža et al. (2020) were the first to directly investigate 
taVNS-facilitated language learning, specifically for Mandarin tone. In a double-blind study, they 
directly compared priming and peristim taVNS protocols compared to a sham control in a two-day 
Mandarin tone word training for tone-naïve native speakers of English. Active stimulation was 
applied before (priming) or during (peristim) learning and testing tasks. They found peristim but 
not priming to reliably improve accuracy on lexical recognition while priming but not peristim 
improved reaction time on lexical recognition. In an analysis of pupillometry data to assess cog-
nitive effort and ties to the LC-NE system, they found a reduction in sustained effort day-to-day 
for the sham group in line with the idea of less effort being applied to better-learned words, and a 
significantly stronger effect for peristim. For priming, results were interpreted as possibly in line 
with a tonic, rather than phasic (task-evoked) effect on arousal. In total, the authors concluded 
that effects are in line with the idea that peristim taVNS supported better encoding of new to-be-
learned information whereas priming taVNS may instead support better lexical access of already-
learned information.
Thakkar et al. (2020) also found positive taVNS results to extend to orthography acquisition. 
Separately, Calloway et al. (2020) investigated the potential for another researched mechanism 
of action for VNS to affect language learning, the mitigation of anxiety (George et al., 2008), 
and found 10 minutes of priming taVNS to reduce negative affect, somatic anxiety, and cognitive 
anxiety.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
79
There is still a dearth of language learning research with TMS, tES, and PNS, so there are numerous 
ways to expand the field. Much more research is needed with each of these techniques to form firm 
conclusions around their efficacy.
Considerations and Limitations of NIBS Methods
There are a number of pros and cons for each of these NIBS methods. All result in at least some-
what indirect neuromodulation as stimulation is applied on the outside of the body versus directly to 
brain tissue. TMS and tES can be combined with structural MRIs to pinpoint where brain areas are 
specific to a person and even specific to language processing (e.g., Broca’s Area, Wernicke’s Area), 
given that brain morphology varies widely. In this way, TMS and tES can accurately encapsulate 
a brain region of interest; however, given the spatial resolution of both methods, they are inexact 
and likely to also affect neighboring regions and their associated functions. PNS has both better 
and worse spatial resolution: better in that there is a specific brainstem nucleus (e.g., nucleus of 
the solitary tract for VNS) that will be stimulated in turn by the stimulated cranial nerve, but worse 
in that the effects of interest for PNS interventions are more about what happens downstream from 
that initial nucleus, for example stimulation of the LC and the release of neurotransmitters like NE 
that are dispersed throughout the cortex. Thus, a major advantage for TMS and tES over PNS is the 
inability of PNS to target specific brain structures of interest. However, while TMS and tES can only 
target a variety of surface-level cortical structures on the order of centimeters, PNS on the other hand 
indirectly stimulates structures in the brainstem leading to connected structures such as the LC and 
to the release of myriad neurotransmitters throughout the brain to produce broader (if more domain-
general) impacts to cognition and language learning. Nevertheless, TMS, tES, and PNS can each be 
combined with other behavioral, physiological, and neurocognitive methods to more conclusively 
pinpoint brain areas and functions and causally associate them with a particular behavior. Again, most 
critically, all three techniques have also been associated with LTP under certain conditions and thus 
to the causal enhancement of learning and memory processes broadly, making each relevant to the 
investigation of language learning.
In terms of practical concerns around data collection, there are a number of considerations. It’s 
important to note that TMS has a noise artifact (repetitive clicking noise). This may not be a problem 
for NIBS priming methodologies, but may be problematic if concurrent or peristimulus stimulation is 
mechanistically desired for a particular research design. Minimally, this could be distracting to a par-
ticipant during a task, and, maximally, could actively interfere with auditory task designs. While tES 
and PNS are silent interventions, tES can induce somatosensory artifacts across the scalp, which can 
also be distracting to participants. PNS can also produce a physical sensation under the electrodes or 
even harmless muscle spasms, depending on the location and stimulation intensity. For instance, the 
cervical branch of the vagus nerve is embedded deeper under the skin of the neck than the auricular 
branch is under the skin of the ear. Because of this, tcVNS is practically impossible without some 
physical sensation (even harmless muscle spasms in the neck if placed incorrectly) which may be 
uncomfortable or distracting to individuals. However, multiple studies have now shown that taVNS 
can be effectively delivered below a participant’s individual perceptual threshold while still showing 
positive language learning outcomes (e.g., Calloway et al., 2020; Pandža et al., 2020).
To show causal evidence of NIBS on behavior, double-blind studies are ideal in which participants 
and proctors are blind to whether the participant is receiving active stimulation vs. sham stimula-
tion or belongs to a no-stimulation control. At the minimum, single-blind studies can also be used 
in which the participants but not the proctors are blind to participant group. Properly blinding NIBS 
methods means replicating the TMS clicking noise for a sham control, using tES over a control 
brain region to produce similar somatosensory effects or, if using PNS at a location or intensity that 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
80
necessarily causes physical sensation, using PNS over a control skin area that is not innervated by the 
cranial nerve of interest.
While all three techniques involve potentially costly equipment upfront and require training for 
their effective and safe use, relative to other neurocognitive methodologies there are some advantages 
to neurostimulation. For example, the equipment for these techniques is cheaper than MRI data 
collection, participant setup and takedown are often faster and easier than for EEG, and no specially 
shielded room is required for data collection. However, methodologically sound TMS and to a lesser 
extent tES studies involve “neuronavigation” such that researchers can be sure they are targeting 
brain regions of interest for each individual as precisely as possible (Polanía et al., 2018), and this 
is done in conjunction with a structural MRI, which increases the cost of the research and adds MRI 
contraindications back into the research design.
In terms of safety, TMS, tES, and PNS appear to be safe when used properly (Antal et al., 2017; 
Redgrave et al., 2018; Rossi et al., 2021). However, rare side effects can occur of which researchers 
should be aware. The most serious adverse effect is for TMS, which in extremely rare circumstances, 
if proper use guidelines are not followed, may cause acute seizures (Rossi et al., 2021). TMS is also 
contraindicated for individuals with metallic or electronic implants near the TMS coil (Rossi et al., 
2021). For tES and PNS protocols, in which electrodes come into physical contact with the skin and 
scalp, the most common side effects can include uncomfortable heating or sensation directly under 
the electrode (Antal et al., 2017; Redgrave et al., 2018), but mild pain is also common under the 
stimulation site for TMS (Rossi et al., 2021). The potential for headaches has also been observed for 
all three methods (Antal et al., 2017; Redgrave et al., 2018; Rossi et al., 2021). Because of a remote 
possibility of cardiac effects (Farmer et al., 2021), tVNS is usually administered to the left ear or 
left side of the neck as right branches of the vagus nerve are more closely connected to the heart. 
Because of the still relative novelty of some of these methods and the study of their implementa-
tion, researchers often impose restrictive eligibility criteria out of an abundance of caution where 
safety research is still currently lacking, such as administering tVNS to the left side as mentioned or 
excluding participants from tVNS if they have a history of fainting spells (vasovagal syncope is a 
condition in which an overactive vagus nerve can result in fainting).
TMS, tES, and PNS in the literature currently all suffer from a replication problem due to still 
active uncertainty around how different parameters affect a number of factors ranging from not only 
variation in sensation artifacts but also, crucially, the neurocognitive mechanisms affected. Indeed, 
it has been noted in particular that variation in how TMS and tES are implemented has actively 
prevented conclusive findings from meta-analyses (see Polanía et al., 2018). All three methods can 
be implemented in myriad ways, for example, at different levels of intensity, with different stimula-
tion wave forms, or with different electrode placements. The conclusive impact of any modification 
of these settings is still under active investigation (e.g., see discussion in Farmer et al., 2021 for 
tVNS), but researchers looking to implement these techniques should take particular care in choosing 
parameters as changes in any of these could affect not only the strength of any NIBS effects but even 
change the underlying mechanism of action (Polanía et al., 2018).
Innovations and Future Directions
New NIBS parameters and techniques are still being developed for existing methods to overcome 
their current limitations or even to target additional neurological mechanisms, such as to improve 
both spatial resolution and the ability to target deeper brain structures for tES (Datta et al., 2009). 
At the same time, new neurostimulation techniques are also being developed. For example, early 
findings for transcranial focused ultrasound stimulation (tFUS) suggest it can successfully overcome 
the inherent limitations of existing transcranial methods by being able to easily target deeper brain 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
81
structures and with a higher spatial resolution, inducing cortical excitation on the order of millimeters 
compared to centimeters for TMS and tES (Tufail et al., 2010).
The topic of language learning is still relatively new to exploration with NIBS interventions, but 
the cited research provides preliminary evidence that various NIBS methods have the potential to 
meaningfully impact language learning outcomes. The effects of NIBS on attention and memory 
consolidation could promote more effective language learning, and some of the cited studies suggest 
potential for longer-lasting effects. Assessing the benefits of any new intervention on language learning 
outcomes is non-trivial. Does the intervention serve to increase phoneme and/or word recognition 
accuracy overall? Increase the overall learning rate? Reduce the mental load associated with learning 
an individual item, freeing up mental resources for other aspects of learning? Are there interactions 
with NIBS efficacy and learner individual differences? Particularly challenging for NIBS is that, 
due to a paucity of established research with comparable implementations and parameterizations, 
expected effect sizes have not been firmly established, and thus it is possible that NIBS-induced 
changes in neural function might be subtle or very focused, and thus primarily relevant for only 
a subset of possible language learning outcomes. Given the range of possibilities, assessments of 
NIBS-driven language-learning benefits should encompass multiple outcome measures whenever 
possible, to include indices like accuracy, reaction time, pupillometry, EEG, and fMRI. Perhaps most 
importantly, rigorous assessments of longer-lasting effects of NIBS in the form of delayed posttests 
are critical to evaluate the potential for any truly practical implications of NIBS to support language 
learning.
As currently more tDCS and tVNS studies exist in the realm of language learning enhancement, a 
promising additional line of research would be to directly pit the two NIBS methods against each other 
with the same training paradigm. Given the potential differences in mechanisms of action, it would 
be of interest to investigate differences in effect size improvements between the two techniques. 
Additionally, there is a dearth of literature on TMS to enhance language learning, and further explor-
ation of that methodology should be made to empirically evaluate its utility versus other alternatives. 
Likewise, further exploration of tES techniques in addition to tDCS (including tACS and tRNS) is 
warranted given preliminary positive results. While the PNS studies cited here focused on taVNS, 
tcVNS also has the potential to accelerate language learning with some incipient research showing 
lasting cognitive effects after brief stimulation (e.g., Lewine et al., 2019), as does transcutaneous 
trigeminal nerve stimulation (TNS) across the forehead (Colzato & Vonck, 2017).
Contrasting with more correlational neurocognitive techniques, neurostimulation provides the 
opportunity to make causal inferences between particular cognitive functions and associated behav-
ioral outcomes, and it can be combined with those correlational methods for a more targeted or mech-
anistically validated impact. Research on NIBS in L2 is clearly still at the initial stages, but it has the 
potential to transform the field of SLA.
Further Readings
For a comprehensive overview of NIBS research, covering primarily TMS and tES techniques:
Polanía, R., Nitsche, M.A., & Ruff, C.C. (2018). Studying and modifying brain function with non-invasive brain 
stimulation. Nature Neuroscience, 21(2), 174–187. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-017-0054-4
For a systematic review of high-frequency rTMS studies stimulating over prefrontal cortex, many of which found 
improvements on verbal measures:
Guse, B., Falkai, P., & Wobrock, T. (2010). Cognitive effects of high-frequency repetitive transcranial magnetic 
stimulation: a systematic review. Journal of Neural Transmission, 117(1), 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00702-009-0333-7
For a meta-analysis of tES effects on second and foreign language learning, which covers multiple tES methods, 
identifies gaps in the literature, and makes recommendations for future research:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
82
Balboa-Bandeira, Y., Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., Ibarretxe-Bilbao, N., Ojeda, N., & Peña, J. (2021). Effects of 
transcranial electrical stimulation techniques on second and foreign language learning enhancement in 
healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia, 107985. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2021.107985
For an empirical taVNS study of Mandarin tone word learning that analyzed event-related potentials from Pandža 
et al. (2020), showing evidence of stronger lexico-semantic encoding via the N400 after taVNS:
Phillips, I., Calloway, R.C., Karuzis, V.P., Pandža, N.B., O’Rourke, P., & Kuchinsky, S.E. (2021). Transcutaneous 
auricular vagus nerve stimulation strengthens semantic representations of foreign language tone words during 
initial stages of learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01783
Acknowledgments
This material is based in part upon work supported by the Naval Information Warfare Center and Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency under Cooperative Agreement No. N66001–17-2-4009. The views, 
opinions, and/or findings contained in this material are those of the author and should not be interpreted as 
representing the official views or policies of the Department of Defense or the U.S. Government.
References
Ambrus, G.G., Vékony, T., Janacsek, K., Trimborn, A. B., Kovács, G., & Nemeth, D. (2020). When less is 
more: Enhanced statistical learning of non-adjacent dependencies after disruption of bilateral DLPFC. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 114, 104144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2020.104144
Antal, A., Alekseichuk, I., Bikson, M., Brockmöller, J., Brunoni, A.R., Chen, R., … & Paulus, W. (2017). Low 
intensity transcranial electric stimulation: safety, ethical, legal regulatory and application guidelines. Clinical 
Neurophysiology, 128(9), 1774–1809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.clinph.2017.06.001
Antonenko, D., Faxel, M., Grittner, U., Lavidor, M., & Flöel, A. (2016). Effects of transcranial alternating current 
stimulation on cognitive functions in healthy young and older adults. Neural Plasticity, 2016. https://doi.org/
10.1155/2016/4274127
Balboa-Bandeira, Y., Zubiaurre-Elorza, L., Ibarretxe-Bilbao, N., Ojeda, N., & Peña, J. (2021). Effects of 
transcranial electrical stimulation techniques on second and foreign language learning enhancement in 
healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Neuropsychologia, 107985. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2021.107985
Calloway, R., Karuzis, V., Tseng, A., Martinez, D., & O’Rourke, P. (2020). Auricular Transcutaneous Vagus 
Nerve Stimulation (tVNS) Affects Mood and Anxiety during Second Language Learning. In S. Denison., M. 
Mack, Y. Xu, & B.C. Armstrong (Eds.), Proceedings of the 42nd annual conference of the Cognitive Science 
Society (pp. 3496–3502). Cognitive Science Society.
Cheeran, B., Talelli, P., Mori, F., Koch, G., Suppa, A., Edwards, M., … & Rothwell, J.C. (2008). A common 
polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor gene (BDNF) modulates human cortical plasticity 
and the response to rTMS. The Journal of Physiology, 586(23), 5717–5725. https://doi.org/10.1113/jphys
iol.2008.159905
Colzato, L., & Beste, C. (2020). A literature review on the neurophysiological underpinnings and cognitive effects 
of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation: challenges and future directions. Journal of Neurophysiology, 
123(5), 1739–1755. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00057.2020
Colzato, L.S., & Vonck, K. (2017). Transcutaneous vagus and trigeminal nerve stimulation. In L.S. Colzato (Ed.), 
Theory-driven approaches to cognitive enhancement (pp. 115–126). Springer, Cham.
DaSilva, A.F., Truong, D.Q., DosSantos, M.F., Toback, R.L., Datta, A., & Bikson, M. (2015). State-of-art neuro-
anatomical target analysis of high-definition and conventional tDCS montages used for migraine and pain 
control. Frontiers in Neuroanatomy, 9, 89. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnana.2015.00089
Datta, A., Bansal, V., Diaz, J., Patel, J., Reato, D., & Bikson, M. (2009). Gyri-precise head model of transcranial 
direct current stimulation: improved spatial focality using a ring electrode versus conventional rectangular 
pad. Brain Stimulation, 2(4), 201–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2009.03.005
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Engineer, N.D., Riley, J.R., Seale, J.D., Vrana, W.A., Shetake, J.A., Sudanagunta, S.P., … & Kilgard, M.P. 
(2011). Reversing pathological neural activity using targeted plasticity. Nature, 470, 101–104. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nature09656
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation to Investigate Second Language
83
Farmer, A.D., Strzelczyk, A., Finisguerra, A., Gourine, A.V., Gharabaghi, A., Hasan, A., … & Koenig, J. (2021). 
International consensus based review and recommendations for minimum reporting standards in research on 
transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation (version 2020). Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 14, 409. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.568051
Follesa, P., Biggio, F., Gorini, G., Caria, S., Talani, G., Dazzi, L., … & Biggio, G. (2007). Vagus nerve stimu-
lation increases norepinephrine concentration and the gene expression of BDNF and bFGF in the rat brain. 
Brain Research, 1179, 28–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2007.08.045
Frangos, E., Ellrich, J., & Komisaruk, B.R. (2015). Non-invasive access to the vagus nerve central projections 
via electrical stimulation of the external ear: fMRI evidence in humans. Brain Stimulation, 8(3), 624–636. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2014.11.018
Fritsch, B., Reis, J., Martinowich, K., Schambra, H.M., Ji, Y., Cohen, L.G., & Lu, B. (2010). Direct current 
stimulation promotes BDNF-dependent synaptic plasticity: potential implications for motor learning. Neuron, 
66(2), 198–204. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2010.03.035
George, M.S., Ward Jr, H.E., Ninan, P.T., Pollack, M., Nahas, Z., Anderson, B., … & Ballenger, J.C. (2008). A 
pilot study of vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) for treatment-resistant anxiety disorders. Brain Stimulation, 
1(2), 112–121. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2008.02.001
Ingvalson, E.M., Ettlinger, M., & Wong, P.C. (2014). Bilingual speech perception and learning: A review of recent 
trends. International Journal of Bilingualism, 18(1), 35–47. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006912456586
Klooster, D.C., de Louw, A.J., Aldenkamp, A.P., Besseling, R.M.H., Mestrom, R.M.C., Carrette, S., … & Boon, 
P. (2016). Technical aspects of neurostimulation: Focus on equipment, electric field modeling, and stimu-
lation protocols. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 65, 113–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubio
rev.2016.02.016
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lewine, J.D., Paulson, K., Bangera, N., & Simon, B.J. (2019). Exploration of the impact of brief noninvasive 
vagal nerve stimulation on EEG and event-related potentials. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural 
Interface, 22(5), 564–572. https://doi.org/10.1111/ner.12864
Marshall, L., Mölle, M., Hallschmid, M., & Born, J. (2004). Transcranial direct current stimulation during 
sleep improves declarative memory. Journal of Neuroscience, 24(44), 9985–9992. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2725-04.2004
Meinzer, M., Jähnigen, S., Copland, D.A., Darkow, R., Grittner, U., Avirame, K., … & Flöel, A. (2014). 
Transcranial direct current stimulation over multiple days improves learning and maintenance of a novel 
vocabulary. Cortex, 50, 137–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.07.013
Miniussi, C., Cappa, S.F., Cohen, L.G., Flöel, A., Fregni, F., Nitsche, M.A., … & Walsh, V. (2008). Efficacy 
of repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation/transcranial direct current stimulation in cognitive 
neurorehabilitation. Brain Stimulation, 1(4), 326–336. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2008.07.002
Monte-Silva, K., Kuo, M.F., Hessenthaler, S., Fresnoza, S., Liebetanz, D., Paulus, W., & Nitsche, M.A. (2013). 
Induction of late LTP-like plasticity in the human motor cortex by repeated non-invasive brain stimulation. 
Brain Stimulation, 6(3), 424–432. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2012.04.011
Moreno-Duarte, I., Gebodh, N., Schestatsky, P., Guleyupoglu, B., Reato, D., Bikson, M., & Fregni, F. (2014). 
Transcranial electrical stimulation: Transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), transcranial alternating 
current stimulation (tACS), transcranial pulsed current stimulation (tPCS), and transcranial random noise 
stimulation (tRNS). In The Stimulated Brain (pp. 35–59). Academic Press.
Mottaghy, F.M., Hungs, M., Brügmann, M., Sparing, R., Boroojerdi, B., Foltys, H., … & Töpper, R. (1999). 
Facilitation of picture naming after repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation. Neurology, 53(8), 1806–
1806. https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.53.8.1806
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Nitsche, M.A. & Paulus, W. (2001). Sustained excitability elevations induced by transcranial DC motor cortex 
stimulation in humans. Neurology, 57, 1899–1901. https://doi.org/10.1212/WNL.57.10.1899
Pandža, N.B., Phillips, I., Karuzis, V.P., O’Rourke, P., & Kuchinsky, S.E. (2020). Neurostimulation and 
pupillometry: New directions for learning and research in applied linguistics. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 40, 56–77. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190520000069
Pascual-Leone, A., Walsh, V., & Rothwell, J. (2000). Transcranial magnetic stimulation in cognitive neuroscience–
virtual lesion, chronometry, and functional connectivity. Current Opinions in Neurobiology, 10, 232–237. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(00)00081-7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nick B. Pandža
84
Pasqualotto, A., Kobanbay, B., & Proulx, M.J. (2015). Neural stimulation has a long-term effect on foreign 
vocabulary acquisition. Neural Plasticity, 2015, 671705. https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/671705
Perceval, G., Martin, A.K., Copland, D.A., Laine, M., & Meinzer, M. (2020). Multisession transcranial direct 
current stimulation facilitates verbal learning and memory consolidation in young and older adults. Brain and 
Language, 205, 104788. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104788
Polanía, R., Nitsche, M.A., & Ruff, C.C. (2018). Studying and modifying brain function with non-invasive brain 
stimulation. Nature Neuroscience, 21, 174–187. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41593-017-0054-4
Redgrave, J., Day, D., Leung, H., Laud, P.J., Ali, A., Lindert, R., & Majid, A. (2018). Safety and tolerability 
of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation in humans; a systematic review. Brain Stimulation, 11(6), 1225–
1238. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2018.08.010
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural neuroimaging to investigate second language. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Rossi, S., Antal, A., Bestmann, S., Bikson, M., Brewer, C., Brockmöller, J., … & Hallett, M. (2021). Safety and 
recommendations for TMS use in healthy subjects and patient populations, with updates on training, ethical 
and regulatory issues: expert guidelines. Clinical Neurophysiology, 132(1), 269–306. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.clinph.2020.10.003
Sandrini, M., Umiltà, C., & Rusconi, E. (2011). The use of transcranial magnetic stimulation in cognitive neuro-
science: a new synthesis of methodological issues. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(3), 516–536. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.06.005
Simonsmeier, B.A., Grabner, R.H., Hein, J., Krenz, U., & Schneider, M. (2018). Electrical brain stimulation 
(tES) improves learning more than performance: A meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 
84, 171–181. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.11.001
Sliwinska, M.W., Violante, I.R., Wise, R.J., Leech, R., Devlin, J.T., Geranmayeh, F., & Hampshire, A. (2017). 
Stimulating multiple-demand cortex enhances vocabulary learning. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(32), 7606–
7618. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3857-16.2017
Thakkar, V.J., Engelhart, A.S., Khodaparast, N., Abadzi, H., & Centanni, T.M. (2020). Transcutaneous auricular 
vagus nerve stimulation enhances learning of novel letter-sound relationships in adults. Brain Stimulation, 
13(6), 1813–1820. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2020.10.012
Tufail, Y., Matyushov, A., Baldwin, N., Tauchmann, M.L., Georges, J., Yoshihiro, A., … & Tyler, W. J. (2010). 
Transcranial pulsed ultrasound stimulates intact brain circuits. Neuron, 66(5), 681–694. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.008
Vonck, K., Raedt, R., Naulaerts, J., De Vogelaere, F., Thiery, E., Van Roost, D., … & Boon, P. (2014). Vagus 
nerve stimulation… 25 years later! What do we know about the effects on cognition? Neuroscience & 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 45, 63–71. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2014.05.005
Yakunina, N., Kim, S.S., & Nam, E.C. (2017). Optimization of transcutaneous vagus nerve stimulation using 
functional MRI. Neuromodulation: Technology at the Neural Interface, 20(3), 290–300. https://doi.org/
10.1111/ner.12541
Zoefel, B. & Davis, M.H. (2017). Transcranial electric stimulation for the investigation of speech perception 
and comprehension. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 32(7), 910–923, https://doi.org/10.1080/23273
798.2016.1247970
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART II
The Neurolinguistics of Second 
Language Learning, Representation, 
and Processing
 
 

 

87
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-10
7
THE NEUROLINGUISTICS 
OF SECOND LANGUAGE 
PHONOLOGY
A View of Phonemic Contrast Learning
Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
Introduction
Each speech sound (e.g., the /s/ in “sound”) is as unique as a snowflake. The language learner’s job 
is to observe this blizzard of sounds to discover the similarities (i.e., the distinctive acoustic features) 
that distinguish one sound category from another. Babies learning a first language (L1) have the 
advantage of starting from scratch: speech sounds accumulate in a pristine snowbank of acoustic 
receptivity and mound into different piles—one pile might be a vowel sound like the /u/ in “soup”—
another, an /l/ at the beginning of “love.” Ultimately, the developing child uncovers the structure of 
these piles and how they map onto words in their language. Acquiring a set of native language cat-
egories in childhood is a far less trivial process than characterized here (see Kuhl & Rivera-Gaxiola, 
2008; Werker & Tees, 2005 for reviews). But by comparison, acquiring the sounds of a new language 
during adolescence or in adulthood is a bigger challenge.
The perceptual system of the adult language learner is already a bumpy terrain of native lan-
guage sounds. Incoming sounds in a new language may have no obvious analogue in one’s native 
language(s) (e.g., Zulu clicks are unlike any phoneme in English) or may be deceptively familiar 
(e.g., the Hindi dental and retroflex stop consonants sound like barely different flavors of /d/ to native 
speakers of a language such as German or several varieties of English). Perceptual biases built in 
childhood to quickly recognize the difference between /d/ and /g/ now work against the adult who is 
trying to distinguish novel sounds.
The difficulty of learning speech sounds in adulthood is a fairly easy phenomenon to observe. 
Non-native accents are a dead giveaway to incomplete acquisition of the sounds of that language. In 
the biblical story of the shibboleth (Judges 12:1–15), non-native mispronunciations were punishable 
by death. Indeed, the reported toll for incomplete second language (L2) acquisition in this case was 
42,000. The consequences of incomplete acquisition are rarely so dire, but non-native accent discrim-
ination can have negative professional and social consequences (e.g. Kim et al., 2019) despite strong 
evidence that listeners can and do readily adapt to accented speech (Baese-Berk et al., 2020).
In this chapter, we discuss some of the obstacles to the acquisition of non-native phonology, 
focusing primarily on perception, but also with an eye towards parallel questions in production, and 
with an appeal to neurobiological evidence for the representation of native and non-native speech 
sounds. We will explore the hypothesis that obstacles to phonological acquisition in adulthood 
are attributable to changes in neural plasticity, examine the extent to which successful non-native 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
88
acquisition co-opts processing mechanisms for native sound processing, and delve into some of the 
individual differences in brain structure and function that predict individual variability in learning 
success.
Critical Issues, Topics, and Methodological Challenges
Before turning to the neural evidence on this phenomenon, it is important to consider the wealth of 
knowledge generated from decades of behavioral work on this topic. Several themes run through 
research on the neural basis of L2 phonology. First, learning to perceive the difference between 
non-native speech categories may or may not proceed in parallel with learning to accurately produce 
these categories. Some have shown that perceptual gains and production accuracy tend to go hand-
in-hand, but this is not a foregone conclusion (Bradlow et al., 1997; Callan et al., 2003). Perceptual 
sensitivity to the distinctive acoustic features that mark a new phonetic contrast seems like a neces-
sary prerequisite for accurate production of these contrasts (an assumption reflected in, for example, 
Flege’s speech learning model; Flege, 1995). This leads to the prediction that neural sensitivity to 
phonemic contrasts should emerge in perception before accurate speech production emerges, which 
is a question that, to our knowledge, has yet to be tested. The literature on the neural correlates of 
expertise in learning to produce non-native contrasts has received less attention compared to per-
ception. This relative paucity of work on L2 production is partially attributable to methodological 
challenges—techniques like ERP and fMRI are sensitive to motion artifacts. In general, the broad 
patterns found in studies of the neural correlates of L2 sound production (e.g. Carey et al., 2017, 
Hashizume et al., 2014) parallel what is found in the literature on perceptual expertise.
Second, not all non-native speech contrasts are equally difficult to learn. A fundamental principle 
of several models of non-native speech sound learning (e.g., Best et al., 2001; Flege, 1995; Kuhl 
et al., 2008) is that non-native sounds that are closer in perceptual space to native-language sounds 
are especially difficult—particularly when two non-native sounds are subsumed within an L1 cat-
egory. Examples of this phenomenon include the Hindi dental and retroflex stop consonants, /d̪ / and /
ɖ/, which appear as allophones of /d/ in several languages, or the English /l/ and /ɹ/ sounds, which are 
allophonic variants in Japanese. In this sense, the difficulty of learning depends on the contrast itself 
as well as the language background of the listener. Comparison of easy- vs. hard-to-learn contrasts 
could reveal qualitatively or quantitatively different patterns of neural sensitivity as different pro-
cessing resources and strategies may be brought to bear. Unfortunately, most researchers tend to 
work with a few “pet” contrasts, and to our knowledge there has been no thorough imaging work 
comparing non-native contrasts with greater or lesser acoustic similarity. Similarly, the systems for 
learning segmental distinctions (i.e., phonemes like /a/ and /d/) compared to suprasegmental contrasts 
(i.e., lexical tone contrasts used in many of the worlds’ languages) may not be equivalent (Feng et al., 
2018; Silbert et al., 2015; Wong et al., 2007). Tonal contrasts are different from segmental contrasts 
on several dimensions—they are longer duration and are typically cued primarily by one acoustic fea-
ture (e.g., pitch, both height and direction). Further, since vocal pitch is used for other purposes (e.g., 
emotion, question vs. statement intonation), learning new tone categories may involve co-opting 
systems for affective processing or linguistic prosody. In sum, although some convergence in the 
neural systems for learning tone and segmental contrasts can be found, it would be unreasonable (and 
perhaps surprising) to expect identical neural systems for processing all non-native sound contrasts.
Other methodological challenges of studying L2 phonology acquisition are shared with other 
domains of L2 learning and the study of bilingualism in general. Namely, when studying language 
learners in the wild, it is impossible to equate the quality and quantity of L2 input, nor can one con-
trol the timing of exposure to that input. Researchers (including ourselves) have resorted to training 
naive listeners on L2 sounds, but these studies rarely approach the duration and intensity of exposure 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
89
that an immersion environment would provide. Finally, as we reflect below, every study of non-
native sound learning is necessarily a study of individual differences. In our own studies, college 
students with apparently similar backgrounds will perform very differently on training tasks—some 
participants hit ceiling performance after a handful of trials, while other participants are still at chance 
performance by the end of training. In the L2 pedagogy literature, researchers are concerned with 
notions of learning “aptitude,” an estimation of a learner’s probable skill in learning non-native sound 
contrasts. Aptitude is likely a combination of an interwoven set of perceptual, cognitive, and socio-
cultural factors (e.g. Sparks et al., 2011) but we argue that individual differences in brain structure and 
function may be one source of differences in learning success, a topic we return to in the final section.
Theoretical Perspectives and Related Findings
Adult L2 learners rarely obtain native-like proficiency in all aspects of an L2. For example, even 
highly proficient L2 speakers often have persistent difficulties perceiving and producing speech 
sounds in their L2 (Bradlow et al., 1997; Flege et al., 2007). Why, then, are non-native sounds diffi-
cult to learn in adulthood? Theories of non-native speech perception have typically appealed to two 
sources of difficulty—the initial perceptual state of the adult learner and differences in neuroplasticity.
Perceptual Warping as an Obstacle to Non-Native Speech Sound Acquisition
Any L2 learner has, by definition, already acquired one language. According to many mainstream 
theories of non-native speech perception, the mechanisms that support the acquisition of speech cat-
egories in the L1 are still available throughout the lifespan and can, at least in principle, support L2 
speech sound acquisition (e.g., Best et al., 2001; Flege, 1995; Kuhl et al., 2008). These theories of 
course recognize the difficulties of perceiving and producing L2 speech sounds in adulthood, but they 
primarily attribute these difficulties to experience rather than maturational constraints. Namely, the 
trouble with learning new speech sounds arises not so much from hard limits on learning mechanisms, 
but rather from interference from native language speech categories. This class of theories generates 
the prediction that the neural systems that respond to successful acquisition of new sound categories 
in adulthood will be similar to those evoked during childhood sound acquisition.
The native-language magnet model refers to this as native language neural commitment (Kuhl 
et al., 2008). According to this model, the neural circuitry gradually “commits” to the activation 
patterns of the L1 until the phonological system reaches stability, and these carefully honed native 
language sensitivities work at odds to the process of recognizing overlapping non-native sounds. 
The end result is that non-native learning in adulthood may be difficult because neural circuits have 
become specialized for native language category structures (Myers, 2014).1
Critical/Sensitive Periods in the Brain
A (non-exclusive) alternative explanation is that there are changes in neural plasticity (i.e., quali-
tative shifts in the recruitment of different brain systems) over development that prevent the adult 
learner from completely learning non-native sounds. One explanation for these difficulties is that 
there is a critical period, sometimes also called a sensitive or optimal period, for language acquisition 
(Lenneberg, 1967; Penfield, 1965).2 The critical period hypothesis assumes that there are biologic-
ally constrained time periods in which the learner is particularly capable of learning, either because 
the brain is particularly plastic or because it is especially susceptible to input from the environ-
ment (Lenneberg, 1967; see also Werker & Hensch, 2015 for review). Lenneberg argued that critical 
periods for language acquisition were linked to a process of hemispheric specialization over mat-
uration, where the shift from bilateral organization of language in childhood to left-lateralization 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
90
was accompanied by a loss in plasticity. (For more on age in L2 neurocognition, see Fromont, this 
volume.)
However, more recent evidence suggests that broad-scale neural changes accompanying develop-
ment result in changes in perceptual and motor flexibility. Werker and Hensch (2015) note that neural 
circuits using GABA, an inhibitory neurotransmitter, enter a plastic state, driven both by neurochem-
ical changes that accompany maturation as well as by the structure of the sensory input. Although the 
GABA-linked maturational pathway has yet to be fully worked out in humans, behavioral evidence 
suggests that infants begin attuning to the specific properties of speech they are exposed to in utero 
(such as rhythmic classes; Mehler et al., 1988), suggesting that this window for speech plasticity is 
open at birth. They describe a series of molecular “brakes” that dampen these periods of neural plasti-
city during maturation, leading to more stability, but less receptivity, in certain sensory systems (Reh 
et al., 2020). Although the timing of the closure of the critical/sensitive period for speech perception 
is a matter of substantial debate, it is argued that these shifts leave adult learners at a disadvantage for 
non-native sound learning.
The evidence that exposure to a language in childhood results in more accurate perception and 
production of phonology is nearly incontrovertible (Flege et al., 1995, 1999; Granena & Long, 2013; 
Piske et al., 2001). At the same time, there is cause for optimism: changes in neural plasticity do not 
entirely doom the adult language learner. In a study of 10–16-year-old and adult learners of a difficult 
non-native speech contrast, we found that adults consistently outperformed adolescents, suggesting 
that developmental changes in neural plasticity are not sufficient to interfere with these early learning 
stages (Fuhrmeister et al., 2020; see also Heeren & Schouten, 2008; Wang & Kuhl, 2003). Indeed, 
Werker and Hensch (2015) point out that the brakes on plasticity are not absolute and can be lifted—
potentially through pharmacological interventions, but also through directed attention to perceptual 
stimuli.
Testing Critical/Sensitive Period Effects: Age-of-Acquisition or Exposure?
Although developmentally linked critical period effects are major drivers of first language acquisi-
tion, it is more challenging to test the hypothesis that critical periods limit L2 learning because it is 
difficult to separate the effects of biological maturation from the social and cultural context in which 
adults and children learn language. Adults and children typically learn new languages under different 
circumstances, and it is common for children to spend more time using their L2 in their day-to-day 
activities than adults (Flege et al., 1995, 1999; Piske et al., 2001). It is therefore likely that the bio-
logical age-of-acquisition effects have been over-estimated, and the effects of quantity and quality of 
L2 exposure have been under-estimated. For instance, the amount of L2 use explains a great deal of 
variance in how native-like a learner’s pronunciation is rated (Piske et al., 2001). Given that amount 
of L2 use and age of acquisition tend to covary, and that both predict proficiency, it can be difficult to 
separate these effects in studies of “real-world” learners.
Imaging studies may help disentangle influences of age of acquisition from proficiency. For 
example, using fMRI, we can see where phonological processing takes place in the brain for groups 
of participants who have qualitatively or quantitatively different experience with an L2 (Archila-
Suerte et al., 2015; Nichols & Joanisse, 2016; see also Golestani, 2016). Research with particular 
populations may also be especially well-suited for probing critical period effects—specifically, in 
participants who were adopted as young children to another country and report having forgotten their 
(original) first language.
Individuals who had only brief exposure to a language as children offer insights into critical period 
effects for L2 phonology by testing whether limited exposure to a language in early childhood leaves 
traces that are evident later in life. Pallier et al. (2003) compared brain activation (using fMRI) of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
91
individuals who were adopted from South Korea as children into French-speaking families and indi-
viduals who had learned French from birth. They found no differences in activation between these 
groups when listening to Korean sentences, suggesting that no traces of the early Korean exposure 
remained. They did, however, find that the amount of activation differed between the two groups 
when listening to French speech, suggesting that the late exposure to French may have left subtle 
neural traces. Ventureyra et al. (2004) tested similar groups of participants on a Korean phoneme dis-
crimination task and did not find that the adoptees had any advantage over the French monolinguals 
in discriminating Korean sounds. Thus, early exposure to a language in itself does not seem sufficient 
to induce native-like neural responses when hearing that language later in life.
Other studies have attempted to disentangle age-of-acquisition effects from proficiency and have 
found that these variables may be represented independently in the brain, at least when considering 
language proficiency holistically (Nichols & Joanisse, 2016). There has been less work specific-
ally on L2 speech, but one study has indeed found distinct patterns of neural activation for age of 
acquisition and proficiency (Archila-Suerte et al., 2015). Archila-Suerte et al. (2015) tested Spanish–
English bilinguals of varying ages of acquisition and proficiency levels in perception and production 
of English sounds. Early and late bilinguals did not differ on a behavioral speech production task, 
nor did they differ from a group of monolingual English-speakers. However, they did find differences 
in brain activation for perception depending on age of acquisition and proficiency: bilinguals with 
higher proficiency showed more activation compared to bilinguals with lower proficiency in the 
bilateral superior temporal gyri and the right rolandic operculum, areas related to perception of phon-
etic detail and subvocal rehearsal, respectively. They also found interesting similarities in activation 
between late bilinguals and monolinguals compared to early bilinguals, suggesting that learning one 
language in early childhood vs. learning two may influence where speech is processed in the brain. 
Findings such as these, in which differences in neural activation but not in behavior are reported, are 
interesting because they suggest that language users can take more than one route in the brain to get 
the same outcome.
Overall, the imaging literature addressing age-of-acquisition effects on L2 phonology is sparse. 
This is perhaps unsurprising, as such questions often require testing highly specific populations that 
can be difficult to recruit. Ultimately, age of acquisition may play a role in how L2 speech sounds are 
represented and processed in the brain, but future work will need to determine whether these effects 
are due to maturational constraints, proficiency, amount of L2 use, or interference from L1 categories. 
Perhaps we should be asking different questions than “whether” there is a critical period, but rather, 
which parts of the L2 phoneme acquisition process are affected by age or what exactly do younger 
learners have an advantage in when it comes to learning the phonology of an L2?
Does Proficient Non-Native Acquisition Become Native-Like?
A conceivable explanation for poorer sound acquisition in adulthood is that adults may recruit 
different (potentially less efficient) cognitive and perceptual capacities than young children to tackle 
this problem. In the following section we ask whether the neural systems devoted to novel contrast 
learning resemble those for L1 contrasts in adult learners.
Brain Structures for Native-Language Speech Perception
Sensitivity to native language speech sounds can be found practically throughout the entire auditory 
processing hierarchy. This pathway extends from early processing of sound in the brainstem, to pri-
mary auditory cortex, laterally over the cortex to the superior temporal gyri (STG) and superior tem-
poral sulcus, bilaterally, and projecting forward to involving the inferior frontal gyri (IFG, Blumstein 
& Myers, 2014; Myers, 2014).
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
92
Brainstem responses to sound, as measured by a form of EEG known as auditory brainstem 
response, reflect the properties of that sound with high fidelity (Coffey et al., 2019; Kraus et al., 
1995). Specific sensitivity to native-language contrasts can be seen in electrophysiological responses 
to sound very early in the auditory processing stream. Speakers of tone languages, where encoding 
of fine-grained differences in pitch are highly relevant for lexical status, show enhanced encoding 
of pitch features in the brainstem response (Bidelman & Lee, 2015; Maggu et al., 2021), suggesting 
that language learning results in selective auditory expertise for features that are language-relevant 
(Pallier et al., 1997).
Further evidence of this phenomenon comes from data showing that early speech-evoked potentials 
reflect the categorical structure of native-language sounds, a property that must be acquired through 
experience (Bidelman & Lee, 2015). Indeed, the bilateral STG, falling just beyond the primary audi-
tory cortex, show both graded responses to speech (reflecting high fidelity to the auditory prop-
erty of the input) as well as sensitivity to the specific structure of native language categories (Desai 
et al., 2008; Myers, 2007; Toscano et al., 2010). Evidence from electrocorticography (ECoG), where 
electrodes are placed directly on the surface of the brain, shows sensitivity to native language cat-
egory structure in distributed neuronal populations (Chang et al., 2010; Mesgarani et al., 2014), but 
intriguingly these populations show evidence of sensitivity that tracks phonetic classes (Mesgarani 
et al., 2014). By the time the auditory signal arrives at the lateral surface of the STG, and into the 
superior temporal sulcus, neuronal responses show tuning that reflects the composition of speech 
categories. The role of regions beyond the STG for native language phonetic processing has been 
debated (Hickok et al., 2011), but evidence suggests that the IFG, especially posterior portions of 
these structures, are invoked under conditions of phonetic competition—for instance, when presented 
with a token that falls between “back” and “pack” (Evans & Davis, 2015), and may reflect highly 
categorical speech responses (Myers et al., 2009).
How then, do these native-language responses change when listeners are confronted with a new 
phonetic category? In general, training on non-native speech sound categories results in a neural 
pattern (both temporal and spatial) that approaches the native-like response. Early evidence for this 
came from a series of studies in which participants were trained to distinguish items from a novel 
sound category (Desai et al., 2008; Liebenthal et al., 2010). When participants underwent explicit 
training on new non-native contrasts, increased activation was observed in a network of regions 
involved in native-language processing (i.e., left-lateralized temporo-parietal and frontal regions) 
after training (Callan et al., 2003; Golestani & Zatorre, 2004; Myers & Swan, 2012; Ventura-Campos 
et al., 2013).
Turning to speech production, more proficient learners of an L2 vowel contrast showed increased 
recruitment of a set of speech motor regions also used in native language production (Carey et al., 
2017) as participants were preparing to speak. Similar findings of overlap in non-native and native 
speech production come from studies of bilinguals reading aloud (Berken et al., 2015), and naming 
pictures (Parker Jones et al., 2013), although these studies were not designed to isolate the effects of 
non-native phonological processing from other levels of language production (e.g. lexical selection, 
semantic processing, etc.). In a well-powered study of speech production over the course of develop-
ment, Hashizume et al. (2014) scanned children (ages 6–18) while they imitated native and non-native 
syllables. Increasing activation in left pars opercularis, a subregion of Broca’s area, during production 
correlated with production accuracy. Strikingly, the neural systems recruited for novel sound category 
learning are very similar to those recruited for native-language sound category processing.
Also of interest is how the neural response to category learning shifts as listeners gain proficiency. 
In perceptual learning studies, learners initially recruit a network that includes areas that are core to 
L1 phonetic processing, such as the bilateral STG, but also those that are less-important for native-
language perception, for instance the IFG and temporo-parietal junction. As listeners progress from 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
93
being entirely unfamiliar with the non-native sounds to an emergent proficiency with these sounds, 
but while they are still working hard to distinguish them, executive and attentional demands may 
be leveraged more strongly. We have proposed elsewhere (Myers, 2014) that as phonetic categories 
become better-defined, top-down signals from frontal and parietal regions provide a feedback signal 
to tune sensitivities in the temporal lobe, and that increased proficiency may be accompanied by 
decreased reliance on frontal and parietal systems. In essence, once the superior temporal lobes have 
been appropriately sensitized to the structure of non-native categories, they can handle most of the 
job of perceiving non-native contrasts without intervention from more peripheral resources.
Other work has highlighted the importance of coordination between frontal-striatal circuits in 
developing sensitivities to novel contrasts (Feng et al., 2018; Yi et al., 2016). In the application of the 
dual learning system to tone learning, the problem of non-native sound learning is couched as one 
of using external feedback to navigate a multi-dimensional acoustic space to discover the structure 
of categories within this space (Chandrasekaran et al., 2014).3 This dual-learning system is proposed 
to involve coordination between two learning systems, a “reflective,” strategic, rule-based system 
and a “reflexive,” more automatic system mapping the sound to a reward (Chandrasekaran et al., 
2014). Feng and colleagues (2021) asked whether successful non-native learners come to resemble 
native learners in the perception of lexical tone. In this fMRI study, native English speakers’ neural 
patterns were compared to a group of native Mandarin speakers after the English speakers had under-
gone intensive training on Mandarin tones (Feng et al., 2019; Yi et al., 2016). Neural patterns of the 
more proficient learners of the tone categories more closely resembled those of native speakers. This 
finding bolsters the notion that the end result of non-native proficiency is not qualitatively different 
from native language proficiency.
As alluded to earlier, a perennial problem for studies of non-native sound acquisition lies in bridging 
the gap between lab-based studies characterized by shorter duration, artificial tasks, structured stimuli 
and feedback, and real-world language learning, marked by immersive, variable, phonetic informa-
tion integrated with other levels of language structure, little structured feedback. Qi and colleagues 
(2019) tested a group of participants who were enrolled in intensive Mandarin courses. They showed 
that early recruitment of right hemisphere structures, the right IFG in particular, followed by disen-
gagement from this right hemisphere system was related to better learning outcomes. In a systematic 
review, Qi and Legault (2020) argue that initial learning phases, as well as more complex learning 
situations, may rely on recruitment of bilateral regions, but that successful learning is accompanied 
by a shift to the left-lateralized language architecture. (For more on the context of learning in L2 
neurocognition, see Bowden & Faretta-Studenberg, this volume.)
Taken together, evidence supports the view that proficient non-native speech sound learning 
recruits native-language neural systems, and that these systems are available to the learner throughout 
the lifespan. What, then, accounts for the pervasive age-of-acquisition effects that are still well-
attested in perception and production? As mentioned earlier in the chapter, developmental shifts in 
perceptual sensitivity (Kuhl et al., 2008), maladaptive learning strategies (Chandrasekaran et al., 
2014), and differences in exposure (Piske et al,. 2001) are all likely bottlenecks on L2 learning, even 
though they are not hard limiters of success. In the next section, we turn to emerging data showing 
that individual differences in brain structure may predict the accuracy and speed at which adults can 
learn new sounds.
Individual Differences in Brain Structure Supporting  
Non-Native Sound Acquisition
Individual differences in perception and production of L2 speech sounds are common. (For more 
on individual differences in L2 neurocognition, see Luque & Covey, this volume.) The previous 
section identified regions of the brain that are found to be involved in perception or production of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
94
L2 speech sounds, and we often see parallels between function and structure in the brain (Golestani, 
2014). Relationships between brain structure and behavior can help elucidate sources of individual 
differences and hint at whether behavioral differences may be innate or due to experience (e.g., 
Zatorre et al., 2012).
In one of the first studies examining relationships between brain structure and non-native speech 
perception, Golestani et al. (2002) found several differences in parietal regions in faster vs. slower 
learners of an unfamiliar speech contrast. They found, for example, that faster learners had more 
white matter volume near the parietal-occipital sulcus, and generally more white matter volume in the 
left hemisphere compared when compared to slower learners. Golestani and Pallier (2007) obtained 
a similar finding for speech production: participants who produced non-native speech sounds more 
accurately had more white matter in inferior parietal regions than less accurate producers.
Other studies have found relationships between structural measures of temporal areas and percep-
tion or production of non-native speech sounds. For example, we found that surface area and volume 
of the left STG positively predicted learning of non-native speech sounds after training (Fuhrmeister 
& Myers, 2021). Wong et al. (2007) found that more successful learners of a non-native (tonal) 
contrast had more grey and white matter volume in Heschl’s gyrus, and they observed a negative 
correlation between speed of learning and gray matter volume in this area. Golestani et al. (2007) 
reported greater white matter densities in Heschl’s gyrus for faster learners of a non-native (seg-
mental) speech contrast. This is likely compatible with the Wong et al. (2007) findings, as there are 
sometimes tradeoff relationships between gray and white matter (i.e., more white matter = less gray 
matter). Some studies have even found higher instances of split or duplicate Heschl’s gyri in faster 
sound learners (Golestani et al., 2007) and in individuals with more accurate production of unfamiliar 
speech sounds (Turker et al., 2017). The findings of split or duplicate gyri are especially interesting 
because the structure of Heschl’s gyrus is highly heritable (Peper et al., 2007) and thought to develop 
in utero (White et al., 2010). Relationships between behavioral skills and gyrification patterns in this 
region may be a result of an innate predisposition for that skill.
Some studies report relationships between structure of frontal regions, specifically the insula, and 
non-native speech perception or production. For example, Golestani and Pallier (2007) found greater 
white matter densities in the left insula among individuals who showed more vs. less accurate pro-
duction of non-native speech sounds. Rodriguez et al. (2018) found that cortical thickness of the left 
anterior insula predicted learning of new speech sounds in bilinguals, but not monolinguals (but see 
Sebastián-Gallés et al., 2012).
Measurements of brain structure can be informative for examining individual differences in 
behavior. Some relationships that have been found between brain structure and L2 speech suggest 
a potential innate predisposition (e.g., Heschl’s gyrus morphology); however, other aspects such as 
white matter volume or cortical thickness may reflect experience (Hofer et al., 2020). Therefore, an 
individual’s aptitude for perception and production of non-native speech sounds is likely influenced 
by both innate and experience-driven factors.
Pedagogical and Clinical Implications
A review of the behavioral and neural data on non-native speech sound learning paints a far less 
pessimistic picture for adult L2 learners than conventional wisdom might suppose. Lab-based 
training regimens provide substantial gains (Bradlow et al., 1999; Fuhrmeister et al., 2020; Golestani 
& Zatorre, 2004), adults may not have an insuperable disadvantage in learning non-native sounds 
(Fuhrmeister et al., 2020), and the neural patterns of successful sound learners begin to approach 
native listeners (e.g., Feng et al., 2021). There is already some use of phonetic training programs in 
L2 pedagogy (Barriuso & Hayes-Harb, 2018; Thomson & Derwing, 2015), although pronunciation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
95
training is more widespread than perceptual training. In general, there is substantial evidence that per-
ceptual system is still malleable in adulthood. The structure of the learning environment (e.g. the type 
and quantity of exposure, and qualities of the training program), and even factors such as proximity to 
sleep have been found to enhance perceptual learning across learners (Barriuso & Hayes-Harb, 2018; 
Earle & Myers, 2015; Ingvalson et al., 2015).
Nonetheless, studies of individual differences in brain and behavior do suggest that some learners 
may have a slightly easier time learning non-native sounds, perhaps due to differences in structural or 
functional neural architectures that are more optimized for non-native speech sound learning or due to 
certain experiences that support this process. Despite this, there is reason for optimism: listeners are 
quite adept at compensating with contextual cues that allow them to fill in the blank when the signal 
is unclear (Baese-Berk et al., 2020). Future research on the obstacles to L2 phonological acquisition 
will likely focus on how to best support learning on the part of the conversation partner as well as 
the L2 learner.
Current Trends and Future Directions
Several themes emerge as promising research directions in the neural correlates of non-native sound 
learning. First, there is interest in determining what factors might be able to “lift the brakes” on 
adult language plasticity. In the near term, this includes manipulating factors like exposure dosage 
and quality to optimize learning. For instance, a line of work by our lab and others suggests that the 
timing of phonetic training (i.e., closer to sleep vs. further away) influences the ability of listeners to 
retain perceptual categories in memory (Earle & Myers, 2015; Qin & Zhang, 2019). Going forward, 
analysis of large-scale neural, genetic, and behavioral datasets may better capture the wide range of 
language-learning performance. Once this problem space has been worked out, we may be able to 
tailor training paradigms to the specific perceptual and cognitive profile that each learner presents 
(Wong et al., 2017). Perhaps most importantly, a shift in the culture surrounding L2 acquisition puts 
the onus on the listener as well as the speaker to facilitate language comprehension (Baese-Berk et al., 
2020). Finally, the advent of methods to allow neuroimaging of conversation partners simultaneously 
during spontaneous conversation (i.e., a “hyperscanning” technique) may allow us to understand 
these more complex neural dynamics at play during more ecologically valid language settings.
Notes
1	 The Native Language Magnet model and Perceptual Assimilation Model (Best et al., 2001) also both pre-
dict that bilingual individuals may have an advantage for subsequent learning of at least certain sound cat-
egories. In the NLM, early exposure to an L2 keeps the period of plasticity open longer (the “perceptual 
wedge” hypothesis), and in the PAM, the presence of an additional phonetic inventory (e.g. a larger number 
of acquired vowels and consonants in two compared to one language) increases the probability that listeners 
will be able to map novel sounds to different categories. Nonetheless, evidence that bilinguals are superior 
non-native sound learners (when those sound categories are not already contrastive in their native languages) 
is limited (Archila-Suerte et al., 2016).
2	 Note that we use terms such as “critical/sensitive period,” “age of acquisition,” and “neuroplasticity” in 
this chapter. In our view, these phrases are not fully synonymous and refer to somewhat different facets of 
the question. For instance, as a field we have assumed that the reason that age of acquisition effects exist is 
greater neuroplasticity during a critical or sensitive period, but this is still being worked out—one could have 
a sensitive period that is not about neuroplasticity, per se, but arises from competition between language-
specific and domain-general learning mechanisms.
3	 In the context of tone categories, the acoustic dimensions that are integrated may reflect aspects like tone 
height or trajectory; other phonetic categories similarly involve integrating probabilistic acoustic cues. Cues 
to word-initial stop voicing include voice onset time, pitch, length of the proceeding vowel, and burst spec-
trum (Chodroff & Wilson, 2014); at least 24 different acoustic cues contribute to fricative place of articula-
tion (McMurray & Jongman, 2011).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
96
Further Readings
This article is ideal for readers who want a fuller understanding of the cellular and chemical processes that drive 
plasticity, and how these play out in language acquisition.
Werker, J.F., & Hensch, T.K. (2015). Critical periods in speech perception: New directions. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 66(1), 173–196. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015104
This review of non-native speech communication puts the focus on the listener rather than on the talker, pointing 
out that in a communication context, listeners can and do readily adapt to non-native speech.
Baese-Berk, M.M., McLaughlin, D.J., & McGowan, K.B. (2020). Perception of non-native speech. Language 
and Linguistics Compass, 14(7), Article e12375. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12375
The authors outline an exciting new direction in language pedagogy, suggesting that neural and genetic data 
could be used to tailor individualized training programs to optimize language learning.
Wong, P.C.M., Vuong, L.C., & Liu, K. (2017). Personalized learning: From neurogenetics of behaviors to 
designing optimal language training. Neuropsychologia, 98, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2016.10.002
References
Archila-Suerte, P., Bunta, F., & Hernandez, A.E. (2016). Speech sound learning depends on individuals’ ability, 
not just experience. The International Journal of Bilingualism: Cross-Disciplinary, Cross-Linguistic Studies 
of Language Behavior, 20(3). https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006914552206
Archila-Suerte, P., Zevin, J., & Hernandez, A.E. (2015). The effect of age of acquisition, socioeducational status, 
and proficiency on the neural processing of second language speech sounds. Brain and Language, 141, 35–
49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.11.005
Baese-Berk, M.M., McLaughlin, D.J., & McGowan, K.B. (2020). Perception of non-native speech. Language 
and Linguistics Compass, 14(7), e12375. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12375
Barriuso, T.A., & Hayes-Harb, R. (2018). High variability phonetic training as a bridge from research to practice. 
CATESOL Journal, 30(1), 177–194.
Berken, J.A., Gracco, V.L., Chen, J.-K., Watkins, K.E., Baum, S., Callahan, M., & Klein, D. (2015). Neural 
activation in speech production and reading aloud in native and non-native languages. NeuroImage, 112, 
208–217. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.03.016
Best, C.T., McRoberts, G.W., & Goodell, E. (2001). Discrimination of non-native consonant contrasts varying in 
perceptual assimilation to the listener’s native phonological system. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 109(2), 775–794. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1332378
Bidelman, G.M., & Lee, C.-C. (2015). Effects of language experience and stimulus context on the neural organ-
ization and categorical perception of speech. NeuroImage, 120, 191–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2015.06.087
Bowden, H., & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Blumstein, S.E., & Myers, E.B. (2014). Neural systems underlying speech perception. In K.N. Oshsner & S. 
Kosslyn (Eds), Oxford handbook of cognitive neuroscience, volume 1: Core topics (pp. 507–523). https://doi.
org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780199988693.013.0025
Bradlow, A.R., Akahane-Yamada, R., Pisoni, D.B., & Tohkura, Y. (1999). Training Japanese listeners to identify 
English /r/ and /l/: Long-term retention of learning in perception and production. Perception & Psychophysics, 
61(5), 977–985. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03206911
Bradlow, A.R., Pisoni, D.B., Akahane-Yamada, R., & Tohkura, Y. (1997). Training Japanese listeners to iden-
tify English /r/ and /l/: IV. Some effects of perceptual learning on speech production. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 101(4), 2299–2310. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.418276
Callan, D.E., Tajima, K., Callan, A.M., Kubo, R., Masaki, S., & Akahane-Yamada, R. (2003). Learning-induced 
neural plasticity associated with improved identification performance after training of a difficult second-
language phonetic contrast. Neuroimage, 19(1), 113–124. https://doi.org/10.1016/s1053-8119(03)00020-x
Carey, D., Miquel, M.E., Evans, B.G., Adank, P., & McGettigan, C. (2017). Vocal tract images reveal neural 
representations of sensorimotor transformation during speech imitation. Cerebral Cortex, 27(5), 3064–3079. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx056
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
97
Chandrasekaran, B., Yi, H.-G., & Maddox, W.T. (2014). Dual-learning systems during speech category learning. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(2), 488–495. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-013-0501-5
Chang, E.F., Rieger, J.W., Johnson, K., Berger, M.S., Barbaro, N.M., & Knight, R.T. (2010). Categorical speech 
representation in human superior temporal gyrus. Nature Neuroscience, 13(11), 1428–1432. https://doi.org/
10.1038/nn.2641
Chodroff, E., & Wilson, C. (2014). Burst spectrum as a cue for the stop voicing contrast in American English. The 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 136(5), 2762. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4896470
Coffey, E.B.J., Nicol, T., White-Schwoch, T., Chandrasekaran, B., Krizman, J., Skoe, E., Zatorre, R.J., & Kraus, N. 
(2019). Evolving perspectives on the sources of the frequency-following response. Nature Communications, 
10(1), 5036. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-13003-w
Desai, R., Liebenthal, E., Waldron, E., & Binder, J.R. (2008). Left posterior temporal regions are sensitive to 
auditory categorization. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(7), 1174–1188. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2008.20081
Earle, F.S., & Myers, E.B. (2015). Sleep and native language interference affect non-native speech sound 
learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 41(6), 1680–1695. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000113
Evans, S., & Davis, M.H. (2015). Hierarchical organization of auditory and motor representations in speech per-
ception: Evidence from searchlight similarity analysis. Cerebral Cortex, 25(12), 4772–4788. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/bhv136
Feng, G., Gan, Z., Wang, S., Wong, P.C.M., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2018). Task-general and acoustic-invariant 
neural representation of speech categories in the human brain. Cerebral Cortex, 28(9), 3241–3254. https://
doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhx195
Feng, G., Li, Y., Hsu, S.-M., Wong, P.C.M., Chou, T.-L., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2021). Emerging native-similar 
neural representations underlie non-native speech category learning success. Neurobiology of Language, 
2(2), 280–307. https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00035
Feng, G., Yi, H.G., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2019). The role of the human auditory corticostriatal network in 
speech learning. Cerebral Cortex, 29(10), 4077–4089. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhy289
Flege, J.E. (1995). Second language speech learning: Theory, findings, and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.), 
Speech perception and linguistic experience: Issues in cross-language research (pp. 233–277). York Press.
Flege, J.E., Bohn, O.-S., & Munro, M.J. (2007). Language experience in second language speech learning: In 
honor of James Emil Flege. John Benjamins Publishing.
Flege, J.E., Munro, M.J., & MacKay, I.R. (1995). Factors affecting strength of perceived foreign accent in 
a second language. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 97(5), 3125–3134. https://doi.org/
10.1121/1.413041
Flege, J.E., Yeni-Komshian, G.H., & Liu, S. (1999). Age constraints on second-language acquisition. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 41(1), 78–104. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1999.2638
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Fuhrmeister, P., & Myers, E.B. (2021). Structural variation in the temporal lobe predicts learning and retention 
of non-native speech sounds. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 37(1), 63–79. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2021.1944658
Fuhrmeister, P., Schlemmer, B., & Myers, E.B. (2020). Adults show initial advantages over children in learning 
difficult nonnative speech sounds. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 63(8), 2667–2679. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2020_JSLHR-19-00358
Golestani, N. (2014). Brain structural correlates of individual differences at low-to high-levels of the language 
processing hierarchy: A review of new approaches to imaging research. International Journal of Bilingualism, 
18(1), 6–34. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006912456585
Golestani, N. (2016). Neuroimaging of phonetic perception in bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 
19(4), 674–682. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728915000644
Golestani, N., Molko, N., Dehaene, S., LeBihan, D., & Pallier, C. (2007). Brain structure predicts the learning of 
foreign speech sounds. Cerebal Cortex, 17(3), 575–582. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhk001
Golestani, N., & Pallier, C. (2007). Anatomical correlates of foreign speech sound production. Cerebral Cortex, 
17(4), 929. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhl003
Golestani, N., Paus, T., & Zatorre, R.J. (2002). Anatomical correlates of learning novel speech sounds. Neuron, 
35(5), 997–1010. https://doi.org/10.1016/s0896-6273(02)00862-0
Golestani, N., & Zatorre, R.J. (2004). Learning new sounds of speech: Reallocation of neural substrates. 
Neuroimage, 21(2), 494–506. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.071
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
98
Granena, G., & Long, M.H. (2013). Age of onset, length of residence, language aptitude, and ultimate L2 
attainment in three linguistic domains. Second Language Research, 29(3), 311–343. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0267658312461497
Hashizume, H., Taki, Y., Sassa, Y., Thyreau, B., Asano, M., Asano, K., Takeuchi, H., Nouchi, R., Kotozaki, Y., 
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., & Kawashima, R. (2014). Developmental changes in brain activation involved in the 
production of novel speech sounds in children. Human Brain Mapping, 35(8), 4079–4089. https://doi.org/
10.1002/hbm.22460
Heeren, W.F.L., & Schouten, M.E.H. (2008). Perceptual development of phoneme contrasts: How sensitivity 
changes along acoustic dimensions that contrast phoneme categories. The Journal of the Acoustical Society 
of America, 124(4), 2291–2302. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.2967472
Hickok, G., Costanzo, M., Capasso, R., & Miceli, G. (2011). The role of Broca’s area in speech percep-
tion: Evidence from aphasia revisited. Brain and Language, 119(3), 214–220. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2011.08.001
Hofer, E., Roshchupkin, G.V., Adams, H.H.H., Knol, M.J., Lin, H., Li, S., Zare, H., Ahmad, S., Armstrong, N.J., 
Satizabal, C.L., Bernard, M., Bis, J.C., Gillespie, N. A., Luciano, M., Mishra, A., Scholz, M., Teumer, A., Xia, 
R., Jian, X., … Seshadri, S. (2020). Genetic correlations and genome-wide associations of cortical structure in 
general population samples of 22,824 adults. Nature Communications, 11(1), 4796. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-18367-y
Ingvalson, E.M., Dhar, S., Wong, P.C.M., & Liu, H. (2015). Working memory training to improve speech percep-
tion in noise across languages. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 137(6), 3477–3486. https://
doi.org/10.1121/1.4921601
Kim, R., Roberson, L., Russo, M., & Briganti, P. (2019). Language diversity, nonnative accents, and their 
consequences at the workplace: Recommendations for individuals, teams, and organizations. The Journal of 
Applied Behavioral Science, 55(1), 73–95. https://doi.org/10.1177/0021886318800997
Kraus, N., McGee, T., Carrell, T.D., King, C., Tremblay, K., & Nicol, T. (1995). Central auditory system plasti-
city associated with speech discrimination training. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7(1), 25–32. https://
doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1995.7.1.25
Kuhl, P.K., Conboy, B.T., Coffey-Corina, S., Padden, D., Rivera-Gaxiola, M., & Nelson, T. (2008). Phonetic 
learning as a pathway to language: New data and native language magnet theory expanded (NLM-e). 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 363, 363(1493), 979–1000. https://
doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2007.2154
Kuhl, P., & Rivera-Gaxiola, M. (2008). Neural substrates of language acquisition. Annual Review Neuroscience, 
31, 511–534. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.neuro.30.051606.094321
Lenneberg, E.H. (1967). Biological foundations of language. Wiley.
Liebenthal, E., Desai, R., Ellingson, M.M., Ramachandran, B., Desai, A., & Binder, J.R. (2010). Specialization 
along the left superior temporal sulcus for auditory categorization. Cerebral Cortex, 20(12), 2958–2970. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq045
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Maggu, A.R., Lau, J.C.Y., Waye, M.M.Y., & Wong, P.C.M. (2021). Combination of absolute pitch and tone lan-
guage experience enhances lexical tone perception. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 1–10. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41598-020-80260-x
McMurray, B., & Jongman, A. (2011). What information is necessary for speech categorization? Harnessing 
variability in the speech signal by integrating cues computed relative to expectations. Psychological Review, 
118(2), 219–246. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0022325
Mehler, J., Jusczyk, P., Lambertz, G., Halsted, N., Bertoncini, J., & Amiel-Tison, C. (1988). A precursor of lan-
guage acquisition in young infants. Cognition, 29(2), 143–178. https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(88)90035-2
Mesgarani, N., Cheung, C., Johnson, K., & Chang, E.F. (2014). Phonetic feature encoding in human superior 
temporal gyrus. Science, 343(6174), 1006–1010. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1245994
Myers, E.B. (2007). Dissociable effects of phonetic competition and category typicality in a phonetic categoriza-
tion task: An fMRI investigation. Neuropsychologia, 45(7), 1463–1473. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2006.11.005
Myers, E.B. (2014). Emergence of category-level sensitivities in non-native speech sound learning. Frontiers in 
Neuroscience, 8, 238. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2014.00238
Myers, E.B., Blumstein, S.E., Walsh, E., & Eliassen, J. (2009). Inferior frontal regions underlie the percep-
tion of phonetic category invariance. Psychological science, 20(7), 895–903. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9280.2009.02380.x
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurolinguistics of Second Language Phonology
99
Myers, E.B., & Swan, K. (2012). Effects of category learning on neural sensitivity to non-native phonetic cat-
egories. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(8), 1695–1708. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00243
Nichols, E.S., & Joanisse, M.F. (2016). Functional activity and white matter microstructure reveal the inde-
pendent effects of age of acquisition and proficiency on second-language learning. NeuroImage, 143, 15–25. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.08.053
Pallier, C., Bosch, L., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (1997). A limit on behavioral plasticity in speech perception. 
Cognition, 64(3), B9–B17. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(97)00030-9
Pallier, C., Dehaene, S., Poline, J.-B., LeBihan, D., Argenti, A.-M., Dupoux, E., & Mehler, J. (2003). Brain 
imaging of language plasticity in adopted adults: Can a second language replace the first? Cerebral Cortex, 
13(2), 155–161. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/13.2.155
Parker Jones, O., Seghier, M.L., Kawabata Duncan, K.J., Leff, A.P., Green, D.W., & Price, C.J. (2013). Auditory-
motor interactions for the production of native and non-native speech. The Journal of Neuroscience, 33(6), 
2376–2387. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3289-12.2013
Penfield, W. (1965). Conditioning the uncommitted cortex for language learning. Brain: A Journal of Neurology, 
88(4), 787–798. https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/88.4.787
Peper, J.S., Brouwer, R.M., Boomsma, D.I., Kahn, R.S., & Hulshoff Pol, H.E. (2007). Genetic influences on 
human brain structure: A review of brain imaging studies in twins. Human Brain Mapping, 28(6), 464–473. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.20398
Piske, T., MacKay, I.R.A., & Flege, J.E. (2001). Factors affecting degree of foreign accent in an L2: A review. 
Journal of Phonetics, 29(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1006/jpho.2001.0134
Qi, Z., Han, M., Wang, Y., de Los Angeles, C., Liu, Q., Garel, K., Chen, E.S., Whitfield-Gabrieli, S., Gabrieli, 
J.D.E., & Perrachione, T.K. (2019). Speech processing and plasticity in the right hemisphere predict vari-
ation in adult foreign language learning. NeuroImage, 192, 76–87. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2019.03.008
Qi, Z., & Legault, J. (2020). Neural hemispheric organization in successful adult language learning: Is left always 
right? In K. D. Federmeier & H.-W. Huang (Eds.), Psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 72, pp. 119–
163). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.plm.2020.02.004
Qin, Z., & Zhang, C. (2019). The effect of overnight consolidation in the perceptual learning of non-native tonal 
contrasts. PLOS ONE, 14(12), e0221498. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0221498
Reh, R.K., Dias, B.G., Nelson, C.A., Kaufer, D., Werker, J.F., Kolb, B., Levine, J.D., & Hensch, T.K. (2020). 
Critical period regulation across multiple timescales. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
117(38), 23242–23251. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1820836117
Rodriguez, S.M., Archila-Suerte, P., Vaughn, K.A., Chiarello, C., & Hernandez, A.E. (2018). Anterior insular 
thickness predicts speech sound learning ability in bilinguals. NeuroImage, 165, 278–284. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.10.038
Sebastián-Gallés, N., Soriano-Mas, C., Baus, C., Díaz, B., Ressel, V., Pallier, C., Costa, A., & Pujol, J. (2012). 
Neuroanatomical markers of individual differences in native and non-native vowel perception. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 25(3), 150–162. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2011.11.001
Si, X., Zhou, W., & Hong, B. (2017). Cooperative cortical network for categorical processing of Chinese lexical 
tone. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 114(46), 12303–
12308. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1710752114
Silbert, N.H., Smith, B.K., Jackson, S.R., Campbell, S.G., Hughes, M.M., & Tare, M. (2015). Non-native phon-
emic discrimination, phonological short term memory, and word learning. Journal of Phonetics, 50, 99–119. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2015.03.001
Sparks, R.L., Humbach, N., Patton, J., & Ganschow, L. (2011). Subcomponents of second-language aptitude 
and second-language proficiency. The Modern Language Journal, 95(2), 253–273. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1540-4781.2011.01176.x
Thomson, R.I., & Derwing, T.M. (2015). The effectiveness of L2 pronunciation instruction: A narrative review. 
Applied Linguistics, 36(3), 326–344. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu076
Toscano, J.C., McMurray, B., Dennhardt, J., & Luck, S.J. (2010). Continuous perception and graded categoriza-
tion. Psychological Science, 21(10), 1532–1540. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610384142
Turker, S., Reiterer, S.M., Seither-Preisler, A., & Schneider, P. (2017). “When music speaks”: Auditory cortex 
morphology as a neuroanatomical marker of language aptitude and musicality. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 
2096. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.02096
Ventura-Campos, N., Sanjuán, A., González, J., Palomar-García, M.-Á., Rodríguez-Pujadas, A., Sebastián-Gallés, 
N., Deco, G., & Ávila, C. (2013). Spontaneous brain activity predicts learning ability of foreign sounds. The 
Journal of Neuroscience, 33(22), 9295–9305. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4655-12.2013
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Myers and Pamela Fuhrmeister
100
Ventureyra, V.A.G., Pallier, C., & Yoo, H.-Y. (2004). The loss of first language phonetic perception in adopted 
Koreans. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17(1), 79–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0911-6044(03)00053-8
Wang, Y., & Kuhl, P. (2003). Evaluating the “critical period” hypothesis: Perceptual learning of Mandarin tones 
in American adults and American children at 6, 10 and 14 years of age. In M. J. Solé, D. Recasens, & 
J. Romero (Eds.), Proceedings of the 15th International Congress of Phonetic Sciences (pp. 1537–1540). 
Futurgraphic.
Werker, J.F., & Hensch, T.K. (2015). Critical periods in speech perception: New directions. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 66(1), 173–196. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015104
Werker, J.F., & Tees, R.C. (2005). Speech perception as a window for understanding plasticity and commitment 
in language systems of the brain. Developmental Psychobiology, 46(3), 233–251. https://doi.org/10.1002/
dev.20060
White, T., Su, S., Schmidt, M., Kao, C.-Y., & Sapiro, G. (2010). The development of gyrification in childhood 
and adolescence. Brain and Cognition, 72(1), 36–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2009.10.009
Wong, P.C.M., Perrachione, T.K., & Parrish, T.B. (2007). Neural characteristics of successful and less successful 
speech and word learning in adults. Human Brain Mapping, 28(10), 995–1006. https://doi.org/10.1002/
hbm.20330
Wong, P.C.M., Vuong, L.C., & Liu, K. (2017). Personalized learning: From neurogenetics of behaviors to 
designing optimal language training. Neuropsychologia, 98, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2016.10.002
Wong, P.C.M., Warrier, C. M., Penhune, V. B., Roy, A. K., Sadehh, A., Parrish, T. B., & Zatorre, R. J. (2007). 
Volume of left Heschl’s gyrus and linguistic pitch learning. Cerebral Cortex, 18(4), 828–836. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/bhm115
Yi, H.-G., Maddox, W. T., Mumford, J. A., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2016). The role of corticostriatal systems in 
speech category learning. Cerebral Cortex, 26(4), 1409–1420. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu236
Zatorre, R. J., Fields, R. D., & Johansen-Berg, H. (2012). Plasticity in gray and white: Neuroimaging changes in 
brain structure during learning. Nature Neuroscience, 15(4), 528–536. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.3045
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-11
8
THE NEUROLINGUISTICS OF  
THE SECOND LANGUAGE 
LEXICO-SEMANTIC SYSTEM
Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
Introduction and Critical Definitions
The lexico-semantic system (words and their meanings) is the backbone of the second language (L2) 
learner’s new language. As the saying goes, “Without grammar, you can’t say much; but without 
vocabulary, you can’t say anything.” Indeed, learners indicate that vocabulary is one of the most sig-
nificant hurdles they face during the quest for proficiency (Huckin & Bloch, 1993).
In this chapter, we review studies that have used neurolinguistic methods to examine the L2 
lexico-semantic system. Numerous neuroscientific methods have been used in this area. These 
include electroencephalography (EEG), event-related brain potentials (ERPs), functional mag-
netic resonance imaging (fMRI), voxel-based morphometry (VBM), positron emission tomography 
(PET), and case studies (see Table 8.1 for a list of relevant methods). These methods vary in their 
invasiveness, expense, and complexity. Therefore, some have been used more often than others and 
will be described in more detail. Because each method has different benefits to offer, it is useful to 
compare these studies and synthesize their outcomes to paint a larger picture of the current trends in 
the neurolinguistics of the lexico-semantic system.
Before diving into critical issues and topics, we begin with additional information about the most 
frequently used methods in this research, which we highlight most in this chapter: ERPs and MRI. 
ERPs are derived from the continuous EEG, which represents the electrical activity of the brain as 
recorded from the surface of the scalp using electrodes. ERPs differ from the continuous EEG in that 
they are time-locked to events (e.g., stimulus presentations, responses). ERPs are useful in examining 
L2 lexico-semantic processing because parts of the ERP waveform are sensitive to this processing, 
and because recording EEG and pre-processing these data is relatively inexpensive compared to other 
neurolinguistic methods. ERPs are very good at indicating when in time events occur.
The N400 ERP component is the most widely researched ERP component in lexico-semantic  
processing because of its immediate sensitivity to multiple word-level factors, both in first language  
(L1) and L2 (for a review of the N400 in lexico-semantic processing, see Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017).  
In language research, the N400 is characterized by a negative-going waveform occurring approxi-
mately 300–400 ms after stimulus onset, peaking at centro-parietal electrode sites. The N400 is  
more negative to semantic violations and incongruities. It is normally most evident after averaging  
waveforms across sessions and individuals. However, the exact timing, location, and amplitude of  
the N400 can vary with proficiency, task demands, and materials used (Federmeier, 2021; Jankowiak,  
2021; Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017). The size of the N400 in lexico-semantic processing depends on  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
102
many factors, including the task type and task demands (e.g., lexical/semantic decision tasks, self- 
paced reading tasks, translation production, etc.), materials used (e.g., related versus unrelated,  
expected versus unexpected, and trained versus untrained words, conflict versus no conflict, etc.),  
sample population (e.g., balanced versus unbalanced bilinguals,1 same script versus different script  
bilinguals), and study design (e.g., within subject L1 and L2 versus observation of monolinguals  
versus bilinguals; Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017).2
The other highly popular method in the neurolinguistic study of the L2 lexico-semantic system is 
neuroimaging (see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). PET requires the administration of a radioactive 
tracer. Because MRI is a much less invasive procedure, its popularity quickly surpassed that of PET, 
and it has become the dominant neuroimaging technique in neuroscience (for a review, see Sabourin, 
2014). Whereas MRI is used to compare structure, fMRI is an imaging method that takes advantage 
of magnetic properties of hydrogen ions in the brain to record blood flow indirectly. This technique is 
used for determining spatial location of function.
Using MRI and other methods, L1 lexical processing has been localized to regions of the left 
temporal lobe, left superior frontal cortex, and the left and right angular gyrus (e.g., Sabourin, 2014; 
Zhang et al., 2020). For word retrieval and generation, the inferior frontal gyrus (IFG: often known as 
Broca’s area) and other areas of the frontal lobe are implicated (Sabourin, 2014).
Critical Issues and Topics
The neurolinguistic methods mentioned above have been used to address several critical issues in the 
field of L2 lexico-semantics, which we will address in the upcoming section. These include: How do 
the two languages interact during recognition—are both languages active when only one is needed? 
And if so, how does this interaction unfold? What changes are associated with increased L2 profi-
ciency? And what additional insights about the L2 lexico-semantic system can be drawn from case 
Table 8.1  List of Relevant Methodologies
Methodology
Description
Electroencephalography (EEG)
Continuous measure of the electrical activity of the 
brain (see Motteralla & Prat, this volume)
Event-related brain potentials (ERPs)
Brain activity time locked to events; derived from 
the continuous EEG (see Dickson & Pelzl, this 
volume)
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Imaging scans of brain structure made possible by a 
very powerful magnet (see Kousaie & Klein, this 
volume)
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
Imaging scans of brain function made possible by a 
very powerful magnet (e.g., MRI), that measure 
blood flow in the brain indirectly (see Kousaie & 
Klein, this volume)
Voxel based morphometry (VBM)
Measure of change in (grey or white matter) tissue 
volume; derived from structural MRI scans (see 
Rossi et al., this volume)
Positron emission tomography (PET)
Imaging scans of brain function that make use of 
radioactive tracers (see Kousaie & Klein, this 
volume)
Clinical/case studies
In depth, descriptive records of individuals or groups 
of individuals (see Scimeca et al., this volume)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
103
studies? Critically, neurolinguistic methods may be able to reveal findings in these research areas 
that could be obscured using behavioral methods alone. This may be because some neurolinguistic 
methods take measurements on a finer timescale (e.g., milliseconds for ERPs) as behavior unfolds, 
whereas behavioral methods often examine behavior at endpoints of a process (e.g., a button press).
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
How Do the Two Languages Interact During Recognition?
Elston-Güttler and colleagues conducted a series of three ERP experiments examining bilinguals’ 
ability to “zoom into” their L2, the idea that bilinguals can focus on L2 without L1 interference. 
These studies also provide critical information about the role of context on lexico-semantic pro-
cessing. Elston-Güttler et al.’s (2005) participants were native-German speakers who were learning 
English (age of first exposure approximately 12 years). The participants were shown 20 minutes of 
a silent crime serial that was narrated in German or English. Following the film, participants were 
presented with a series of sentences, which ended either in an interlingual homograph, or in an unre-
lated control word. A target word appeared on the screen following the final word of the sentence, to 
which the participants performed a lexical decision. An example sentence is “The girl gave her friend 
a pretty GIFT.” followed by the related target “POISON” (“gift” means “poison” in German rather 
than “gift”), or the unrelated target “SHELL”; all sentence-final words and targets were presented in 
capital letters.
Participants who saw the film in German demonstrated N200 (an ERP component typically 
associated with language inhibition; see Kaan, 2007, for a review) and N400 components that were 
more negative for unrelated than related trials, suggesting that German remained activated despite not 
being relevant to the English sentence-reading task. This effect held for the first block (15 minutes) 
of the study. The same was not true for participants who viewed the English version of the film. Thus, 
hearing the film narration in English enabled participants to “zoom into” L2, whereas this was made 
difficult for participants presented with the German film.
Elston-Güttler and Gunter (2009) conducted a follow-up study using a similar methodology to 
Elston-Güttler et al. (2005), but in addition to manipulating the context prior to the experiment (the 
language of the film), they also manipulated the sound that was played during the visual experiment. 
Participants were native German speakers who had begun learning English at approximately age 
11. They were all deemed proficient late learners, but additional (median split) proficiency analyses 
were performed. In Experiment 1, Elston-Güttler and Gunter showed the English version of the film 
before the experiment, and during the experiment itself half of the participants heard noise (back-
ward pseudowords) and the other half heard German pseudowords. In Experiment 2, they showed the 
German version of the film before the experiment and during the experiment the participants heard 
noise. In Experiment 3, they showed the English version of the film before the experiment, and during 
the experiment the participants heard real German words. They found an N400 priming effect (i.e., 
ERPs more negative for unrelated than related trials) for the conditions that supported German acti-
vation, namely seeing the film in English but hearing German pseudowords (Experiment 1); viewing 
the film in German and hearing noise (Experiment 2); and viewing the film in English and hearing 
German words (Experiment 3 but only for less-proficient participants). Whereas the activation was 
present for participants at all proficiency levels during only the first half of Experiments 1 and 2, it 
lasted throughout Experiment 3, likely because real German words were played for the duration of 
the experiment. The authors concluded that playing real German words activated German semantics 
and phonology, which made it more difficult for the less-proficient participants in Experiment 3 to 
“zoom into” L2.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
104
Paulmann et al. (2006) conducted a related experiment using a primed lexical decision task 
preceded by the film narrated in German or English to determine the influence of context on “zooming 
in.” In this study, the primes were interlingual homographs (e.g., “bald”) or control primes that were 
matched in length and frequency to the critical primes. The targets were the German translations of 
the interlingual homographs (e.g., “soon,” which translates into German as “bald”). The same items 
were used as in the previous two Elston-Güttler studies. Participants were native German speakers 
who began learning English at approximately age 10.5 and were proficient speakers. Trials began 
with the presentation of a fixation for 200 ms, followed by the prime for 200 ms, then the target, 
which remained on the screen for up to 3000 ms or until a lexical decision was made. In contrast 
to the findings of the previously described studies, an N400 relatedness effect (i.e., more negative 
ERPs for unrelated than related trials) was observed regardless of the language in which the film 
was presented, and regardless of the block of the experiment. This suggests that without supportive 
sentence context, participants were unable to “zoom into” their L2, reinforcing the view that the two 
languages can remain active even when one language is irrelevant to the task. Taken together, the 
findings of these studies suggest that the native language often remains active during recognition 
even when not needed (i.e., that lexical access is nonselective in nature).
What Changes Are Associated with Proficiency?
In addition to examining how L1 and L2 lexical processing may interact, research has also examined the 
development of L2 lexical processing with increasing proficiency. In one of the initial key studies in the 
study of proficiency-related changes, McLaughlin et al. (2004) examined learners of French at a mean 
of 14, 63 and 138 hours of instruction. They tested their knowledge of French using a semantic priming 
paradigm while recording ERPs. The key findings of this study were that learners showed a word-
pseudoword difference in ERPs after only 14 hours of instruction, that the magnitude of the ERP effects 
were correlated with hours of instruction, and that relatedness effects appeared by 63 hours of instruc-
tion. Interestingly, these effects were not mirrored in the behavioral findings, which in the absence of 
ERP data would have led to the conclusion that not much learning had occurred. These findings are 
important for two reasons: First, they demonstrate that adult L2 vocabulary learning can occur relatively 
quickly. Second, they demonstrate that a dissociation can appear between the neurolinguistic and behav-
ioral measures used in an experiment, such that one can suggest that learning has taken place when 
the other does not (see also Chen et al., 2007; Tokowicz & MacWhinney, 2005, for similar findings in 
grammar). Related to the McLaughlin et al. findings, Pu et al. (2016) found early evidence of an N400 
in L2 learners to novel words. After approximately two days and four hours of training total, English 
monolinguals exhibited a frontal, early N400 to incorrectly paired Spanish–English word pairs—a con-
trast that was significantly different from baseline tests and from related pairings. The component was 
evident across anterior regions rather than the classic centro-parietal areas normally found in more pro-
ficient speakers, and it is the earliest evidence of lexico-semantic learning present at the neural level.
Research examining proficiency and L2 lexical processing has extended beyond the earliest stages 
of learning. Indeed, reviews by Jankowiak (2021), Jankowiak and Rataj (2017), and Vandenberghe 
et al. (2019), encompass numerous ERP studies that were conducted to assess lexico-semantic access/
vocabulary learning in speakers of varying proficiencies. The studies outlined in these reviews show 
that, with increased proficiency, L2 speakers exhibit native-like patterns. This is evident in the timing 
of the N400 (e.g., less proficient speakers show a delayed N400 peak latency, that occurs with more 
standard timing with increased proficiency), amplitude (e.g., more proficient speakers show more 
negative amplitudes in response to L2 words), and rough topography (e.g., less proficient speakers 
tend to show the N400 effect more frontally, whereas more proficient speakers show the N400 effect 
more centro-parietally).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
105
A few studies included in the reviews are particularly relevant for the role of proficiency in L2 lex-
ical processing. In an ERP study, Elgort et al. (2015) trained bilingual L2 English speakers on “rare” 
English words through an implicit word learning task. The words were rated low in orthographic and 
meaning familiarity and extracted from a database of rare English words. Participants read highly 
constraining sentences containing the rare words. Testing involved a semantic relatedness task, in 
which participants saw a sentence on the screen, one word at a time, containing the learned word in 
the sentence-final position, followed by a word probe. Learners were then asked to determine if the 
final word of the sentence (the “rare,” learned word) was related to the subsequent probe. For test 
trials on which the sentence final word and the probe were not semantically related, both less and 
more-proficient L2 English bilinguals showed a frontal N400 to the rare words, although the amp-
litude for less-proficient speakers was somewhat smaller. More-proficient bilinguals also showed a 
robust N400 over centro-parietal regions, whereas less-proficient bilinguals did not show the same 
pattern in this area. The authors concluded that less-proficient participants were at a disadvantage due 
to their insufficiently developed lexico-semantic networks; because of this, new words could not be 
well integrated into the network and had fewer and/or weaker connections.
In a series of three studies, Stein and colleagues investigated the influence of increased profi-
ciency on brain changes using three different imaging techniques, EEG/ERP (Stein et al., 2006), 
fMRI (Stein et al., 2009), and VBM (Stein et al., 2012). Due to the use of similar experimental 
methods across the three studies, an interesting set of comparisons can be drawn. In all three studies, 
native English speakers who were studying German abroad in Switzerland were examined toward the 
start of their stay and at end of their stay, approximately five months later. Participants varied in their 
prior exposure to German, and all attended a three-week intensive German language course prior to 
their first experimental session. German proficiency was measured at both experimental time points 
using a multiple-choice cloze test and a task in which participants were asked to translate 40 German 
words into English. A combined measure of proficiency was formed from two tasks.
Stein et al. (2006) presented English, German (L2), and Romansh (unknown) words to participants 
while continuous EEG was recorded. The analyses included trials on which participants indicated 
knowing the English and German words and not knowing the Romansh words. The analyses 
emphasized stimulus-locked topographic differences and found differences between 396 to 540 ms 
post-stimulus between Session 1 and Session 2 for German words. They then conducted a source 
localization analysis to determine the neural generator(s) of this effect, which revealed that a cluster 
of voxels in left IFG was less activated on Session 2 than Session 1. They conducted a microstate 
analysis (an analysis of the topographical pattern of activity of the brain that lasts for several tens 
of milliseconds; see Murray et al., 2004) to determine the timing of these effects. They ultimately 
interpreted these results as coming from a latency shift rather than lower activation on Session 2 
due to the findings of the microstate analysis. They concluded that the aspect of word processing 
responsible for the topographical differences (and the left IFG activation) becomes more rapid with 
increased proficiency. This is most likely semantic processing, given past research on IFG and the 
timing of the topographic differences.
Stein et al. (2009) similarly presented English, German, and Romansh words to participants but 
using an fMRI protocol. They compared brain activation during L1 and L2 processing on Sessions 1 
and 2. For Session 1, stronger activation for L2 than L1 was observed at the following brain areas: right 
IFG, left IFG, and inferior frontal sulcus, and left supplementary motor area. On Session 2, profi-
ciency was higher, and activation was higher in L2 than L1 at only left IFG. The authors concluded 
that higher L2 proficiency is associated with brain activation patterns that more closely resemble 
those in L1, and that left IFG activation in this context reflects the semantic nature of the task.
Stein et al. (2012) used VBM to examine whether changes in grey matter correlated with changes 
in proficiency during the exchange program. The participants were scanned using MRI at the start and 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
106
end of their stay. Two brain clusters, roughly the left anterior temporal lobe and left IFG, correlated 
with proficiency, such that increased proficiency was associated with increased grey matter density. 
Thus, within a timespan of only five months, increased proficiency was correlated with increased 
grey matter density in a part of the brain associated with language processing.
Across these three studies, left IFG is the common denominator. In Stein et al. (2006), for German 
word processing, a cluster of voxels in left IFG was less activated on Session 2 than Session 1, and 
the microstate analysis suggested that this was in fact due to faster processing in left IFG. Stein et al. 
(2009) observed higher activation in the L2 than in L1 only in left IFG on Session 2. And Stein et al. 
(2012) found that grey matter density in left IFG correlated with increased L2 proficiency. This 
underscores the critical role of this brain area for L2 lexico-semantic processing with increased pro-
ficiency. It is unfortunate that the first two of these studies were not able to more directly link profi-
ciency changes at the individual level with brain changes as was possible in the third study, but this 
was restricted due to methodological issues and small sample sizes.
In a neuroimaging review, Abutalebi and Green (2007) argued for a convergence of neural 
pathways of L1 and L2 that is modulated by increased proficiency, mainly in the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC), basal ganglia, and parietal areas. Increased activation in less-proficient speakers, they argue, 
can be explained via automatic versus controlled processing in the PFC and these related cognitive 
control areas (see also Guo & Ma, this volume). For example, in many of the studies examined, 
more-proficient L2 speakers showed reduced activation during lexico-semantic processing, whereas 
less-proficient speakers showed increased activation, suggesting that more advanced L2 learners’ 
processing was more automatic, whereas less-advanced L2 learners relied more heavily on effortful, 
thoughtful processing of the L2, and necessitated more brain activation. Abutalebi and Green suggest 
that future directions in this field emphasize more longitudinal studies to examine developmental 
changes more closely beyond the cross-sectional level.
In line with these findings, a recent meta-analysis by Sulpizio et al. (2020) examined the shared 
functional regions of the lexico-semantic network across 18 PET and fMRI studies that used several 
tasks: word reading, naming, production, and repetition; picture naming; semantic judgement; lexical 
decision; and discourse listening. In the L1>L2 contrast collapsing across age of acquisition, signifi-
cant clusters were found in parts of the left lateral and ventral temporal lobe, the parietal cortex, the 
IFG, and the left posterior cingulate. In subcortical areas, activation was evident in the right caudate 
nucleus, left thalamus, and left amygdala. These cortical and subcortical regions are thought to be a 
part of the neural network that stores and activates semantic representations. In the L2>L1 contrast 
collapsing over age of acquisition, only the globus pallidus, the right insula, and right cerebellum 
showed significant activation. These are thought to be more responsible for cognitive control and top-
down control mechanisms. In addition, a general pattern of increased left PFC activation was found 
for the L2>L1 contrast, suggesting that L2 imposes more demands on working memory, inhibitory, 
or general cognitive control mechanisms than L1. Additionally, the finding that more activation for 
regions associated with L1 suggests that an individual’s L1 involves a more global network of activa-
tion than the L2. This is likely indicative of more deep processing backed by a rich lexico-semantic 
network, whereas less activation from L2 could suggest more shallow processing.
Although higher L2 proficiency has been associated with less activation in cognitive control brain 
areas, other frontal and temporal areas of the brain exhibit more robust connectivity in proficient 
speakers, which may be indicative of deeper semantic processing. Zhang et al. (2020) conducted 
an fMRI study investigating the differences between embodied semantic processing of verbs in 
monolinguals and L2 speakers. In a semantic judgement task, Zhang et al. found that English mono-
lingual speakers showed more complex patterns of brain area connectivity between the IFG, middle 
temporal gyrus, anterior temporal lobe, posterior superior temporal gyrus, supplementary motor area, 
and caudate nucleus when judging the semantic relatedness of verbs and nouns than Chinese-English 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
107
intermediate and high proficient bilinguals. More robust connection between these areas in English 
monolinguals may indicate that L2 English speakers engage in more shallow processing of semantic 
representations due to weaker connections and greater difficulty for the brain to alter existing func-
tional pathways. In monolingual English speakers, these pathways were established at a young age. 
Interestingly, however, both intermediate and more-proficient L2 speakers showed the same acti-
vation as monolingual speakers in sensorimotor areas of the brain, including the precentral gyrus 
and the primary motor cortex, when asked to make semantic judgements about verbs. Although the 
connectivity between these regions was weaker, the L2 speakers’ activation appeared to be trending 
in a native-like direction. Thus, word recognition and semantic representations of words can overlap 
in some brain areas in monolinguals and more proficient L2 speakers, but also clearly differ in con-
nectivity. See Bakker-Marshall et al. (2021) and Bradley et al. (2013) for extensions of this research 
to third language learning.
What Additional Insights About the L2 Lexico-Semantic System  
Can Be Drawn from Case Studies?
Case studies are also a rich source of information although they can be difficult to conduct due to 
the nature of the research and the overall unpredictability of brain trauma and aphasia. In bilinguals 
with aphasia, the situation becomes even more complicated because pre-deficit proficiency cannot 
be reliably tested and relies heavily on self-report (but see Kiran et al., 2014 for a study examining 
bilingual aphasia and language proficiency). Case studies are important because they can give us 
clues into what information in the brain is lost with lesions and what is retained (see Scimeca et al., 
this volume).
In a comprehensive case-study review, García (2015) examined 21 cases of brain-lesioned 
bilinguals with varying degrees and subtypes of aphasia, sociolinguistic disorders, and dementia 
through the lenses of the revised hierarchical model (RHM: Kroll & Stewart, 1994; Kroll et al., 2010) 
and the declarative/procedural (DP) model (Ullman, 2016). The RHM proposes a strong connection 
between L1 lexical and conceptual representations, a strong connection going from L2 to L1 lexical 
representations, and the weakest connections between L2 lexical and conceptual representations and 
from L1 lexical to L2 lexical representations. As proficiency increases, the connection between L2 
lexical and conceptual representations will strengthen. Given the structure of these links, García 
predicted that persons with aphasia or other language-related deficits could show imbalanced impair-
ment between the two directions of translation. In addition, because the RHM assumes a direct, 
strong lexical route from L2 to L1 and a weaker lexical route from L1 to L2, it is possible that indi-
viduals with impaired language function could translate lexically while ignoring the conceptual link.
The DP model relies more on the concepts of memory to explain L2 lexico-semantic processing. 
According to the DP model, word processing and semantic representations of both L1 and L2 are 
predominantly located in the posterior regions of the brain: the hippocampal gyrus, the medial tem-
poral lobe, and other areas of the parietal and temporal lobes. These areas are also associated with 
declarative memory. The model also suggests that general language abilities are housed in the left 
hemisphere. Thus, lesions in the posterior region should produce impairment in word translation and 
word processing (García, 2015).
The RHM and DP model provided confirmatory evidence for García’s (2015) clinical case-study 
observations. Indeed, some patients displayed the “inability to translate” from L2 to L1 but could 
translate L1 to L2, and vice versa, as well as “paradoxical translation behavior” in which patients 
could not produce translations at will but could speak the language instinctively, suggesting two sep-
arate and independent routes for L1 to L2 and L2 to L1 translation. Another set of patients exhibited 
“translation without comprehension,” providing clinical evidence for a lexical translation route 
without conceptual mediation. Interestingly, some patients exhibited “compulsive translation,” in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
108
which they produced utterances in both of their languages involuntarily. This provides some evidence 
of the co-activation of the two languages as well as the argument for the continuous inhibition of one 
language to produce the other (Abutalebi & Green, 2007), resulting in competition and a demand for 
cognitive control. In support of the DP model, García found that most patients with left-lateralized 
posterior lesions exhibited impairments in word translation, and nearly all patients in the analysis had 
lesions in the left hemisphere. García concluded that word translation is left-lateralized and relies 
mainly on declarative memory.
Although case studies in this area provide solid evidence for a functional and structural L2 lexico-
semantic system in the brain, a future direction in clinical research of bilingual word processing and 
translation involve the integration of case studies with neuroimaging, and a direct comparison with 
healthy bilingual controls. It may seem that evidence from case studies contradicts the frameworks 
of a shared neural substrate such as the convergence hypothesis. This hypothesis was first proposed 
by Green (2003) and states that with time and increasing proficiency, the L2 system will eventually 
converge with the L1 system rather than relying on separate neural substrates. This hypothesis has 
been supported by studies showing that more proficient L2 speakers show less activation while using 
the L2 in brain areas traditionally associated with language control, such as the PFC, basal ganglia, 
and the inferior parietal lobule. Less activation in these areas, then, gives way to the idea that inhibi-
tory control and cognitive control processes are more important for early, less-proficient speakers 
than advanced, more-proficient speakers (see Grant & Li, 2015, for further discussion). However, 
small samples size and varied levels of deficits and lesion locations can make generalization through 
clinical observations difficult. Importantly, a solid baseline of proficiency could not be established 
with the participants from García (2015) except through self-report, which may not be as reliable as 
a pretest of proficiency, so the connection between proficiency and degree of deficit is still unknown.
Complications and discrepancies in the shared neural substrate framework can arise further when 
investigating clinical rehabilitation and intervention in language deficits. Particularly, a question worth 
answering in this field is whether bilingual proficiency pre-aphasia is connected to the degree of def-
icit and/or the degree of rehabilitation. In some cases, language intervention in one impaired language 
can lead to cross-language generalization and improvement in the other language, but this may not 
always be the case. In a case study of two Persian–English bilinguals, Bahadoran-Baghbaderani et al. 
(2021) found that retraining the participants’ L2 (English) had some impact on the Persian L1 based 
on the speaker’s L2 proficiency pre-aphasia, but the intervention did not significantly improve word 
and picture naming cross-linguistically. Specifically, retraining English words improved memory 
only for Persian cognates, but not Persian noncognates, suggesting that intervention in one language 
does not significantly affect or benefit recovery of the other language. They concluded that there are 
separate routes for translation, in support of the RHM (Kroll & Stewart, 1994; Kroll et al., 2010).
Although aphasia is generally the result of an immediate, traumatic injury, such as from a stroke 
or other trauma (with some exceptions), progressive, neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s 
Disease (AD) provide further insight into the neural pathways associated with L1 and L2 lexico-
semantic processing. Costa et al. (2012) examined the effects of mild or moderate stages of AD on 
language dominance (compared with a group of patients with mild cognitive impairment). Highly 
proficient Spanish–Catalan bilinguals performed picture naming, word translation, and picture-word 
matching tasks in each language direction. There was a significant main effect of language domin-
ance (participants did better on tasks that recruited their dominant language and L2 to L1 translation 
tasks), and a main effect of disease progression (patients with moderate AD showed more deficits 
than patients with mild AD, who showed more deficits than patients with mild cognitive impairment). 
However, no significant interaction between language dominance and group was found, suggesting 
that bilingual language degeneration in proficient bilinguals declines in a similar way in healthy 
controls and bilinguals with aphasia. Interestingly, the effects of cognate status and word frequency 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
109
interacted separately with language dominance and group, suggesting that more severely impaired 
patients benefit more from higher frequency words and cognates, especially in their L2. Because the 
study examined highly proficient bilinguals, Costa et al. speculated that smaller differences in profi-
ciency between languages indicate more similar patterns of language decline in the lexico-semantic 
domain. These findings are consistent with the Convergence Hypothesis, suggesting that higher pro-
ficiency leads to the convergence or sharing of the same neural substrates in word processing.
Emerging Themes from the Evidence
From the critical research outcomes in the neurolinguistics of the lexico-semantic system, four themes 
and current trends emerge across neuroimaging methods. First, under the theme of word recognition, 
it is evident based on the studies mentioned that richness of lexical representations can make L2 
vocabulary learning easier (e.g., Elgort et al., 2015). The more vocabulary words one knows already, 
the easier it is to acquire more vocabulary, presumably because of the already-established lexical 
and semantic representations that the new vocabulary can be connected to. Surrounding the theme 
of word recognition, it has generally been found that more activation in areas associated with lexico-
semantic languages processing indicates a deeper, richer semantic network whereas less activation 
and connection of these areas indicates more shallow processing. This is especially true in cortical 
and subcortical brain regions associated with semantic representations and characterized by larger, 
more negative N400 amplitudes located in central and posterior regions.
The second theme is bilingual word production. The studies associated with translation and L2 
production hinge on the support of the RHM. Generally, translating from L1 to L2 is more difficult 
than the reverse (e.g., Kroll & Stewart, 1994), as is using L2 to complete a language task, such as 
picture naming. According to the RHM, L2 is generally more effortful or difficult to access than L1 
because the conceptually-mediated link to L1 is stronger than then corresponding link to L2 (Kroll 
& Stewart, 1994; Kroll et al., 2010). Like word recognition, bilingual production can vary based on 
word features themselves, regardless of proficiency. Cognates and higher frequency words generally 
facilitate L2 production more than noncognates or lower frequency words, and introducing conflict, 
such as with “false friends” or interlingual homographs, creates competition and results in recurrent 
errors in speech (Christoffels et al., 2013; Costa et al., 2012). Bilingual word production and transla-
tion can also hinge on the control between the two languages and switching (e.g., Abutalebi & Green, 
2007; Grant & Li, 2015), as is evident in the co-activation of both languages (see, e.g., Christoffels 
et al., 2013). Interestingly, case studies of persons with aphasia and traumatic language deficits 
suggest that there are independent routes for translation in the brain, citing differences in translation 
and bilingual word production deficits in bilinguals with aphasia (Bahadoran-Baghbaderani et al., 
2021; García, 2015). The unpredictable and complex nature of traumatic injury and brain lesions 
may account for the differences cited in case studies, but a larger sample is likely needed to study this 
phenomenon more closely.
Third, the L2 lexico-semantic system relies on inhibitory and cognitive control of the L1 and L2; 
this is especially observed in unbalanced bilinguals. A situation or task that activates both languages 
at the same time, such as a translation task, may induce competition between L1 and L2. Furthermore, 
evidence from both fMRI and ERPs shows increased frontal activity at the beginning stages of word 
learning in bilinguals, and this activation is thought to be modulated by proficiency. In fMRI, the 
left IFG along with other frontal lobe associated areas, tend to be activated in less-proficient L2 
speakers, whereas this activation is not evident in more-proficient L2 speakers (Abutalebi & Green, 
2007; Grant & Li, 2015; Stein et al., 2009). In ERP, a late N400 is evident in frontal electrode sites 
in less-proficient speakers for unfamiliar or newly learned words, whereas more-proficient speakers 
do not show a frontal N400, and instead show the classic centro-parietal N400s associated with 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
110
semantic violations in monolinguals (Jankowiak, 2021; Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017; Vandenberghe 
et al., 2019). Both pieces of evidence for frontal activation indicate more effortful processing of L2. 
Less-proficient speakers rely on semantic retrieval and general cognitive processing to process L2, 
whereas more-proficient bilinguals do not recruit these brain areas, likely because processing is less 
demanding. Frontal regions of the brain, such as the PFC, are associated with greater cognitive con-
trol; we see this in activation in fMRI studies and the evidence of the frontal N400 in ERP studies, 
likely indicating more cognitive effort in less-proficient bilinguals and perhaps monolinguals learning 
an L2 (Abutalebi & Green, 2007)
Finally, underlying the aforementioned themes is the umbrella framework that is perhaps the 
most studied in the L2 lexico-semantics; changes associated with proficiency. Across the multiple 
studies examined through neuroscientific means, there is strong, accumulating evidence for a lan-
guage system that converges with increases in proficiency. The convergence hypothesis (Green, 
2003), along with the RHM (Kroll & Stewart, 1994; Kroll et al., 2010), and the declarative/DPM 
(Ullman, 2016), all argue for a model of some shared L1 and L2 neurolinguistic lexico-semantic 
processes that, over time and with increasing proficiency, become more similar in structure and 
function, so that the L2 becomes more native-like. Further neurolinguistic research is needed to 
examine bilinguals through a developmental lens, because the framework of overlapping neural 
pathways does not fully account for some proficiency differences when both languages are learned 
relatively early in life (see, e.g., Mondt et al., 2009). Furthermore, the onset and rehabilitation of 
persons with aphasia or other language deficits being able to retain one language but not the other 
cannot be explained by a single, shared neural substrate of L1 and L2 (e.g., García, 2015). Because 
of this, more clinical and developmental research should be done to dissect these discrepancies at 
the neural level using EEG and fMRI. Although this shared neural substrate framework is not cut 
and dried, there continues to be strong evidence that changes associated with proficiency lead to 
neurocognitive changes that look more and more native-like in the brain. Simply, increases in profi-
ciency lead to native-like L2 processing of vocabulary. This is evident through clinical studies, fMRI 
studies, and ERP studies.3
Current Trends and Future Directions
Future directions of neurolinguistic lexico-semantic research include finding a way to incorporate 
all the strong assets of neurolinguistic tools to create a more complete picture of acquisition in L2 
learners. A main component appears to be the collaboration of both fMRI and EEG to use the strengths 
of each to create a model that accounts for temporal explanatory power of acquisition as well as 
a more refined spatial resolution; it is crucial to not only know the time course of brain patterns 
during which the lexico-semantic system is processed, but also in which regions of the brain this is 
most important. Combining EEG and fMRI would permit us to standardize connections and regions 
associated with L2 lexico-semantic processing in terms of activation and functionality (see, e.g., Zhu 
et al., 2019 for a sentence comprehension study that uses this technique). Another alternative is to 
use magnetoencephalography (MEG), which is a technique that maps brain activity using magnetic 
fields. It is similar to EEG in some respects but has better spatial resolution. However, it also cannot 
record from as much of the brain as EEG can; EEG detects activity that originates from both sulci 
and cortical gyri, whereas MEG is most sensitive to activity that originates in sulci. Therefore, the 
selection of a particular method will depend on several factors including the purported origin of the 
activity of interest.
The studies reviewed in this chapter were conducted in a laboratory setting, which poses some 
real-word external validity concerns. The use of portable EEG systems (e.g., Ammerman et al., 2016) 
might be able to capture real learning in a classroom more robustly than in a laboratory, particu-
larly when examining L2 development in children. Finally, some discrepancies between the effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
111
of proficiency and age of acquisition are still debated (see Mondt et al., 2009). The predictive power 
of proficiency is generally more supported by the research than that of age of acquisition, but age of 
acquisition is still sometimes used as a proxy for proficiency. Therefore, a logical next step in this 
research might be to directly compare and measure proficiency and age of acquisition via a longitu-
dinal design to directly observe neural differences. Studying adult learners longitudinally from initial 
L2 exposure would also permit more fine-grained study of the earliest stages of L2 acquisition, which 
would benefit from additional investigation.
Indeed, recent EEG and L2 lexico-semantic processing research has begun to emphasize the N400 
effect in language learning, rather than in more proficient bilinguals (Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017). 
Electrophysiological changes in learners have been evident after just a few hours of language training, 
indicating that exposure or familiarity with the new language can cause neural changes in the brain. 
An interesting next step would be to examine the underlying individual differences that might facili-
tate or attenuate this immediate language sensitivity (see Luque & Covey, this volume). Are some 
people better equipped to learn L2 vocabulary more than others? Can we observe differences in 
amplitude or latency between “better equipped” language learners and their counterparts? Individual 
differences that span beyond working memory, cognitive control, and inhibition, such as musical 
ability may even play a role in better L2 lexico-semantic learning/processing (see, e.g., Tokowicz 
et al., 2023). Furthermore, more research on individual differences in this domain is warranted, par-
ticularly given that personalized instruction is already taking place for school-aged children (see, 
e.g., www.carnegielearning.com/solutions/world-languages/que-chevere-spanish/; www.rosettast
one.com/k12/). These tools can be adapted to adult learners once the proper parameters have been 
determined.
Taken together, neurolinguistic research on the L2 lexico-semantic system is vast and continu-
ously expanding. Neuroimaging, EEG/ERP, and case studies are on the cutting edge of investigating 
deeper into L2 processing through the lenses of language control, word recognition, word production, 
and proficiency to determine what processes are important for the development and maintenance 
of an L2.
Notes
1	 Here, we follow the convention in the psycholinguistic literature by referring to individuals as “bilingual” 
if they have some level of familiarity with two languages. We provide details of the level of familiarity with 
each study.
2	 Note that ERPs are not necessarily generated from the neural tissue directly below the area at which they are 
most prominently exhibited at the scalp.
3	 Notably, L2 can also influence L1 at the lexico-semantic level (e.g., Degani et al., 2011).
Further Readings
This paper presents an overview of research using the N400 to investigate questions about bilingualism and 
places the findings in the context of models of bilingual language representation and processing.
Jankowiak, K., & Rataj, K. (2017). The N400 as a window into lexico-semantic processing in bilingualism. 
Poznan Studies in Contemporary Linguistics, 53(1), 119–156. https://doi.org/10.1515/psicl-2017-0006.
This chapter discusses language in its historical, physical, social/cognitive, and inferential contexts.
Kutas, M., Kluender, R., Barkley, C., & Amsel, B. (2016). Language. In J. Cacioppo, L. Tassinary, & G. Berntson 
(Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology (pp. 511–525). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781107415782.023
This paper summarizes MRI and EEG approaches to brain changes, specifically as related to L2 learning.
Luk, G., Pliatsikas, C., & Rossi, E. (2020). Brain changes associated with language development and learning: A 
primer on methodology and applications. System, 89, 102209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.102209.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
112
This paper reviews fMRI studies that examine lexical processing, sentence processing, and cognitive control in 
bilinguals and L2 learners.
Sabourin, L. (2014). fMRI research on the bilingual brain. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 34, 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0267190514000038.
Acknowledgment
During the writing of this manuscript, NT and VT were funded by NSF-BCS2020793.
References
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D. (2007). Bilingual language production: The neurocognition of language representation 
and control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 20(3), 242–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2006.10.003
Ammerman, K.E., & Van Hell, J.G. (2016). Lexical processing in child and adult beginning second language 
learners. The Penn State McNair Journal, 1, 1–19.
Bahadoran-Baghbaderani, A., Tahririan, M.H., Saadatnia, M., & Ketabi, S. (2021). Contributions of pre and 
postmorbid nondominant language interventions to coactivation of L1–L2 lexical representations: A case 
study of Persian-English bilingual stroke-induced aphasic patients. Research in Applied Linguistics, 12(1), 
48–67. https://doi.org/10.22055/rals.2021.16724
Bakker-Marshall, I., Takashima, A., Fernandez, C.B., Janzen, G., McQueen, J.M., & Van Hell, J.G. (2021). 
Overlapping and distinct neural networks supporting novel word learning in bilinguals and monolinguals. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(3), 524–536. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1366728920000589
Bradley, K.A., King, K.E., & Hernandez, A.E. (2013). Language experience differentiates prefrontal and subcor-
tical activation of the cognitive control network in novel word learning. NeuroImage, 67, 101–110. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.018
Chen, L., Shu, H.U.A., Liu, Y., Zhao, J., & Li, P. (2007). ERP signatures of subject–verb agreement in L2 learning. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 10(2), 161–174. https://doi.org/10.1017/s136672890700291x
Christoffels, I.K., Ganushchak, L., & Koester, D. (2013). Language conflict in translation: An ERP study of 
translation production. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 646–664. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445
911.2013.821127
Costa, A., Calabria, M., Marne, P., Hernández, M., Juncadella, M., Gascón-Bayarri, J., Lleó, A., Ortiz-Gil, J., 
Ugas, L., Blesa, R., & Reñé, R. (2012). On the parallel deterioration of lexico-semantic processes in the 
bilinguals’ two languages: Evidence from Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychologia, 50(5), 740–753. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.01.008
Degani, T., Prior, A., & Tokowicz, N. (2011). Bidirectional transfer: The effect of sharing a translation. Journal 
of Cognitive Psychology, 23, 18–28. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2011.445986
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Elgort, I., Perfetti, C.A., Rickles, B., & Stafura, J.Z. (2015). Contextual learning of L2 word meanings: Second 
language proficiency modulates behavioural and event-related brain potential (ERP) indicators of learning. 
Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 30(5), 506–528. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.942673
Elston-Güttler, K.E., & Gunter, T.C. (2009). Fine-tuned: Phonology and semantics affect first-to-second-language 
zooming in. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(1), 180–196. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21015
Elston-Güttler, K.E., Gunter, T.C., & Kotz, S.A. (2005). Zooming into L2: Global language context and adjust-
ment affect processing of interlingual homographs in sentences. Cognitive Brain Research, 25, 57–70. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.04.007
Federmeier, K.D. (2021). Connecting and considering: Electrophysiology provides insights into comprehension. 
Psychophysiology, 59, 13940. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13940
García, A. (2015). Translating with an injured brain: Neurolinguistic aspects of translation as revealed by 
bilinguals with cerebral lesions. Meta, 60(1), 112–134. https://doi.org/10.7202/1032402ar
Grant, A., & Li, P. (2015). Brain mapping of lexico-semantic functions in bilinguals. Journal of Cognitive 
Science, 16(1), 1–15. https://doi.org/10.17791/jcs.2015.16.1.1
Green, D.W. (2003). The neural basis of the lexicon and the grammar in L2 acquisition: The convergence 
hypothesis. In R. van Hout, A. Hulk, F. Kuiken, & R.J. Towell (Eds.), The lexicon–syntax interface in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Lexico-Semantic System
113
second language acquisition (pp. 197–208). John Benjamins Publishing Company. https://doi.org/10.1075/
lald.30.10gre
Guo, M., & Ma, F. (this volume). Cognitive control in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
& J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Huckin, T., & Bloch, J. (1993). Strategies for inferring word meaning in context: A cognitive model. In T. Huckin, 
M. Haynes, & J. Coady (Eds.), Second language reading and vocabulary learning (pp. 153–179). Ablex.
Jankowiak, K. (2021). Current trends in electrophysiological research on bilingual language processing. 
Language and Linguistics Compass, 15(8), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12436
Jankowiak, K., & Rataj, K. (2017). The N400 as a window into lexico-semantic processing in bilingualism. 
Poznan Studies in Contemporary Linguistics, 53(1), 119–156. https://doi.org/10.1515/psicl-2017-0006
Kaan, E. (2007). Event-related potentials and language processing: A brief overview. Language and Linguistics 
Compass, 1(6), 571–591. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818x.2007.00037.x
Kiran, S., Balachandran, I., & Lucas, J. (2014). The nature of lexical-semantic access in bilingual aphasia. 
Behavioural Neurology, 2014, 389565. https://doi.org/10.1155/2014/389565
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for asym-
metric connections between bilingual memory representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 33(2), 
149–174. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1994.1008
Kroll, J.F., Van Hell, J.G., Tokowicz, N., & Green, D.W. (2010). The Revised Hierarchical Model: A critical 
review and assessment. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 13(3), 373–381. https://doi.org/10.1017/
s136672891000009x
Kutas, M., Kluender, R., Barkley, C., & Amsel, B. (2016). Language. In J. Cacioppo, L. Tassinary, & G. Berntson 
(Eds.), Handbook of psychophysiology (pp. 511–525). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/
9781107415782.023
Luk, G., Pliatsikas, C., & Rossi, E. (2020). Brain changes associated with language development and 
learning: A primer on methodology and applications. System, 89, 102209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2020.  
102209.
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of second-language word meaning: Minimal 
instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience, 7(7), 703–704. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1264
Mondt, K., Balériaux, D., Metens, T., Paquier, P., Van de Craen, P., Van den Noort, M., & Denolin, V. (2009). 
An fMRI study of level of proficiency as a predictor of neurocognitive convergence for L1/L2 during a 
lexicosemantic task in a paediatric population. Second Language Research, 25(1), 107–134. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658308098998
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Murray, M.M., Michel, C.M., De Peralta, R.G., Ortigue, S., Brunet, D., Andino, S.G., & Schnider, A. (2004). 
Rapid discrimination of visual and multisensory memories revealed by electrical neuroimaging. Neuroimage, 
21(1), 125–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.09.035
Paulmann, S., Elston-Güttler, K.E., Gunter, T.C., & Kotz, S.A. (2006). Is bilingual lexical access influenced by 
language context? NeuroReport, 17(7), 727–731. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wnr.0000214400.88845.fa
Pu, H., Holcomb, P., & Midgley, K.J. (2016). Neural changes underlying early stages of L2 vocabulary acquisi-
tion. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 40, 55–65. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2016.05.002
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural neuroimaging to investigate second language. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Sabourin, L. (2014). fMRI research on the bilingual brain. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 34, 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/s0267190514000038
Scimeca, M., Carpenter, E., & Kiran, S. (this volume). Aphasia, rehabilitation and second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Natasha Tokowicz and Victoria Tkacikova
114
Stein, M., Dierks, T., Brandeis, D., Wirth, M., Strik, W., & Koenig, T. (2006). Plasticity in the adult language 
system: A longitudinal electrophysiological study on second language learning. Neuroimage, 33(2), 774–783. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.07.008
Stein, M., Federspiel, A., Koenig, T., Wirth, M., Lehmann, C., Wiest, R., Strik, W., Brandeis, D., & Dierks, 
T. (2009). Reduced frontal activation with increasing 2nd language proficiency. Neuropsychologia, 47(13), 
2712–2720. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.05.023
Stein, M., Federspiel, A., Koenig, T., Wirth, M., Strik, W., Wiest, R., Brandeis, D., & Dierks, T. (2012). Structural 
plasticity in the language system related to increased second language proficiency. Cortex, 48(4), 458–465. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2010.10.007
Sulpizio, S., Del Maschio, N., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Bilingual language processing: A meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 108, 834–853. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.014
Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit measures of sensitivity to violations in second 
language grammar: An event-related potential investigation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 
173–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0272263105050102
Tokowicz, N., Melcher, E., & Terrazas, G. (2023). Sleeping musicians perform better than musical 
sleepers: Musical training and ability interact in second language translation-ambiguous word learning. 
[Manuscript under review]. Department of Psychology, Department of Linguistics, Learning Research and 
Development Center, University of Pittsburgh.
Ullman, M.T. (2016). The declarative/procedural model: a neurobiological model of language learning, know-
ledge, and use. In G. Hickok & S.A. Small (Eds.), Neurobiology of language (pp. 953–968). Academic Press. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794-2.00076-6
Vandenberghe, B., Montero Perez, M., Reynvoet, B., & Desmet, P. (2019). The role of Event-related potentials 
(ERPs) as sensitive measures in L2 vocabulary acquisition research. Journal of the European Second 
Language Association, 3(1), 35–45. https://doi.org/10.22599/jesla.60
Zhang, X., Yang, J., Wang, R., & Li, P. (2020). A neuroimaging study of semantic representation in first and 
second languages. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(10), 1223–1238. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2020.1738509
Zhu, Z., Bastiaansen, M., Hakun, J. G., Petersson, K.M., Wang, S., & Hagoort, P. (2019). Semantic unifica-
tion modulates N400 and BOLD signal change in the brain: A simultaneous EEG-fMRI study. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 52, 100855. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2019.100855
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

115
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-12
9
THE NEUROLINGUISTICS 
OF THE SECOND LANGUAGE 
MORPHOLOGICAL SYSTEM
The Role of Grammar-Related and  
Speaker-Related Factors
Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
Introduction and Critical Definitions
Morphemes are the smallest units that convey meaning in language. Inflectional morphemes like -i 
and -ed in (1) and (2) below are combined with a stem via affixation to generate different forms of the 
same lexical item, for example, a verb with different number, person, or tense features.
(1)  Re-í
stem-affix1.sg.past/‘I laughed’
(2)  Laugh-ed
stem-affix.past
A native or proficient non-native speaker of Spanish will be able to extract a composite set of 
information from the morpheme -í in (1), namely that a single individual laughed at some point in the 
past and that this is the speaker of the utterance. Conversely, a reader with little knowledge of Spanish 
may be unable to extract the full set of information provided by the verb.
How is morphological knowledge attained in a second language (L2)? Can it become native-like, 
and how? We review and critically evaluate recent neuroimaging studies that have addressed these 
questions, with the goal of highlighting the role that grammar- and speaker-related factors play in 
shaping the L2 morphological system and its neurocognitive underpinnings. Native-like morpho-
logical knowledge refers here to the ability of L2 speakers to process the L2 as efficiently and auto-
matically as their native language. Yet, we clarify that native-likeness does not assume the existence 
of a monolingual speaker norm and recognizes that L2 speakers can only become bilingual, by defin-
ition, given that they already possess the knowledge of one language (their mother tongue).
L2 learning occurs either simultaneously (e.g., in early bilinguals) or sequentially (e.g., in late 
learners) with respect to the first language (L1). Understanding the (possible) cross-linguistic transfer 
of rules, and the conditions under which it occurs is thus pivotal to understanding how the L2 language 
system develops (e.g., MacWhinney, 2005). We refer to this factor as the L1–L2 similarity factor (see 
Sabourin & Manning, this volume). L1–L2 similarity refers to structurally mappable features, that is, 
 
 
 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
116
features that are present both in the L1 and in the L2 (MacWhinney, 2005). Morphological features 
can also be similarly or dissimilarly realized/distributed across constituents in the two languages. 
The L1 and the L2 are considered similar here if the morphological feature at issue (e.g., number) is 
present and realized on the same constituents (e.g., noun–verb, adjective–noun) in both languages. 
However, both aspects of similarity are also considered separately, when possible.
Experience-related factors that pertain to the speakers’ L2 history, such as age of acquisition 
(AoA), proficiency, and immersion in an L2 environment are also considered crucial during learning 
(e.g., Ullman, 2014, 2020; see Luque & Covey, this volume). AoA refers to the starting point of L2 
learning, i.e., when the speaker was first exposed to the language. Proficiency refers to the ability to 
use a language, as measured by performance on standardized tests or task-related accuracy scores. 
Immersion duration refers to the length of residence in an L2-speaking country. We review evi-
dence about all these factors, mainly from electroencephalography (EEG/ERPs) and functional 
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), but also briefly from non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS), 
and comment on their potential to investigate L2 morphological processing and the brain areas that 
support it. Because of the few ERP studies available on L2 morphological production, our focus will 
be primarily on L2 sentence comprehension studies.
Critical Issues and Theoretical Perspectives
Within neurolinguistics, historical, theoretical, and methodological issues exist in defining how L2 
morphological knowledge is attained and whether it can reach native-likeness. Historically, early 
experimental research on L2 processing was mainly conducted in English, a language with an 
impoverished morphological system. Such findings are therefore difficult to generalize to morpho-
logically richer languages (such as Spanish, Hindi, or Finnish), in which inflection and morpho-
syntactic relations can include a wider set of features (e.g., gender, person, number, and tense) and 
constituents (e.g., determiners, adjectives, as well as demonstratives, nouns, and verbs).
Theoretically, models of L2 processing differ in the relevance they attribute to linguistic and experi-
ential factors in L2 processing. Whereas proposals like the competition Model (MacWhinney, 2005, 
2018) formalize and discuss how L1–L2 cross-language interaction can affect ultimate L2 attainment, 
accounts like the declarative/procedural model (Ullman, 2014, 2020; see also Ullman & Morgan-  
Short, this volume) highlight the importance of experience-related factors such as L2 AoA and 
immersion.
In this vein, previous reviews and meta-analyses have failed to reach a consensus on the relative 
weight that grammar- and speaker-related factors have on the native-likeness of L2 morphological 
processing (e.g., Caffarra et al., 2015, De Diego-Balaguer & Rodriguez-Fornells, 2010; Roncaglia-
Denissen & Kotz, 2016; Tanner et al., 2014). L1–L2 similarity has been indicated as a key factor in 
some analyses (e.g., Kotz, 2009) but less crucial in others (e.g., Caffarra et al., 2015; Polczynska & 
Bookheimer, 2021). The so-called critical period hypothesis (Birdsong, 2018; Hartshorne et al., 2018; 
Johnson & Newport, 1989; Newport et al., 2001), and the assumption that the later the L2 is acquired 
the lower its native-likeness is, gave a prominent role to AoA, although more recent work suggests 
that this factor may be less crucial than previously considered (e.g., Kotz, 2009; Steinhauer, 2014; 
see also Caffarra et al., 2015).
In addition to L1–L2 similarity and AoA, proficiency has been indicated as a key factor in deter-
mining the temporal dynamics of L2 morphological processing and the degree of neural convergence 
between L1 and L2 (e.g., Steinhauer et al., 2009; see also Kotz, 2009; Van Hell & Tokowicz, 2010). 
Yet, this factor has also been considered problematic, due to differences in its measurement across 
studies and its correlation with other variables such as exposure, AoA, and immersion (Ullman, 2014; 
for more on AoA and proficiency, see Fromont, this volume). Finally, the learning environment also 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
117
plays a significant role in L2 final attainment. Immersive contexts have a positive impact on L2 
acquisition (for a recent overview, see Jackson & Schwiter, 2019) because they provide more natur-
alistic and variegated exposure to the L2 compared to formal education settings in the L1-speaking 
country. Longer immersion duration can lead to higher grammatical sensitivity (Caffarra et al., 2015). 
However, the evidence available is still limited, as few studies have focused on this variable (for more 
on learning context, see Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume).
From a methodological perspective, the available neuroimaging evidence on L2 morphological 
processing mainly comes from EEG/ERP studies, arguably because this technique is more accessible 
across laboratories than (more expensive) techniques such as fMRI, or does not have potential side 
effects, as with NIBS. Combining the experimental evidence from these three different techniques 
enables the characterization of both the time course and the neural implementation of the mechanisms 
that subserve L2 morphological processing, as well as the identification of the brain substrates that 
could be causally involved. This is the approach that we undertake in this review.
Thus, the goals of the current review are to provide an updated picture of the role of grammar- and 
speaker-related factors based on recent neuroimaging evidence and to identify overlooked aspects 
that may deepen our insight into the complexity of L2 morphological processing.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
Event-Related Potential (ERP) Studies
ERPs have been widely adopted in L2 research (for more on this method, see Dickson & Pelzl, this 
volume). ERPs are computed by averaging the portion of the electroencephalogram (EEG) signal 
that is time-locked to the presentation of a relevant stimulus (e.g., an isolated word, or a word in a 
sentence). The main advantages of ERP data are the ability to record neural activity continuously, 
without time delay, and with a high temporal resolution (in the millisecond range).
Sentence comprehension ERP studies offer a comprehensive picture of the role of grammar- and 
speaker-related factors during L2 morphosyntactic processing. Sentences are generally presented 
visually word-by-word at the center of the screen at a fixed pace, and the participant is required to 
provide a grammaticality judgment at the end of each sentence. The electrophysiological activity 
generated by a word containing a grammatical error (e.g., *My cat are cute) is then compared with the 
activity generated by the same word in a grammatical sentence (e.g., My cats are cute).
Inflection errors tend to elicit early negativities (250–500 ms after stimulus presentation), followed 
by a late positivity peaking about 600 ms post-stimulus onset. An early negativity with anterior and 
left-lateralized topography is referred to as left-anterior negativity (LAN), as opposed to the more 
broadly distributed negativity that characterizes the N400 effect. These negativities are thought to 
reflect automatic morphosyntactic processing (see Molinaro et al., 2011 for a review) and semantic/
lexical integration difficulties (see Lau et al., 2008 for a review). Whereas these early negativities 
are not consistently reported across studies and languages, late positive-going deflections represent a 
rather stable correlate of morpho-syntactic anomalies. They are typically evident in central-posterior 
areas of the scalp and are often referred to as a “P600.” Functionally, P600 effects are generally 
interpreted as an index of structure integration or reanalysis (see Molinaro et al., 2011 for a review).
The emergence of early negative and late positive effects has been used to delineate different 
stages in the development of L2 morphosyntactic knowledge (e.g., Osterhout et al., 2004; Osterhout 
et al., 2006; Steinauer et al., 2009). When the speaker has very little knowledge of the L2 grammar, no 
ERP effects arise when comparing grammatically correct and incorrect sentences because the speaker 
cannot detect the grammatical error. Subsequently, the speaker may start memorizing salient word/
morphological combinations (e.g., My cats are…) as unanalyzed chunks. At this stage, any violation 
of the memorized pattern (e.g., *My cat are…) would result as unfamiliar, thus triggering an N400, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
118
which is highly sensitive to word sequence probabilities. Finally, when L2 proficiency is attained, the 
speaker is able to abstract morphosyntactic rules successfully, and consequently shows native-like 
ERP patterns in response to violations, i.e., left-anterior or bilateral early negativities followed by 
a P600. In these accounts, different stages of morphosyntactic acquisition are mainly driven by L2 
proficiency.
However, in their meta-analysis, Caffarra et al. (2015) found that other factors may play a 
role. Immersion duration had an impact on early ERP responses and their underlying cognitive 
mechanisms: The probability of reporting a LAN effect was higher when the immersion in an L2-
speaking country was long (> 5 years). Conversely, proficiency had an impact on late mechanisms of 
(morpho)syntactic processing: More P600 effects were found when L2 proficiency was high (above 
75%). Interestingly, AoA only marginally affected N400 effects, and L1–L2 similarity did not play a 
crucial role in any ERP effect.
Table 9.1A summarizes ERP violation studies investigating sentence-level comprehension of L2 
inflection published after Caffarra et al.’s meta-analysis. Considering these recent studies, it seems 
that the native-likeness of the ERP patterns changes as a function of several factors, as suggested in 
previous work and reviewed below.
Grammar-Related Factors
By considering different dimensions of L1–L2 similarity (type of feature, type of relation/configur-
ation), our review of more recent studies suggests that a finer-grained classification of L1–L2 simi-
larity can capture effects (see Alemán Bañón et al., 2017; Díaz et al., 2016; Gabriele et al., 2021; 
Martinez de la Hidalga et al., 2021) that previous work could not identify, although the evidence 
still appears somewhat heterogeneous. Gabriele et al. (2021) found similar ERP responses (P600) in 
response to subject–verb and adjective–noun number violations in L1 English L2 Spanish speakers, 
thus suggesting that the presence/absence of a feature in the L1 inventory plays a bigger role 
compared to the morphological realization of this feature across languages. In contrast, Díaz et al. 
(2016) reported data from Basque suggesting that the way a feature is realized is important. They 
tested two groups of L1 Spanish L2 Basque speakers with early and later L2 AoA. The violation of a 
shared feature (number) that is expressed on different constituents in the L2 (object-verb) triggered 
an N400 in the group of late learners and a marginal P600 in early bilinguals. Native speakers showed 
P600 effects in response to these violations (Díaz et al., 2011).
Speaker-Related Factors
In contexts where the L2 speakers cannot exploit consolidated L1 grammatical knowledge to process 
L2 morphology, speaker-related factors seem to become relevant. In a study with L1 Polish/Russian–
L2 German speakers, Meulman et al. (2015) showed that morphological similarity may determine 
the appearance of AoA effects. They found different P600 effects as a function of AoA when pro-
cessing an L1–L2 dissimilar phenomenon (i.e., determiner–noun gender agreement; see also Nichols 
& Joanisse, 2019), but not when processing a similar phenomenon (tense/finiteness marking). These 
findings suggest that when the L1 and the L2 share similar morphological properties, both early and 
late learners can reach native-like processing. Conversely, when the L1 and the L2 differ morpho-
logically, native-like processing may be attained only if the L2 is acquired earlier in life.
Similarly, L2 proficiency has been shown to interact with L1–L2 similarity. For example, Alemán 
Bañón et al. (2018) and Gabriele et al. (2021) investigated similarity effects with L1 English speakers 
of L2 Spanish. When the morphological patterns differed (e.g., gender, which is not morphologically 
realized in adjective–noun relations in English), only highly proficient speakers of Spanish showed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
119
P600 effects. When a feature present in both languages was manipulated (number), both low and 
high-proficiency speakers showed P600 effects.
Higher proficiency is generally reported to trigger larger P600 effects (Alemán Bañón et al., 2018, 
2021; Bice & Kroll, 2021; Gabriele et al., 2021; Nichols & Joanisse, 2019; but see Armstrong et al., 
2018). Interestingly, Alemán Bañón et al. (2018) compared the impact of two different measures of 
proficiency, namely d-prime scores derived from a grammaticality judgment task performed during 
EEG recording and overall L2 proficiency derived from standardized grammar tests. Whereas task-
related proficiency correlated with P600 amplitudes in all conditions, overall proficiency scores 
did not.
Few ERP studies have investigated immersion duration effects, and just one reported a signifi-
cant effect on the amplitude of late components (Alemán Bañón et al., 2021). In line with Caffarra 
et al. (2015), other studies that tested immersion (Table 9.1A) showed early negativities (either LAN 
or N400, but see Meykadeh, Golfam, Nasrabadi et al., 2021), but only with intermediate or long 
immersion duration.
Summary of ERP Findings
The ERP studies presented here show that the emergence of early negativities mirroring automatic 
(native-like) processing is not solely driven by L2 morphosyntactic knowledge/proficiency. LAN 
effects have been reported in two studies testing determiner–noun violations (Caffarra et al., 2017; 
Nichols & Joanisse, 2019). However, many studies have failed to find LAN effects not only in L2 but 
also in native speakers, demonstrating that such findings cannot be related to a low level of morpho-
logical knowledge. N400 effects were found to mirror intermediate stages of L2 knowledge only in 
some studies (Díaz et al., 2016; Martinez de la Hidalga et al., 2021), whereas in other studies N400 
effects (followed by P600s) mirrored native-like processing (Zawiszewski & Laka, 2020; Bice & 
Kroll, 2021). The only ERP component that was reliably affected by proficiency was the P600, in line 
with Caffarra et al.’s finding. However, the P600 amplitude was also reduced by L1–L2 dissimilar-
ities, later AoA, and shorter immersion duration. In other words, evidence coming from recent ERP 
research shows that additional (grammar- and speaker-related) factors should be taken into account 
when predicting the time course of L2 morphological processing.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI)
The slow temporal resolution that characterizes fMRI makes it unsuitable for capturing the time 
course of neurocognitive processes, but its exquisite spatial resolution can give invaluable insights 
into the brain areas that are actively involved during a linguistic task (for more on this method, see 
Kousaie & Klein, this volume). fMRI is therefore an extraordinary resource to assess the extent of 
overlap or segregation in the cortical representations of L1 and L2 and modulation of brain activation 
patterns by experience- and grammar-related factors. Yet, fMRI investigations on L2 morphological 
processing are still scant, and the evidence for the effect of grammar- and speaker-related variables 
appears to be quite fragmented. Moreover, unlike ERPs, there is no meta-analysis or review of fMRI 
studies specifically on L2 morphological processing to date. Therefore, the review below is based on 
the available fMRI literature that could be identified at the time of writing this chapter.
fMRI studies investigating L2 morphological processing have mostly examined English regular 
and irregular tense inflection at the single-word level. Few studies have investigated the processing 
of morphosyntactic relations in sentences (e.g., subject–verb agreement, see Table 9.1B for an over-
view). Overall, the available evidence points to substantial neuroanatomical overlap between L1 
and L2 morphological systems. Across studies (see Table 9.1B and references therein), consistent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

120
Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
Table 9.1  Experimental Studies Investigating Morphosyntactic Violations
Table 9.A
Study
L1
L2
Feature
Constituents
L1–L2 AOA
PRF
IMM
N400
LAN
P600
Meulman 
et al. 
(2015)
Polish/
Russian
German
Tense/Finiteness
Gender
VP
Det-N
S
D
L
L
H
H
L
L
NA
NA
NA
NA
X
X (AOA)
Díaz et al. 
(2016)
Spanish
Basque
Case
Number
Number
NP
Obj-V
Subj-V
D
D
S
E
L
E
L
E
L
H
L
H
L
H
L
L
L
L
L
L
L
X (delayed)
X (delayed)
X
NA
NA
NA
NA
X (marginal)
X (early)
X
Alemán 
Bañón 
et al. 
(2017)
English
Spanish
Number
Gender
NP-Adj
NP-Adj
D
D
L
L
H
H
S
S
X (larger)
X (smaller)
Caffarra et al. 
(2017)
Basque
Spanish
Gender
Det-N
D
E
H
L
X
X
Alemán 
Bañón 
et al. 
(2018)
English
Spanish
Number
Gender
NP -Adj
NP-Adj
D
D
L
L
L
H
L
H
S
S
S
S
X
X
X
Armstrong 
et al. 
(2018)
Chinese
English
Number
Subj-V
D
L
L
I
X
Nichols & 
Joanisse 
(2019)
English
French
Gender
Det-N
D
E
L
I/L
X (AOA) X* (AOA, 
PRF)
Zawiszewski 
& Laka 
(2020)
Spanish
Basque
Basque
Spanish
Case–ergative
Case–dative
Case–allative
Case–accusative
Case–dative
Case–allative
NP
NP
NP
NP
PP
PP
D
S
S
D
S
S
E
E
E
E
E
E
H
H
H
H
H
H
L
L
L
L
L
L
X
X
X
X
X
X*
X
X*
X*
X*
 
 
newgenrtpdf

121
Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
Alemán 
Bañón 
et al. 
(2021)
English
Spanish
Person–1st
Person–3rd
Subj-V
Subj-V
S
S
L
L
H
H
S
S
X (PRF)
X (IMM)
Bice and 
Kroll 
(2021)
Spanish
English
Number
Subj-V
S
E
H
L
X
NA
X (PRF)
Cheng et al. 
(2021)
Chinese
English
Number
Subj-V
D
L
L
S
X*
Gabriele 
et al. 
(2021)
English
Spanish
Number
Number
Gender
Subj-V
NP-Adj
NP-Adj
S
D
D
L
L
L
L
L
L
NA
NA
NA
X (PRF)
X (PRF)
(PRF)
Liang et al 
(2021)
English/
Dutch/
Italian/
Polish/
Swedish
Chinese
Aspect
VP
D
L
H
S
*
Martínez de 
la Hidalga 
et al. 
(2021)
Spanish
Basque
Number
Person
Number
Person
Subj(erg)-V
Subj(erg)-V
Subj(abs)-V
Subj(abs)-V
D
D
S
S
E
E
E
E
H
H
H
H
L
L
L
L
X*
X*
*
*
X* (smaller)
X* (smaller)
X (larger)
X (larger)
Meykadeh 
et al. 
(2021)
Turkish
Farsi
Number
Subj-V
S
E
H
L
X
Morgan-
Short et al. 
(2022)
English
Spanish
Number
Subj-V
S
L
L
NA
X
(Continued)
 
 
newgenrtpdf

122
Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
Table 9.1B
Study
L1
L2
Feature
Constituents
L1–L2 AOA
PRF
IMM
Main findings
Wartenburger 
et al. 
(2003)
Italian
German
Person/Number/Case Subject-verb
S
E/L
H/L
L/I/S
L1–L2 overlap in left IFG at early 
AoA. Increased IFG activation in 
the late-AoA group.
Sakai et al. 
(2004)
Japanese
English
Tense
Single word (verb)
D
L
(During 
experiment 
training)
L
NA
L1–L2 overlap in left IFG
Tatsuno 
and Sakai 
(2005)
Japanese
English
Tense
Single word (verb)
D
L
(During 
experiment 
training)
L/H (two 
groups)
NA
Less left IFG activation 
corresponding to higher proficiency
Hernandez 
et al. 
(2007)
Spanish
English
Gender
Single word (noun)
D
E/L
H
NA
Greater activation for L2 late learners.
Lehtonen 
et al. 
(2009)
Finnish/
Swedish
Finnish/
Swedish
Inflected vs. non-
inflected nouns
Single word (noun)
D
E
H
NA
Greater left IFG activation for Finnish 
vs. Swedish inflected words
Pliatsikas 
et al. 
(2014)
Greek
English
Tense
Single word (verb)
S
L
H
I
Overlapping activation patterns for 
natives and non-natives.
L2 immersion modulates activation 
difference between regular and 
irregular in left IFG. L2 proficiency 
modulates activation difference 
between regular and irregular in left 
caudate modulated.
Yan et al. 
(2016)
Chinese
English
Tense
Single word (verb)
D
L
H
NA
Increased activation in left IFG, 
anterior/posterior STG, MTG, IPL, 
and BG for regular compared to 
irregular tense.
 
 
newgenrtpdf
Table 9.1  (Continued)

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
123
Meykhadeh 
et al. 
(2021)
Turkish
Persian
Person, Number
Subject-verb
S
L
H
I
L1–L2 overlap
L1: Left pars opercularis more 
sensitive to ungrammatical (relative 
to grammatical conditions).
L2: Greater activation in left STG 
for ungrammatical compared to 
grammatical conditions.
Notes: We report the speakers’ L1, L2, morphosyntactic Feature tested, Constituents involved. L1–L2 (S: similar; D: different): “similar” when the feature at issue 
was present in both languages and the violation involved the same constituents in both languages, “different” in all the other cases. AOA (E: early; L: late): “early” for 
a mean AoA value below 10 years; “late” for a mean AoA above 10. PRF (L: low; H: high) was “low” for mean proficiency values below 75%; “high” for mean values 
above 75%; IMM (S: short; I: intermediate; L: long) was “short” for mean length of residence in the L2-speaking country less than 2 years, “intermediate” for mean 
values between 2 and 5 years, “long” for mean values above 5 years. Table 9.1 A summarizes the ERP literature. The grey boxes identify the factors that were formally 
analyzed, either in traditional group-analyses or in correlation/regression analyses in relation with ERP effect amplitudes (in this last case, we report their effect in 
parentheses). In the N400/LAN/P600 columns X stands for the presence of an ERP effect (violation–control condition). The asterisk (*) stands for smaller amplitude 
compared to native speakers. Table 9.1 B summarizes the fMRI literature. Legend: IFG: Inferior Frontal Gyrus; STG: Superior Temporal Gyrus; IPL: Inferior Parietal 
Lobule; BG: Basal Ganglia; NA= not available.
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
124
activation patterns have been identified both cortically, especially in left frontal regions, and 
subcortically, in the left caudate nucleus, the basal ganglia, and the cerebellum.
Research on native and non-native processing offers two different functional interpretations of 
the involvement of the left inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) during morphological processing. Some 
proposals emphasize the domain-specific nature of the morphosyntactic computations supported by 
this region (e.g., Friederici, 2017), especially with regard to the pars opercularis. In contrast, other 
accounts associate this region with domain-general cognitive control mechanisms (e.g., Bornkessel-
Schlesewsky & Schlesewsky, 2013) that support linguistic processing, in light of the white-matter 
tracts that connect this area with subcortical regions such as the caudate nuclei. Interestingly, studies 
with bilingual speakers have functionally associated these subcortical regions with the monitoring 
and control functions that are triggered when the linguistic system is required to switch between two 
languages (Branzi et al., 2021; Crinion et al., 2006; Lehtonen et al., 2005; see Abutalebi, 2008 for 
a review).
Grammar–and speaker-related variables can influence the amount of language control necessary to 
monitor L1 interference, and thus the degree of automaticity with which L2 processing mechanisms 
are performed (see Abutalebi, 2008; Polczynska & Bookheimer, 2021; Roncaglia-Denissen & Kotz, 
2016 for reviews). Neurophysiologically, such factors can modulate the degree of efficiency of a 
given area in supporting a specific cognitive function. In fact, the neuronal organization of a brain 
region could be optimized for native language processing and its automatized mechanisms, but not 
for the L2 and its more controlled computations (Abulalebi, 2008; Indefrey, 2006). The involvement 
of larger neuronal populations, and so the emergence of stronger activation patterns, could there-
fore compensate for the lower neuronal and computational efficiency of the L2. As L2 processing 
becomes more automatic, the neuronal organization of the involved region(s) could become more 
efficient, leading to a change in the linkage between performance and strength of activation (Indefrey, 
2006), i.e., a decrease in activation.
Grammar-Related Factors
Contrary to electrophysiological studies, inherently linguistic factors such as L1–L2 similarity have 
received scarce attention in the fMRI literature on morphological processing. Previous reviews have 
suggested that, across linguistic domains, typologically similar languages are more likely to show a 
convergent neuroanatomical representation (Polczynska & Bookheimer, 2021; Roncaglia-Denissen 
& Kotz, 2016). However, the studies reviewed in Table 9.1B suggest that neuroanatomical overlap 
can also occur across typologically dissimilar languages. Converging patterns of activation in left 
IFG regions have been found in comparisons between languages that differ in their degree of mor-
phological richness (e.g., agglutinating Finnish vs. fusional Swedish morphology in simultaneous 
bilingual speakers, Lehtonen et al., 2005), or in the way a morphological feature is expressed on a 
verb (e.g., tense in English L2 vs. Japanese and Chinese as L1, Sakai et al., 2004; Tatsuno & Sakai, 
2005; Yan et al., 2016). These results are similar to contrasts between languages that share morpho-
syntactic features (tense in Greek and English, Pliatsikas et al., 2014; person/number in German and 
Italian, as in Wartenburger et al., 2003, and in Persian and Turkish, Meykadeh, Golfam, Batouli, & 
Sommer, 2021).
To complicate matters further, in both morphologically similar and dissimilar L1–L2 pairs, the 
neural overlap can be accompanied by either quantitative or qualitative differences. For example, 
Lehtonen et al. (2009) showed that the processing of the complex agglutinative morphology of 
Finnish yielded stronger activation of the left IFG compared to the simpler fusional morphology 
of Swedish. Meykadeh et al. (2021) tested Turkish and Persian, which similarly encode person and 
number agreement on the verb (and showed that within their common left fronto-temporal network, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
125
the left IFG was more engaged by grammatical sentences in the L1 (Turkish), whereas the left pos-
terior superior temporal gyrus was more sensitive to ungrammaticality in the L2 (Persian).
Part of the difficulty in identifying the contribution of cross-linguistic similarity to the neural 
representation of L2 morphology is likely to be methodological in nature. Although L1–L2 similarity 
is usually acknowledged in the rationale of the functional neuroimaging studies we reviewed, it is 
neither entered in the experimental design so as to test the effect of shared vs. non-shared morpho-
logical features, nor is a precise definition of cross-linguistic (dis-)similarity provided, contrary to the 
ERP studies previously described. It is therefore difficult to disentangle the effect of L1–L2 similarity 
from that elicited by speaker-related variables. For example, Wartenburger et al. (2003) reported 
overlapping patterns of activation between Italian L1 and German L2 (both languages similarly mark 
number and gender information in determiners, nouns, adjectives, and verbs), but only at high levels 
of proficiency and early AoA (i.e., when more automatic and efficient processing is expected). With a 
later AoA and lower proficiency, quantitative differences between L1 and L2 emerged. Similarly, the 
partial L2 specialization in left temporal areas reported by Meykadeh et al. (2021) could be modulated 
by the different AoA of Persian and the different immersion that characterized the languages (natural-
istic for L1 and a mixture of naturalistic and formal for L2). These factors could affect the efficiency 
and native-likeness of the response, even at very high levels of L2 proficiency. In this respect, fMRI 
findings align with ERP evidence on the interaction between L1–L2 similarity and speaker-related 
factors.
Speaker-Related Factors
Clearer but not fully consistent scenarios emerge for the role of proficiency and AoA. A negative 
correlation is usually identified between proficiency and neural activation: As proficiency progresses 
towards a native-like level, L2 activation in a given area decreases (Tatsuno & Sakai, 2005) and 
becomes indistinguishable from the L1. Pliatsikas et al. (2014) reported a positive correlation between 
the size of the regularity effect (regular > irregular forms) in the left caudate nucleus and the L2 pro-
ficiency of a group of late Greek-English bilinguals. As English proficiency increased, so did the 
efficiency with which English morphologically complex words were processed, such that left-caudate 
activation became statistically indistinguishable from that of native speakers.
When proficiency is kept constant across groups, AoA has been found to influence morphological 
processing in the L2 and lead to quantitative modulations in activation patterns, as evidenced by the 
greater left IFG involvement associated with categorizing gender-irregular nouns for late learners 
compared to native speakers of Spanish (Hernandez et al., 2007). Likewise, highly proficient Italian–
German speakers who had acquired their L2 late (> 6 years) showed stronger left IFG activation for 
the L2 compared to the L1 in response to morphosyntactic violations (Wartenburger et al., 2003). In 
both studies, following Indefrey (2006), the stronger involvement of left IFG in the L2 could be due 
to this region’s lower efficiency in processing a later-learned language. However, in contrast to these 
studies, Pliatsikas et al. (2014) observed no quantitative differences between native speakers and 
late-learners of English in the patterns of activation elicited by regular and irregular past-tense pro-
cessing in a lexical decision task. This suggests that efficient, native-like neuronal organization can 
be achieved even when the L2 is acquired late.
Task-related differences may explain the seemingly inconsistent conclusions reached by the three 
studies. Compared to lexical decision tasks (as in Pliatsikas et al., 2014), gender categorization or 
grammaticality judgments (as in Hernandez et al., 2007, and Wartenburger et al., 2003, respectively) 
involve additional rule-based mechanisms aimed at verifying inflectional consistency across lexical 
items (e.g., noun–verb, determiner–noun). Such mechanisms are activated even when not explicitly 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
126
required, as in gender-decision tasks (see Cubelli et al., 2005). Several single-word production studies 
have shown that patterns of cortical activations during lexical access are modulated by the speakers’ 
L2 proficiency (low > high proficiency), but not by AoA, which appears to have a more sizeable 
impact on rule-based morphosyntactic processing (Abutalebi, 2008; Indefrey, 2006; Wartenburger 
et al., 2003). Thus, the distinct effects of AoA across the three studies could be due to the different 
sensitivity that behavioral tasks have to this speaker-related factor.
To our knowledge, no hemodynamic study has so far systematically tested whether L2 immersion 
duration has any effect on the neuroanatomical correlates of L2 morphological processing. Of the 
eight functional neuroimaging studies included in this review, only three report their participants 
to have been naturalistically immersed in the L2 environment, ranging from short to long periods 
(Meykhadeh, Golfam, Nasrabadi et al., 2021; Pliatsikas et al., 2014; Wartenburger et al., 2003). 
Both Pliatsikas et al. (2014) and Wartenburger et al. (2003) found L1–L2 overlap with increasing 
immersion, thus suggesting that naturalistic exposure can guide the L2 towards reaching a native-
like neural representation. This is in line with ERP studies showing that learning in immersion-like 
contexts leads to electrophysiological signatures more fully typical of native speakers (Morgan-Short 
et al., 2012). However, more research is necessary to determine whether immersion duration is a 
strong and independent predictor of the cortical representation of L2 morphology (for the effect of 
immersion on volumetric brain changes, see Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume).
Summary of fMRI Findings
The findings reviewed above suggest that L1–L2 similarity alone is not a robust and independent 
predictor of the neural representation of L2 morphology. However, research that systematically 
manipulates this factor or uses techniques with the finest spatial resolution, such as invasive brain 
stimulation in neurosurgical studies, would confirm this conclusion. Speaker-related factors have the 
most tangible effects on the neural representation of L2 morphology. However, as will be discussed 
below, when examining the role of such variables and their predictive power, it is important to con-
sider the degree of collinearity that exists between AoA, proficiency, and immersion duration (i.e., 
early exposure to the L2 is usually associated with naturalistic immersion, thus higher proficiency).
Current Trends and Future Directions
Native-likeness refers to the ability of speakers to process stimuli in an L2 (almost) as efficiently and 
automatically as in their native language. The degree of overlap between L1 and L2 electrophysio-
logical and neuroanatomical correlates is taken to be a marker of the level of native-likeness achieved 
by a group of speakers. The greater their similarity, the more native-like, and so the more efficient 
and automatic, L2 processing is assumed to be. Our review shows that quantitative and qualitative 
modulations relative to native patterns of reference can depend on grammar- and speaker-related 
factors.
Inherent to the definition of native-likeness provided above is a controversial assumption that 
characterizes the profile of native speakers, namely their homogeneity in terms of processing routines, 
as well as the homogeneity of the electrophysiological and hemodynamic responses to stimuli in 
their native language. A legitimate question is whether it makes sense to consider native speakers as 
a homogeneous group, given the increasing bi/multilingual status and globalization of the world’s 
population. Many studies have suggested reconsidering the “gold standard” for nativelikeness in 
ERPs and investigating L1 and L2 processing along a continuum (e.g., Tanner et al., 2013, 2014; 
see also Freunberger et al., 2022). Future challenges in the field could therefore be to identify the 
variables that can account for inter-individual variability both in native and non-native processing, as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
127
well as the appropriate methodology to investigate and account for such variability (see for example, 
Fromont, and Luque & Covey, this volume).
Factors Affecting Morphological Processing
Our review suggests that to date, none of the different grammar- and speaker-related factors considered 
here are independent predictors of L2 native-likeness. This is partly due to differences in the depth 
with which the different techniques have been used to examine the effects of specific predictors, as in 
the case of L1–L2 similarity and proficiency, as well as the number of studies adopting these different 
methodologies to investigate L2 morphosyntactic processing.
ERP research has proceeded as far as to investigate (dis-)similarities in single features and the 
position in which they are expressed within morphosyntactic relations across languages. In contrast, 
fMRI studies have predominantly focused on the regular vs. irregular past tense opposition and how it 
is handled across broadly defined typologically similar or dissimilar languages. Future hemodynamic 
studies should therefore go beyond single-word processing and assess L1–L2 (dis-)similarities at 
the sentence level. In this respect, a fruitful testing ground is the contrast between morphological 
features and their presence/absence in L1 and L2 languages, thus extending and complementing 
existing single-word (e.g., Hernandez et al., 2007) and sentence-level L1 studies (Carreiras et al., 
2015; Mancini et al., 2017; Quiñones et al., 2014, 2018).
Like L1–L2 similarity, proficiency encompasses distinct components—such as global and task-
related proficiency—that can differentially affect the response of interest. Empirical evidence 
concerning the impact that distinct proficiency assessments have on morphological processing comes 
from ERP research, while to the best of our knowledge, fMRI studies have not addressed this issue. 
Task-related proficiency reflects a specific and less naturalistic measure of proficiency, which, unlike 
global proficiency, cannot provide a complete measure of the real linguistic abilities of L2 speakers 
in everyday life. Consequently, the role that this type of proficiency has in the modulation of late ERP 
components should be interpreted with more caution. One possibility, albeit more radical, would be 
to abandon the general concept of proficiency and rely on more specific indices of L2 experience such 
as the type and amount of L2 exposure and immersion (e.g., Ullman, 2014) and/or the frequency of 
L2 use (e.g., Martinez de la Hidalga et al., 2021; Osterhout et al., 2006).
A Note on Non-Invasive Brain Stimulation
Research on non-invasive brain stimulation (NIBS) investigates the effects that magnetic and electric 
stimulation, namely TMS (transcranial magnetic stimulation) and tDCS (transcranial direct current 
stimulation), have on participants’ performance (see Pandža, this volume). In language research, 
participants are generally asked to produce a word/sentence or to perform a metalinguistic task (e.g., 
grammaticality judgments) while specific brain regions are stimulated. The stimulation can either 
have disruptive effects, mirrored by longer reaction times and/or lower task accuracy, or it can posi-
tively enhance the participants’ performance, leading to shorter reaction times and/or higher accuracy.
NIBS research on L2 acquisition is still in its early stages (see Pandža, this volume). For instance, 
studies of picture naming (Tussis et al., 2017) and language switching (Holtzheimer et al., 2005) have 
been reported. Although these studies did not manipulate morphology or morphosyntax specifically, 
their results suggest that research on L2 processing could benefit from non-invasive brain stimulation 
techniques.
Available NIBS evidence on native language processing with healthy and brain-damaged speakers 
points to a causal role of the left IFG in morphosyntactic processing (for a review see Maran et al., 
2022) and of the temporal lobe in the retrieval of irregular past tense verbs in English (Holland & 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
128
Lambon-Ralph, 2010). These findings lend support to the correlational evidence provided by the 
hemodynamic studies discussed above, suggesting that NIBS could provide useful insights into the 
neural representation of the L1 and L2.
Final Remarks
In the introduction to this chapter, we highlighted theoretical, historical, and methodological issues 
behind the lack of a comprehensive neurolinguistic account of L2 morphological processing. Our 
review of recent ERP, fMRI, and NIBS literature shows that while historical limitations have been 
overcome, there are still some methodological aspects that should be considered in future research. 
A case in point is represented by the use of rigid categories to assess the effects of experience-related 
variables (i.e., division into distinct low- and high- proficiency groups). L2 data are subject to a 
high degree of variability, as it is notoriously difficult to find bilingual speakers with homogeneous 
linguistic profiles, and this variability is not accounted for in the statistical analyses. New methodo-
logical approaches are thus needed (see Fromont, this volume).
Finally, ERP studies have provided a fine-grained picture of the temporal dynamics related to the 
processing of different morphosyntactic features and relations, while a more fragmented scenario 
emerges from fMRI and NIBS. Brain areas and networks involved during L2 morphological pro-
cessing have been identified but, to date, it is still hard to define whether these networks change as a 
function of different morphosyntactic features/relations.
Further Readings
This article attempts to provide a set of global principles that determine the neuroanatomical overlap of languages 
in the brain.
Połczyńska, M.M., & Bookheimer, S.Y. (2021). General principles governing the amount of neuroanatomical 
overlap between languages in bilinguals. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 130, 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.08.005
This article discusses issues related to a rigid concept of native-likeness in ERP research.
Freunberger, D., Bylund, E., & Abrahamsson, N. (2022). Is it time to reconsider the “gold standard” for 
nativelikeness in ERP studies on grammatical processing in a second language? A critical assessment based 
on qualitative individual differences. Applied Linguistics, 43(3), 433–452. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/
amab058
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge funding from the Basque Government (BERC 2022–2025 program), the Spanish 
State Research Agency (BCBL Severo Ochoa excellence accreditation CEX2020-001010-S, grants PSI2015-
65694-P, RTI2018-096311-B-I00, and PCI2022-135031-2 to NM, grants RYC-2017-22015 and PID2020-
113945RB-I00 to SM), Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101028370 to NB.
References
Abutalebi, J. (2008). Neural aspects of second language representation and language control. Acta Psychologica, 
128(3), 466–478. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2008.03.014
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2018). Using event-related potentials to track morphosyntactic 
development in second language learners: The processing of number and gender agreement in Spanish. PloS 
ONE, 13(7), Article e0200791. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0200791
Alemán Bañón, J., Miller, D., & Rothman, J. (2017). Morphological variability in second language learners: An 
examination of electrophysiological and production data. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 43(10), 1509–1536. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000394
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
129
Alemán Bañón, J., Miller, D., & Rothman, J. (2021). Examining the contribution of markedness to the L2 
processing of Spanish person agreement: An event‑related potentials study. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 43(4), 699–728. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263120000479
Armstrong, A., Bulkes, N., & Tanner, D. (2018). Quantificational cues modulate the processing of English 
subject-verb agreement by native Chinese speakers: An ERP study. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
40(4), 731–754. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263118000013
Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2021). Grammatical processing in two languages: How individual differences in language 
experience and cognitive abilities shape comprehension in heritage bilinguals. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
58, Article 100963. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100963
Birdsong, D. (2018). Plasticity, variability and age in second language acquisition and bilingualism. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 9, Article 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00081
Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., & Schlesewsky, M. (2013). Reconciling time, space and function: A new dorsal–
ventral stream model of sentence comprehension. Brain and Language, 125(1), 60–76. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2013.01.010
Bowden, H., & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Branzi, F.M., Martin, C.D., & Paz-Alonso, P.M. (2021). Task-relevant representations and cognitive control 
demands modulate functional connectivity from ventral occipito-temporal cortex during object recognition 
tasks. Cerebral Cortex, 32(14), 3068–3080. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhab401
Caffarra, S., Barber, H., Molinaro, N., & Carreiras, M. (2017). When the end matters: Influence of gender cues 
during agreement computation in bilinguals. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 32(9), 1069–1085. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2017.1283426
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: An empirical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
Carreiras, M., Quiñones, I., Mancini, S., Hernández-Cabrera, J.A., & Barber, H. (2015). Verbal and nominal 
agreement: An fMRI study. NeuroImage, 120, 88–103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.06.075
Cheng, Y., Cunnings, I., Miller, D., & Rothman, J. (2021). Double-number marking matters for both L1 and L2 
processing of nonlocal agreement similarly: An ERP investigation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 
44(5), 1309–1329. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263121000772
Crinion, J., Turner, R., Grogan, A., Hanakawa, T., Noppeney, U., Devlin, J.T., Aso, T., Urayama, S., Fukuyama, 
H., Stockton, K., Usui, K., Green, D.W., & Price, C.J. (2006). Language control in the bilingual brain. 
Science, 312(5779), 1537–1540. www.jstor.org/stable/3846323
Cubelli, R., Lotto, L., Paolieri, D., Girelli, M., & Job, R. (2005). Grammatical gender is selected in bare noun 
production: Evidence from the picture–word interference paradigm. Journal of Memory and Language, 
53(1), 42–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2005.02.007
De Diego-Balaguer, R., & Rodriguez-Fornells, A. (2010). Contributions to the functional neuroanatomy 
of morphosyntactic processing in L2. Language Learning, 60(1), 231–259. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9922.2009.00557.x
Díaz, B., Erdocia, K., De Menezes, R.F., Mueller, J.L., Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Laka, I. (2016). Electrophysiological 
correlates of second-language syntactic processes are related to native and second language distance regard-
less of age of acquisition. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, Article 133. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00133
Díaz, B., Sebastián-Gallés, N., Erdocia, K., Mueller, J.L., & Laka, I. (2011). On the cross-linguistic validity of 
electrophysiological correlates of morphosyntactic processing: A study of case and agreement violations in 
Basque. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 24(3), 357–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2010.12.003
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Freunberger, D., Bylund, E., & Abrahamsson, N. (2022). Is it time to reconsider the “gold standard” for 
nativelikeness in ERP studies on grammatical processing in a second language? A critical assessment based 
on qualitative individual differences. Applied Linguistics, 43(3), 433–452. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/
amab058
Friederici, A.D. (2017). Language in our brain: The origins of a uniquely human capacity. MIT Press. https://
doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/11173.001.0001
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
130
Gabriele, A., Alemán Bañón, J., Hoffman, L., Covey, L., Rossomondo, A., & Fiorentino, R. (2021). Examining 
variability in the processing of agreement in novice learners: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 47(7), 1106–1140. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000983
Hartshorne, J.K., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Pinker, S. (2018). A critical period for second language acquisition: Evidence 
from 2/3 million English speakers. Cognition, 177, 263–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.04.007
Hernandez, A.E., Hofmann, J., & Kotz, S.A. (2007). Age of acquisition modulates neural activity for both 
regular and irregular syntactic functions. NeuroImage, 36(3), 912–923. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2007.02.055
Holland, R., & Lambon Ralph, M.A. (2010). The anterior temporal lobe semantic hub is a part of the language 
neural network: Selective disruption of irregular past tense verbs by rTMS. Cerebral Cortex, 20(12), 2771–
2775. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhq020
Holtzheimer, P., Fawaz, W., Wilson, C., & Avery, D. (2005). Repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation may 
induce language switching in bilingual patients. Brain and Language, 94(3), 274–277. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2005.01.003
Indefrey, P. (2006). A meta-analysis of hemodynamic studies on first and second language processing: Which 
suggested differences can we trust and what do they mean? Language Learning, 56, 279–304. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-9922.2006.00365.x
Jackson, J., & Schwieter, J. (2019). Study abroad and immersion. In J. Schwieter, & A. Benati (Eds.), The 
Cambridge handbook of language learning (pp. 727–750). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/
10.1017/9781108333603
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: The influence of 
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21(1), 60–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90003-0
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from 
the Dynamic Restructuring Model. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kotz, S.A. (2009). A critical review of ERP and fMRI evidence on L2 syntactic processing. Brain and Language, 
109(2–3), 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2008.06.002
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lau, E.F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for semantics: (De) constructing the N400. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(12), 920–933. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2532
Lehtonen, M., Vorobyev, V., Soveri, A., Hugdahl, K., Tuokkola, T., & Laine, M. (2009). Language-specific 
activations in the brain: Evidence from inflectional processing in bilinguals. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
22(5), 495–513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2009.05.001
Lehtonen, M.H., Laine, M., Niemi, J., Thomsen, T., Vorobyev, V.A., & Hugdahl, K. (2005). Brain correlates of 
sentence translation in Finnish–Norwegian bilinguals. NeuroReport, 16(6), 607–610. https://doi.org/10.1097/
00001756-200504250-00018
Liang, L., Chondrogianni, V., & Chen, B. (2021). Online processing of the grammatical aspect marker by L2 
Chinese learners. Second Language Research, 38(4), 765–786. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658321996423
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
MacWhinney, B. (2005). New directions in the competition model. In M. Tomasello, & D.I. Slobin (Eds.), 
Beyond nature-nurture: Essays in honor of Elizabeth Bates (pp. 81–110). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781410611192
MacWhinney, B. (2018). A unified model of first and second language learning. In M. Hickmann, E. Veneziano, 
& H. Jisa (Eds.), Sources of variation in first language acquisition: Languages, contexts and learners (pp. 
287–312). John Benjamins Publishing Company. https://doi.org/10.1075/tilar.22
Mancini, S., Quiñones, I., Molinaro, N., Hernandez-Cabrera, J.A., & Carreiras, M. (2017). Disentangling 
meaning in the brain: Left temporal involvement in agreement processing. Cortex, 86, 140–155. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.cortex.2016.11.008
Maran, M., Friederici, A.D., & Zaccarella, E. (2022). Syntax through the looking glass: A review on two-word 
linguistic processing across behavioral, neuroimaging and neurostimulation studies. Neuroscience and 
Biobehavioral Reviews, 142, Article 104881. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2022.104881
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Morphological System
131
Martínez de la Hidalga, G., Zawiszewski, A., & Laka, I. (2021) Going native? Yes, if allowed by cross-linguistic 
similarity. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, Article 742127. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.742127
Meulman, N., Wieling, M., Sprenger, S.A., Stowe, L.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Age effects in L2 grammar 
processing as revealed by ERPs and how (not) to study them. PloS ONE, 10(12), Article e0143328. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0143328
Meykadeh, A., Golfam, A., Batouli, S.A.H., & Sommer, W. (2021). Overlapping but language-specific 
mechanisms in morphosyntactic processing in highly competent L2 acquired at school entry: fMRI evidence 
from an alternating language switching task. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 15, Article 728549. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.728549
Meykadeh, A., Golfam, A., Nasrabadi, A.M., Ameri, H., & Sommer, W. (2021). First event-related potentials 
evidence of auditory morphosyntactic processing in a subject-object-verb nominative-accusative language 
(Farsi). Frontiers in Psychology, 12, Article 698165. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.698165
Molinaro, N., Barber, H.A., & Carreiras, M. (2011). Grammatical agreement processing in reading: ERP findings 
and future directions. Cortex, 47(8), 908–930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.02.019
Morgan-Short, K., Finestrat, I., Luque, A., & Abugaber, D. (2022). Exploring new insights into explicit and 
implicit second language processing: Event-related potentials analyzed by source attribution. Language 
Learning, 72(2), 365–411. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12492
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). Explicit and implicit second language 
training differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 24(4), 933–947. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00119
Newport, E.L., Bavelier, D., & Neville, H.J. (2001). Critical thinking about critical periods: Perspectives on a crit-
ical period for language acquisition. In E. Dupoux (Ed.), Language, brain, and cognitive development: Essays 
in honor of Jacques Mehler (pp. 481–502). MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/4108.001.0001
Nichols, E.S., & Joanisse, M.F. (2019). Individual differences predict ERP signatures of second language 
learning of novel grammatical rules. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(1), 78–92. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728917000566
Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Kim, A., Greenwald, R., & Inoue, K. (2004). Sentences in the brain: Event-
related potentials as real-time reflections of sentence comprehension and language learning. In M. Carreiras, 
& C. Clifton, Jr. (Eds.), The on-line study of sentence comprehension: Eyetracking, ERP, and beyond (pp. 
271–308). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203509050
Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Pitkänen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & Molinaro, N. (2006). Novice learners, longi-
tudinal designs, and event-related potentials: A means for exploring the neurocognition of second language 
processing. Language Learning, 56, 199–230. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2006.00361.x
Pandža, N. (this volume). Using non-invasive brain stimulation to investigate second language. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge
Pliatsikas, C., Johnstone, T., & Marinis, T. (2014). fMRI evidence for the involvement of the procedural memory 
system in morphological processing of a second language. PloS ONE, 9(5), Article e97298. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0097298
Połczyńska, M.M., & Bookheimer, S.Y. (2021). General principles governing the amount of neuroanatomical 
overlap between languages in bilinguals. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 130, 1–14. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.08.005
Quiñones, I., Molinaro, N., Mancini, S., Hernández-Cabrera, J.A., & Carreiras, M. (2014). Where agreement 
merges with disagreement: fMRI evidence of subject–verb integration. NeuroImage, 88, 188–201. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.11.038
Quiñones, I., Molinaro, N., Mancini, S., Hernández-Cabrera, J.A., Barber, H., & Carreiras, M. (2018). Tracing 
the interplay between syntactic and lexical features: fMRI evidence from agreement comprehension. 
NeuroImage, 175, 259–271. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.03.069
Roncaglia-Denissen, M.P., & Kotz, S.A. (2016). What does neuroimaging tell us about morphosyntactic pro-
cessing in the brain of second language learners? Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(4), 665–673. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728915000413
Sabourin, L., & Manning, G. (this volume). Cross-linguistic transfer in second language neurocognition. In 
K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Sakai, K.L., Miura, K., Narafu, N. and Muraishi, Y. (2004). Correlated functional changes of the prefrontal cortex 
in twins induced by classroom education of second language. Cerebral Cortex, 14(11), 1233–1239. https://
doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhh084
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Nicoletta Biondo, Nicola Molinaro, and Simona Mancini
132
Steinhauer, K. (2014). Event-related potentials (ERPs) in second language research: A brief introduction to the 
technique, a selected review, and an invitation to reconsider critical periods in L2. Applied Linguistics, 35(4), 
393–417. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu028
Steinhauer, K., White, E.J., & Drury, J.E. (2009). Temporal dynamics of late second language acquisi-
tion: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Second Language Research, 25(1), 13–41. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658308098995
Tanner, D., McLaughlin, J., Herschensohn, J., & Osterhout, L. (2013). Individual differences reveal stages of L2 
grammatical acquisition: ERP evidence. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(2), 367–382. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728912000302
Tanner, D., Inoue, K., & Osterhout, L. (2014). Brain-based individual differences in online L2 grammatical com-
prehension. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17(2), 277–293. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
3000370
Tatsuno, Y., & Sakai, K.L. (2005). Language-related activations in the left prefrontal regions are differentially 
modulated by age, proficiency, and task demands. Journal of Neuroscience, 25(7), 1637–1644. https://doi.
org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3978-04.2005
Tussis, L., Sollmann, N., Boeckh-Behrens, T., Meyer, B., & Krieg, S.M. (2017). Identifying cortical first and 
second language sites via navigated transcranial magnetic stimulation of the left hemisphere in bilinguals. 
Brain and Language, 168, 106–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2017.01.011
Ullman, M.T. (2014). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically motivated theory of first and second 
language. In B. VanPatten, & J. Williams (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction 
(2nd ed., pp. 147–172). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203628942
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically motivated theory of first and second 
language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An 
introduction (3rd ed., pp. 128–161). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429503986
Ullman, M.T., & Morgan-Short, K. (this volume). How the declarative and procedural memory brain circuits 
support second language: Electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological evidence. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Van Hell, J.G., & Tokowicz, N. (2010). Event-related brain potentials and second language learning: Syntactic 
processing in late L2 learners at different L2 proficiency levels. Second Language Research, 26(1), 43–74. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658309337637
Wartenburger, I., Heekeren, H.R., Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S. F., Villringer, A., & Perani, D. (2003). Early 
setting of grammatical processing in the bilingual brain. Neuron, 37(1), 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(02)01150-9
Yan, H., Zhang, Y.M., Xu, M., Chen, H.Y. and Wang, Y.H. (2016). What to do if we have nothing to rely on: Late 
bilinguals process L2 grammatical features like L1 natives. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 40, 1–4. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2016.04.002
Zawiszewski, A., & Laka, I. (2020). Bilinguals processing noun morphology: Evidence for the language distance 
hypothesis from event-related potentials. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 55, Article 100908. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100908
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

133
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-13
10
THE NEUROLINGUISTICS 
OF THE SECOND LANGUAGE 
SYNTACTIC SYSTEM
José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
Introduction
In this chapter, we review recent neurolinguistic evidence regarding the adult second language (L2) 
processing of syntax. Examining how sentence structures are constructed and ultimately mapped to 
meaning at the brain level can shed new light on the extent to which adult learners are successful in 
processing the L2, including whether they can utilize L2 grammatical knowledge in real time and 
whether they rely on the same mechanisms during processing as native speakers. Ultimately, research 
in this area can inform our understanding of core theoretical issues regarding the nature of L2 acqui-
sition, shedding light on the possibilities and limitations of L2 processing. In the following, we first 
discuss approaches to examining L1 and L2 syntactic processing, reviewing approaches to examining 
the cortical organization of L1 and L2 syntactic systems, and approaches allowing one to examine 
the dynamics of L1 and L2 syntactic processing with high temporal precision. We then introduce core 
theoretical issues and critical factors such as age of acquisition and proficiency which may impact 
the L2 acquisition and processing of syntax, and discuss recent research examining the L2 processing 
of word order and wh-dependency resolution, informing our understanding of the L2 processing of 
fundamental syntactic operations such as structure building and dependency resolution; these studies 
also suggest promising areas for future research, as we discuss in the section “Current trends and 
future directions.”
Syntactic Processing in Native Speakers
Syntactic processing in adult native speakers is widely argued to be incremental, with incoming 
material incorporated into the syntactic and semantic representation of the sentence as it unfolds (e.g., 
Tanenhaus et al., 1995). Studies on native language processing have demonstrated the incremental 
processing of a range of core syntactic phenomena, including the construction of syntactic structure 
and the establishment of grammatically constrained dependencies between elements in the syntax 
(for discussion of the relation between grammar and processing, see e.g., Lewis & Phillips, 2015).
Native language processing has also been shown to involve, at least to some extent, prediction: the 
anticipation of linguistic elements before they appear in the bottom-up input (see e.g., Altmann & 
Mirković, 2009; Federmeier, 2007; Kaan, this volume). Such effects are widely attested in studies 
at the lexical (e.g., Ito et al., 2018) and morphosyntactic levels (e.g., Wicha et al., 2004), and are 
also observed in the more limited set of studies examining syntactic prediction (e.g., Bovolenta & 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
134
Husband, 2022). Prediction is also argued to be recruited by native speakers in the establishment of 
syntactic dependencies (see e.g., Covey et al., 2022, and Michel, 2014, discussed below). Questions 
remain regarding to what extent L2 learners utilize the same types of processing argued to subserve 
native processing; this includes both the integration of encountered linguistic elements and the pre-
diction of upcoming linguistic elements (see Hopp, 2022, for recent discussion).
Examining the Cortical Organization of L1 and L2 Syntax
Insights regarding the cortical organization of native and non-native languages can be gained from 
neurolinguistic methods yielding information regarding to what extent the brain areas recruited for 
native processing are also recruited when processing the L2. One such approach involves the use of 
hemodynamic imaging methods such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and positron 
emission tomography (PET; see Kousaie & Klein, this volume) to examine changes in brain activity 
related to syntactic processing, with high spatial resolution, allowing one to examine to what extent 
similar locations are recruited for L1 and L2 processing. Complementary information regarding the 
organization of the L1 and L2 syntactic systems can be gained from neuropsychological approaches 
such as the examination of spared and impacted aspects of language in people with aphasia (see 
Scimeca et al., this volume) or those with neurodegenerative diseases impacting language.
The neurolinguistic literature on native language syntax has yielded a rich set of findings regarding 
the brain regions involved in syntactic processing, implicating areas such as the left inferior frontal 
gyrus (Broca’s area), as well as anterior and posterior temporal areas, although debate continues 
regarding the precise functional contributions of these and other brain areas (for recent discussion, see 
Matchin & Hickok, 2020). L2 syntactic research in this vein has addressed questions such as to what 
extent L2 syntactic processing involves recruitment of brain areas associated with L1 syntax (e.g., 
Johnson et al., 2018; Sakai et al., 2004). For example, Johnson et al. (2018) tested native English-
speaking adult learners of American Sign Language (ASL) in an fMRI study examining responses 
to visually presented sentences, testing participants in both the L1 (English) and L2 (ASL). A main 
finding of the study was that L1 and L2 areas responsive to the syntactic manipulation largely over-
lapped, despite differences in modality (written English vs. ASL). Some differences in the extent of 
activation for the L2 compared to the L1 were also observed, including greater activation for the L2 
in Broca’s area; Johnson et al. (2018) suggest that this may reflect increased cognitive load during 
L2 processing, under the view in which Broca’s area engagement for syntax reflects the recruitment 
of cognitive resources during processing. This study exemplifies how hemodynamic research can 
be used to examine the cortical organization of L1 and L2 syntactic systems, and to reveal potential 
differences between L1 and L2 syntactic processing that may be related to factors such as increased 
processing demands in the L2. Structural imaging methods (see Rossi et al., this volume) have also 
begun to yield information regarding differences or changes over time in brain structures as they relate 
to the L2 acquisition of syntax. Yamamoto and Sakai (2016), for example, observed differences in 
connections between frontal and tempo-parietal areas that correlated with native Japanese-speaking 
L2 English learners’ performance on a syntactic judgment task targeting structural properties of verbs 
(e.g., transitivity/argument structure). Studies like these inform our understanding of how the brain 
networks subserving L2 syntax are organized and change over the course of L2 acquisition (for a 
recent meta-analysis of neuroimaging findings, see Sulpizio et al., 2020).
Examining the Dynamics of L1 and L2 Syntactic Processing
A second family of neurolinguistic approaches to examining syntactic processing utilizes methods 
providing precise information regarding the timing of brain activity, including the electrophysiological 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
135
measures electroencephalography (EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG). The native and L2 
neurolinguistic literature on syntactic processing has relied heavily on these approaches, and particu-
larly on EEG, as these methods allow one to track the dynamics of processing of particular aspects of 
syntax as the sentence unfolds during real-time processing. Thus, in the remainder of this chapter, we 
primarily focus on L1 and L2 studies on syntactic processing that utilize EEG.
EEG is a brain-imaging method offering a precise (millisecond-level) record of brain activity (see 
Dickson & Pelzl, this volume, for more detail). Analysis of brain responses time-locked to critical 
events (e.g., the appearance of a critical word in a sentence) yields event-related potentials (ERPs). 
Different ERPs can be characterized and distinguished via properties including their timing, whether 
they are short-duration or sustained, their polarity (positive vs. negative), and their distribution over 
the scalp (e.g., Kaan, 2007). Crucially, different ERPs have been associated with distinct aspects 
of syntactic processing. These include the early left anterior negativity (ELAN), emerging around 
150–300 ms post stimulus onset and canonically largest on left-anterior electrode sites on the scalp, 
which has been argued to index an early stage of processing involving the building of basic phrase 
structure (but see Steinhauer & Drury, 2012 for critical discussion of this literature). The left anterior 
negativity (LAN), emerging around 300–500 ms post onset, has been associated with the processing 
of morphosyntax (e.g., Molinaro et al., 2011). The N400 is a negativity emerging around 300–600 
ms post onset and typically largest at centro-posterior electrode sites, and has been associated with 
processing of lexical-semantic information (e.g., Lau et al., 2008). The P600 is a positivity emerging 
between approximately 400–900 ms, most prominently at centro-posterior electrode sites, which has 
been associated with the detection of syntactic violations, unexpected syntactic continuations, and 
parts of the sentence engendering complex syntactic processing, such as when a dependency can 
be resolved (e.g., Kaan et al., 2000). Thus, the P600 is often characterized as reflecting syntactic 
processes including integration, reanalysis, and repair, although the P600 has also been observed for 
semantic anomalies (e.g., Kim & Osterhout, 2005), and alternative interpretations, for example that 
the P600 may reflect conflict monitoring or error detection, have also been proposed (see e.g., Kaan, 
2007; Tanner et al., 2017, for discussion).
We next discuss research examining the L2 processing of syntax using EEG in order to highlight 
core theoretical issues in L2 acquisition and processing in this domain.
Theoretical Perspectives and Approaches
Although the scope of research on the neurolinguistics of L2 syntax continues to broaden, certain 
issues have received special attention (Caffarra et al., 2015). Most early reports investigated the 
extent to which age of L2 acquisition shapes both the mechanisms recruited for L2 syntactic pro-
cessing (e.g., Bowden et al., 2013; Fromont et al., 2020; Hahne & Friederici, 2001; Rossi et al., 2006; 
Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996) and the cortical representation of the L2 (e.g., Kim et al., 1997; Perani 
et al., 1998; Wartenburger et al., 2003). Theoretically, this research was motivated by the question 
of whether there is a critical period for L2 acquisition. Under most versions of this hypothesis (e.g., 
Lenneberg, 1967; Johnson & Newport, 1989), it is posited that a gradual decline in brain plasticity 
with an offset around puberty hinders the acquisition of formal aspects of the L2 to native-like levels, 
including its syntax. For that reason, SLA researchers became interested in bringing neurolinguistic 
evidence in the form of brain responses or cortical areas of specialization, to bear on this question. 
Results from these early reports revealed more native-like results for early relative to late learners, 
in line with the predictions of critical period proposals. However, age of L2 acquisition was largely 
confounded with L2 proficiency in these studies, such that learners with a later age of acquisition also 
tended to be less proficient (e.g., Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996). Subsequent studies investigated the 
unique contribution of L2 proficiency to syntactic development among post-puberty learners, with a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
136
focus on whether high-proficiency learners were capable of showing native-like brain responses to 
syntactic computations (e.g., Rossi et al., 2006) and engaging similar brain regions for the L1 and 
the L2 (e.g., Perani et al., 1998; Wartenburger et al., 2003). This literature on syntactic development 
showed that, at high levels of proficiency, adult L2 learners tend to show native-like brain responses, 
at least for basic syntactic computations (i.e., phrase structure), and recruit similar cortical areas as 
early L2 learners (e.g., Perani et al., 1998; Rossi et al., 2006), although age of acquisition remains a 
modulating factor in some reports (e.g., Wartenburger et al., 2003).
With respect to the ERP literature, the linguistic properties investigated in these early studies 
and the predicted patterns of brain responses were informed by Friederici’s syntax-first model of 
sentence processing (2002). Under this model, implicit knowledge of phrase structure is argued to 
guide the initial stages of sentence processing. In native speakers, phrase structure violations such 
as The scientist criticized Max’s *of proof the theorem, where the preposition of violates the selec-
tional restrictions (with respect to word category) of the preceding genitive phrase (e.g., Weber-
Fox & Neville, 1996) were found to elicit an ELAN and a P600. Under Friederici’s model, the 
ELAN indexes first-pass, automatic, and unconscious syntactic processing (Friederici, 2002; Hahne 
& Friederici, 2002), whereas the P600 is assumed to reflect more controlled processes of syntactic 
reanalysis and repair (Hahne & Friederici, 2002).
Most early ERP studies investigated whether adult L2 learners, too, were capable of such 
rapid phrase structure building, as indexed by the ELAN (and the P600), in order to inform the 
abovementioned debates regarding the possibilities and limitations of adult L2 acquisition (Weber-
Fox & Neville, 1996; Hahne & Friederici, 2001; Rossi et al., 2006; Pakulak & Neville, 2011). 
Although some reports found that high-proficiency learners elicited an ELAN for phrase structure 
violations (e.g., Rossi et al., 2006), the functional interpretation of the ELAN was later challenged by 
Steinhauer and Drury (2012), who identified a number of limitations with the paradigm eliciting the 
ELAN, including baseline differences between grammatical and ungrammatical sentences that may 
distort ERPs (e.g., compare Max’s proof of… to Max’s of proof…).
Age of acquisition and proficiency have remained prevalent topics in more recent research on the 
neurolinguistics of L2 syntax (see also Fromont, this volume; Luque & Covey, this volume), although 
both the theoretical and the linguistic focus have shifted. As opposed to testing the predictions of 
Friederici’s model (2002), recent studies have tested current theoretical models of L2 processing. 
Some studies have examined whether the processing of long-distance syntactic dependencies among 
adult L2 learners is grammatically constrained (e.g., Covey et al., 2022; Jessen et al., 2017; Jessen & 
Felser, 2019), a question raised by Clahsen and Felser’s Shallow Structure Hypothesis (2006, 2018). 
The Shallow Structure Hypothesis posits that adult L2 learners have a representational deficit at the 
level of the syntax and rely on abstract syntax to a lesser extent than native speakers in real-time 
processing, regardless of proficiency and L1–L2 similarity. Other studies have examined the extent 
to which the neurocognitive mechanisms involved in L2 syntactic processing can develop to native-
like levels (e.g., Bowden et al., 2013; Mickan & Lemhöfer, 2020) and how syntactic development is 
modulated by cross-linguistic similarity (e.g., Andersson et al., 2019; Mickan & Lemhöfer, 2020). 
These questions have been largely informed by Ullman’s Declarative/Procedural Model (2001, 2004) 
and Steinhauer et al.’s hierarchy of developmental stages (2009). The Declarative/Procedural Model 
posits that language relies upon two neurobiologically distinct memory systems, the declarative and 
procedural memory systems. While declarative memory subserves the lexicon, procedural memory 
subserves grammatical rules. With respect to L2 processing, the model’s core tenet is that learners rely 
on declarative memory for (morpho)syntactic properties for which native speakers rely on procedural 
memory. However, with increased proficiency and experience, learners can come to process syn-
tactic rules in a qualitatively native-like manner. Steinhauer et al. (2009) also argue against absolute 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
137
limitations in learners’ ability to process (morpho)syntactic dependencies. Instead, the authors pro-
pose that learners go through a series of developmental stages, as a function of L2 proficiency and 
factors such as L1–L2 similarity. Finally, other studies have examined the extent to which adult L2 
learners can generate predictions about upcoming syntactic structure in real-time (e.g., Covey et al., 
2022; Kaan et al., 2016;), in order to test theoretical proposals that make different claims regarding 
learners’ predictive capabilities (e.g., Grüter et al., 2017; Kaan, 2014; Kaan, this volume). Although 
very few studies have examined this question, the available evidence suggest that structural predic-
tion might be an area of divergence between native and nonnative speakers. In the next session, we 
review research related to these issues in two particular syntactic domains that have received attention 
in the recent L2 ERP literature: word order and wh-dependencies.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
The L2 Processing of Word Order Constraints
A number of ERP studies have investigated whether L2 learners obey different word order constraints 
in the same way as native speakers. The question of how learners process phrase structure violations, 
which inspired most early reports (e.g., Hahne & Friederici, 2001; Müller et al., 2005; Pakulak & 
Neville, 2011; Rossi et al., 2006; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996), has continued to spur interest. For 
example, Bowden et al. (2013) and Fromont et al. (2020) manipulated phrase structure constraints in 
Spanish and French, respectively, with designs that minimized the abovementioned baseline issues 
identified by Steinhauer and Drury (2012). In Bowden et al.’s study, phrase structure violations yielded 
a LAN-P600 biphasic pattern in both native speakers and high-proficiency learners of Spanish. In 
contrast, intermediate learners only showed a P600, which the authors interpret as support for the 
Declarative/Procedural Model. In Fromont et al.’s study, phrase structure errors elicited an N400, 
which might reflect the mismatch between the predicted morphological features of the target versus 
the encountered words. In addition, an analysis of individual differences revealed that, in both native 
speakers and learners, high levels of proficiency, daily usage of French, and years of immersion were 
associated with larger P600 effects, in line with earlier studies pointing to proficiency as a more deter-
ministic factor than age of acquisition (e.g., Rossi et al., 2006).
Other studies have investigated how the processing of word order constraints is impacted by L1–
L2 similarity (e.g., Andersson et al., 2019; Mickan & Lemhöfer, 2020). For example, Andersson 
et al. (2019) investigated the processing of verb-second “V2” word order in L2 Swedish by learners 
of intermediate proficiency whose L1 did or did not instantiate the V2 property, German and English, 
respectively. V2 is a word order constraint by which the finite verb of a declarative main clause must 
occupy the second syntactic position in the sentence. In Swedish, basic word order is Subject-Verb-
Object (SVO), as shown in (1a). However, if an element such as an adverb is fronted, the verb appears 
before the subject (Adverb-Verb-Subject-Object), as in (1b). Placing the verb in the third position 
(V3) renders the sentence ungrammatical (1c).
(1)  a.  Hon spelade piano.
        she played piano
        “She played piano.”
     b. Idag spelade hon piano.
        today played she piano
        “Today she played piano.”
     c.  *Idag hon spelade piano.
        today she played piano
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
138
Studies on production showed that L2 learners of V2 languages incorrectly produce V3 order even 
when their L1 instantiates the V2 property (e.g., Bardel & Falk, 2007; Håkansson et al., 2002). The 
study by Andersson et al. (2019) extended this investigation to comprehension. Importantly, unlike 
ERP studies probing word order violations that are less representative of L2 learners’ production 
errors (e.g., The scientist criticized Max’s *of the theorem), Andersson et al.’s study examined an error 
type that is widely attested among L2 learners acquiring V2 languages.
In the EEG task, participants read sentences with correct V2 and incorrect V3 order (1b,c), and 
provided a grammaticality judgment. Behaviorally, the two learner groups did not differ from one 
another, and both were outperformed by the native controls. In terms of brain responses, across 
all three groups, ungrammatical V3 sentences yielded a posterior negativity (300–500ms), which 
reached anterior electrodes in the L1 Swedish group (partly consistent with the LAN), and a pos-
terior P600 (700–1000ms).1 Additional analyses showed that the L1 English learners differed from 
the native controls to a greater extent than the L1 German learners. Thus, the results by Andersson 
et al. are among the first to show an effect of transfer on the L2 processing of word order constraints. 
Although both learner groups in their study were sensitive to the V2 property, having V2 in the L1 
facilitated the learners’ processing.
Mickan and Lemhöfer (2020) investigated how L2 syntactic development was modulated by 
L1–L2 similarity with a cross-sectional design including German-speaking learners of Dutch at 
three levels of experience (beginners, intermediate, advanced). The study probed a word order 
constraint that applies similarly in Dutch and German (V2 order), and one where Dutch and 
German are in direct conflict (double infinitives). The results of the grammaticality judgment task 
associated with the EEG task showed a clear developmental trajectory, with advanced learners 
showing native-like accuracy in both the no-conflict and conflict conditions, and intermediate and 
beginning learners lagging behind in both conditions. In terms of brain responses, word order 
violations in the no-conflict condition yielded a central-posterior P600 relative to grammatical 
sentences in native speakers and learners of advanced and intermediate proficiency. In contrast, 
beginning learners showed a broadly distributed N400-like effect (and a late frontal negativity). In 
the conflict condition, all learner groups differed either quantitatively (intermediate, advanced) or 
qualitatively (beginning) from the Dutch controls. While the latter showed a broadly distributed 
P600 for violations, the P600 in the intermediate and advanced groups was delayed and topo-
graphically restricted. Finally, the beginners elicited a similar N400 effect to the one in the no-
conflict condition.
Thus, Mickan and Lemhöfer’s results (2020) lend support to the trajectory of processing stages 
outlined by Steinhauer et al. (2009). With only two months of L2 experience, the beginners relied on 
qualitatively different neurocognitive mechanisms, as indexed by N400-like effects for both viola-
tion types (Stage 2 in Steinhaeur et al.’s model). In contrast, the intermediate and advanced learners 
(six and ten months of experience, respectively) showed qualitatively native-like brain responses 
for both word order constraints (i.e., P600 effects), although these were impacted by L1–L2 simi-
larity, which is also in line with Steinhauer et al.’s model (Stages 3 and 4). Crucially, the fact that 
beginners showed an N400 effect for violations of a property that was similar in the L1 and the L2 
provides strong evidence in favor of Steinhauer et al.’s model (e.g., see Osterhout et al., 2006 in the 
domain of morphosyntax; cf. Gabriele et al., 2021) and against prominent theories of transfer from 
the behavioral literature which predict an advantage for properties that exist in the L1 (e.g., Schwartz 
& Sprouse, 1996), since it suggests that the learners did not engage in grammatical processing for 
properties instantiated in their L1. That said, as the authors themselves acknowledge, it remains 
an open question whether the same development trajectory would emerge if the learners had been 
grouped based on their global proficiency (which was tested with two metrics) as opposed to their 
L2 experience.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
139
The Processing of Wh-Dependencies
A recent series of L2 studies has used ERPs to investigate the processing of wh-dependencies as in 
(2a), from Stowe (1986).
(2)  a.  My brother wanted to know who Ruth will bring us home to __ at Christmas.
     b.  My brother wanted to know if Ruth will bring us home to Mom at Christmas.
In languages such as English, the derivation of sentences with relative clauses and wh-questions is 
argued to involve wh-movement such that a wh-phrase (who), called the “filler,” has been moved from 
its canonical position in the syntactic structure to the beginning of the clause, leaving behind a “gap,” 
as indicated by the underscore in (2a). During online processing, encountering a wh-filler such as who 
initiates a search for a potential gap position at each grammatically possible position in the syntax 
until the dependency is successfully completed, and the fronted wh-element can then be integrated 
into the syntactic and semantic representation of the sentence (e.g., Frazier, 1987; Frazier & Flores 
D’Arcais, 1989). Early evidence for this model of “active gap prediction” comes from studies such as 
Stowe (1986), in which native speakers read sentences such as (2), and reading times of the word us in 
sentences with wh-extraction as in (2a) were compared to reading times of the same word in sentences 
without extraction (2b). The results showed longer reading times at us in (2a) as compared to (2b), a 
slowdown which has been argued to index the unmet prediction of a gap in the direct object position 
following the verb (bring), which is already filled with lexical material. This effect is referred to as 
a “filled-gap effect.” These results suggest that processing of wh-dependencies is incremental, and 
that the parser predicts a gap in structurally licensed positions in the syntax (e.g., following the verb) 
before confirmation of the actual location of the gap site (in 2a, following the preposition to) where the 
filler can be integrated. An advantage of using ERPs to examine the processing of wh-dependencies 
is that the measure is well-suited to assess whether similar mechanisms underlie processing in natives 
and L2 learners. In the native ERP literature on wh-dependencies, gap prediction has been argued to 
be indexed by the N400 (e.g., Michel, 2014) while filler integration has been argued to be indexed by 
the P600 (e.g., Felser et al., 2003; Gouvea et al., 2010; Kaan et al., 2000; Phillips et al., 2005).
Jessen and Felser (2019) used ERPs to examine two aspects of wh-dependency processing, gap 
prediction and reanalysis, which in this study refers to a case in which the prediction of a gap is 
disconfirmed. The key question was whether L2 learners can recover from an initial misanalysis, as 
this is an area that has been shown to be difficult (e.g., Dussias & Piñar, 2010). Jessen and Felser 
examined whether native speakers and advanced German-speaking learners of English show evidence 
of an active gap filling strategy, linking a wh-filler to a potential lexical licensor before evidence of a 
gap is confirmed in the bottom-up input (see also Dallas et al., 2013). They used a plausibility para-
digm, manipulating the semantic fit of the filler argument, which was a relativized noun phrase (the 
house/women that), and the potential subcategorizer (built) as in (3a,b) below.
(3)  a.  Bill liked the house that Bob built some ornaments for _ at his workplace.
     b.  Bill liked the women that Bob built some ornaments for _ at his workplace.
Jessen and Felser observed an N400 effect for both natives and L2 learners at the verb “built” in 
(3b) as compared to (3a), an effect that was argued to index an active gap-filling strategy, reflecting 
difficulty in integrating the implausible filler (the women that) with the potential lexical licensor 
(built). The negativity was present for the learners at the following region as well (e.g., some). 
Jessen and Felser also observed a P600 at the preposition for in the plausible condition (3a) as 
compared to the implausible condition (3b) only for the L2 learners. The P600 was argued to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
140
index reanalysis, reflecting difficulty in abandoning the original direct object analysis and instead 
integrating the filler at the actual gap site following the preposition. Reanalysis is argued to be 
more difficult in the plausible condition (3a) because it should be easier to abandon the direct 
object analysis in (3b) where the link between the noun phrase filler and the verb is semantically 
implausible. They argue that reanalysis may be more difficult for the L2 learners (e.g., Dussias & 
Piñar, 2010, Jacob & Felser, 2016), as evidenced by the P600, and more automatic and effortless 
for the natives.
Jessen et al. (2017) make a similar argument on the basis of evidence from the processing of 
indirect object wh-dependencies (see 4a) by similar groups of native and L1 German L2 English 
speakers.
(4)  a.  *Sara tickled the monkey for which Peter arranged some classes for it after the 
vacation.
     b.  Sara tickled the monkey while Peter arranged some classes for it after the vacation.
Indirect object wh-dependencies are interesting to examine because it is easier to tease apart effects 
of semantic integration and effects related to positing a gap. The filler phrase the monkey for which in 
(4a) should clearly indicate that the noun phrase is not a direct object of the verb arrange, but rather 
an indirect object/goal argument of the verb whose canonical position in the syntax follows the direct 
object. Thus, any effects observed at the verb should be related to argument structure/semantic inte-
gration and not gap-filling. The actual gap position in (4a) follows the direct object (some classes), 
but in this experiment, the gap was filled with a resumptive indirect object phrase (for it), rendering 
the sentence ungrammatical.
Jessen et al. compared the processing of (4a) with the sentence in (4b), which did not involve a 
wh-dependency. The results showed that both natives and L2 learners yielded an N400 effect in the 
350–500 ms time window following the verb. Although this effect had been predicted as an index of 
semantic integration, Jessen et al. state that the N400 may index a pragmatic anomaly as the filler (the 
monkey for which) is an unlikely Goal argument of the verb arrange and others in the stimuli such as 
confess which usually require the Goal argument to be human.
At the filled gap position (for it), which renders the sentence ungrammatical, both natives and 
learners yielded a positivity in the 600–800 ms time window; although the effect was frontally 
distributed for the natives, there was suggestive evidence that the effect was more broadly distributed 
for L2 learners. Jessen et al. additionally examined whether the processing of the filler phrase itself 
(for/to which) would elicit a sustained LAN, which has been argued to index the storage of the filler 
phrase in working memory until the point at which it can be integrated in the structure (e.g., King 
& Kutas, 1995; Kluender & Kutas, 1993; Phillips et al., 2005). This effect was observed only in L2 
learners and was more restricted in distribution as compared to the sustained LAN effects observed 
in previous studies of native speakers (e.g., Fiebach et al., 2002; Phillips et al., 2005). Jessen et al. 
propose that the filler storage may have been more automatized in natives, and thus, did not show any 
effects. Overall, Jessen et al. argue that the processing of indirect object wh-dependencies is qualita-
tively similar in L2 learners and natives, but may be more effortful in learners.
Covey et al. (2022) also used a filled-gap paradigm to examine the processing of wh-dependencies, 
but following Stowe (1986), the sentences were fully grammatical. Covey et al. examined whether 
gap prediction is grammatically constrained in native English speakers and Chinese-speaking learners 
of English, using a design as in (5a–d) that manipulated both clause type (wh- or declarative) and 
whether or not the sentence included an “island,” (Ross, 1967), a structure from which wh-extraction 
is prohibited by the grammar.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
141
(5)  a.  Jamie wondered if the editor interviewed Dave Campbell with the reporter from the 
department. (Declarative, Non-Island)
     b.  Jamie wondered who the editor interviewed Dave Campbell with __ from the 
department. (Wh-, Non-Island)
     c.  Jamie wondered if the editor [that interviewed Dave Campbell] kissed the reporter after 
the meeting. (Declarative, Island)
     d.  Jamie wondered who the editor [that interviewed Dave Campbell] kissed __ after the 
meeting. (Wh-, Island)
Covey et al. predicted that an N400 effect would emerge at the object filled-gap position (Dave 
Campbell) in the wh-sentence in (5b) as compared to (5a) if both natives and L2 learners hypothe-
size that the filler who is a direct object of the verb, showing evidence of active gap prediction 
(Michel, 2014). In contrast, they predicted no effects at the same region in (5c,d) as the critical region 
following the verb is embedded within a relative clause island (the editor that interviewed Dave 
Campbell) and thus, does not license extraction. Covey et al. found evidence that wh-processing is 
grammatically constrained as both L2 learners and natives showed filled-gap effects in (5a,b), but 
not in (5c,d). However, the effect that emerged for the two groups at the critical region in (5a,b) 
differed, with native speakers yielding an N400 effect as predicted, and L2 learners yielding a broadly 
distributed P600. Covey et al. interpreted the N400 which emerged in the natives as indexing active 
gap prediction (Michel, 2014). In contrast, the P600 observed for the learners was argued to index 
syntactic integration difficulty. The overall results suggest that although predictive processing may 
be limited in some contexts for L2 learners (Grüter et al., 2017), there is evidence that L2 processing 
is grammatically constrained.
The differences observed at the filled-gap region between L2 learners and natives in the Covey 
et al. study may seem to contrast with the results of the studies by Jessen and colleagues, but direct 
comparison is difficult. Jessen and Felser (2019) used a plausibility manipulation, measuring effects 
at the verb (3a,b), and thus, the N400 effect that was observed for both learners and native speakers 
may indeed index active gap prediction or alternatively, as Jessen and Felser (2019) acknowledge, 
it may index a violation of semantic plausibility. In addition, while Jessen et al. (2017) observed 
positivities for both natives and learners at the filled-gap region, the filled gap position also rendered 
the sentence ungrammatical, and thus, the positivity may index sensitivity to the grammatical viola-
tion (e.g., Friederici, 2002). Thus, the question of whether L2 learners and natives use similar pre-
dictive mechanisms in this domain is still ripe for investigation.
Current Trends and Future Directions
In this section, we highlight some of the trends exemplified in the studies above and point to new 
directions that future studies can address. First, the Andersson et al. (2019) study on the processing of 
V2 word order in L2 Swedish pioneered a new direction in L2 ERP studies of word order by exam-
ining a syntactic property that behavioral evidence had previously established as challenging for L2 
learners. Previous L2 ERP studies had focused largely on word category violations, a property that 
allowed for a test of Friederici’s (2002) model of language processing but did not clearly link up to 
core issues in L2 theories. Focusing systematically on syntactic properties that are difficult for L2 
learners allows neurolinguistic research to more directly address the possibilities and limitations of 
L2 processing and allows for an investigation of the factors that modulate difficulty in processing.
Another issue highlighted by the Andersson et al. (2019) study is the role of the L1, as the results 
differed depending on whether the learners’ L1 also instantiated the V2 property. The extent to which 
the learners’ L1 may have potentially modulated processing is an open question in the literature on the 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
142
L2 processing of wh-dependencies reviewed above. The Covey et al. (2022) study that showed quali-
tative differences between L2 learners and natives included Chinese-speaking learners of English 
whose L1 does not instantiate overt wh-movement, unlike the L1 German learners in the studies by 
Jessen and colleagues. Future studies in this domain, and in others, should follow the approach taken 
by Andersson et al. (2019) and systematically examine the role of the L1 with direct comparisons of 
multiple L1 groups whose L1 varies with respect to the syntactic phenomenon under investigation.
An area that is ripe for the examination of transfer is syntactic binding. Binding Theory is a set of 
syntactic principles that govern the set of licit, possible antecedents for a reflexive pronoun, pronoun, 
or noun phrase (Chomsky, 1981). As just one example, Principle A of the Binding Theory states that 
a reflexive pronoun (himself/herself) must take an antecedent within a local domain and thus, in (6), 
Silvia is a possible antecedent for herself, but Elisa is not, as indicated by co-indexation below.
(6)  Elisai said that Silvia j likes herself*i/j.
(7)  The successful woman congratulated herself/*himself on the promotion. (Osterhout & 
Mobley, 1995)
A series of studies in the L1 ERP literature has shown that native speakers adhere to binding 
constraints online and yield P600s when confronted with violations of this constraint, such as when 
a possible antecedent is in a syntactically licensed position but presents a mismatch in morpho-
syntactic features as is seen in (7) (Osterhout & Mobley, 1995; Harris et al., 2000). Liang et al. 
(2018) found that L1 Chinese learners of L2 English were also sensitive to gender mismatches 
with reflexives. However, to our knowledge, no L2 ERP study has examined whether L2 learners 
can systematically rule out illicit antecedents outside of the licit binding domain (e.g., Elisa in 6), a 
question that has received attention in the L2 psycholinguistics literature (e.g., Felser & Cunnings, 
2012). Furthermore, there are languages such as Mandarin that allow what is called long-distance 
binding, and the reflexive ziji in Mandarin would allow both local (Silvia) and long-distance (Elisa) 
antecedents (Pan, 1997). Systematically examining these crosslinguistic differences in L2 processing 
would not only allow for an examination of L1 transfer, but would also speak to theories such as the 
Shallow Structure Hypothesis, discussed above, which predicts a limited ability to adhere to syn-
tactic constraints online.
Finally, we would like to highlight the experimental design in Covey et al. (2022), who examined 
the processing of wh-dependencies and is to our knowledge one of the first L2 ERP studies to not rely 
on a violation paradigm. Although the examination of brain responses to ungrammatical sentences 
has yielded interesting results, the focus on grammatical violations, particularly in studies that 
include an acceptability judgment task, may encourage the use of metalinguistic knowledge and thus 
makes it more challenging to understand L2 processing in more natural contexts. The experimental 
design used by Covey et al. (2022) builds directly on the psycholinguistic paradigm pioneered by 
Stowe (1986). There are many such domains in which the psycholinguistics literature can inspire the 
neurolinguistics literature in its examination of fully grammatical but “challenging” contexts such as 
garden path sentences, which would allow for an examination of structure building and reanalysis, 
addressing recent proposals in the L2 literature that learners differ from native speakers in their 
ability to reanalyze a syntactic structure on the basis of further input (e.g., Cunnings, 2017). The 
psycholinguistics literature could also be a source of inspiration for future L1 and L2 ERP studies on 
the prediction of syntactic structure. Evidence for structure prediction (outside of the domain mor-
phosyntax) is still relatively limited (see Kaan et al., 2016), and the field may benefit from revisiting 
psycholinguistic paradigms that have been argued to reflect structural prediction in various contexts 
(e.g., Staub & Clifton, 2006; Yoshida, 2006; Yoshida et al., 2013; see Ferreira & Qiu, 2021). Overall, 
the future directions we suggest are aligned towards systematically focusing on specific linguistic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
143
phenomena that provide test cases for the kinds of mechanisms underlying processing for natives 
and L2 learners and using experimental designs that allow for a more direct test of theories in L2 
acquisition.
Note
1	 Although V3 sentences did not yield the purported ELAN, the critical word had different baselines in V2 
(e.g., …spelade hon) and V3 sentences (e.g., …idag hon).
Further Readings
This book provides an overview of research on the cognitive neuroscience of language:
Hickok, G., & Small, S.L. (2015). Neurobiology of language. Elsevier.
This paper provides an overview of key theoretical issues in the L2 sentence processing literature:
Hopp, H. (2022). Second language sentence processing. Annual Review of Linguistics, 8, 235–256. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1146/annurev-linguistics-030821-05411d
This issue of Brain Research presents cutting-edge studies on prediction in native speakers:
Onnis, L., & Huettig, F. (2021). Recent advances in prediction in language processing research. Special Issue, 
Brain Research, 1757.
Authors’ Note
All authors contributed equally. Correspondence can be addressed to Alison Gabriele, Department of Linguistics, 
1541 Lilac Lane, Lawrence, KS 66045. Email: gabriele@ku.edu
References
Andersson, A., Sayehli, S., & Gullberg, M. (2019). Language background affects online word order processing 
in a second language but not offline. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(4), 802–825. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728918000573
Altmann, G.T.M., & Mirković, J. (2009). Incrementality and prediction in human sentence processing. Cognitive 
Science, 33, 583–609. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1551-6709.2009.01022.x
Bardel, C., & Falk, Y. (2007). The role of the second language in third language acquisition: the case of Germanic 
syntax. Second Language Research, 23, 459–484. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0267658307080557
Bovolenta, G., & Husband, E.M. (2022). Structural prediction during language comprehension revealed by elec-
trophysiology: Evidence from Italian auxiliaries. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/xlm0001115
Bowden, H.W., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.T. (2013). Native-like brain processing of syntax can 
be attained by university foreign language learners. Neuropsychologia, 51, 2492–2511. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.09.004
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: An empirical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures in Government and Binding. Dordrecht: Foris.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(1), 
3–42. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0142716406060024
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2018). Some notes on the shallow structure hypothesis. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 40, 693–706. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263117000250
Covey, L., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2022). Island sensitivity in L2 learners: evidence from acceptability 
judgments and event-related potentials. Second Language Research. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676583221116039
Cunnings, I. (2017). Parsing and working memory in bilingual sentence processing. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 20(4), 659–678. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1366728916000675
Dallas. A., DeDe, G., & Nicol, J. (2013). An event-related potential (ERP) of filler-gap processing in native and 
second language speakers. Language Learning, 63(4), 766–799. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/lang.12026
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
144
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dussias, P.E., & Piñar, P. (2010). Effects of reading span and plausibility in the reanalysis of wh gaps by 
Chinese–English second language speakers. Second Language Research, 26(4), 443–472. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658310373326
Federmeier, K. (2007). Thinking ahead: The role and roots of prediction in language comprehension. 
Psychophysiology, 44, 491–505. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2007.00531.x
Felser, C., Clahsen, H., & Münte, T.F. (2003). Storage and integration in the processing of filler-gap dependen-
cies: An ERP study of topicalization and wh-movement in German. Brain and Language, 87, 345–354. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00135-4
Felser, C., & Cunnings, I. (2012). Processing of reflexives in a second language: the timing of structural and 
discourse-level constraints. Applied Psycholinguistics, 33, 571–603. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S014271641
1000488
Ferreira, F., & Qiu, Z. (2021). Predicting syntactic structure. Brain Research, 1770, 147632. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147632
Fiebach, C.J., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A.D. (2002). Separating syntactic memory costs and syntactic inte-
gration costs during parsing: The processing of German WH-questions. Journal of Memory and Language, 
47(2), 250–272. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0749-596X(02)00004-9
Frazier, L. (1987). Processing syntactic structures: Evidence from Dutch. Natural Language and Linguistic 
Theory, 5, 519–559. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00138988
Frazier, L., & Flores D’Arcais, G.B. (1989). Filler-driven parsing: A study of gap-filling in Dutch. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 28, 331–344. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(89)90037-5
Friederici, A.D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
6(2), 78–84. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01839-8
Fromont, L.A. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Fromont, L.A., Royle, P., & Steinhauer, K. (2020). Growing Random Forests reveals that exposure and profi-
ciency best account for individual variability in L2 (and L1) brain potentials for syntax and semantics. Brain 
and Language, 204, 104770. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104770
Gabriele, A., Alemán Bañón, J., Hoffman, L., Covey, L., Rossomondo, A., & Fiorentino, R. (2021). Examining 
variability in the processing of agreement in novice learners: evidence from event-related potentials. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 47(7), 1106–1140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000983
Gouvea, A.C., Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Poeppel, D. (2010). The linguistic processes underlying the P600. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 25, 149–188. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01690960902965951
Grüter, T., Rohde, H., & Schafer, A.J. (2017). Coreference and discourse coherence in L2: The roles of gram-
matical aspect and referential form. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 7(2), 199−229. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1075/lab.15011.gru
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A.D. (2001). Processing a second language: Late learners’ comprehension mechanisms 
as revealed by event-related brain potentials. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 4(2), 123–141. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1366728901000232
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A.D. (2002). Differential task effects on semantic and syntactic processes as revealed by 
ERPs. Cognitive Brain Research, 13, 339–356. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0926-6410(01)00127-6
Harris, T., Wexler, K., & Holcomb, P. (2000). An ERP investigation of binding and coreference. Brain and 
Language, 75(3), 313–346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/brln.2000.2318
Håkansson, G., Pienemann, M., & Sayehli, S. (2002). Transfer and typological proximity in the context of 
second language processing. Second Language Research, 18, 250–273. http://dx.doi.org/10.1191/026765
8302sr206oa
Hopp, H. (2022). Second language sentence processing. Annual Review of Linguistics, 8, 235–256. http://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-linguistics-030821-054113
Ito, A., Pickering, M.J., & Corley, M. (2018). Investigating the time-course of phonological prediction in native 
and non-native speakers of English: A visual world eye-tracking study. Journal of Memory and Language, 98, 
1−11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.09.002
Jacob, G., & Felser, C. (2016). Reanalysis and semantic persistence in native and non-native garden path 
recovery. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69(5), 907–925. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/17470
218.2014.984231
Jessen, A., & Felser, C. (2019). Reanalysing object gaps during non-native sentence processing: Evidence from 
ERPs. Second Language Research, 35(2), 285−300. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0267658317753030
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
145
Jessen, A., Festman, J., Boxell, O., & Felser, C. (2017). Native and non-native speakers’ brain responses to filled 
indirect object gaps. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 46(5), 1319−1338. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10
936-017-9496-9
Johnson, L., Fitzhugh, M.C., Yi, Y., Mickelsen, S., Baxter, L.C., Howard, P., & Rogalsky, C. (2018). Functional 
neuroanatomy of second language sentence comprehension: An fMRI study of late learners of American Sign 
Language. Frontiers in Psychology, 9(1626). http://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01626
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: The influence of mat-
urational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60–99. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90003-0
Kaan, E. (2007). Event-related potentials and language processing: A brief overview. Language and Linguistics 
Compass, 1(6), 571–591. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818X.2007.00037.x
Kaan, E. (2014). Predictive sentence processing in L1 and L2. What’s different? Linguistic Approaches to 
Bilingualism, 4, 257–282. http://dx.doi.org/10.1075/lab.4.2.05kaa
Kaan, E. (this volume). The neurocognition of prediction in second language processing and learning. In K. 
Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kaan, E., Harris, A., Gibson, E., & Holcomb, P. (2000). The P600 as an index of syntactic integration difficulty. 
Language and Cognitive Processes, 15, 159–201. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/016909600386084
Kaan, E., Kirkham, J., & Wijnen, F. (2016). Prediction and integration in native and second-language processing 
of elliptical structures. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(1): 1–18. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1366728914000844
Kim, K.H.S., Relkin, N.R., Lee, K.M., & Hirsch, J. (1997). Distinct cortical areas associated with native and 
second languages. Nature, 388, 171–174. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/40623
Kim, A., & Osterhout, L. (2005). The independence of combinatory semantic processing: Evidence from 
event-related potentials. Journal of Memory and Language, 52(2), 205–225. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2004.10.002
King, J.W., & Kutas, M. (1995). Who did what and when? Using word-and clause-level ERPs to monitor 
working memory usage in reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 7, 376–395. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.1995.7.3.376
Kluender, R., & Kutas, M. (1993). Bridging the gap: Evidence from ERPs on the processing of unbounded 
dependencies. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 5, 196–214. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1993.5.2.196
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lau, E.F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for semantics: (de)constructing the N400. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9, 920–933. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nrn2532
Lenneberg, E.H. (1967). Biological Foundations of Language. Wiley.
Lewis, S., & Phillips, C. (2015). Aligning grammatical theories and language processing models. Journal of 
Psycholinguistic Research, 44, 27–46. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1007/s10936-014-9329-z
Liang, L., Wen, Y., & Dong, Y. (2018). Gender constraint in L1 and L2 reflexive pronoun resolution by Chinese-
English bilinguals. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 45, 1–12. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2017.08.001
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Matchin, W., & Hickok, G. (2020). The cortical organization of syntax. Cerebral Cortex, 30, 1481–1498. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhz180
Mickan, A., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). Tracking syntactic conflict between languages over the course of L2 acqui-
sition: A cross-sectional ERP study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(5), 822–846. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1162/jocn_a_01528
Michel, D. (2014). Individual cognitive measures and working memory accounts of syntactic island phenomena. 
Doctoral Dissertation, University of California, San Diego.
Molinaro, N., Barber, H.A., & Carreiras, M. (2011). Grammatical agreement processing in reading: ERP findings 
and future directions. Cortex, 47, 909–930. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.02.019
Müller, J.L., Hahne, A., Fujii, Y., & Friederici, A.D. (2005). Native and nonnative speakers’ processing of a mini-
ature version of Japanese as revealed by ERPs. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(8), 1229–1244. https://
psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1162/0898929055002463
Osterhout, L., & Mobley, L. (1995). Event related potentials elicited by failure to agree. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 34, 739–773. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1995.1033
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

José Alemán Bañón, Robert Fiorentino, and Alison Gabriele
146
Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Pitkanen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & Molinaro, N. (2006). Novice learners, 
longitudinal designs, and event-related potentials: A means for exploring the neurocognition of 
second language processing. Language Learning, 56(Suppl 1), 199–230. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9922.2006.00361.x
Pakulak, E., & Neville, H.J. (2011). Maturational constraints on the recruitment of early processes for 
syntactic processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 2752–2765. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2010.21586
Pan, H. (1997). Constraints on reflexivization in Mandarin Chinese. New York, NY: Garland.
Perani, D., Paulesu, E., Sebastián Gallés, N., Dupoux, E., Dehaene, S., Bettinardi, V., et al. (1998). The bilingual 
brain. Proficiency and age of acquisition of the second language. Brain, 121(10), 1841–1852. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/brain/121.10.1841
Phillips, C., Kazanina, N., & Abada, S.H. (2005). ERP effects of the processing of syntactic long-distance depend-
encies. Cognitive Brain Research, 22(3), 407−428. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2004.09.012
Ross, J. (1967). Constraints on variables in syntax. Doctoral Dissertation, MIT.
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural neuroimaging to investigate second language. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Rossi, S., Gugler, M.F., Friederici, A.D., & Hahne, A. (2006). The impact of proficiency on syntactic second-
language processing of German and Italian: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 18, 2030–2048. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.12.2030
Sakai, K.L., Miura, K., Narafu, N., & Muraishi, Y. (2004). Correlated functional changes of the prefrontal cortex 
in twins induced by classroom education of second language. Cerebral Cortex, 14(11), 1233–1239. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhh084
Schwartz, B.D., & Sprouse, R.A. (1996). L2 cognitive states and the full transfer/full access model. Second 
Language Research, 12(1), 40–72. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/026765839601200103
Scimeca, M., Carpenter, E., & Kiran, S. (this volume). Aphasia, rehabilitation, and second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Staub, A., & Clifton, C. (2006). Syntactic prediction in language comprehension: evidence from either…or. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(2), 425–436. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1037/0278-7393.32.2.425
Steinhauer, K., & Drury, J.E. (2012). On the early left-anterior negativity (ELAN) in syntax studies. Brain and 
Language, 120, 135–162. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2011.07.001
Steinhauer, K., White, E.J., & Drury, J.E. (2009). Temporal dynamics of late second language acquisi-
tion: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Second Language Research, 25, 13–41. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1177/0267658308098995
Stowe, L. (1986). Parsing wh–constructions: Evidence for online gap location. Language and Cognitive 
Processes, 1, 227–245. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01690968608407062
Sulpizio, S., Del Maschio, N., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Bilingual language processing: A meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 108, 834–853. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.014
Tanenhaus, M.K., Spivey-Knowlton, M.J., Eberhard, K.M., & Sedivy, J.C. (1995). Integration of visual and lin-
guistic information in spoken language comprehension. Science, 268(5217), 1632–1634. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1126/science.7777863
Tanner, D., Grey, S., & van Hell, J.G. (2017). Dissociating retrieval interference and reanalysis in the P600 
during sentence comprehension. Psychophysiology, 54(2), 248–259. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12788
Ullman, M.T. (2001). A neurocognitive perspective on language: The declarative/procedural model. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 2, 717–726. http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/35094573
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative/procedural model. 
Cognition, 92, 231–270. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.008
Wartenburger, I., Heekeren, H.R., Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S.F., Villringer, A., & Perani, D. (2003). Early 
setting of grammatical processing in the bilingual brain. Neuron, 37, 159–170. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(02)01150-9
Weber-Fox, C., & Neville, H.J. (1996). Maturational constraints on functional specializations for language pro-
cessing: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 8, 231–256. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1996.8.3.231
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Syntactic System
147
Wicha, N.Y.Y., Moreno, E.M., & Kutas, M. (2004). Anticipating words and their gender: An event-related brain 
potential study of semantic integration, gender expectancy, and gender agreement in Spanish sentence reading. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(7), 1272–1288. http://dx.doi.org/10.1162/0898929041920487
Yamamoto, K., & Sakai, K. L. (2016). The dorsal rather than ventral pathway better reflects individual syn-
tactic abilities in second language. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 10(295). http://dx.doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2016.00295
Yoshida, M. (2006). Constraints and mechanisms in long-distance dependency formation [Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation]. University of Maryland, College Park.
Yoshida, M., Dickey, M.W., & Sturt, P. (2013). Predictive processing of syntactic structure: Sluicing and ellipsis 
in real-time sentence processing. Language and Cognitive Processes, 28(3), 272–302. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1080/01690965.2011.622905
 
 
 
 
 

148
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-14
11
THE NEUROLINGUISTICS 
OF THE SECOND LANGUAGE 
PRAGMATIC SYSTEM
Francesca M. M. Citron
Introduction and Critical Definitions
The field of pragmatics is concerned with the comprehension of meaning in context. Pragmatic com-
petence allows us, for example, to make sense of seemingly unrelated utterances or to infer a request 
from a statement. See the ­examples below:
(1)  Mum:  Do we have fruit?
     Son:  Dad is buying apples.
(2)  It’s quite warm in here.
In (1) the son’s answer is not a direct yes/no response; nevertheless, based on our knowledge of the 
world we understand the relevance of his answer, which goes one step further to provide an upcoming 
solution to the lack of fruit. Only new information is explicitly provided to make communication 
efficient, given that the rest can be easily inferred, i.e.: (a) there is no fruit (b) but there will be some. 
Similarly, in an appropriate context, (2) can be interpreted as a request to open a window to lower the 
temperature. Pragmatic competence requires a range of non-verbal skills beyond language mastery 
such as: inferring implied meaning, understanding the intention of the speaker by walking a mile in 
their shoes (theory of mind), generating alternative meanings and selecting the most appropriate one 
for a given context (executive control); finally, integration of background and culture-specific know-
ledge within a communicative interaction.
Second language (L2) or intercultural pragmatics is concerned with how meaning in context is 
understood and negotiated between speakers of different native languages or speakers of the same 
native language but with different cultures (e.g., Portuguese versus Brazilian). For example, in Italian 
“Listen!” is a positive way to draw someone’s attention before communicating something; however, 
to a British English speaker such an utterance would imply that they haven’t been listening. One of 
the most influential theories of intercultural pragmatics is the Socio-Cognitive Approach by Kecskes 
(2014) which combines cognitive, social, and interactional elements by taking into account the com-
municative intention of the speaker (a priori) and the co-constructed intention that emerges during 
the actual social communicative experience (post factum). Interlocutors from different cultures are 
continually searching for meaning using their individual minds within a socio-cultural context by 
negotiating and co-constructing norms of interaction that are unique to their intercultural communi-
cative situation (Kecskes, 2014; Kecskes & Zhang, 2009); as a result, new pragmatic norms are often 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
149
set (Pennycook, 2009). This approach is particularly helpful in current times of globalization: with 
English as a Lingua Franca being used worldwide for communication by a larger number of non-
native than native speakers, intercultural pragmatics has moved away from the concept of language 
learner to embrace the alternative concept of language user (Firth & Wagner, 1997).
The large body of extant research on L2 pragmatics is applied research that stems from L2 learning 
and teaching; it has been concerned with how to teach pragmatic phenomena such as politeness rules 
and expressions, and how to assess their mastery after learning. Most of the time, language produc-
tion tasks have been employed. In contrast, research on pragmatics within one target language and 
culture has had less of an applied focus, exploring how different pragmatic phenomena are processed 
by listeners or readers, looking at different processing stages and at which linguistic and non-verbal 
skills are needed for comprehension. This body of research has focused on more automatic, often 
implicit online processes, employing psycho- and neurolinguistic methods such as response times 
(button press), eye-movements, physiological and brain activity measures during the comprehension 
of meaning in context, with little to no attention to meaning production.
The aim of the present chapter is to integrate these two apparently separate fields by reviewing: (1) 
any extant neurolinguistic research on L2 pragmatics, highlighting its precious contributions to the 
field when compared to more traditional applied research; (2) extant neurolinguistic research on spe-
cific pragmatic phenomena in native speakers, which would be worth extending to L2 speakers, 
highlighting the benefits. The main focus throughout is on neurolinguistic research on pragmatics in 
L2 speakers and differences between L2 and native speakers.
Historical Perspectives
Theories of Conversational Pragmatics
In everyday communication, much meaning is implied because it would be inefficient, tedious and 
time-consuming to make any single piece of information explicit. This requires listeners/readers to 
infer meaning, by generating conversational implicatures (Grice, 1975/1989), i.e., inferences based 
on contextual factors and conventions typically observed in conversation. To account for how implied 
meaning is inferred in conversation, Grice has posited the Cooperative Principle (Grice, 1975/1989, 
p. 26): “Make your contribution such as is required, at the stage at which it occurs, by the accepted 
purpose or direction of the talk exchange in which you are engaged.”
In other words, this principle suggests one gives enough information for the needs of the current 
conversational exchange. It is further specified by four maxims that prescribe how much information 
to provide (Maxim of Quantity), that the content must be based on truthful and actual knowledge 
(Quality) and be relevant (Relevance), and that one must avoid obscure, ambiguous, overly lengthy 
and confused information (Grice, 1975/1989, pp. 26–27). In the case of (1) above, the apparent lack 
of cooperation, e.g., the fact that the son does not answer “No, we don’t have fruit,” is a signal to the 
mum to find cooperation at a deeper level, namely to infer what is not explicitly said by generating a 
conversational implicature.
Grice’s influential theory provided an account of the general standards governing verbal commu-
nication and led to predictions of a two-stage process whereby meaning is first extracted independ-
ently of context: if the utterance adheres to the cooperative principle, then no additional processing 
is required, whereas if one of the maxims is violated, then the listener/reader needs to infer implied 
meaning to find cooperation at a deeper level. This will lead to longer processing times. However, 
much psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic research has shown that a two-stage process is not always 
needed, that available contextual cues are immediately used to make sense of the conversational 
exchange, and help predict which meaning is intended by the speaker/writer (e.g., Beeman et al., 
2000; Glucksberg, 2001; Penolazzi et al., 2007).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
150
A further influential framework for pragmatic processing is Relevance Theory, according to which 
“Human cognition tends to be geared toward the maximization of relevance” (Sperber & Wilson, 
1995, p. 260); humans are viewed as information processing systems whose cognitive functions 
(e.g., perception, attention, memory) are constrained, and who need to select what is most relevant 
to avoid getting overwhelmed by the amount of information the environment provides. Relevance is 
determined by extracting the most information for the least effort, therefore obtaining maximum cog-
nitive effects. Successful communication will take place if the information conveyed by the speaker 
in a specific context to a specific audience will be relevant, i.e., it will consist of new, interesting 
information, and the message will be not too complex and not too simple to understand. Relevance 
theory considers human cognition in explaining communicative exchanges, assumes less cooperation 
than Grice, and includes both implicit and explicit information, with no clear distinction; further-
more, relevance principles apply automatically, with no need to go through norms and violations as 
in Grice’s maxims, or separate processing stages. Finally, Relevance Theory is more compatible with 
models and empirical evidence that postulate concurrent processing of a range of information cues 
in the environment.
Traditional Research on L2 Pragmatics
Historically, research on L2 pragmatics has focused on speech acts and politeness. Speech acts are 
utterances that perform a communicative action such as refusal, assertion, request, and apology. 
Speech Act Theory revolutionized the traditional view of utterances as true/false assertions to posit 
that utterances “do things” (Austin, 1962), e.g.: “Sorry!” or “I nominate you to be the representative.”
This body of research compared speech acts, such as requests and apologies, across different 
languages, investigating how these change across situations, or how many different speech strat-
egies exist in a language (e.g., Blum-Kulka & Olshtain, 1984). Using a discourse completion task 
(DCT), which involves presenting speakers with a scenario followed by a blank space that elicits a 
targeted speech act utterance (e.g., Yuan, 2001), this work identified potential areas of difficulty due 
to differences between languages (Gass & Neu, 2009); it also showed that proficiency and length 
of study led to higher pragmatic competence in L2 speakers (e.g., Bardovi-Harlig & Bastos, 2011); 
nevertheless, it concluded overall that pragmatic competence is difficult to define, measure and com-
pare across languages (Culpeper et al., 2018).
Subsequent research on teaching and assessment of pragmatics in L2 has also predominantly 
focused on speech acts, and particularly requests (although formulaic language has also received 
attention) as well as the use of technology in teaching pragmatics (e.g., Taguchi, 2015); meta-analyses 
concluded that pragmatics can certainly be taught, that structurally simple pragmatic utterances (e.g., 
greetings) are easier to learn, and that explicit instruction on the pragmatic rules of a target language/
culture is more effective than implicit teaching (e.g., Plonsky, 2011), although the latter can be just 
as effective if it promotes noticing of the pragmatic function of the utterance, and deeper processing 
of it (Taguchi, 2015). This led to the development of teacher guides (e.g., Martínez-Flor & Usó-Juan, 
2006) and online resources (Cohen, 2016). With regards to assessment, different methods have been 
developed and an integration of DCT, role plays, self-assessment surveys, interviews, and others, has 
proven useful to test acquisition of a range of pragmatic utterances, from speech acts to implicatures 
and routines (e.g., Bardovi-Harlig & Shin, 2014; Roever, 2011).
Only more recently the study of L2 pragmatics has expanded to include comprehension of 
implicatures, routines and discourse comprehension more generally, by starting to incorporate 
psycholinguistic studies of online comprehension to complement more traditional approaches 
outlined above. However, only routines and discourse comprehension have featured neurolinguistic 
experiments. In the following two sections, a brief outline of research findings on routines using 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
151
more traditional corpus, teaching, and assessment approaches will be provided, to then delve into 
neurolinguistic studies. The complementarity of different approaches and the crucial contribution of 
neurolinguistics to our understanding of pragmatic routines in L2 speakers will be discussed.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
Pragmatic Routines: Traditional Applied Research
Pragmatic routines are fixed linguistic forms or chunks whose meanings are systematic and 
conventionalized according to a particular context. They include formulaic expressions (FEs) such 
as “Ladies and Gentlemen,” which requests attention and is associated with the opening of a formal 
occasion. FEs are extensively used in daily communication because their salient meanings are easily 
accessible and retrievable from memory, therefore allowing interlocutors to achieve more cognitive 
effects with less processing effort (e.g., Giora, 1999; Sinclair, 1991; Sperber & Wilson, 1995).
Research on the use of routines, mainly based on corpus studies, has shown that L2 speakers do 
make use of FEs in relevant contexts when they know them, i.e., they generate less FEs than native 
speakers, and create their own FEs during interactions (Kecskes, 2015, 2016). Furthermore, fre-
quency is a key determinant of processing and use of FEs in L2 speakers, who are less sensitive to 
meaning salience than native speakers (Ellis et al., 2008).
While corpus linguistics does not help to distinguish between frequently occurring collocations 
(e.g., bride and groom; black and white) and pragmatic routines/FEs, relevant work on the acqui-
sition of routines has combined corpus data with discourse elicitation tasks in both native and L2 
speakers of a target language to help identify conventional FEs (Bardovi-Harlig et al., 2015). This 
research investigated why L2 learners have less routines in their repertoire and use less routines than 
native speakers (House, 1996), showing that, as L2 proficiency increased, acceptance of authentic 
FEs also increased, while acceptance of modified versions decreased (Bardovi-Harlig et al., 2010). 
Other studies showed that, even at lower levels of proficiency, L2 learners were able to accurately 
judge the naturalness of FEs in context and to select appropriate FEs for a given situational context 
(Edmonds, 2014). Research on production is in line with the previously mentioned corpus research 
in showing evidence of creation of new FEs and the development of interlanguage pragmatics (e.g., 
Bardovi-Harlig & Stringer, 2017; Taguchi et al., 2013; Tateyama et al., 1997).
Pragmatic Routines: Neural Evidence
FEs, such as idioms and metaphors, have received attention in psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic 
research on L2 processing. This research is highly relevant as it provides a detailed timeline of how 
formulaic expressions are processed, from the initial presentation of an expression (in written or 
spoken form) up until a response is given (e.g., judgment or categorization). It also provides an over-
view of the neural network and associated cognitive functions at play during comprehension.
Idiom Comprehension: Neural Evidence
According to Wray (2002), formulaic expressions are sequences of words or other elements that 
appear to be prefabricated, i.e., stored and retrieved whole from memory, instead of being generated 
by the language grammar. A predominant type of FE in daily communication consist of idioms, 
e.g., She spilled the beans, which are preferred over literal expressions because of humans’ natural 
tendency to economy of effort (idiom principle; Sinclair, 1991; see also Sperber & Wilson, 1995). 
Idioms are the most conventionalized form of FE, given that their meaning is found in dictionaries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
152
and can be specialized but not radically modified by context or phrasal modifications (e.g., She 
didn’t spill a single bean or I’m going to spill the beans retain the same idiomatic meaning of 
“revealing a secret”). One of the most influential theories of idiom processing states that these are 
initially processed incrementally (word by word) until a recognition point is reached, at which the 
hearer recognizes it as idiom; at this point, incremental processing stops and the idiomatic meaning 
is retrieved from memory as a whole (Configuration Hypothesis; Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988). 
However, Cieślika (2006) suggests that the literal interpretation of idioms is more salient to L2 
speakers; proficient L2 speakers represent the literal, less salient, meaning even when they know 
the idiomatic meaning and even within a context supporting the idiomatic interpretation (Cieślika 
& Heredia, 2011).
Measures of online processing, such as behavioral, eye-movement, and electrophysiological 
studies, on native speakers have supported the Configuration Hypotheses (Cacciari & Tabossi, 1988) 
showing: (a) faster response times to idioms compared to literal or novel metaphorical expressions; 
(b) an advantage in late eye-movement measures during natural reading, i.e., faster total reading time 
for idioms, a smaller number of fixations, and shorter fixations overall (Carrol & Littlemore, 2020; 
Siyanova-Chanturia et al., 2011; Underwood et al., 2004); and (c) less semantic integration costs 
indexed by smaller amplitude of the N400 component (Laurent et al., 2006; Paulmann et al., 2015; 
Strandburg et al., 1993; Vespignani et al., 2010); crucially, (d) after the recognition point, evidence 
of automatic idiom retrieval from memory has been provided by the observation of a P300 compo-
nent in response to idioms (Canal et al., 2017; Vespignani et al., 2010) or highly predictable sentence 
closures (Roehm et al., 2007). This neural signature is crucial to prove automatic memory retrieval; 
in fact, shorter response times can otherwise be accounted for by other factors, such as frequency 
(for details on electrophysiological methodology and ERP components, see Dickson & Pelzl, this 
volume).
As previously mentioned, L2 speakers show a slightly different pattern of results. Eye movement 
studies show a smaller number of fixations to idioms than literal or novel strings, however no 
differences in either early or late measures of reading times (Underwood et al., 2004). Furthermore, 
L2 speakers need more time to retrieve idiomatic than literal meanings of ambiguous idioms 
embedded in story contexts that bias toward one interpretation or the other (Siyanova-Chanturia et al., 
2011). Nevertheless, at high levels of proficiency, native-like eye-movement patterns were found 
(Carrol et al., 2016). Similar processing of phrasal verbs by proficient L2 and native speakers was 
also reported, whereby literal uses evoked a larger N400 amplitude than figurative uses (Paulmann 
et al., 2015).
Metaphor Comprehension: Neural Evidence
When it comes to metaphors, e.g., That was a bitter breakup, slightly different processing mechanisms 
are at play. On a continuum that goes from prefabricated language to ad hoc generated language, 
conventional metaphors constitute less conventionalized expressions than idioms as their meaning 
is less strictly defined and can change depending on context. Metaphors are not simply commonly 
used expressions; rather, they help us understand abstract concepts in more concrete terms through 
conceptual mappings, e.g., in the example above “bitter taste” is used to conceptualize something 
“bad” (Gibbs, 2006; Lakoff & Johnson, 1980). Conceptual mappings, e.g., KIND is WARM, underlie 
a range of different conventional metaphors (i.e., She has a sunny disposition; He’s a warm person; 
Warmth oozes from him), while novel metaphors used in poetry and literary texts are creative 
extensions of existing mappings (e.g., Steen & Gibbs, 2004). However, the Emergentist Account of 
metaphor challenges the latter stance to show the role of language use and (non-literary) discourse in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
153
the generation of novel metaphors that rely on new conceptual mappings, some of which gradually 
become conventional and frequently used (Cameron & Deignan, 2006).
Conventional metaphors are typically processed as quickly as literal expressions by native speakers 
(Giora, 1999; Glucksberg, 1998; Keysar, 1989). However, at the neural level stronger engagement 
of the bilateral extended language network (ELN; Ferstl, 2010; Ferstl et al., 2008) is found for con-
ventional metaphors, and in particular the left inferior frontal gyrus and left superior temporal gyrus, 
indexing activation and selection of multiple semantic representations, and semantic and pragmatic 
processing, respectively (Bohrn et al., 2012). Novel metaphors are instead more difficult to pro-
cess than both conventional metaphorical and literal expressions and engage the ELN to a much 
larger extent (Bohrn et al., 2012; Rapp et al., 2012). Novel metaphors are also more likely to involve 
the right hemisphere since they require semantic associations between distant concepts (Cardillo 
et al., 2012; Yang, 2014). Event-related potentials clearly show higher semantic integration costs 
due to contextual expectations, indexed by a graded effect on the N400 component, which has larger 
amplitude for conventional metaphors than literal expressions, and even larger for novel metaphors 
(Bambini et al., 2016; Lai & Curran, 2013; Weiland et al., 2014). In addition, some studies report 
larger amplitude of a late positive component for metaphors (LPC; some authors labelled it P600), 
indexing interpretation and pragmatic integration processes that are independent of context (Bambini 
et al., 2016; Rataj et al., 2018; Weiland et al., 2014).
L2 speakers, even when highly proficient, typically show stronger activation of the ELN than 
native speakers during language processing, independently of whether the expression is metaphor-
ical or literal (Citron et al., 2020; Marian et al., 2003; Perani & Abutalebi, 2005). Additionally, 
they show activation of the language-switching network, even during tasks that involve only the L2 
and require no switching (e.g., Citron et al., 2020; Luk et al., 2011); this network involves execu-
tive control functions in the prefrontal cortex, the anterior cingulate cortex, but also the caudate 
nucleus (within the basal ganglia). Interestingly, in addition to showing less clear-cut distinction 
between metaphorical and literal language (Citron et al., 2020),1 L2 speakers tend to process conven-
tional metaphors more similarly to novel metaphors, involving the right hemisphere more strongly, 
even when they know their meaning (Mashal et al., 2015). Converging evidence comes from ERP 
research that shows larger amplitude of the LPC in response to conventional and novel metaphors 
compared to literal expressions in L2 speakers, while a clear distinction between the two metaphor-
ical conditions was observed only in their native language (L1; Jankowiak et al., 2017). More gen-
erally, proficient L2 speakers show more effortful processing for metaphors than literal expressions, 
and for metaphors in their L2 than in L1, both indexed by larger amplitude of the N400 component 
(Chen et al., 2013).
Overall, conventionalized expressions such as idioms and conventional metaphors are processed 
more efficiently and lead to larger cognitive effects than literal language, while novel, more creative 
expressions require more processing effort. When it comes to L2 speakers, the processing effort 
involved in processing conventionalized expressions may outweigh the cognitive effects; therefore, 
L2 speakers end up using less FEs or making up new FEs based on their native language to try 
and create more cognitive effects. Using more traditional methods from applied L2 pragmatics, one 
can only infer L2 speakers’ struggle despite their high proficiency, given that they show similar 
understanding and acceptance of FEs as native speakers. Yet, neurolinguistics shows that their online 
processing is still quite far off the one observed in native speakers. Also, neurolinguistics provides 
proof of the larger cognitive effects of conventional metaphors, i.e., stronger activation of the ELN, 
which are otherwise as easy to process as their literal counterparts if one looks at reading times or 
offline comprehension measures. Hence, the rhetorical advantage provided by (even conventional) 
FEs can be more subtly picked up by neurolinguistic methods.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
154
Discourse Comprehension: Neural Evidence
Psycho/neurolinguistic research has investigated the comprehension of expository or narrative 
texts, which requires non-verbal cognitive functions beyond linguistic knowledge. Topics include 
integration of linguistic information in context, establishment of text coherence, drawing of tem-
poral or causal inferences to connect events, processing of semantic and pragmatic incongruencies, 
and violation of expectations based on world knowledge. These phenomena are tightly related to 
conversational pragmatics and relevant to L2 pragmatics. However, neurolinguistic studies so far 
have investigated whether pragmatic processing differs in L2 speakers independently of cultural 
differences. This section provides a review of initial neurolinguistic research on text/discourse com-
prehension in L2 speakers.
Text or discourse comprehension involves the construction of different mental representations: (a) 
an initial surface structure or verbatim representation, which will quickly decay from memory; 
followed by (b) a text-base representation, containing the main relational terms, predicates and 
arguments, i.e., gist-like memory, enriched by bridging inferences which help establish text coher-
ence; (c) an overall mental model of what the text is about, the situation model, constructed by 
integrating information from the text with the reader’s background and world knowledge; this 
goes beyond explicit information to include interpretations and the drawing of temporal and causal 
inferences (Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978).
Foucart et al. (2016) investigated the time course of discourse comprehension in L2 and native 
speakers using three-sentence texts with different degrees of causal relatedness, and asked participants 
to rate how easy it is to connect the outcome sentence to the initial context (replication of Kuperberg 
et al., 2011, on native speakers):
(3)  Highly related:                      Jill had very fair skin
                                       She forgot to put sunscreen on
                                       She had sunburn on Monday
(4)  Intermediately related:               Jill had very fair skin
                                       She usually remembered to wear sunscreen
                                       She had sunburn on Monday
(5)  Unrelated:                       Jill’s skin always tanned well
                                       She always puts on sunscreen
                                       She had sunburn on Monday
While Kuperberg et al. (2011) reported largest N400 amplitude for causally unrelated sentences, 
followed by intermediately related and then highly related sentences, showing that the complexity 
of causal inferences needed to establish coherence affects semantic integration, Foucart et al. (2016) 
showed a clear N400 distinction in native speakers between unrelated and highly related sentences 
only, while an early distinction between intermediate and highly related sentences was found in an 
early positivity (100–200 ms). Crucially, L2 speakers also showed sensitivity to the three conditions, 
but at later processing stages than native speakers, with a larger late positivity (600–750 ms) for unre-
lated than highly related conditions, and a larger late negativity (same time window) for intermedi-
ately than highly related sentences. Behavioral responses confirmed that both native and L2 speakers 
perceived the sentences in the three conditions as increasingly more difficult to connect (Foucart 
et al., 2016). This is in line with the proposal and psycholinguistic evidence for limited resource allo-
cation to discourse-level processes during comprehension of L2 (Morishima, 2013).
Further neurolinguistic research shows that, when semantic and pragmatic processes are con-
currently at play, L2 speakers pay more attention to pragmatic factors. In another replication study, 
Foucart et al. (2015) investigated semantic and pragmatic (age and gender) incongruencies in L2 and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
155
native speakers during listening comprehension, using similar materials and design to Van Berkum 
et al. (2008), and adding a plausibility rating task:
(6)  Pragmatic (in)consistency      I talk a lot to my son on the weekend
                                   Speaker: woman (consistent) vs. girl
                                   (inconsistent)
(7)  Semantic violation            I talk a lot with my valley on the weekend
                              Speaker: woman
Van Berkum et al. (2008) found both types of incongruency to elicit larger amplitude of an early N400 
(200-700 ms) in L1 speakers, indexing early integration of both pragmatic and semantic informa-
tion, with an additional late positivity effect in response to speaker’s gender inconsistency. However, 
Foucart et al. (2015) observed an N400 effect for semantic incongruencies only, both in L1 and 
L2 speakers, although a subset of L1 speakers showed N400 sensitivity to pragmatic violations. In 
addition, pragmatic incongruencies evoked larger amplitude of a late positive component in native 
speakers (LPC; 700–1200). These results show similar semantic processing in L1 and L2, but are 
inconsistent with regards to whether pragmatic processing occurs concurrently with or later than 
semantic processing in L1 (Lattner & Friederici, 2003; Van Berkum et al., 2008).
Most importantly, pragmatic incongruencies evoked an earlier positivity in L2 speakers (P300; 
400–700 ms), suggesting that they either process pragmatic cues at earlier stages than native speakers 
or/and rely more strongly on pragmatic than semantic information. The latter suggestion is con-
sistent with L2 speakers’ lower confidence in the interpretation of semantic violations (i.e., more “I 
do not understand” answers than native speakers; Foucart et al., 2015). L2 speakers may rely more 
on speaker’s identity when they have difficulty integrating meaning. This stronger sensitivity or reli-
ance to pragmatic information is in line with psycholinguistic research on scalar implicatures (Dupuy 
et al., 2018; Slabakova, 2010) and metaphor comprehension (Johnson & Rosano, 1993), which show 
preference for pragmatic interpretations in L2 speakers, and is likely due to the fact that pragmatic 
processing is common across L1 and L2 because non-verbal, whereas lexico-semantic processing 
depends more critically on language proficiency (see Jankowiak & Rataj, 2017).
A further investigation of pragmatic and semantic processing in L2 speakers focused on the inte-
gration of world knowledge during sentence comprehension (Martin et al., 2016; replicating Martin 
et al., 2014, on native speakers):
  (8) Context                            Before the age of eight, children start to…
  (9) Correct completion                read and to write
(10) World-knowledge violation            smoke and to write
(11) Semantic violation                  bark and to write
The original study in native speakers showed that both types of violation affected the N400 amplitude, 
with largest amplitude for semantic violations, followed by pragmatic violations, and smallest for 
correct sentences (Martin et al., 2014), in line with previous similar findings, and with the suggestion 
of concurrent, parallel processing of pragmatic and semantic information in discourse comprehension 
(Hagoort et al., 2004; Kelly et al., 2004; Van Berkum et al., 2008). In addition, smaller amplitude of 
the P2 component for the semantic violation than the other conditions (Martin et al., 2014) points 
to early semantic integration, in line with similar studies in native speakers (Landi & Perfetti, 2007; 
Penolazzi et al., 2007; Pinheiro et al., 2010). L2 speakers also showed sensitivity to both types of 
violations as indexed by N400 effects; however, a similar amplitude was observed for pragmatic and 
semantic violations, each of which differed from the correct sentences (Martin et al., 2014). This 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
156
suggests either that L2 speakers are less sensitive to semantic violations, possibly because of their 
lower proficiency, or that they rely more strongly on pragmatic information, in line with previous 
arguments brought forward by Foucart et al. (2015). Furthermore, no modulation of the P2 compo-
nent in response to semantic violations was observed in L2 speakers, either because of less sensitivity 
to semantic information or later semantic integration compared to native speakers. Finally, in a group 
comparison across studies, both P2 and N400 amplitudes showed larger amplitudes in L1 than L2 
speakers.
Overall, from the studies reviewed in this section, we can conclude that L2 speakers can use 
different sources of information in parallel during discourse comprehension, similarly to native 
speakers, however the time course of these processes differs. In particular, L2 speakers are more 
sensitive to pragmatic information, while they show reduced or delayed responses to semantic infor-
mation, in line with previous psycholinguistic research (Dupuy et al., 2018; Johnson & Rosano, 
1993; Slabakova, 2010). Neurolinguistic research confirms and complements this evidence by pro-
viding a detailed overview of the time-course of online comprehension processes. However, what 
would happen at the neural level when a pragmatic violation in one language/culture is perceived as 
perfectly appropriate in another language/culture? Future research ought to address this and similar 
questions.
Speech Act Comprehension in Native Speakers: Neural Evidence
Intercultural pragmatic research on speech acts could greatly benefit from neurolinguistic studies. 
In recent years, a handful of studies has investigated the temporal unfolding and neural correlates 
of speech act comprehension in native speakers. For example, requests and naming were compared 
by presenting short videos with interacting partners talking: one partner asked the other to either 
request or name three objects among 12. In terms of temporal unfolding, ERP results showed 
that the two types of speech act are distinguished very early on (around 120 ms), showing larger 
amplitude for requests (Egorova et al., 2013). Using a very similar paradigm and stimuli, a subse-
quent MEG study showed temporal and spatial distinction whereby requests specifically activated 
action representations in the sensorimotor cortex around 50–90 ms, while naming activated areas 
associated with referential semantic retrieval (angular gyrus) around 100–150 ms. Furthermore, 
both speech acts showed recruitment of the theory of mind (ToM) network around 200–300 ms 
(Egorova et al., 2014). Finally, converging fMRI evidence, which provides better spatial reso-
lution (see also Kousaie & Klein, this volume), confirmed common (e.g., ToM network) and 
distinct activations (e.g., premotor cortices for requests) between the two types of speech acts 
(Egorova et al., 2016). Overall, these results show extremely early access to pragmatic and socio-
communicative information during language comprehension, a clear neural distinction between 
different speech acts, and a common network devoted to the understanding of the speaker’s 
intentions. These findings are in line with other neuroimaging work showing stronger recruit-
ment of the ToM network for indirect than direct replies (e.g., Bašnáková et al., 2015; Feng et al., 
2017; Van Ackeren et al., 2016), while requests for actions specifically activated motor-related 
cortices (Van Ackeren et al., 2016). Further fine-grained distinctions in the temporal unfolding 
of declinations, pre-offers and answers to questions were elegantly investigated using ERPs and 
EEG oscillations by Gisladottir et al. (2018; 2015).
Conducting similar work on L2 speakers would provide precious information on their online com-
prehension processes (see Boxer & Rossi, 2021): are L2 speakers able to distinguish among different 
speech acts as early as native speakers, or do they show later distinction? Will L2 speakers struggle 
with such differentiations and possibly need to revise initial representations to finally achieve correct 
interpretation?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
157
Current Trends and Future Directions
Neuropragmatics is also concerned with affective processes such as empathy, humor, persua-
sion, immersion during reading of narrative texts, and emotional engagement more generally. For 
example, when implied emotions are inferred during sentence comprehension, activation of the 
emotion neural network has been shown, including the amygdala, which quickly and automatically 
responds to evolutionary relevant stimuli, but also the ventro-medial prefrontal cortex, associated 
with the evaluation of affective information (Lai et al., 2015). In addition to the recruitment of ToM 
areas, previous neuroimaging work on indirect replies during job interviews showed activation of the 
bilateral anterior insula, associated with awareness of viscero-sensory bodily responses to emotive 
stimuli/events, and pregenual anterior cingulate cortex, related to empathy, when participants acted 
as interviewers rather than passive listeners (Bašnáková et al., 2015). Furthermore, recent neuro-
physiological research has shown that conventional figurative language is better suited than literal 
language in engaging readers/listeners at the emotional level, showing enhanced left amygdala acti-
vation in response to metaphorical and idiomatic expressions than their literal counterparts (Citron 
et al., 2019; Citron & Goldberg, 2014; Citron et al., 2016; Forgács et al., 2012), among other areas, 
and larger pupil dilations (Mon et al., 2021). These findings show how certain pragmatic phenomena 
give rise to rhetorical advantages. Finally, a recent study on eye movements during humor com-
prehension shows emotional reactions indexed by changes in pupil dilation, in addition to online 
punchline incongruency processing, which leads to a switch from an initial to a final interpretation, 
elegantly described by eye movements (Israel et al., 2022).
Virtually no neurocognitive work exists on emotional aspects of L2 pragmatic processes, despite 
a large body of research showing L2 speakers’ emotional distance from the L2, especially when it 
comes to taboo words or reprimands (see review by Pavlenko, 2012). Other work shows instead that 
L2 speakers are equally able to detect and process emotive content in single words and show similar 
ERP components to native speakers, although slightly delayed or with smaller amplitude (e.g., Opitz 
& Degner, 2012). Finally, bilinguals are less vulnerable to negative information and to heuristic 
biases in decision making in their L2 (Costa et al., 2014; Wu & Thierry, 2012; see also Foucart, this 
volume).
Only two neuroimaging studies related to pragmatics in L2 speakers provide initial information 
on their emotional engagement. Hsu et al. (2015) looked at brain activity during literary reading of 
happy, sad, and affectively neutral passages from Harry Potter in L1 and L2, showing clear recruit-
ment of the emotion neural network in response to happy versus neutral texts only when reading 
in the L1, while the extended-language network and ToM areas, necessary for narrative compre-
hension, were similarly recruited in L1 and L2. Further analyses showed that emotion-laden texts 
elicit a stronger and more nuanced emotional experience when read in the L1. Similarly, Citron et al. 
(2020) extended their investigation of emotional engagement in response to conventional figurative 
language to proficient L2 speakers, to find little distinction between metaphorical and literal phrases 
at the neural level. Furthermore, while affective engagement increased in response to increasingly 
more metaphorical sentences in native speakers, no additional recruitment of emotion-related neural 
structures was observed in L2 speakers, therefore pointing toward a reduced rhetorical advantage of 
figurative expressions in L2 (Citron et al., 2020). More neurolinguistic work on the affective aspects of 
pragmatics in L2 is needed; understanding what role emotion plays in L2 pragmatics may also provide 
important insights into more applied research on teaching and learning of pragmatics across languages.
Note
1	 A result confirmed by Ibáñez et al. (2010) for low-proficiency L2 speakers in ERP research showing no dis-
tinction between metaphorical and literal meanings in the N400 component.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
158
Further Readings
For a broader overview of intercultural pragmatics:
Culpeper, J., Mackey, A., & Taguchi, N. (2018). Second language pragmatics: From theory to research. 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315692388
State of the art:
Félix-Brasdefer, J.C., & Shively, R.L. (2021). New directions in second language pragmatics. De Gruyter 
Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110721775
Overview of online processing of figurative expressions in L2:
Heredia, R.R., & Cieślika, A.B. (2015). Bilingual figurative language processing. Cambridge University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139342100
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Professor Evelyn Ferstl and an anonymous reviewer for their comments on previous versions of 
this chapter.
References
Austin, J.L. (1962). How to do things with words. Harvard University Press.
Bambini, V., Bertini, C., Schaeken, W., Stella, A., & Di Russo, F. (2016). Disentangling metaphor from con-
text: An ERP study. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 559. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00559
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Bastos, M.-T. (2011). Proficiency, length of stay, and intensity of interaction, and the 
acquisition of conventional expressions in L2 pragmatics. Intercultural Pragmatics, 8, 347–384. https://doi.
org/10.1515/IPRG.2011.017
Bardovi-Harlig, K., Kasper, G., Nguyen, H.T., & Yoshimi, D.R. (2010). Recognition of conventional expressions 
in L2 pragmatics. Pragmatics and Language Learning, 12, 141–162.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., Mossman, S., & Vellenga, H.E. (2015). The effect of instruction on pragmatic routines in aca-
demic discussion. Language Teaching Research, 19, 324–350. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168814541739
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Shin, S.-Y. (2014). Expanding traditional testing measures with tasks from L2 pragmatics 
research. Iranian Journal of Language Testing, 4, 26–49.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Stringer, D. (2017). Unconventional expressions: Productive syntax in the L2 acquisition 
of formulaic language. Second Language Research, 33, 61–90. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316641725
Bašnáková, J., Van Berkum, J.J.A., Weber, K., & Hagoort, P. (2015). A job interview in the MRI scanner: How 
does indiretness affect addressees and overhears? Neuropsychologia, 76, 79–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2015.03.030
Beeman, M.J., Bowden, E.M., & Gernsbacher, M.A. (2000). Right and left hemisphere cooperation for drawing 
predictive and coherence inferences during normal story comprehension. Brain and Language, 71, 310–336. 
https://doi.org/10.1006/brln.1999.2268
Blum-Kulka, S., & Olshtain, E. (1984). Requests and apologies: A cross-cultural study of speech act realization 
patterns (CCSARP). Applied Linguistics, 5, 196–213.
Bohrn, I.C., Altmann, U., & Jacobs, A.M. (2012). Looking at the brains behind figurative language—A quantita-
tive meta-analysis of neuroimaging studies on metaphor, idiom, and irony processing. Neuropsychologia, 50, 
2669–2683. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.07.021
Boxer, D., & Rossi, E. (2021). Studying speech acts: An expanded scope and refined methodologies. In J.C. 
Félix-Brasdefer & R. Shively (Eds.), New directions in second language pragmatics. Walter De Gruyter.
Cacciari, C., & Tabossi, P. (1988). The comprehension of idioms. Journal of Memory and Language, 27, 668–
683. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(88)90014-9
Cameron, L., & Deignan, A. (2006). The emergence of metaphor in discourse. Applied Linguistics, 27, 671–690. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/aml032
Canal, P., Pesciarelli, F., Vespignani, F., Molinaro, N., & Cacciari, C. (2017). Basic composition and eriched 
integration in idiom processing: An EEG study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000351
Cardillo, E.R., Watson, C.E., Schmidt, G.L., Kranjec, A., & Chatterjee, A. (2012). From novel to familiar: Tuning 
the brain for metaphors. NeuroImage, 59, 3212–3221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.079
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
159
Carrol, G., Conklin, K., & Gyllstad, H. (2016). Found in translation. The influence of the L1 on the reading of 
idioms in a L2. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 38, 403–443. https://doi.org/10.1017/S027226311
5000492
Carrol, G., & Littlemore, J. (2020). Resolving figurative expressions during reading: The role of familiarity, trans-
parency, and context. Discourse Processes, 57, 609–626. https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2020.1729041
Chen, H., Peng, X., & Zhao, Y. (2013). An ERP study on metaphor comprehension in the bilingual brain. Chinese 
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 36, 505–517. https://doi.org/10.1515/cjal-2013-0034
Cieślika, A.B. (2006). Literal salience in on-line processing of idiomatic expressions by second language 
learners. Second Language Research, 22, 115–144.
Cieślika, A.B., & Heredia, R.R. (2011). Hemispheric asymmetries in processing L1 and L2 idioms: Effects of 
salience and context. Brain and Language, 116, 136–150. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2010.09.007
Citron, F.M.M., Cacciari, C., Funcke, J., Hsu, C.-T., & Jacobs, A.M. (2019). Idiomatic expressions evoke 
stronger emotional responses in the brain than literal sentences. Neuropsychologia, 131, 233–248. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.05.020
Citron, F.M.M., & Goldberg, A.E. (2014). Metaphorical sentences are more emotionally engaging than their lit-
eral counterparts. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 26, 2585–2595. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00654
Citron, F.M.M., Güsten, J., Michaelis, N., & Goldberg, A.E. (2016). Conventional metaphors in longer passages  
evoke affective brain response. NeuroImage, 139, 218–230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2016.06.  
020 
Citron, F.M.M., Michaelis, N., & Goldberg, A.E. (2020). Metaphorical language processing and amygdala acti-
vation in L1 and L2. Neuropsychologia, 140, 107381. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.  
107381
Cohen, A.D. (2016). The design and construction of websites to promote L2 pragmatics. In K. Bardovi-Harlig 
& J. C. Félix-Brasdefer (Eds.), Pragmatics and language learning. National Foreign Language Resource 
Centre, University of Hawai’i.
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Arnon, I., Aparici, M., & Apesteguia, J. (2014). “Piensa” twice: On the foreign language 
effect in decision making. 130, 236–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.11.010
Culpeper, J., Mackey, A., & Taguchi, N. (2018). Introduction to second language pragmatics. In J. Culpeper, A. 
Mackey, & N. Taguchi (Eds.), Second language pragmatics: From theory to research (pp. 1–24). Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315692388
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dupuy, L., Stateva, P., Andreetta, S., Cheylus, A., Déprez, V., & Henst, J.B.V.D. (2018). Pragmatic abilities in 
bilinguals: The case of scalar implicatures. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 9, 314–340. https://doi.
org/10.1075/lab.17017.dup
Edmonds, A. (2014). Conventional expressions: Investigating pragmatics and processing. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 36, 69–99. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263113000557
Egorova, N., Pulvermueller, F., & Shtyrov, Y. (2014). Neural dynamics of speech act comprehension: An MEG 
study of naming and requesting. Brain Topography, 27, 375–392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10548-013-  
0329-3
Egorova, N., Shtyrov, Y., & Pulvermueller, F. (2013). Early and parallel processing of pragmatic and semantic 
information in speech acts: neurophysiological evidence. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 86. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00086
Egorova, N., Shtyrov, Y., & Pulvermueller, F. (2016). Brain basis of communicative actions in language. 
NeuroImage, 125, 857–867. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.10.055
Ellis, N.C., Simpson-Vlach, R., & Maynard, C. (2008). Formulaic language in native and second language 
speakers: Psycholinguistics, corpus linguistics, and TESOL. TESOL Quarterly, 42, 375–396.
Feng, W., Wu, Y., Jan, C., Yu, H., Jiang, X., & Zhou, X. (2017). Effects of contextual relevance on pragmatic 
inference during conversation: An fMRI study. Brain and Language, 171, 52–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2017.04.005
Ferstl, E.C. (2010). Neuroimaging of text comprehension: Where are we now? Italian Journal of Linguistics, 
22, 61–88.
Ferstl, E.C., Neumann, J., Bogler, C., & von Cramon, D.Y. (2008). The extended language network: A meta-
analysis of neuroimaging studies on text comprehension. Human Brain Mapping, 29, 581–593.
Firth, A., & Wagner, J. (1997). On discourse, communication, and (some) fundamental concepts in SLA research. 
The Modern Language Journal, 81, 285–300.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
160
Forgács, B., Bohrn, I.C., Baudewig, J., Hofmann, M J., Csaba, P., & Jacobs, A.M. (2012). Neural correlates of 
combinatorial semantic processing of literal and figurative noun noun compound words. NeuroImage, 63, 
1432–1442. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.07.029
Foucart, A. (this volume). Moral decision making and second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
& J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Foucart, A., Garcia, X., Ayguasanosa, M., Thierry, G., Martin, C.D., & Costa, A. (2015). Does the speaker matter? 
Online processing of semantic and pragmatic information in L2 speech comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 
75, 291–303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.06.027
Foucart, A., Romero-Rivas, C., Gort, B.L., & Costa, A. (2016). Discourse comprehension in L2: Making 
sense of what is not explicitly said. Brain and Language, 163, 32–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2016.09.001
Gass, S., & Neu, J. (2009). Speech acts across cultures: challenges to comunication in a second language. 
Mouton De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110219289
Gibbs, R.W. (2006). Metaphor interpretation as embodied simulation. Mind and Language, 21, 434–458. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0017.2006.00285.x
Giora, R. (1999). On the priority of salient meanings: studies of literal and figurative language. Journal of 
Pragmatics, 31, 919–929. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378-2166(98)00100-3
Gisladottir, R.S., Bögels, S., & Levinson, S.C. (2018). Oscillatory brain responses reflect anticipation during 
comprehension of speech acts in spoken dialog. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 12, 34. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnhum.2018.00034
Gisladottir, R.S., Chwilla, D.J., & Levinson, S.C. (2015). Conversation electrified: ERP correlates of speech 
act recognition in underspecified utterances. PLoS ONE, 10, e0120068. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0120068
Glucksberg, S. (1998). Understanding metaphor. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 7, 39–43. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.ep13175582
Glucksberg, S. (2001). Understanding figurative language: From metaphors to idioms. Oxford University Press.
Grice, H.P. (1975/1989). Studies in the way of words. Harvard University Press.
Hagoort, P., Hald, L., Bastiaansen, M., & Petersson, K.M. (2004). Integration of word meaning and world know-
ledge in language comprehension. Science, 304, 438–441. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1095455
House, J. (1996). Developing pragmatic fluency in English as a foreign language: Routines and metapragmatic 
awareness. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 17, 225–252.
Hsu, C.-T., Jacobs, A.M., & Conrad, M. (2015). Can Harry Potter still put a spell on us in a second language? 
An fMRI study on reading emotion-laden literature in late bilinguals. Cortex, 63, 282–295. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2014.09.002
Ibáñez, A., Manes, F., Escobar, J., Trujillo, N., Andreucci, P., & Hurtado, E. (2010). Gesture influences the 
processing of figurative language in non-native speakers: ERP evidence. Neuroscience letters, 471, 48–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2010.01.009
Israel, L., Konieczny, L., & Ferstl, E.C. (2022). Cognitive and affective aspects of verbal humor: A visual-world 
eye-tracking study. Frontiers in Communication, February 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2021.758173
Jankowiak, K., & Rataj, K. (2017). The N400 as a window into lexico-semantic processing in bilingualism. 
Poznań Studies in Contemporary Linguistics, 53, 119–156. https://doi.org/10.1515/psicl-2017-0006
Jankowiak, K., Rataj, K., & Naskręcki, R. (2017). To electrify bilingualism: Electrophysiological insights into 
bilingual metaphor comprehension. PLoS ONE, 12, e0175578. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0175578
Johnson, J., & Rosano, T. (1993). Relation of cognitive style to metaphor interpretation and second language 
proficiency. Applied Psycholinguistics, 14, 159–175. https://doi.org/10.1017/S014271640000953X
Kecskes, I. (2014). Intercultural pragmatics. Oxford University Press.
Kecskes, I. (2015). Is the idiom principle blocked in bilingual L2 production? In R.R. Heredia & A. B. Cieślika 
(Eds.), Bilingual figurative language processing (pp. 28–53). Cambridge University Press.
Kecskes, I. (2016). Deliberate creativity and formulaic language use. In K. Allan, A. Capone, & I. Kecskes 
(Eds.), Pragmemes and theories of language use (pp. 3–20). Springer International Publishing Switzerland. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-43491-9
Kecskes, I., & Zhang, F. (2009). Activating, seeking and creating common ground: A socio-cognitive approach. 
Pragmatics and Cognition, 17, 331–355. https://doi.org/10.1075/p&c.17.2.06kec
Kelly, S.D., Kravitz, C., & Hopkins, M. (2004). Neural correlates of bimodal speech and gesture comprehension. 
Brain and Language, 89, 253–260. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00335-3
Keysar, B. (1989). On the functional equivalence of literal and metaphorical interpretations in discourse. Journal 
of Memory and Language, 28, 375–385. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(89)90017-X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistics of the Second Language Pragmatic System
161
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T.A. (1978). Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological 
Review, 85, 363–394. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.85.5.363
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kuperberg, G.R., Paczynski, M., & Ditman, T. (2011). Establishing causal coherence across sentences: An ERP 
study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23, 1230–1246. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21452
Lai, V.T., & Curran, T. (2013). ERP evidence for conceptual mappings and comparison processes during the 
comprehension of conventional and novel metaphors. Brain and Language, 127, 484–496. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2013.09.010
Lai, V.T., Willems, R.M., & Hagoort, P. (2015). Feel between the lines: Implied emotion in sentence comprehen-
sion. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00798
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors we live by. University of Chicago.
Landi, N., & Perfetti, C.A. (2007). An electrophysiological investigation of semantic and phonological pro-
cessing in skilled and less-skilled comprehenders. Brain and Language, 102, 30–45. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2006.11.001
Lattner, S., & Friederici, A.D. (2003). Talker’s voice and gender stereotype in human auditory sentence 
processing–evidence from event-related brain potentials. Neuroscience Letters, 339, 191–194. https://doi.
org/10.1016/S0304-3940(03)00027-2
Laurent, J.-P., Denhières, G., Passerieux, C., Iakimova, G., & Hardy-Baylé, M.-C. (2006). On understanding 
idiomatic language: The salience hypothesis assessed by ERPs. Brain Research, 1068, 151–160. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.brainres.2005.10.076
Luk, G., Green, D., Abutalebi, J., & Grady, C. (2011). Cognitive control for language switching in bilinguals: A 
quantitative meta-analysis of functional neuroimaging studies. Language and Cognitive Processes, 27, 1479–
1488. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690965.2011.613209
Marian, V., Spivey, M., & Hirsch, J. (2003). Shared and separate systems in bilingual language pro-
cessing: Converging evidence from eyetracking and brain imaging. Brain and Language, 86, 70–82. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0093-934X(02)00535-7
Martin, C.D., Garcia, X., Breton, A., Thierry, G., & Costa, A. (2014). From literal meaning to veracity in two 
hundred milliseconds. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 40. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00040
Martin, C.D., Garcia, X., Breton, A., Thierry, G., & Costa, A. (2016). World knowledge integration during second 
language comprehension. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31, 206–216. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2015.1084012
Martínez-Flor, A., & Usó-Juan, E. (2006). A comprehensive pedagogical framework to develop pragmatics in the 
foreign language classroom: The 6Rs approach. Applied Language Learning, 16, 39–63.
Mashal, N., Borodkin, K., Maliniak, O., & Faust, M. (2015). Hemispheric involvement in native and non-native 
comprehension of conventional metaphors. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 35, 96–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneuroling.2015.04.001
Mon, S., Nencheva, M., Citron, F.M.M., Lew-Williams, C., & Goldberg, A.E. (2021). Conventional metaphors 
elicit greater real-time engagement than literal paraphrases or concrete sentences. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 121, 104285. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2021.104285
Morishima, Y. (2013). Allocation of limited cognitive resources during text comprehension in a second language. 
Discourse Processes, 50, 577–597. https://doi.org/10.1080/0163853X.2013.846964
Opitz, B., & Degner, J. (2012). Emotionality in a second language: It’s a matter of time. Neuropsychologia, 50, 
1961–1967. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.04.021
Paulmann, S., Ghareeb-Ali, Z., & Felser, C. (2015). Neurophysiological markers of phrasal verb processing: evi-
dence from L1 and L2 speakers. In R.R. Heredia & A. Cieślika (Eds.), Bilingual figurative language pro-
cessing (pp. 245–267). Cambridge University Press.
Pavlenko, A. (2012). Affective processing in bilingual speakers: Disembodied cognition? International Journal 
of Psychology, 47, 405–428. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207594.2012.743665
Pennycook, A. (2009). Global Englishes and transcultural flows. Applied Linguistics, 30, 305–307. https://doi.
org/10.1093/applin/amp017
Penolazzi, B., Hauk, O., & Pulvermueller, F. (2007). Early semantic context integration and lexical access as 
revealed by event-related brain potentials. Biological Psychology, 74, 347–388. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biopsycho.2006.09.008
Perani, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2005). The neural basis of first and second language processing. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 15, 202–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2005.03.007
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Francesca M. M. Citron
162
Pinheiro, A.P., Galdo-Alvarez, S., Sampaio, A., Niznikiewicz, M., & Gonçalves, O.F. (2010). Electrophysiological 
correlates of semantic processing in Williams syndrome. Research in Developmental Disabilities, 31, 1412–
1425. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ridd.2010.06.017
Plonsky, L. (2011). The effectiveness of second language strategy instruction: A meta-analysis. Language 
Learning, 61, 993–1038. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2011.00663.x
Rapp, A.M., Mutschler, D.E., & Erb, M. (2012). Where in the brain is nonliteral language? A coordinate-based 
meta-analysis of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies. NeuroImage, 63, 600–610. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.022
Rataj, K., Przekoracka-Krawczyk, A., & van der Lubbe, R.H.J. (2018). On understanding creative language: The 
late positive complex and novel metaphor comprehension. Brain Research, 1678, 231–244. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2017.10.030
Roehm, D., Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I., Rösler, F., & Schlesewsky, M. (2007). To predict or not to pre-
dict: Influences of task and strategy on the processing of semantic relations. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
19, 1259–1274. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.8.1259
Roever, C. (2011). Testing of second language pragmatics: Past and future. Language Testing, 28, 463–481. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0265532210394633
Sinclair, J. (1991). Corpus, concordance, collocation. Oxford University Press, USA.
Siyanova-Chanturia, A., Conklin, K., & Schmitt, N. (2011). Adding more fuel to the fire: An eye-tracking study 
of idiom processing by native and non-native speakers. Second Language Research, 27, 251–272. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0267658310382068
Slabakova, R. (2010). Scalar implicatures in second language acquisition. Lingua, 120, 2444–2462. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.lingua.2009.06.005
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1995). Relevance: Communication and Cognition (2nd ed.). Blackwell Publishers.
Steen, G.J., & Gibbs, R.W. (2004). Questions about metaphor in literature. European Journal of English Studies, 
8, 337–354. https://doi.org/10.1080/1382557042000277421
Strandburg, R., Marsh, J., Brown, W., Asarnow, R., Guthrie, D., & Higa, J. (1993). Event-related potentials in high-
functioning adult autistics. Neuropsychologia, 31, 413–434. https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(93)90058-8
Taguchi, N. (2015). Instructed pragmatics at a glance: Where instructional studies were, are, and should be going. 
Language Teaching, 48, 1–50. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444814000263
Taguchi, N., Li, S., & Xiao, F. (2013). Production of formulaic expressions in L2 Chinese: A developmental 
investigation in a study-abroad context. Chinese as a Second Language Research, 2, 23–58. https://doi.org/
10.1515/caslar-2013-0021
Tateyama, Y., Kasper, G., Mui, L. P., Tay, H M., & Thananart, O.O. (1997). Explicit and implicit teaching of 
pragmatic routines. Pragmatics and Language Learning, 8, 163–178.
Underwood, G., Schmitt, N., & Galpin, A. (2004). The eyes have it: An eye-movement study into the processing 
of formulaic sequences. In N. Schmitt (Ed.), Formulaic sequences (pp. 153–172). John Benjamins.
Van Ackeren, M.J., Smaragdi, A., & Rueschemeyer, S.-A. (2016). Neuronal interactions between mentalising 
and action systems during indirect request processing. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 11, 
1402–1410. https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsw062
Van Berkum, J.J.A., van den Brink, D., Tesink, C.M.J.Y., Kos, M., & Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integra-
tion of speaker and message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20, 580–591. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2008.20054
Vespignani, F., Canal, P., Molinaro, N., Fonda, S., & Cacciari, C. (2010). Predictive mechanisms in idiom com-
prehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 22, 1682–1700.
Weiland, H., Bambini, V., & Schumacher, P.B. (2014). The role of literal meaning in figurative language com-
prehension: evidence from masked priming ERP. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 583. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fnhum.2014.00583
Wray, A. (2002). Formulaic language and the lexicon. Cambridge University Press.
Wu, Y.J., & Thierry, G. (2012). How reading in a second language protects your heart. The Journal of 
Neuroscience, 32, 6485–6489. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6119-11.2012
Yang, J. (2014). The role of the right hemisphere in metaphor comprehension: A meta-analysis of functional mag-
netic resonance imaging studies. Human Brain Mapping, 35, 107–122. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.22160
Yuan, Y. (2001). An inquiry into empirical pragmatics data-gathering methods: Written DCTs, oral DCTs, 
field notes, and natural conversations. Journal of Pragmatics, 33, 271–292. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0378-2166(00)00031-X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART III
Neurolinguistic Theories and Models 
of Second Language
 
 

 

165
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-16
12
HOW THE DECLARATIVE AND 
PROCEDURAL MEMORY BRAIN 
CIRCUITS SUPPORT SECOND 
LANGUAGE
Electrophysiological, Neuroimaging, and 
Neurological Evidence
Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
Introduction
The declarative/procedural (DP) model is a neurocognitive theoretical framework that addresses 
multiple aspects of typical and disordered language, including across first and second language (L1 
and L2) (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020). The model is grounded in the notion of 
cooptation. According to this basic principle of evolution and biology, previously existing structures 
and mechanisms are constantly being reused—co-opted—for new purposes. Thus, language should 
depend importantly on previously existing neurocognitive substrates that were coopted for this new 
function—whether or not those substrates have become further specialized for language through evo-
lution, development, or learning.
The DP model applies this principle of cooptation to language, with a focus on learning. The model 
is based on two premises related to learning. First, most of language must be learned, whether or not 
aspects are innately specified. Second, declarative and procedural memory are arguably the two most 
important learning and memory circuits (systems) in the brain, in both animals and humans (Squire 
& Dede, 2015; Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020). Given these premises and the principle of cooptation, the 
declarative and procedural memory circuits are predicted to play critical roles in language, across 
both L1 and L2. This is the essence of the DP model.
The DP Model, with a Focus on Second Language
We first describe the declarative and procedural learning and memory circuits. We then summarize 
key predictions for language that follow from this independent understanding of the circuits, focusing 
on the neural basis of L2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
166
The Declarative and Procedural Learning and Memory Circuits
According to the neurocognitive perspective espoused by the DP model, declarative and procedural 
memory are defined on the basis of their neuroanatomy (Ullman, 2004, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020). 
In this section, we provide an overview of the two learning and memory circuits independent of lan-
guage, focusing on their neural bases. (For other theoretical perspectives of declarative and proced-
ural memory or knowledge and their roles in language, see Morgan-Short & Ullman, 2022.)
Declarative memory is defined as the learning and memory that rely on the medial temporal lobe 
(MTL) and associated circuitry (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020). The DP model 
focuses on the portion of this circuitry that underlies “what” (as opposed to “where”) knowledge, 
which appears to be most relevant to language. (The “what” circuit may be characterized as sub-
serving information about what things are in the world about us, which can be contrasted with “where” 
in space they occur.) This “what” declarative memory circuit (which for simplicity we refer to below 
as “declarative memory”) encompasses several core structures: the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, 
and perirhinal cortex, all of which lie within the MTL, as well as the visual and auditory neocortical 
temporal lobe-based ventral streams (“what” pathways) (Ullman, 2016, 2020; Ullman & Reichle, 
2023). Evidence suggests that these different structures play somewhat different roles even while 
working closely together (Diana et al., 2007; Fernández & Tendolkar, 2006; Miyashita, 2019; Suzuki 
& Naya, 2014; Ullman & Reichle, 2023). Here we summarize these roles. The visual and auditory 
ventral streams hierarchically process inputs, in a posterior to anterior manner (Rauschecker & Scott, 
2009). The resulting representation is passed to perirhinal cortex (directly for the visual modality, 
indirectly via parahippocampal cortex for audition). Perirhinal cortex evaluates to what extent the 
representation mismatches existing representations in neocortex and perirhinal cortex, by retrieving 
that neocortical information. If there is a mismatch (in content or strength), that is, the representation 
is unfamiliar, warranting updating/strengthening that existing representation (if there is no mismatch, 
no learning need occur), perirhinal cortex encodes the representation and passes it downstream via 
(anterior) entorhinal cortex to the hippocampus. The hippocampus rapidly binds together the various 
(novel) aspects of the representation (and thus is critical for learning associations), including back 
upstream in neocortex across the ventral streams and temporopolar and middle temporal cortex. 
Thanks to this binding, direct corticocortical connections can then be formed and strengthened via 
Hebbian learning (fire together, wire together). Gradually these associations tend to undergo systems 
consolidation, whereby they become more dependent on direct corticocortical connections, with a 
decreased dependence on the hippocampus/MTL, though the latter may continue to play a role for 
years or even decades.
The (what) declarative memory circuit also involves other brain structures, ranging from structures 
in the “circuit of Papez” that are closely connected to the hippocampus (e.g., the fornix, the mammil-
lary bodies, and anterior nucleus of the thalamus) to various neocortical regions, including inferior 
frontal and posterior parietal cortex (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020). For example, inferior frontal cortex, 
perhaps in particular Brodmann’s areas 45/47 within traditional Broca’s area, appear to be important 
for recalling information, though at least for recently learned knowledge this may occur in concert 
with hippocampal-based “recollection.” Although we have focused here on the functional neuro-
anatomy of the declarative memory circuit (that is, what parts of the brain do what), since most 
research on the circuit has examined its functional neuroanatomy, there is also a good-sized literature 
on other neurobiological correlates of the circuit, including the genes (e.g., BDNF, APOE, KIBRA) 
and hormones (e.g., estrogen) that modulate it (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020).
The declarative memory circuit’s functional characteristics are quite well understood, in par-
ticular regarding what and how it learns. The circuit has been implicated in the learning, storage, and 
processing of various types of information, across domains and sensory modalities, even including 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits
167
motor knowledge (Squire & Dede, 2015; Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020). Indeed, 
it is extremely flexible in what it can learn. The circuit seems to be critical for learning arbitrary 
pieces of information and their associations. It can support both explicit information (which entails 
awareness and is linked closely to working memory) and implicit information (which does not entail 
awareness)—although it appears to be the only learning circuit that can underlie explicit knowledge. 
Learning in the circuit can be extremely rapid, even after one presentation of the relevant stimulus. 
Of interest in this chapter focusing on L2, evidence suggests that learning in declarative memory 
improves during childhood and then plateaus in adolescence and early adulthood, after which it 
declines.
Procedural memory is defined as the learning and memory that rely on the basal ganglia and 
associated circuitry (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020). Evidence suggests that the basal 
ganglia, in particular the anterior neostriatum (the anterior caudate nucleus and anterior putamen), 
underlie early phases of procedural learning. Learning involves generating predictions about associ-
ations (e.g., the next item of a sequence, or the output of a rule), and then evaluating these predictions 
based on the correctness of the prediction (Frank, 2005; Ullman et al., 2020). Learning occurs in par-
ticular when predictions are incorrect (if they were correct, there is no need to learn), especially when 
such disconfirmatory information is rapidly available after the prediction is generated (e.g., predic-
tion of the next item in a sequence is rapidly followed by an item that can (dis)confirm the prediction). 
This process depends critically on dopaminergic-neostriatal projections from midbrain structures, 
in particular the substantia nigra pars compacta. Basal ganglia-based learning involves the creation/
strengthening of connections between cortical neuronal populations that project to the neostriatum 
and those to which the basal ganglia project via the thalamus, while these input and output neuronal 
populations (representing the input and output elements of the association) are both active. The basal 
ganglia-based formation of these connections between cortical regions, which is gradual but can occur 
reasonably quickly, then facilitates the formation/strengthening of direct corticocortical connections 
via Hebbian learning, which tends to occur quite slowly. An increased reliance on the corticocortical 
connections (systems consolidation) is associated with increased automatization, though the analo-
gous input-output circuitry passing through the basal ganglia may continue to be relied upon, and 
indeed posterior neostriatal regions may also support automatized processing. Consistent with basal 
ganglia inputs originating importantly in parietal regions, and the basal ganglia projecting strongly to 
(pre)motor and other frontal regions, the corticocortical circuits formed by the basal ganglia may play 
a key role in the dorsal stream “how” pathway (Ullman, 2004, 2016). Although, as with declarative 
memory, we have focused on the functional neuroanatomy of procedural memory, other aspects of the 
neurobiology of the circuit have also been studied, including the genes (e.g., PPP1R1B, DRD2, and 
FOXP2) that affect it (Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020).
The functional characteristics of the procedural memory circuit are quite well understood, in 
particular regarding what and how it learns. The procedural memory circuit underlies the learning, 
storage, and processing of predictable relations for a range of functions, including cognitive and 
(perceptuo-)motor skills (such as motor sequences), perceptual sequences (often tested in statistical 
learning paradigms), categories, habits, and routes (for navigation). Learning and knowledge in the 
circuit seem to be entirely implicit. Learning occurs gradually over multiple exposures, although it 
can take place as quickly as a few minutes or as slowly as months or more, as a function of various 
factors. For example, associations (e.g., between items in a sequence) are learned faster if they are 
more predictable or if they are adjacent (vs. non-adjacent). Unlike declarative memory, learning 
in this circuit seems to already be robust early in childhood, though it appears to decline around 
adolescence.
The declarative and procedural memory circuits also interact (Packard, 2008; Ullman, 2004, 2016; 
Ullman et al., 2020). First, representations learned in declarative memory can apparently inhibit 
 
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
168
(block) analogous representations learned in procedural memory, and vice versa, depending on which 
is predominant. For example, if a rat learns to navigate a maze by quickly learning landmarks in 
declarative memory, these can inhibit navigation strategies, such as automatically turning at a corner, 
that are gradually being learned in procedural memory. The two circuits can therefore be thought of 
as being in competition, which is often referred to as the “seesaw effect.” Second, the two circuits 
can complement each other by learning analogous functions, such as knowledge of a given route, 
sequence, or category. That is, the two circuits play at least partly redundant roles, though they gen-
erally learn somewhat different types of knowledge. For example, declarative memory may learn 
explicit knowledge of the order of elements of a sequence whereas procedural memory may impli-
citly learn to predict subsequent elements in the sequence. Certain types of knowledge, however, can 
be learned by only one or the other of the two systems; importantly, arbitrary pieces of information 
and their associations may only be learnable by declarative memory.
A range of variables appear to modulate which of the two circuits is relied on more for those tasks 
and functions that can be learned in either. Here we focus on a few variables that are particularly rele-
vant for learning L2. First, the amount of input matters. Less input often leads to a greater reliance on 
declarative memory (since it learns quickly), whereas more input can shift dependence to procedural 
memory (which can become predominant due to automatization). Second, the type of input makes 
a difference. In particular, explicit, instructed input should lead to learning in declarative memory, 
since that is the only memory system to support explicit knowledge. Third, age of acquisition also 
matters. Children will tend to rely more on procedural memory and younger adults more on declara-
tive memory, simply because learning in procedural memory is stronger during childhood whereas 
learning in declarative memory improves over the course of childhood and adolescence.
Predictions of the DP Model for Language, with a Focus on L2
Here we present a subset of the wide range of predictions for language that can be generated by the 
DP model based on our independent understanding of the memory systems, as summarized in the 
previous section. Although the model has numerous predictions for language across L1 and L2, this 
section focuses on the functional neuroanatomy of the lexicon and grammar in L2 (Morgan-Short & 
Ullman, 2022; Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020).
Lexical memory should depend heavily on declarative memory, across both L1 and L2. This 
follows from this circuit’s critical role in learning arbitrary pieces of information and their asso-
ciations, since such knowledge constitutes a substantial portion of the lexicon. Thus, all idiosyn-
cratic lexical knowledge, including about open-class words, irregular morphology, and unpredictable 
multi-word linguistic forms such as idioms should be learned largely in declarative memory. As 
such, various brain structures in the declarative memory circuit are expected to be involved in lexical 
learning, representation, and processing, with the exact structure(s) depending on which functions the 
task at hand depends on. For example, a task that involves learning should rely importantly (though 
not only) on MTL structures, particularly the hippocampus if new associations (e.g., word form-
meaning pairings) are being learned. In contrast, if the task involves existing (familiar) knowledge, it 
may rely less on the MTL and more on neocortical structures in the circuit. More generally, our inde-
pendent understanding of declarative memory, including its functional neuroanatomical, endocrine, 
and genetic correlates, should inform our understanding of lexical memory.
In contrast, lexical abilities should depend much less on procedural memory. Nevertheless, they 
may do so in certain specific circumstances, such as during word segmentation (in which word-
forms are being implicitly extracted from sequences of sounds in the speech stream), for closed-class 
words and morphemes (e.g., the, -ed), and for motor-related words like hammer (which involve 
representations of motor skills that were likely learned in procedural memory) (Ullman et al., 2020).
 
 

Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits
169
Grammar is a different story. Grammar shares key characteristics with procedural memory. Both 
grammar and procedural memory involve learning sequential and categorical knowledge, which 
is largely implicit and eventually automatized in both cases, and both involve prediction (Ullman 
et al., 2020). Thus, procedural memory may be expected to play a critical role in grammar, across 
linguistic subdomains, including syntax, morphology, and phonology (phonotactics). The structures 
constituting the procedural circuit should therefore be involved in the learning, representation, 
and processing of grammar, with the exact structure depending on which functions are involved. 
For example, early stages of learning should engage the anterior neostriatum. Learning should 
depend on dopaminergic projections from midbrain structures, in particular the substantial nigra 
pars compacta. And as grammatical procedures become automatized, they should depend more on 
neocortical regions, especially in parietal and frontal cortex. Left hemisphere procedural memory 
structures may be particularly important for grammar given the more general left lateralization of 
language.
However, as discussed earlier, the two memory circuits interact. Of particular interest here, given 
their redundant roles, declarative memory may also be expected to support grammar. In fact, thanks 
to its flexible nature, declarative memory may memorize individual chunks (e.g., the affixed form 
kicked), generalize analogically across such forms to new forms (e.g., blicked), and learn explicit 
rules. Thus, procedural and declarative memory should both support grammar, but in different ways.
Importantly, because the two memory systems have different characteristics, grammar should 
depend more on one or the other system as a function of various factors (Ullman, 2020; Ullman 
et al., 2020). This should result in a differential dependence of grammar on declarative and proced-
ural memory in L2 and L1. First, because declarative memory learns faster than procedural memory, 
grammar should depend more on declarative memory during early stages of L2 (and L1) learning 
and more on procedural memory at later stages (after more exposure). Second, because explicit 
knowledge can only be supported by declarative memory, explicit instructed grammatical informa-
tion (e.g., in L2 classroom settings) should lead to a greater dependence of grammar on declarative 
memory, whereas an absence of such input may shift reliance to procedural memory—especially 
when instead the learner is exposed to naturalistic/immersion contexts (in L1 or L2). This is because 
the rapid input of natural speech may be particularly well-suited for procedural learning, given that 
this system learns by predicting subsequent elements and receiving rapid feedback (e.g., subsequent 
linguistic elements can be predicted, and the rapid appearance of such elements in the input in natural 
speech can constitute rapid feedback; Ullman, 2020). Third, because learning in procedural memory 
seems well-established early in life and then may decline, whereas learning in declarative memory 
is poor early on, but then improves during childhood, grammar should tend to rely more heavily on 
procedural memory for early-learned languages (L1 or L2), and more on declarative memory for 
languages acquired comparatively later in life (at least to early adulthood, after which declarative 
memory in particular declines).
Overall, grammar in adult L2 should therefore tend to depend more on declarative than proced-
ural memory as compared to adult L1, for the reasons laid out just above: the L2 will be at an earlier 
stage of learning (because it was learned later, and thus will have had less exposure); L2s are more 
likely than L1s to be taught explicitly; and L2 learners have later ages of acquisition. Nevertheless, 
we emphasize that L2 grammar can also be expected to depend on procedural memory, in particular 
(but not only) with more exposure and in immersion contexts.
Empirical Evidence
Now we turn to empirical evidence relevant to the predictions of the DP model. We focus on electro-
physiological (event-related potential), functional neuroimaging, and neurological (lesion) studies, 
concentrating on reviews and meta-analyses when available.
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
170
Event-Related Potentials
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are scalp-recorded electrophysiological measures of brain activity. 
ERP research on language, in particular on lexical and grammatical processing, has identified three 
main ERP components: N400s, P600s, and (left) anterior negativities, or ANs (see Dickson & Pelzl, 
this volume, and Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume). Evidence (mainly from L1) has linked all 
three components to declarative or procedural memory, though with different degrees of certainty.
N400s have been tied to the “what” declarative memory circuit and its functions (Ullman, 2001; 
Ullman & Reichle, 2023). Indeed, the component has been most clearly localized to temporal lobe 
structures, in particular the MTL, especially (peri)rhinal cortex, as well as middle temporal cortex 
(Lau et al., 2008; Ullman, 2001; Ullman & Reichle, 2023). The neurocognitive bases of P600s 
are somewhat less clear. P600s have been linked to conscious (explicit) aspects of processing and 
declarative memory, including its temporal-lobe neural substrates (Morgan-Short, Finestrat, et al., 
2022; Ullman, 2001). The apparent involvement of the basal ganglia in P600s (Kotz et al., 2003) may 
be explained by this structure’s role in attention and working memory (Janacsek et al., 2022). The 
neurocognitive bases of ANs are least clear, and indeed this component is observed less reliably than 
the other two. Nevertheless, it has been tentatively suggested that ANs, which have been linked to the 
left frontal cortex, may at least partially reflect the processing of automatized procedures learned in 
procedural memory (Morgan-Short et al., 2012; Ullman, 2001, 2005, 2020).
Recent reviews of ERP L2 research suggest that L2 lexical stimuli commonly elicit N400s, even 
from very early stages of L2 word learning (Jankowiak, 2021; Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume; 
Vandenberge et al., 2019; we are not aware of any meta-analyses on this topic). This pattern is con-
sistent with the DP model’s claim that words are learned and stored in declarative memory. Indeed, 
the finding that N400s are found at very early stages of word learning is expected, given that learning 
in declarative memory can be very rapid.
The substantial body of ERP research on L2 grammar has been the focus of several reviews (e.g., 
Steinhauer et al., 2009) and one meta-analysis (Caffarra et al., 2015). Steinhauer et al. (2009) suggests 
that for L2 grammar (a) N400s can be found at early L2 stages and low proficiency; (b) P600s 
may also be observed at low proficiency, but are more robust at later stages, with intermediate and 
high proficiency; and (c) ANs are only evidenced much later, at very high or native-like proficiency. 
Caffarra et al. (2015) reported similar patterns, for example, that P600s are more reliably elicited at 
high proficiency, while ANs emerge when participants experience long periods of immersion.
These L2 grammatical ERP patterns are consistent with the DP model. The N400s at early stages 
of learning are expected, given the rapid learning of declarative memory, and its ability to support 
grammar (e.g., via chunking or explicit rules). The P600s that emerge at somewhat later stages, and 
continue to high proficiency, are also consistent with the model, given that the P600 may reflect 
(explicit) processing in declarative memory. In particular, we suggest that P600s may emerge over 
time as learners gain sufficient knowledge of the grammar to be able to consciously process the input. 
Finally, the appearance of ANs (the only component tentatively linked to procedural memory) at high 
proficiency, in particular after immersion, is consistent with the model’s prediction that grammar will 
be gradually proceduralized with experience, particular in immersion contexts.
Functional Neuroimaging
Functional neuroimaging, an approach that generally employs functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI) or positron emission tomography (PET), provides high spatial resolution of the brain 
structures engaged in a given task or activity (for more details, see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). 
Here we report findings from two recent meta-analyses of neuroimaging studies. Tagarelli et al. 
(2019) examined early-stage lexical and grammatical learning in adults in controlled experimental 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits
171
paradigms; for simplicity, we refer to their findings as L2 lexical and grammatical learning. Sulpizio 
et al. (2020) examined L2/L1 contrasts for lexical and grammatical processing in adult bilinguals. In 
reviewing findings from these meta-analyses, we focus on L2 lexical and grammatical activation in 
the core structures of the two memory circuits, namely medial/neocortical temporal lobe regions for 
declarative memory and the basal ganglia for procedural memory.
We discuss lexical findings first. Tagarelli et al. (2019) found that lexical but not grammatical 
learning yielded (primarily left hemisphere) ventral stream structures. This finding is consistent 
with the DP model’s predictions that lexical learning and memory depend on the “what” declarative 
memory circuit. Sulpizio et al. (2020) did not report greater activation in this region (or any other 
temporal lobe region) for the L2 lexicon as compared to the L1 lexicon. This may be attributed to 
the fact that the region is expected to be involved in both L2 and L1, and activation in the latter was 
subtracted from the former. Interestingly, hippocampal and other MTL activation was not observed 
for the L2 lexicon in either meta-analysis. The reasons for this are unclear, but it could be partly due 
to the general difficulty of obtaining hippocampal/MTL activation in neuroimaging studies (Tagarelli 
et al., 2019), as well as systems consolidation resulting in ventral stream neocortical activation pre-
dominating even in the relatively early-stage lexical learning studies included in Tagarelli et al. 
(2019). Nevertheless, a fair number of imaging studies have by now reported hippocampal/MTL 
activation in L2 word learning studies, including some not included in one or both meta-analyses 
(Bartolotti et al., 2017; Berens et al., 2018; Tagarelli et al., 2019; see also Eckerdt et al., this volume).
L2 grammatical but not L2 lexical abilities yielded left anterior neostriatal activation in both 
meta-analyses. This is consistent with early stages of procedural learning depending on the anterior 
neostriatum. The finding of greater activation for L2 than L1 grammar in the left anterior neostriatum 
(Suplizio et al., 2020) is consistent with this structure underlying early stages of procedural learning, 
given that grammar is presumably still being learned in the L2, but not the L1. Importantly, Tagarelli 
et al. (2019) reported that grammar learning predicted by the DP model to rely particularly on pro-
cedural memory (e.g., with implicit training) showed left anterior neostriatal but not hippocampal 
activation, whereas grammar learning predicted to rely especially on declarative memory (e.g., with 
explicit training) showed hippocampal but not neostriatal activation. Interestingly, Sulpizio et al. 
(2020) reported that L1 yielded more activation than L2 in the right neostriatum for both lexicon and 
grammar; however, this neostriatal activation occurred more posteriorly than the anterior neostriatal 
activation obtained for L2 grammar in both meta-analyses. Though the reasons for this finding remain 
to be elucidated, it seems consistent with evidence that posterior portions of the neostriatum underlie 
later stages of procedural learning, including the processing of automatized procedures (e.g., rules for 
grammar, articulation for lexicon).
Lesion Method
The lesion method is premised on the notion that lesions (damage) to particular brain structures 
that are followed by impairments to particular cognitive functions may be taken to imply that the 
lost functions had previously depended on the damaged structures (for discussion of this method, 
including in relation to the DP model, see Ullman, 2020). The lesion literature that is directly rele-
vant to the predictions of the DP model for L2 appears to be substantially smaller than the relevant 
literature for ERPs and functional neuroimaging, and indeed we are not aware of any relevant meta-
analyses or reviews. Here we focus on the most pertinent papers.
Given the DP model’s prediction that lexical knowledge is learned and stored in the “what” declara-
tive memory circuit, we focus on lesions to the core structures in this circuit, namely medial and neo-
cortical temporal lobe regions. Lexical knowledge is posited to be learned in declarative memory 
in both L1 and L2. However, because L2 words are generally expected to be learned later than L1 
 
 
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
172
words, they should have undergone less systems consolidation. Thus, lesions to the MTL may be 
expected to impact L2 words more than L1 words. Unfortunately, we are not aware of any studies that 
have directly examined this prediction, leaving an important gap for future research. Nevertheless, 
some studies have examined L1 and L2 lexical abilities in patients with broad or unspecified temporal 
lobe lesions. The studies we are aware of have found that such patients have more trouble finding 
words (Hyltenstam & Stroud, 1989; Ku et al., 1996) or comprehending words (Brice et al., 2014) 
in the L2 than the L1. For example, a patient with herpes simplex encephalitis with damage appar-
ently restricted to the left temporal lobe showed much greater impairments at picture naming in their 
L2 than their L1 (Ku et al., 1996). Similarly, a patient with Alzheimer’s disease with medial and as 
well as broader temporal lobe shrinkage showed greater word comprehension deficits in L2 than L1 
(Brice et al., 2014). Importantly though, greater L2 than L1 impairments must be treated with caution, 
simply because the L2 is often less well-learned and thus likely involves weaker representations than 
the L1. In other words, the L2 may have been weaker even prior to damage, in addition to potentially 
being more susceptible to damage for this reason.
There appear to be more lesion studies relevant to the DP model’s predictions about grammat-
ical than lexical abilities in L2. First of all, some evidence suggests that temporal lobe damage can 
affect sentence level processing involving syntax more in the L2 than the L1 (Brice et al., 2014; 
Hyltenstam & Stroud, 1989; Ku et al., 1996). This is consistent with the DP model’s prediction 
that L2 grammar relies more on declarative memory than L1 grammar, which should have been 
largely proceduralized. However, as mentioned just above, because the L2 likely involves weaker 
representations as compared to the L1, such a finding must be treated with caution, and does not con-
stitute strong evidence that declarative memory plays a more important role in L2 than L1 grammar.
Lesions to the core structures underlying procedural memory, in particular the basal ganglia, 
lead to a different pattern (Ullman, 2001, 2005, 2020). Accumulating evidence suggests that greater 
impairments of grammar are found in L1 than L2, across syntax, morphology, and phonology, in 
expressive as well as receptive language. This pattern has been observed both in patients with focal 
lesions to the left basal ganglia (Fabbro & Paradis, 1995) and in patients with Parkinson’s disease 
(Johari et al., 2013; Zanini et al., 2004; Zanini et al., 2010), which is also closely linked to basal 
ganglia dysfunction. Left basal ganglia damage has also been found to lead to more grammatical 
errors in non-native language with greater experience (and proficiency) than in non-native language 
with less experience (and proficiency) (Fabbro & Paradis, 1995; Ullman, 2001). A similar pattern of 
greater impairments in L1 than L2 has been observed in agrammatic aphasics with likely left frontal 
damage (Fabbro, 1999; Ullman, 2001). Overall, these findings are particularly striking because the 
basal ganglia or frontal damage leads to more severe problems in the L1 and higher experience lan-
guage, which presumably have stronger rather than weaker representations. Importantly, basal gan-
glia damage does not appear to lead to worse lexical performance in Ll than L2 or in high than low 
experience L2, even in the same patients who show worse grammatical performance in Ll than L2 or 
in the stronger L2 (Fabbro & Paradis, 1995; Ullman, 2001). Thus, basal ganglia and perhaps frontal 
damage appears to be at least somewhat selective, resulting in greater impairments of grammar (but 
not lexicon) in Ll than L2, and in higher than lower experience L2. This pattern is highly consistent 
with the claims of the DP model, since grammatical (but not lexical) knowledge is expected to be 
gradually learned in procedural memory, and thus should depend more on the procedural circuit in L1 
than L2 and in higher than lower experience L2.
Summary of Empirical Evidence
Overall, the extant evidence from ERP, neuroimaging, and lesion studies is largely consistent with the 
predictions of the DP model. The evidence suggests the following. L2 words are learned and stored 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits
173
in the “what” declarative memory circuit (as evidenced by N400s, temporal lobe activation, and 
impairments from temporal lobe lesions). L2 grammar instead depends importantly on procedural 
memory (ANs and left anterior neostriatal activation for L2 grammar but not L2 lexicon). However, 
L2 grammar can also rely on declarative memory. The extent to which it relies on declarative or 
procedural memory depends on various factors. L2 grammar appears to initially rely on declarative 
memory (N400s found at early L2 stages), but then is gradually proceduralized (ANs found at late 
stages; frontal/basal ganglia lesions impact grammar more in L1 than L2 and in higher than lower 
experience L2). Additionally, the nature of the training matters. L2 grammar learned under conditions 
that should increase dependence on declarative memory (e.g., explicit training) shows reliance on the 
hippocampus but not the basal ganglia, whereas the opposite pattern is found for grammar learning 
that should rely particularly on procedural memory (e.g., implicit training) (neuroimaging evidence). 
The factors influencing the relative dependence of L2 grammar on declarative or procedural memory 
can also interact (ANs observed at late stages, specially in immersion contexts). Importantly, although 
here we focus on neurocognitive evidence, behavioral evidence also supports these patterns (Morgan-
Short, Hamrick, & Ullman, 2022; Morgan-Short & Ullman, 2022).
Future Directions
In our review of empirical evidence, we focused on certain widely used neurocognitive methodo-
logical approaches. However, many other approaches can be used to test the predictions of the DP 
model. Here we briefly discuss some of these.
Structural neuroimaging can be employed to examine associations between metrics of grey matter 
(e.g., grey matter volume, cortical thickness) or white matter (e.g., fractional anisotropy, mean dif-
fusivity) of the two circuits and behavioral measures of language (e.g., accuracy or response time 
measures of performance at lexical or grammatical tasks). For example, a correlation between 
hippocampal volume and word learning ability implicates the former in the latter (Greve et al., 2014). 
Additionally, one can examine structural metrics following L2 learning, or in bilinguals as compared 
to monolinguals (Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume). For example, some evidence suggests that 
during development bilinguals show higher white matter integrity (a greater developmental increase) 
than monolinguals in striatal-inferior frontal fibers (Pliatsikas et al., 2020), consistent with striatal 
changes consequential to increased procedural learning of two rather than one language.
Other techniques can also elucidate the relation between language and the two memory 
circuits, including intracranial recording and stimulation, transcranial magnetic stimulation, 
magnetoencephalography, and transcranial electrical stimulation methods such as transcranial direct 
current stimulation (for more on stimulation techniques, see Pandža, this volume). Importantly, such 
techniques can be used to localize function even in deep brain structures such as the MTL and the 
basal ganglia (Janacsek et al., 2022).
Although we have focused here on approaches that can reveal the electrophysiological and neuro-
anatomical bases of language, and how they are related to the declarative and procedural memory 
circuits, other predictions of the DP model can also be tested. For example, one can also test endo-
crine (e.g., estrogen-related), neurochemical (e.g., dopamine-related), and genetic predictions (Johari 
et al., 2019; Ullman, 2004, 2016, 2020; Ullman et al., 2020); for more on genetic evidence regarding 
L2, see Vaughn et al. (this volume).
These approaches can also be fruitfully combined. For example, fMRI concurrent with ERPs can 
synergistically combine benefits of both techniques. We also emphasize that while in this chapter we 
have focused on neurobiological approaches, behavioral methods can also be useful for testing the 
predictions of the DP model (Morgan-Short & Ullman, 2022). For example, examining correlations 
between language abilities on the one hand, and learning abilities in the two circuits on the other, can 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
174
reveal which aspects of the former rely on which circuit (Morgan-Short, Hamrick, & Ullman, 2022). 
Finally, neurobiological techniques can also be usefully combined with behavioral methods (e.g., 
examining whether fMRI language activation in the memory circuits correlates with learning abil-
ities in the circuits; Morgan-Short et al., 2015). Overall, each neurobiological and behavioral method, 
examined independently or in combination, has the potential to test the predictions of the DP model, 
and to augment our understanding of the neurocognition of L2.
Further Readings
This chapter is a recent review of the declarative and procedural memory systems and their roles in L1 and L2:
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The Declarative/Procedural model: A neurobiologically-motivated theory of first and 
second language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition 
(3rd ed., pp. 128–161). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429503986-7
This study presents results from a series of functional neuroanatomical meta-analyses of lexical and grammatical 
learning in adults:
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
This chapter lays out the declarative/procedural model of L2 and L1 in a historical context, and, complementing 
the present chapter, focuses on psycholinguistic predictions, methods, and evidence:
Morgan-Short, K., & Ullman, M. T. (2022). Declarative and procedural memory in second language 
learning: Psycholinguistic considerations. In A. Godfroid & H. Hopp (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and psycholinguistics (pp. 322–334). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781003018872-30
References
Bartolotti, J., Bradley, K., Hernandez, A.E., & Marian, V. (2017). Neural signatures of second language learning 
and control. Neuropsychologia, 98, 130–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.04.007
Berens, S.C., Horst, J.S., & Bird, C.M. (2018). Cross-situational learning is supported by propose-but-verify 
hypothesis testing. Current Biology, 28(7), 1132–1136.e5. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2018.02.042
Brice, A.E., Wallace, S.E., & Brice, R.G. (2014). Alzheimer’s dementia from a bilingual/bicultural perspective: A 
case study. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 36(1), 55–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/1525740114524435
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: An empirical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
Diana, R.A., Yonelinas, A.P., & Ranganath, C. (2007). Imaging recollection and familiarity in the medial tem-
poral lobe: A three-component model. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(9), 379–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.tics.2007.08.001
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Eckerdt, C., Takashima, A., & McQueen, J.M. (this volume). Memory consolidation in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Fabbro, F. (1999). The Neurolinguistics of Bilingualism. Psychology Press.
Fabbro, F., & Paradis, M. (1995). Differential impairments in four multilingual patients with subcortical lesions. 
In M. Paradis (Ed.), Aspects of bilingual aphasia: Vol. III (pp. 139–176). Pergamon Press.
Fernández, G., & Tendolkar, I. (2006). The rhinal cortex: “Gatekeeper” of the declarative memory system. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 10(8), 358–362. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2006.06.003
Frank, M. J. (2005). Dynamic dopamine modulation in the basal ganglia: A neurocomputational account of 
cognitive deficits in medicated and nonmedicated parkinsonism. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(1), 
51–72. https://doi.org/10.1162/0898929052880093
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Declarative and Procedural Memory Brain Circuits
175
Greve, A., Cooper, E., & Henson, R.N. (2014). No evidence that “fast-mapping” benefits novel learning in 
healthy Older adults. Neuropsychologia, 60, 52–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.05.011
Hyltenstam, K., & Stroud, C. (1989). Bilingualism in Alzheimer’s dementia: Two case studies. In K. Hyltenstam 
& L.K. Obler (Eds.), Bilingualism across the lifespan: Aspects of acquisition, maturity and loss (pp. 202–
226). Cambridge University Press.
Janacsek, K., Evans, T.M., Kiss, M., Shah, L., Blumenfeld, H., & Ullman, M.T. (2022). Subcortical cogni-
tion: The fruit below the rind. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 45(1), 361–386. https://doi.org/10.1146/annu
rev-neuro-110920-013544
Jankowiak, K. (2021). Current trends in electrophysiological research on bilingual language processing. 
Language and Linguistics Compass, 15(8), Article e12436. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12436
Johari, K., Ashrafi, F., Zali, A., Ashayeri, H., Fabbro, F., & Zanini, S. (2013). Grammatical deficits in bilin-
gual Azari–Farsi patients with Parkinson’s disease. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 26(1), 22–30. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jneuroling.2012.02.004
Johari, K., Walenski, M., Reifegerste, J., Ashrafi, F., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Sex, dopamine, and hypokinesia: A 
study of inflectional morphology in Parkinson’s disease. Neuropsychology, 33, 508–522. https://doi.org/
10.1037/neu0000533
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from 
the Dynamic Restructuring Model. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kotz, S.A., Frisch, S., Von Cramon, D.Y., & Friederici, A.D. (2003). Syntactic language processing: ERP lesion 
data on the role of the basal ganglia. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 9(7), 1053–
1060. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617703970093
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Ku, A., Lachmann, E.A., & Nagler, W. (1996). Selective language aphasia from herpes simplex encephalitis. 
Pediatric Neurology, 15(2), 169–171. https://doi.org/10.1016/0887-8994(96)00154-3
Lau, E.F., Phillips, C., & Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for semantics: (De)constructing the N400. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(12), 920–933. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2532
Miyashita, Y. (2019). Perirhinal circuits for memory processing. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 20(10), Article 
10. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-019-0213-6
Morgan-Short, K., Deng, Z., Brill-Schuetz, K.A., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., Wong, P.C.M., & Wong, F. (2015). 
A view of the neural representation of second language syntax through artificial language learning under 
implicit contexts of exposure. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 37(2), 383–419. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0272263115000030
Morgan-Short, K., Finestrat, I., Luque, A., & Abugaber, D. (2022). Exploring new insights into explicit and 
implicit second language processing: Event-related potentials analyzed by source attribution. Language 
Learning, 72(2), 365–411. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12492
Morgan-Short, K., Hamrick, P., & Ullman, M.T. (2022). Declarative and procedural memory as predictors of 
second language development. In S. Li, P. Hiver, & M. Papi (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second lan-
guage acquisition and individual differences. Routledge.
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). Explicit and implicit second language 
training differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 24(4), 933–947. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00119
Morgan-Short, K., & Ullman, M. T. (2022). Declarative and procedural memory in second language 
learning: Psycholinguistic considerations. In A. Godfroid & H. Hopp (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and psycholinguistics (pp. 322–334). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/
9781003018872-30
Packard, M.G. (2008). Neurobiology of procedural learning in animals. In J.H. Byrne (Ed.), Concise learning 
and memory: The editor’s selection (pp. 341–356). Elsevier.
Pandža, N.B. (this volume). Using non-invasive brain stimulation to investigate second language. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Pliatsikas, C., Meteyard, L., Veríssimo, J., DeLuca, V., Shattuck, K., & Ullman, M.T. (2020). The effect of 
bilingualism on brain development from early childhood to young adulthood. Brain Structure and Function, 
225(7), 2131–2152. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-020-02115-5
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael T. Ullman and Kara Morgan-Short
176
Rauschecker, J.P., & Scott, S.K. (2009). Maps and streams in the auditory cortex: Nonhuman primates illuminate 
human speech processing. Nature Neuroscience, 12(6), Article 6. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2331
Squire, L.R., & Dede, A.J.O. (2015). Conscious and unconscious memory systems. Cold Spring Harbor 
Perspectives in Biology, 7(3), Article a021667. https://doi.org/10.1101/cshperspect.a021667
Steinhauer, K., White, E.J., & Drury, J.E. (2009). Temporal dynamics of late second language acquisi-
tion: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Second Language Research, 25(1), 13–41. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658308098995
Sulpizio, S., Maschio, N.D., Fedeli, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Bilingual language processing: A meta-analysis 
of functional neuroimaging studies. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 108, 834–853. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2019.12.014
Suzuki, W.A., & Naya, Y. (2014). The perirhinal cortex. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 37(1), 39–53. https://
doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-071013-014207
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
Tokowicz, N., & Tkacikova, V. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language lexico-semantic 
system. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Ullman, M.T. (2001). The neural basis of lexicon and grammar in first and second language: The declarative/
procedural model. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 4(2), 105–122. https://doi.org/10.1017/S13667
28901000220
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative/procedural model. 
Cognition, 92, 231–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.008
Ullman, M. T. (2005). A cognitive neuroscience perspective on second language acquisition: The declarative/
procedural model. In C. Sanz (Ed.), Mind and context in adult second language acquisition (pp. 141–178). 
Georgetown University Press.
Ullman, M.T. (2016). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiological model of language learning, know-
ledge, and use. In G. Hickok & S.L. Small (Eds.), Neurobiology of language (pp. 953–968). Elsevier Inc. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794-2.00076-6
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), 
Theories in second language acquisition (3rd ed., pp. 128–161). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/978042
9503986-7
Ullman, M.T., Earle, F. S., Walenski, M., & Janacsek, K. (2020). The neurocognition of developmental disorders 
of language. Annual Review of Psychology, 71(1), 389–417. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-122216-
011555
Ullman, M.T., & Reichle, R.V. (2023, March 25). The N400 reflects learning and processing in the declarative 
memory “what” circuit: A unifying neurocognitive account [Poster presentation]. Annual Meeting of the 
Cognitive Neuroscience Society, San Francisco, CA, United States.
Vandenberghe, B., Perez, M.M., Reynvoet, B., & Desmet, P. (2019). The role of Event-Related Potentials (ERPs) 
as sensitive measures in L2 vocabulary acquisition research. Journal of EuroSLA, 3(1), 35–45. https://doi.
org/10.22599/jesla.60
Vaughn, K.A., Oak, A., & Hernandez, A.E. (this volume). Genetic factors in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Zanini, S., Tavano, A., & Fabbro, F. (2010). Spontaneous language production in bilingual Parkinson’s disease 
patients: Evidence of greater phonological, morphological and syntactic impairments in native language. 
Brain and Language, 113(2), 84–89. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2010.01.005
Zanini, S., Tavano, A., Vorano, L., Schiavo, F., Gigli, G.L., Aglioti, S.M., & Fabbro, F. (2004). Greater syntactic 
impairments in native language in bilingual Parkinsonian patients. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & 
Psychiatry, 75(12), 1678–1681. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.2003.018507
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

177
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-17
13
NEUROLINGUISTIC METHODS 
AND GENERATIVE APPROACHES 
TO SECOND LANGUAGE 
ACQUISITION
David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
Introduction
From its onset in the early 1980s, Generative Second Language Acquisition (GenSLA) applied the 
tenets of generative linguistic theory to the domain of non-native language acquisition. One early 
goal of GenSLA research was to determine if the logical problem of language acquisition (e.g., 
Chomsky, 1965) also applied to additional language learning in young adulthood (e.g., Bley-Vroman, 
1989; Clahsen & Muysken, 1986; Flynn, 1987; Schachter, 1990; Schwartz, 1987; White, 1989): Do 
constraints from Universal Grammar (UG) reduce the adult second language (L2) hypothesis space, 
as argued for child language acquisition?
With the above in mind, much GenSLA research focused on testing the logical/latent extensions 
of a strong (and weaker) version(s) of the Critical Period Hypothesis (CPH; Lenneberg, 1967) to 
L2 acquisition in adulthood (e.g., Johnson & Newport, 1989, van der silk et al., 2021). Originally, 
the CPH postulated that if an L1 was not acquired by around puberty, mastery of the L1 would be 
hampered (Lenneberg, 1967; Penfield & Roberts, 1959). Alongside other cognitive approaches to 
language acquisition, GenSLA examined whether a similar restriction applied to adult L2 acquisition 
or, conversely, whether hypothesized domain-specific mechanisms for language acquisition remain 
accessible to typical L2 learners after having been activated in child L1 acquisition. In other words, 
was there a critical period for UG? To test this, research investigated the potential for acquiring L2 
representations that: (a) could not be transferred from the L1; (b) were not explicitly taught to L2 
learners; and (c) were neither acquirable on the basis of available input alone nor from solely domain-
general cognitive principles.
Over time, GenSLA has refined its questions and expanded its scope to examine variables that go 
beyond the initial questions of access to UG and L1 transfer effects. This includes better modeling of 
external factors such as quality and quantity of input, degree and context of exposure, and patterns 
of use, as well as internal ones such as individual cognitive differences. A good example of more 
contemporary approaches is that of Sorace’s (2011) Interface Hypothesis. The Interface Hypothesis 
brings GenSLA more aligned with processing considerations proper, claiming that a major bottleneck 
for L2 acquisition concerns processing difficulties related to information integration across linguistic 
domains, such as when choice of syntactic forms is dependent on discourse context.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
178
Processing-focused studies with a neuroimaging component and a specific GenSLA angle are 
not very common, though this observation does not entail that the fingerprint of generative theory 
is un(der)represented in mainstream L2 psycholinguistic theorizing and empiricism. Other theories 
grounded originally in a generative conceptualization of linguistic architecture, i.e. beyond the 
Interface Hypothesis, have had significant impact in the wider L2 literatures, such as the Shallow 
Structure Hypothesis (SSH, Clahsen & Felser, 2006, 2018). This is the case as they offer universal 
relevance via testable insights that can be applied with or without assuming a generative approach to 
grammar. This is welcome since, as a result of these and similar theories, there has been increased com-
patibility between GenSLA and other SLA traditions in recent years (Rothman & Slabakova, 2018).
After the advent of processing-facing theories in the early 2000s in GenSLA, research made exten-
sive use of online methods, such as eye-tracking in masked priming studies examining morpho-
logically complex words (Clahsen et al., 2013), wh-dependencies (Cunnings et al., 2010), reflexive 
pronouns (Felser & Cunnings, 2012; Kim et al., 2015), gender assignment (Hopp, 2013, 2015), and 
case (Hopp & León Arriaga, 2016). More recently, an increasing amount of event-related potential 
(ERP) research has examined gender and number (e.g., Alemán Bañón et al., 2014; Alemán Bañón, 
et al., 2017; Gabriele et al., 2013; see also Biondo et al., this volume), focus structure (Reichle & 
Birdsong, 2014), third language (L3) transfer (González Alonso et al., 2021; Rothman et al., 2015; 
see also Sabourin & Manning, this volume), verbal domain dependencies (Sabourin & Stowe, 2008), 
and filler-gap dependencies (Dekydtspotter et al., 2019, 2021, 2023; Swanson, 2021; Swanson & 
Dekydtspotter, 2022; see also Alemán Bañón et al., this volume). Together, this work reflects a shift 
in the focus of GenSLA; it has expanded its purview beyond the grammar itself by acknowledging 
the role of parsing and input in the overall development of linguistic competence (e.g., Carroll, 2001; 
Dekydtspotter, 2001), focusing on language-external variables for individual difference outcomes 
(e.g., Rothman & Slabakova, 2018) and considering how formal linguistic knowledge is deployed in 
processing (see Clahsen & Felser, 2006, 2018; Cunnings, 2017).
Our goal herein is not to synthesize what is available on the topic of GenSLA per se; for more 
depth we refer the reader to recent state-of-the-science work (Rothman & Slabakova, 2018; 
Slabakova et al., 2020). Rather, our focus relates to how GenSLA has adapted methodologically, par-
ticularly into neurolinguistic methods (see Roberts et al., 2018). From a GenSLA perspective, how 
can one capitalize on neuroimaging methods to address important questions such as: (1) Can adults 
acquire/process properties of an L2 that have no equivalent representation in the L1?, and at the 
same time (2) how can neurolinguistic methods aid in testing the ecological validity of specific claims 
made within generative theory? For example, are there neurological indications of constructs such 
as morphological markedness; processing evidence for the hierarchical structure argued for within 
generative grammar, for instance, structural as opposed to linear distance; and support for abstract 
constructs such as traces/copies in an L2?
With these two questions in italics in mind, we use the processing of grammatical gender and 
non-local (filler-gap) dependencies as exemplars in the remainder of this chapter. In doing so, we 
show how the use of neuroimaging methodologies has provided new evidence for older questions in 
contemporary GenSLA research. At the same time, we highlight how this work addresses recent calls 
to better understand what online processing data mean for formal and applied linguistic theories (e.g., 
Roberts et al., 2018; Ullman & Lovelett, 2018).
Domains of Grammar in Focus
Grammatical Gender and Number
Gender is a grammatical category that sorts nouns into different classes. For example, in Spanish all 
nouns are divided into two gender classes—masculine and feminine:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
179
(1)    El libro nuevo de Amazon por fin ha llegado.
       ‘The new book from Amazon (has) finally arrived.’
(2)    La puerta nueva de la casa por fin ha llegado.
       ‘The new door for the house (has) finally arrived.’
Spanish presents a relatively transparent gender system such that canonical gender markings largely 
distinguish between masculine and feminine nouns (-o indicates masculine and -a indicates fem-
inine), though neither gender value is necessarily identified by a unique marker (Harris, 1991).
Gender assignment is considered an inherent lexical feature of nouns (e.g., Carroll, 1989; Corbett, 
1994; but see Alexiadou, 2004) acquired as part of the lexical inventory of a given word. Gender 
agreement, however, is a morphosyntactic consequence reflecting the underlying syntax of grammat-
ical gender that is seen overtly in other elements related to the noun, such as determiners and adjectives 
in (1–2), which agree overtly with assigned gender (Corbett, 1991; Hockett, 1958). Traditionally, the 
acquisition of gender has been studied using behavioral methods, though advances in experimental 
methodologies facilitate the study of implicit aspects of language processing, including syntactic 
agreement processing in real-time.
Non-Local Dependencies
Several types of non-local dependencies, or constructions where a constituent appears in a different 
position than it typically would in a basic sentence, have been taken advantage of in the study of L2 
processing. To illustrate a basic case first, direct objects generally follow transitive verbs, as in (3), 
but in wh-dependencies in English, they typically occur in sentence-initial position, as in (4).
(3)    Ben saw hawks with binoculars yesterday.
(4)    What did Ben see with binoculars yesterday?
Chomsky (1973) introduced the idea that the syntactic representations for wh-questions in English 
actually include empty slots in canonical direct object position—instantiated under the Government 
and Binding approach as traces (Chomsky, 1981), under Minimalism as silent copies of the wh-phrase 
itself (Chomsky, 1995), and under general psycholinguistic approaches as gaps.
In terms of sentence processing, Fodor (1978) proposed that computing gaps might increase the 
activation level of the wh-phrase in working memory, as if the wh-phrase served as a filler for the gap. 
A critical mass of evidence indeed supports the claim that speakers attempt to interpret what as the 
direct object of see as soon as they encounter this verb in questions like (4) (Frazier & Clifton, 1989; 
Stowe, 1986); however, one challenge is that the verb and the copy are coextensive. As Pickering and 
Barry (1991) argued, the lexical semantics of see allow for a direct object, so the verb’s thematic grid 
alone could also increase activation of the wh-phrase in working memory here.
One construction that avoids the confound between lexical semantic and syntactic processing is 
wh-dependencies with indirect objects, as in (5–7):
(5)    Ben saw hawks with binoculars yesterday.
(6)    With what did Ben see hawks yesterday?
(7)    With what did Ben see hawks with what yesterday?
If there is no syntactic gap, then the activation of with what in working memory should increase only 
at see. In contrast, if a copy exists between hawks and yesterday, then with what should increase in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
180
activation at this position too. Another construction that avoids the same confound is wh-dependencies 
across multiple clauses, as in (8). Crucially, these questions are argued to involve two copies, as 
(9) shows.
(8)      What did Ben say that Amy saw yesterday?
(9)      What did Ben say what that Amy saw what yesterday
A new type of copy appears at the bridge between clauses, between say and that. A final construc-
tion also involves wh-dependencies across multiple clauses, but, importantly, the wh-phrases contain 
reflexives (like herself) or pronouns (like them). Zooming in on wh-phrases with reflexives, a key pre-
liminary observation is that reflexives only allow local antecedents (Chomsky, 1986), as (10) shows.
(10)      Mikei said that Joshj tore a picture of himself*i/j.
Here, himself must be Josh (Chomsky, 1995; but see Keller & Asudeh, 2001). In contrast, in (11), 
himself allows either Mike or Josh as its antecedent.
(11)      Which picture of himselfi/j did Mikei say that Joshj tore?
There is substantial debate on the mechanics that enable this change in referential possibilities 
(Sportiche, 2006), but Barss (1986) made the case that it generally results from the fact that such 
structures involve intermediate copies. In particular, as (12) shows, Josh is local to the lowest copy of 
himself and Mike is local to the intermediate copy.
(12)      Which picture of himself did Mike say which picture of himself that Josh tore  
             which picture of himself
Gender and Number in L2 Spanish: From Stalemate to Event-Related Potentials
The Interpretability Hypothesis (IH; Tsimpli & Dimitrakopoulou, 2007), a prominent GenSLA model, 
posits that access to the full inventory of syntactic features provided by UG in childhood diminishes 
with age as the speaker approaches a critical period, after which the acquisition of new syntactic L2 
features, like grammatical gender, is impossible if the L1 does not instantiate it. According to the IH, 
while advanced L2 learners can use markers of gender agreement for comprehension and production, 
they do so by means of learning, using an alternative mechanism not reliant on syntactic agreement 
and thus leading to enduring optionality. Such an approach captures what behavioral studies on the 
acquisition of gender in Spanish by native English speakers have shown over decades: While produc-
tion of obligatory gender agreement improves with L2 proficiency, even advanced L2 learners display 
significant variability (e.g., Franceschina, 2002, 2005; McCarthy, 2008)
Contrary to the predictions of the IH, other studies have shown that the performance of advanced 
L2 learners on properties licensed by grammatical gender can be indistinguishable from that of native 
speakers, at least in comprehension tasks. For example, White et al. (2004) and Iverson (2009) show 
that advanced L2 Spanish learners reliably use gender as a cue for disambiguation and comprehen-
sion, to the same degree as natives. Both studies argue that gender production underestimates the 
representations L1 English-L2 Spanish learners have at advanced proficiency. One promising alter-
native to the IH is Hopp’s (2013) claim that variability in gender for advanced L2 learners pertains 
more to gender assignment: It is not that L2 learners cannot acquire gender features, realize syntactic 
agreement with articles and adjectives, or process gender like natives, but that they do not always 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
181
associate the right gender value with each noun at the lexical level. In this sense, child and adult 
acquisition would essentially be the same, with potentially distinct surface manifestations arising 
from variables beyond accessibility to the same cognitive and linguistic mechanisms.
To test whether adult L2 ultimate attainment in morphosyntax is delimited by an absolute crit-
ical period for acquiring novel L2 structures, a complementary approach would be to examine pro-
cessing. Showing that processing mechanisms of adult L2 learners and native monolinguals are 
qualitatively similar (or not) would help reduce alternative interpretations of the same available 
data. According to the tenets of the Shallow Structure Hypothesis (SSH; Clahsen & Felser, 2006) 
processing is destined to be shallow in comparison to the L1—e.g., driven by semantics—since 
it is argued that it is not guided by complete syntactic representations, at least not novel L2 ones, 
which are assumed to not be acquirable. Thus, evidence of qualitatively similar processing in both 
L1 and L2 speakers would provide evidence that new L2 structures can be acquired and mentally 
represented like in L1 grammars.
With the adoption of neuroimaging technology to examine linguistic processing, it has been noted 
that qualitatively distinct brain signatures such as event-related potentials (ERPs; for details on the 
method, see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume) correlate with different types of processing underlying 
distinct linguistic phenomena. Thus, qualitative differences between L2 and native control groups’ 
ERP responses to the same stimuli might reflect differences at a level of linguistic representation that 
led to the use of distinct processing mechanisms (see, e.g., Alemán Bañón et al., 2014; Alemán Bañón 
et al., 2017; Clahsen and Felser, 2006; Phillips & Ehrenhofer, 2015). Although language-related ERP 
components do not uniquely reflect linguistic representations (Sassenhagen et al., 2014; Tanner et al., 
2017), they are reliably found in monolingual and advanced bilingual populations. Moreover, and 
relevant to whether the driver of variability in adult L2 ability is age-related brain maturation, findings 
show qualitative shifts in ERP signatures with increased L2 proficiency. This increasingly native-like 
processing over time indicates not only that processing is related to the acquisition of grammar but 
that the mechanisms underlying adult L2 acquisition are flexible.
Gabriele et al. (2013), for example, used ERPs to investigate gender and number processing 
among L1 English-L2 Spanish learners at three distinct levels of proficiency. Interestingly, at low 
levels of proficiency, learners revealed only budding P600 effects (the expected signature for syn-
tactic violations) for number violations; intermediate learners showed an overall advantage for 
number over gender, though their ERPs did not differ qualitatively from those of the native speakers; 
and advanced learners showed no advantage for number or gender, processing both like the native 
speakers. While more robust P600 effects emerged alongside increased L2 proficiency, the learners’ 
ERPs suggest that the underlying processing mechanisms for gender and number are qualitatively 
similar in both groups, lending support to Full Accessibility to UG approaches. Importantly, Gabriele 
et al. (2013) is not alone. A handful of studies show continuity in cases where the L1 and L2 make use 
of similar features and where a novel feature in one or the other language is examined, particularly 
among highly proficient learners (e.g., Frenck-Mestre et al., 2008; Morgan-Short et al., 2010; Ojima 
et al., 2005; Tokowicz & MacWhinney, 2005).
Similarly, Alemán Bañón et al. (2014) used ERPs to examine the processing of number and gender 
agreement among advanced L1 English-L2 Spanish learners. Focusing on the extent to which pro-
cessing was impacted by specific properties of the L1 and/or by structural distance between agreeing 
elements, their learners showed a P600 for both number and gender violations, similarly to natives. 
Additionally, they found that learners were able to process syntactic dependencies outside local 
domains, given that the P600 emerged equally for local violations and those that occurred across 
phrases—though the robustness of the effect was modulated by structural distance for both natives 
and learners. Thus, this study also provides evidence that late learners can be sensitive to hierarchical 
structure.
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
182
Alemán Bañón et al. (2017) examined both production and online processing (with ERPs) of 
number and gender agreement among intermediate and advanced L1 English-L2 Spanish learners, 
focusing on the role of morphological markedness. The authors tested two hypotheses regarding 
the types of suppliance errors L2 learners are more likely to make: either an overreliance on default 
morphology (e.g., McCarthy, 2008) or errors reflecting the strength of learners’ lexical representations 
(e.g., Hopp, 2013). The authors specifically examined nouns whose endings did not have canonical -o  
and -a markers and, thus, whose agreement could not depend on phonological matching. While the 
learners performed better overall with number than gender, they exhibited P600s for both number 
and gender that were qualitatively similar to native speakers on the same experiments (published 
in a separate study; Alemán Bañón & Rothman, 2016). Figure 13.1 highlights the ERP effects and 
associated topographical distributions from Alemán Bañón et al. (2017). For ease of visualization, 
only the number condition is presented here, though we refer the reader to the original study for more 
information. 
Interestingly, learners performed well in production and they did not over-rely on morphological 
defaults (i.e., oversuppliance of masculine adjectives with feminine nouns), suggesting that vari-
ability in gender agreement stemmed from aspects of the lexis rather than the syntax. Thus, marked-
ness did impact processing, and it did so in a native-like manner, meaning that late L2 learners can 
acquire and process novel syntactic features in the L2 in a native-like way.
Despite the processing advantage for properties that exist in both the L1 and L2, as well as the  
advantage advanced learners have over beginners, a recent study showed that some variability seen  
in L2 processing of agreement dependencies can, in part, reflect individual differences in working  
memory, verbal aptitude, and task design. Gabriele et al. (2021) used a battery of behavioral and pro-
duction tasks, including an ERP analysis, to examine number and gender in Spanish by L1 speakers  
of English at lower proficiency. The authors found that the learners showing qualitatively similar  
ERPs for gender and number violations were those with greater metalinguistic abilities and working  
Figure 13.1  Grand Average ERPs of Number Conditions.
Notes: Left: ERPs of relevant number manipulations at electrode Pz; Right: Topographical distribution of relevant number 
manipulations at 250–450 ms and 450–900 ms post stimulus. Central parietal distribution (the red in the rightmost plots) is 
typical for a P600 effect. (Figure adapted from a pre-print of Alemán Bañón et al. (2017). A color version of this figure is 
accessible through this link: https://osf.io/shnbq/).
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
183
memory. Because processing agreement dependencies requires the manipulation of linguistic features  
in working memory, and working memory is known to modulate agreement processing even in native  
speakers, the authors conclude that variability in L2 agreement processing is not unlike variability  
seen in native speakers. Their study provides evidence that not only are differences between L1 and  
L2 processing at the early stages the result of language-specific idiosyncrasies, but also that indi-
vidual characteristics of the learner and the nature of the task are important.
Non-Local Dependencies: Evidence from Neuroimaging Methods
The body of research that has accumulated to test the SSH speaks indirectly to representational 
questions. As a counterweight to the SSH, the Full Transfer/Full Access/Full Parse Hypothesis 
(FPH; Dekydtspotter et al., 2006) proposes that L2 speakers attempt to compute complete syntactic 
representations. The FPH allows, however, that speakers do not compute grammatical representations 
as efficiently in their L2, and thus computations may occasionally fail. The inefficiency is argued to 
stem from increased costs for upstream processes (e.g., activating less-entrenched lexis), leaving 
fewer resources for downstream processes.
Figure 13.2  Areas of the Brain Where Activation was Significantly Greater in the Sentences With Wh-
dependencies Compared to Sentences Without Wh-dependencies. (Figure adapted from Pliatsikas, 
Johnstone and Marinis (2017); doi: https:// doi.org/ 10.5334/ gjgl.95.)
Source: Adapted from Pliatsikas, Johnstone and Marinis (2017); doi: https://doi.org/10.5334/gjgl.95. A color version of this 
figure is accessible through this link: https://osf.io/shnbq/?view_only=edfe0707cf04385ac9f580b6 fa0eb5e).
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
184
Non-local dependencies have played a critical role in research on the SSH and FPH, but results 
from behavioral studies have not been clear cut. For example, in the case of wh-dependencies with 
indirect objects, one cross-modal priming study reports data suggesting that L2 speakers may keep 
fillers active in working memory across a whole dependency rather than reactivating them only at gap 
positions (Felser & Roberts, 2007). Several later priming studies, however, find patterns of results 
indicating that L2 speakers do indeed selectively re-activate fillers at gaps, suggesting real-time com-
putation of complete syntactic representations (e.g., Dekydtspotter & Miller, 2013).
Moving the debate forward, Jessen et al. (2017) used ERPs to characterize how non-native 
speakers compute such dependencies. L1 English speakers and L1 German-L2 English speakers at 
intermediate or advanced proficiency read sentences with adjunct clauses, as well as minimal pair 
sentences with a non-local dependency with an indirect object. The L2 speakers alone exhibited a Left 
Anterior Negativity (LAN) across the whole dependency, until the site of a presumptive gap for the 
indirect object. L1 and L2 English speakers produced a N400 at the verb. Finally, L1 and L2 English 
speakers exhibited a P600 at an (ungrammatical) resumptive indirect object. Jessen and colleagues 
observe that the LAN could reflect continuous activation of the wh-filler in working memory, in line 
with Felser and Roberts (2007). However, they acknowledge that LANs in such contexts are well-
attested in L1 sentence processing (e.g., Fiebach et al., 2002). In any case, Jessen and colleagues 
observe that both L1 and L2 speakers appear to assign preliminary thematic roles at the verb, and then 
to confirm it at the actual gap, as Nicol (1992) had proposed for L1 speakers. ERPs here thus seem to 
offer a way to disentangle various cognitive processes involved in filler-gap dependencies, providing 
additional insight on how L2 speakers may engage in them.
Regarding wh-dependencies across multiple clauses, data from behavioral studies about the SSH 
and FPH have been subject to debate from the very start. For example, Marinis et al. (2005) report 
that L2 speakers showed increased self-paced reading times at embedded verbs in conditions with 
wh-dependencies in comparison to conditions without wh-dependencies, but no difference based on 
whether an intermediate copy also featured in the wh-dependency. However, in their study of L2 
speakers with and without substantial immersion experience, Pliatsikas and Marinis (2013) found 
that the former group read the embedded verb more quickly when the dependency contained an inter-
mediate trace than when it did not, in line with the claim that intermediate gaps facilitate retrieval 
of fillers from working memory at later gap sites. Likewise, using aural stimuli presentation and 
pupillometry measurements, Fernandez et al. (2018) found an analogous decrease in pupil change 
slope. In all three studies, L1 speakers exhibited telling effects at both intermediate gaps as well as 
at the embedded verb. Taken together, behavioral evidence is mixed with respect to L2 speakers, and 
findings mainly point to the complexity involved in processing these constructions.
Crucially, however, (f)MRI has been able to provide further insights into the neural correlates 
of L2 processing of this construction (for more information on fMRI methodology, see Kousaie 
and Klein, this volume). For example, Pliatsikas et al. (2017) scanned L1 Greek-L2 English 
speakers with high proficiency while they read the stimuli from Marinis et al. (2005). These 
speakers exhibited greater activation of the posterior bilateral medial and superior temporal gyri 
for sentences with wh-dependencies, in comparison to sentences without them (Figure 13.2). 
Speakers with the most immersion experience showed numerically (but not statistically) less acti-
vation of the left medial and superior temporal gyri in conditions with an intermediate gap in a wh-
dependency to conditions without an intermediate gap. Pliatsikas and colleagues argue that these 
findings challenge the across-the-board claims of the SSH, arguing alternatively that shallow compu-
tation may be an L2 developmental stage. The spatial granularity of fMRI not only allows us to cap-
ture differences in processing load that behavioral measures might miss, but it also, as the researchers 
noted, feeds our understanding of the neurobiology of second languages and the ecological validity 
of structural hierarchy as envisaged and understood by generative grammar (Friederici et al., 2017).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
185
Turning to wh-questions across multiple clauses where reference is at stake, Dekydtspotter and 
Gilbert (2019) used L1-English advanced L2-French speakers to test the proposal in Roberts (2013) 
that L2 speakers may only compute complete syntactic representations when the task at hand requires 
them to do so. The researchers found effects consistent with the FPH, so Dekydtspotter and colleagues 
(2019) next used a component-independent design as recommended in Luck (2014) to investigate 
whether ERPs could also provide evidence for computation of complete syntactic representations in 
L1 English advanced L2 French speakers. Dekydtspotter and colleagues focused on the window from 
250–550ms into the processing of a bridge verb and complementizer between clauses. At the bridge 
verb, L1 speakers exhibited a posterior positivity for conditions involving discourse coreference 
instead of syntactic binding, only in cases where the matrix subject could not serve as a referent for 
a pronoun in the wh-filler. At the complementizer, L1 speakers exhibited a right-posterior positivity 
for conditions where the matrix subject could serve as a reference for the pronoun in the wh-filler, in 
comparison to conditions where it could not. On the other hand, L2 speakers instead exhibited a mar-
ginal right-posterior positivity for conditions where binding rather than discourse coreference was 
enabled. Since speakers would not show such a difference here unless they computed an intermediate 
copy, Dekydtspotter et al. concluded against the SSH.
Wang (2012) had concluded on the basis of results from a series of self-paced reading 
experiments that L1 Mandarin intermediate L2 English speakers could compute complete syntactic 
representations for similar constructions, even though Mandarin wh-phrases appear in canonical 
position. Swanson (2021) examined neural responses related to the successful computation of this 
construction in the same population. He looked across the dependency, rather than just at the bridge 
between clauses. L1 speakers only produced ERPs that reflected referential computations at the 
sites of copies—the bridge and embedded verbs. While the pattern of ERPs in L2 speakers was 
more complex, these speakers, crucially, produced ERPs that reflected referential computations 
at these same words. The timing and topography of ERPs in L1 and L2 speakers differed starkly, 
however. Swanson also concluded in favor of the FPH and, since Mandarin does not allow this con-
struction, findings were argued to constitute further evidence for continued access to UG beyond 
childhood.
In a final behavioral study on wh-questions across multiple clauses where reference is at stake, 
Dekydtspotter et al. (2018) interpreted their priming data to indicate that their L1 English advanced 
L2 French speakers successfully computed complete syntactic representations online, but that they 
may not have had enough working memory left to compute additional inferences related to the con-
struction. Following up on this finding, Dekydtspotter et al. (2021) recorded EEG while a similar 
group of participants read the same stimuli in an RSVP paradigm, and the researchers examined the 
oscillatory activity at the bridge verb and complementizer (for details on this analytical method, 
see Mottarella & Prat, this volume). While L1 and L2 speakers showed increased induced power 
at 15–16Hz from 347–497ms into the bridge verb for conditions allowing additional inferential 
processing, their patterns differed starkly in induced power at 17–22Hz from 412ms–552ms at the 
subordinator: L1 speakers showed greater power for conditions allowing inferences, whereas L2 
speakers showed greater power for conditions not requiring inferences, due to their greater degree 
of featural specification. A similar difference appeared in induced power at 42–51Hz from 299–
354ms into the bridge verb, and at 41–44Hz from 402–522ms into the subordinator. Dekydtspotter 
et al. (2021) thus argued that L2 speakers may actually prioritize syntactic representations at 
the brain level, supporting their Minimal Brain Adaptation for Representational Prioritization 
(MBARP) hypothesis. Using a similar design, Dekydtspotter et al. (2023) provided complemen-
tary evidence for MBARP, but from a different set of construction comparisons. As elsewhere in 
this chapter, the body of research discussed in this section has used neurocognitive measures to 
bring new insights into current questions in the field, but the nature of the neuronal activity that has 
 
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
186
been observed has also raised new questions about the neurocognition of non-native grammatical 
processing.
Current Trends and Future Directions
Using neuroimaging methods to study L2 acquisition and processing has led to a better understanding 
of the neurological machinery responsible for grammatical competence and processing in L2 acquisi-
tion, including the utility of historically contested hypotheses such as the Critical Period Hypothesis. 
However, efforts to connect theory to application, such as second language education and pedagogy, 
would be a welcome domain of research. Additionally, budding topics such as additive multilin-
gualism stand to gain meaningful insight from neurolinguistic methods in the quest to understand the 
mechanisms responsible for language acquisition and processing beyond an L2.
Further Readings
This paper offers and extensive overview of the neurophysiological methods applied to L2 acquisition, language 
teaching, and language processing:
Roberts, L., González Alonso, J., Pliatsikas, C., & Rothman, J. (2018). Evidence from neurolinguistic meth-
odologies: Can it actually inform linguistic/language acquisition theories and translate to evidence-based 
applications? Second Language Research, 34(1), 125–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316644010
This paper offers an historical perspective on GenSLA while also discussing the shifts within the field to focus 
on input, new test populations, and psycho/neurolinguistic methods:
Rothman, J., & Slabakova, R. (2018). The generative approach to SLA and its place in modern second lan-
guage studies. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 40, 417–442. https://doi.org/10.1017/S02722
63117000134
References
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2014). Morphosyntactic processing in advanced second lan-
guage (L2) learners: An event-related potential investigation of the effects of L1–L2 similarity and structural 
distance. Second Language Research, 30(3), 275–306. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658313515671
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language 
syntactic system. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Alemán Bañón, J., & Rothman, J. (2016). The role of morphological markedness in the processing of number 
and gender agreement in Spanish: An event-related potential investigation. Language, Cognition and 
Neuroscience, 31(10), 1273–1298. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2016.1218032
Alemán Bañón, J., Miller, D., & Rothman, J. (2017). Morphological variability in second language learners: An 
examination of electrophysiological and production data. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 43(10), 1509–1536. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000394
Alexiadou, A. (2004). Inflection class, gender and DP internal structure. In G. Müller, L. Gunkel, & G. Zifonun 
(Eds.), Explorations in nominal inflection (pp. 21–49). De Gruyter. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110197
501.21
Barss, A. (1986). Chains and anaphoric dependences: On reconstruction and its implications [Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation]. MIT.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1989). What is the logical problem of foreign language learning. Linguistic Perspectives on 
Second Language Acquisition, 4, 1–68. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139524544.005
Biondo, N., Molinaro, N., & Manchini, S. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language morpho-
logical system: the role of grammar-related and speaker-related factors. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Carroll, S.E. (1989). Second-language acquisition and the computational paradigm. Language Learning, 39(4), 
53–594. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1989.tb00902.x
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
187
Carroll, S.E. (2001). Input and evidence: The raw material of second language acquisition. John Benjamins 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.25
Chomsky, N. (1965). Aspects of the theory of syntax. MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.21236/AD0616323
Chomsky, N. (1973). Conditions on transformations. In S.R. Anderson & P. Kiparsky (Eds.), A festschrift for 
Morris Halle (pp. 232–286). Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on government and binding: The Pisa lectures. Foris.
Chomsky, N. (1986). Barriers. MIT Press.
Chomsky, N. (1995). The minimalist program. MIT Press.
Clahsen, H., Balkhair, L., Schutter, J.S., & Cunnings, I. (2013). The time course of morphological processing 
in a second language. Second Language Research, 29(1), 7–31. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312464970
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(1), 
3–42. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716406060024
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2018). Some notes on the Shallow Structure Hypothesis. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 40, 693–706. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263117000250
Clahsen, H., & Muysken, P. (1986). The availability of universal grammar to adult and child learners–a study of 
the acquisition of German word order. Second Language Research, 2(2), 93–119. https://doi.org/10.1177/026
765838600200201
Corbett, G.G. (1991). Gender. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139166119
Corbett, G.G. (1994). Gender and gender systems. In R.E. Asher & J.M.Y. Simpson (Eds.), The encyclopedia of 
language and linguistics, Vol. 3 (pp. 1347–1353). Pergamon Press.
Cunnings, I. (2017). Parsing and working memory in bilingual sentence processing. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 20(4), 659–678. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728916000675
Cunnings, I., Batterham, C., Felser, C., & Clahsen, H. (2010). Constraints on L2 learners’ processing of wh-
dependencies. Research in Second Language Processing and Parsing, 87–112. https://doi.org/10.1075/
lald.53.04cun
Dekydtspotter, L. (2001). The universal parser and interlanguage: Domain-specific mental organization in the 
comprehensilm undombien interrogatives in English-French interlanguage. Second Language Research, 
17(2), 91–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/026765830101700201
Dekydtspotter, L., Black, M., Frimu, R. & Panwitz, A.R. (2018). Animacy-based processing loads in anaphora 
resolution in (non-native) French. In J. Cho, M. Iverson, T. Judy, T. Leal, & E. Shimanskaya (Eds.), Meaning 
and structure in second language acquisition: In honor of Roumyana Slabakova (pp. 95–119). John Benjamins 
Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1075/sibil.55.04dek
Dekydtspotter, L. & Gilbert, C. (2019). When nonnative speakers show distinction: Syntax and task interactions 
in long-distance anaphoric dependencies in French. In D. Arteaga (Ed.), L2 grammatical representation and 
processing: Theory and practice (pp. 68–92). Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781788925
358-006
Dekydspotter, L. & Miller, A.K. (2013). Inhibitive and facilitative priming induced by traces in the processing 
of wh-dependencies in a second language. Second Language Research, 29, 345–372. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0267658312467030
Dekydtspotter, L., Miller, A.K., Gilbert, C., Iverson, M., Leal, T. & Swanson, K. (2019). An electrophysio-
logical investigation of domain-specific procedures in (nonnative) French. In H. Wilson, N. King, E.J. Park, 
& K. Childress (Eds.), Selected proceedings of the 2017 Second Language Research Forum (pp. 48–61).  
Cascadilla.
Dekydtspotter, L., Miller, A.K., Iverson, M., Xiong, Y., Swanson, K., & Gilbert, C. (2021). Minimal brain adap-
tation for representational prioritization in non-native parsing: Evidence from a time-frequency analysis of 
recursion in wh-dependencies in French. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 59, 101002. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneuroling.2021.101002
Dekydtspotter, L., Miller, A.K., Iverson, M., Xiong, Y., Swanson, K., & Gilbert, C. (2023). The timing versus fre-
quency problem in nonnative sentence processing: Evidence from a time-frequency analysis of anaphora reso-
lution in successive wh-movement in native and nonnative speakers of French. PLOS ONE, 18: ee0275305. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0275305
Dekydtspotter, L., Schwartz, B.D., & Sprouse, R.A. (2006). The comparative fallacy in L2 processing research. 
In M. Grantham O’Brien, C. Shea, & J. Archibald (Eds.), Proceedings of the 8th Generative Approaches to 
Second Language Acquisition Conference (pp. 33–40). Cascadilla.
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
188
Felser, C., & Cunnings, I. (2012). Processing reflexives in a second language: The timing of structural and 
discourse-level constraints. Applied Psycholinguistics, 33(3), 571–603. https://doi.org/10.1017/S014271641
1000488
Felser, C. & Roberts, L. (2007). Processing wh-dependencies in a second language: A crossmodal priming study. 
Second Language Research, 23, 9–36. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658307071600
Fernandez, L., Höhle, B., Brock, J., & Nickels, L. (2018). Investigating auditory processing of syntactic gaps 
with L2 speakers using pupillometry. Second Language Research, 34, 201–227. https://doi.org/10.1177/
0267658317722386
Fiebach, C.J., Schlesewsky, M., & Friederici, A.D. (2002). Separating syntactic memory costs and syntactic inte-
gration costs during parsing: The processing of German wh-questions. Journal of Memory and Language, 47, 
250–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0749-596X(02)00004-9
Flynn, S. (1987). Contrast and construction in a parameter-setting model of L2 acquisition. Language Learning, 
37(1), 19–62. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1968.tb01311.x
Fodor, J.D. (1978). Parsing strategies and constraints on transformations. Linguistic Inquiry, 9, 427–473.
Franceschina, F. (2002). Case and φ-feature agreement in advanced L2 Spanish grammars. EuroSLA yearbook, 
2(1), 71–86. https://doi.org/10.1075/eurosla.2.07fra
Franceschina, F. (2005). Fossilized second language grammars: The acquisition of grammatical gender (38). 
John Benjamins Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.38
Frazier, L., & Clifton, C. (1989). Successive cyclicity in the grammar and the parser. Language and Cognitive 
Processes, 4, 93–126. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690968908406359
Friederici, A.D., Chomsky, N., Berwick, R.C., Moro, A., & Bolhuis, J.J. (2017). Language, mind and brain. 
Nature Human Behaviour, 1(10), 713–722. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-017-0184-4
Frenck-Mestre, C., Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., & Foucart, A. (2008). The effect of phonological realization 
of inflectional morphology on verbal agreement in French: Evidence from ERPs. Acta Psychologica, 128(3), 
528–536. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2007.12.007
Gabriele, A., Fiorentino, R., & Alemán Bañón, J. (2013). Examining second language development using event-
related potentials: a cross-sectional study on the processing of gender and number agreement. Linguistic 
Approaches to Bilingualism, 3(2), 213–232. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.3.2.04gab
Gabriele, A., Alemán Bañón, J., Hoffman, L., Covey, L., Rossomondo, A., & Fiorentino, R. (2021). Examining 
variability in the processing of agreement in novice learners: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 47(7), 1106–1140. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xlm0000983
González Alonso, J., Alemán Bañon, J., DeLuca, V., Miller, D., Soares, S.M.P., Puig-Mayengo, E., Slaats, S., & 
Rothman, J. (2021). Event related potentials at initial exposure in third language acquisition: Implications 
from an artificial mini-grammar study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 56, 100939. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jne
uroling.2020.100939
Harris, J.W. (1991). The exponence of gender in Spanish. Linguistic Inquiry, 22(1), 27–62.
Hockett, C.F. (1958). A course in modern linguistics. Macmillan. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1958.
tb00870.x
Hopp, H. (2013). Grammatical gender in adult L2 acquisition: Relations between lexical and syntactic vari-
ability. Second Language Research, 29(1), 33–56. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312461803
Hopp, H. (2015). Individual differences in the second language processing of object–subject ambiguities. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 36(2), 129–173. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716413000180
Hopp, H., & León Arriaga, M.E. (2016). Structural and inherent case in the non-native processing of 
Spanish: Constraints on inflectional variability. Second Language Research, 32(1), 75–108. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658315605872
Iverson, M. (2009). Competing SLA hypotheses assessed: Comparing heritage and successive Spanish bilinguals 
of L3 Brazilian Portuguese. In A. Pires & J. Rothman (Eds.), Minimalist inquiries into child and adult lan-
guage acquisition: Case studies across Portuguese (pp. 221–244). De Gruyter Mouton. https://doi.org/
10.1515/9783110215359.2.221
Jessen, A., Festman, J., Boxell, O. & Felser, C. (2017). Native and non-native speakers’ brain responses to 
filled indirect object gaps. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 46, 1319–1338. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10
936-017-9496-9
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: The influence of 
maturational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21(1), 60–99. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90003-0
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurolinguistic Methods and Generative Approaches
189
Keller, F., & Asudeh, A. (2001). Constraints on linguistic coreference: Structural vs pragmatic factors. In J. D. 
Moore & K. Stenning (Eds.), Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 
(pp. 483–488). Erlbaum.
Kim, E., Montrul, S., & Yoon, J. (2015). The on-line processing of binding principles in second language acqui-
sition: Evidence from eye tracking. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36(6), 1317–1374. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0142716414000307
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lenneberg, E.H. (1967). The biological foundations of language. Hospital Practice, 2(12), 59–67. https://doi.
org/10.1080/21548331.1967.11707799
Luck, S.J. (2014). An introduction to the event-related potential technique. MIT press.
Marinis, T., Roberts, L., Felser, C. & Clahsen, H. (2005). Gaps in second language sentence processing. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 53–78. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263105050035
McCarthy, C. (2008). Morphological variability in the comprehension of agreement: An argument for represen-
tation over computation. Second Language Research, 24(4), 459–486. https://doi.org/10.1177/026765830
8095737
Morgan-Short, K., Sanz, C., Steinhauer, K., & Ullman, M.T. (2010). Second language acquisition of gender 
agreement in explicit and implicit training conditions: An event-related potential study. Language Learning, 
60(1), 154–193. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2009.00554.x
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Nicol, J.L. (1992). Reconsidering reactivation. In R. Shillcock & G.T.M. Altmann (Eds.), Cognitive models of 
speech processing: The second Sperlonga meeting. Erlbaum.
Ojima, S., Nakata, H., & Kakigi, R. (2005). An ERP study of second language learning after childhood: Effects 
of proficiency. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(8), 1212–1228. https://doi.org/10.1162/089892905
5002436
Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and Brain Mechanisms. Princeton University Press.
Phillips, C., & Ehrenhofer, L. (2015). The role of language processing in language acquisition. Linguistic 
Approaches to Bilingualism, 5(4), 409–453. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.5.4.01phi
Pickering, M. & Barry, G. (1991). Sentence processing without empty categories. Language and Cognitive 
Processes, 6, 229–259. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690969108406944
Pliatsikas, C., Johnstone, T., & Marinis, T. (2017). An fMRI study on the processing of long distance wh-
movement in a second language. Glossa, 2, 101. https://doi.org/10.5334/gjgl.95
Pliatsikas, C., & Marinis, T. (2013). Processing empty categories in a second language: When naturalistic 
exposure fills the (intermediate) gap. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16, 167–182. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S136672891200017X
Reichle, R.V., & Birdsong, D. (2014). Processing focus structure in L1 and L2 French: L2 proficiency effects 
on ERPs. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 36(3), 535–564. https://doi.org/10.1017/S027226311
3000594
Roberts, L. (2013). Sentence processing in bilinguals. In R.P.G. van Gompel (Ed.), Sentence processing (pp. 
221–246). Psychology Press.
Roberts, L., González Alonso, J., Pliatsikas, C., & Rothman, J. (2018). Evidence from neurolinguistic meth-
odologies: Can it actually inform linguistic/language acquisition theories and translate to evidence-based 
applications? Second Language Research, 34(1), 125–143. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316644010
Rothman, J., Alemán Bañón, J., & González Alonso, J. (2015). Neurolinguistic measures of typological effects 
in multilingual transfer: Introducing an ERP methodology. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1087. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01087
Rothman, J., & Slabakova, R. (2018). The generative approach to SLA and its place in modern second language 
studies. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 40, 417–442. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263117000134
Sabourin, L., & Manning, G. (this volume). Cross-linguistics transfer in second language neurocognition. In 
K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L.A. (2008). Second language processing: When are first and second languages processed 
similarly? Second Language Research, 24(3), 397–430. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658308090186
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

David Miller, Vincent DeLuca, Kyle Swanson, and Jason Rothman
190
Sassenhagen, J., Schlesewsky, M., & Bornkessel-Schlesewsky, I. (2014). The P600-as-P3 hypothesis 
revisited: Single-trial analyses reveal that the late EEG positivity following linguistically deviant material is 
reaction time aligned. Brain and Language, 137, 29–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.07.010
Schachter, J. (1990). On the issue of completeness in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 
6(2), 93–124. https://doi.org/10.1177/026765839000600201
Schwartz, B.D. (1987). The modular basis of second language acquisition. Unpublished dissertation, University 
of Southern California
Slabakova, R., Leal, T., Dudley, A., & Stack, M. (2020). Generative second language acquisition. Cambridge 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108762380
Sorace, A. (2011). Pinning down the concept of “interface” in bilingualism. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 
1(1), 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.1.1.01sor
Sportiche, D. (2006). Reconstruction, binding and scope. In M. Everaert & H. van Riemsdijk (Eds.), The Blackwell 
companion to syntax, Volume 1 (pp. 35–93). Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470996591.ch54
Stowe, L.A. (1986). Parsing WH-constructions: Evidence for on-line gap location. Language and Cognitive 
Processes, 1, 227–245. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690968608407062
Swanson, K. (2021). Neurocognition and non-native grammatical processing: The view from anaphora in 
successive-cyclic wh-movement in L1-Mandarin/L2-English [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Indiana 
University Bloomington.
Swanson, K. & Dekydtspotter, L. (2022). A full parse or a shallow structure in L2? An ERP study of anaphora in 
successive-cyclic wh-movement in L1-Mandarin/L2-English. In Y. Gong & F. Kpogo (Eds.), Proceedings of 
the 46th annual Boston University Conference on Language Development (pp. 768–782). Cascadilla.
Tanner, D., Grey, S., & Van Hell, J.G. (2017). Dissociating retrieval interference and reanalysis in the P600 
during sentence comprehension. Psychophysiology, 54(2), 248–259. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12788
Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit measures of sensitivity to violations in second 
language grammar: An event-related potential investigation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27(2), 
173–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263105050102
Tsimpli, I.M., & Dimitrakopoulou, M. (2007). The interpretability hypothesis: Evidence from wh-interrogatives 
in second language acquisition. Second Language Research, 23(2), 215–242. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676
58307076546
Ullman, M.T., & Lovelett, J.T. (2018). Implications of the declarative/procedural model for improving second 
language learning: The role of memory enhancement techniques. Second Language Research, 34(1), 39–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316675195
van der Silk, F., Schepens, J., Bongaerts, T., & van Hout, R. (2021). Critical period claim revisited: Reanalysis of 
Hartshorne, Tenenbaum, and Pinker (2018) suggests steady decline and learner-type differences. Language 
Learning, 72(1), 87–112. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12470
Wang, Y.-T. (2012). Deep processing of long-distance dependencies in L2 English: The case of anaphora 
[Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Indiana University Bloomington.
White, L. (1989). Universal grammar and second language acquisition. John Benjamins Publishing. https://doi.
org/10.1075/lald.1
White, L., Valenzuela, E., Kozlowska-Macgregor, M., & Leung, Y.K.I. (2004). Gender and number agreement in 
nonnative Spanish. Applied Psycholinguistics, 25(1), 105–133. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716404001067
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

191
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-18
14
SECOND LANGUAGE 
ACQUISITION AND 
NEUROPLASTICITY
Insights from the Dynamic Restructuring Model
Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
Introduction
Learning and using a second language (L2) has been shown to have effects that extend beyond lan-
guage use per se. Notably, these include well-documented effects in the function and the structure of 
the brain, which support and relate to effects observed in behavior. The literature on functional and 
structural neuroplasticity that is induced by L2 learning remains relatively limited, and not without its 
controversies, which usually relate to the methods that have been used and the characteristics of the 
tested samples. The present chapter focuses on the available evidence for structural brain adaptations, 
and relates this to contemporary models for experience-based neuroplasticity, with the aim of offering 
a unifying explanation for seemingly variable patterns documented in previous studies on structural 
brain changes induced by L2 acquisition.
This chapter is organized as follows: after a general overview of theories of patterns of experience-
based neuroplasticity on brain structure, evidence for adaptations that are induced by bilingualism is 
summarized and explained on the basis of the dynamic restructuring model (DRM; Pliatsikas, 2020), 
a recent model in the field. This is followed by an extensive overview of evidence from L2 training 
studies and longitudinal language learning studies. This evidence is evaluated against the predictions 
of the DRM. The chapter concludes with theoretical and methodological suggestions about how this 
emerging field should move forward.
Experience-Based Neuroplasticity
It has been firmly established that the brain is a highly plastic and adaptable organ. The ability of our 
brains to change is a crucial part of our healthy ontogenesis, forming us into unique individuals and 
helping us to achieve our goals effectively (Lindenberger et al., 2017). Brain alterations occur when 
we face influential changes in our environment: for example, after a brain injury or disease, when 
we must increase the efficiency of our behavior, or during acquisition of a new skill (Lindenberger 
& Lövdén, 2019). As for the latter, when we acquire demanding skills we also often must face new, 
emergent tasks, which brings new challenges to our cognitive processes. This creates a mismatch 
between the functional supply of the brain structure and how demanding we experience the skill at 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
192
hand (Wenger et al., 2017). To address this mismatch, the brain adapts its structure at the neuronal 
level in various ways to deal with these demands, usually by increasing the means for effective com-
munication between brain regions. For example, skill acquisition has been shown to increase the 
volume of the grey matter. Grey matter is a collective term for the neurons’ cell bodies (or somata, 
see Figure 14.1). Cell bodies carry out most of the processing and synthesizing of information that is 
received in the form of electric impulses by the dendrites, small extensions on the surface of the cell 
bodies. Dendrites contain dendritic spines, which form synapses with neighboring neurons. Thus, 
dendrites constitute the major avenues for the communication of information. Cognitively challen-
ging experiences trigger the creation of new dendritic spines in order to provide more synapses, i.e., 
communication avenues, eventually leading to volumetric growth of structures responsible for the 
given task. Skill acquisition has also been shown to affect the integrity of the white matter of the 
brain. White matter is the collective term for the neurons’ axon¸ single cable-like structures that 
transfer electrical signals from the cell body to other neurons via synapses that are formed at the 
axon terminals. Axons are usually insulated by myelin, a lipid-rich protein that helps to transfer 
the electric signal at higher rates, which also gives the axons their white color. Skill acquisition has 
been shown to increase the availability of myelin in implicated white matter tracts, suggesting that 
white matter reorganizes to provide better communication between regions, eventually providing the 
means for efficient delivery of the information required for the new skill. Therefore, these processes 
enable brain regions involved in the acquisition of new skills to respond to the altered environmental 
demands effectively (Wenger et al., 2017). The ability of the human brain to adapt when acquiring 
and mastering a new skill is termed experience-dependent neuroplasticity (Lövdén et al., 2013).
Three basic principles are critical in experienced-based neuroplasticity (Kleim & Jones, 2008):  
(i) for an experience to trigger structural brain changes, the increased cognitive demands must be high  
enough to exceed the possibilities of the existing neural resources; (ii) the duration and continuity of  
such experiences are co-determining factors for the changes to occur, and for the time-course within  
which they happen; and (iii) the changes occur in brain areas that subserve the behavior relevant for  
the task at hand.
Figure 14.1  Neuron Anatomy.
Note: Created with BioRender.com
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
193
These predictions have been repeatedly confirmed in animal research (Crawford et al., 2020; Mesa-
Gresa et al., 2021) and in human studies that used structural brain imaging, comparing brain archi-
tecture before and after engagement in a new or newly demanding experience (De Sousa Fernandes 
et al., 2020; Teixeira-Machado et al., 2019). For example, London taxi drivers have been reported 
to have an enlarged region in the posterior hippocampus, which was linked to them maintaining and 
continuously navigating an elaborate mental map of the city (Woollett & Maguire, 2011). Further 
evidence of experience-related grey matter increases in the relevant brain areas comes from a variety 
of other populations including medical students (Draganski et al., 2006), musicians (Wenger et al., 
2021), and, crucially, bilinguals (Mårtensson et al., 2012).
Importantly, it would be simplistic to expect that the immense amount of knowledge and skills that 
humans acquire throughout their lives will lead to continuous increases of brain volumes. Such a view 
is also inconsistent with evolutionary principles that posit that nature’s solution to efficient progress 
is not never-ending growth, but rather the selection of the best candidates among many candidates 
and elimination of the less suitable ones (Lindenberger & Lövdén, 2019; Wenger et al., 2017). This 
principle has also recently crystallized within the field of experience-dependent neuroplasticity into 
the expansion-renormalization model1 (Lindenberger & Lövdén, 2019; Lövdén et al., 2013; Wenger 
et al., 2017).
According to this model (Figure 14.2), experience-related changes often follow a three-phased  
trajectory of expansion, selection, and renormalization. First, the brain reacts to a newly emergent  
demanding task by expanding neuronal resources, such as the availability of synapses in structures  
responsible for the given task, which leads to an overall increase of the relevant regional brain  
volumes. Continuous practice in the new task creates opportunities for the brain to explore which  
of the newly built neural resources are most suitable and effective to achieve the targeted behavior.  
Figure 14.2  Expansion-Renormalization Model.
Note: The illustration depicts the relationship between grey matter changes and behavioral performance according to the 
expansion-renormalization model (Wenger et al., 2017).
Created with BioRender.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
194
On the behavioral level, the performance in the concerned task increases with training until it hits  
a ceiling of efficiency, after which it stabilizes, at which point, the structural volumes in the related  
brain regions are posited to renormalize, sometimes even completely back to the levels prior to  
learning. This potentially reflects the changes on the microscopic level. Namely, among the expanded  
network of neuronal connections, the most efficient ones are selected, whereas the superfluous ones  
are eliminated through a process of so-called synaptic pruning.
In all, skill acquisition may trigger a non-linear trajectory of initial volumetric increases of 
implicated brain structures, followed by decreases as a behaviorally optimal neural circuitry is being 
selected (Wenger et al., 2017).
Bilingualism and the Brain
As already mentioned, the basic principles of neuroplasticity have mainly been applied to instances 
of skill acquisition, usually after intensive training and/or long-term application of a particular skill. 
If that is the case, would the same principles apply to cognitively challenging long-term experiences? 
One such experience can be bilingualism, which is a cognitively demanding experience that requires 
constant monitoring of the environment for linguistic cues and constant inhibition of the non-target 
languages (e.g., Kroll et al., 2012; for more on cognitive control in the context of L2, see Guo & Ma, 
this volume). Moreover, bilingualism very often is a life-long experience, in which people engage 
continuously, which means that the above skills need to be continuously exercised in the long term to 
achieve increasing efficiency in language control, steadily more fluent communication, and growing 
language proficiency.
Based on the above assumption, it is not surprising that an emerging body of literature has reported 
changes in the structure of a range of cortical and subcortical regions and the connections between 
them as an underlying effect of bilingualism (see Tao et al., 2021 for a recent review). These are 
regions that have been particularly shown to be activated in tasks related to language acquisition, 
processing, and control, using predominantly functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (for 
more on this methodology, see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). Specifically, brain activation linked to 
bilingual language control has been observed in brain structures and networks that typically underlie 
cognitive control (Anderson et al., 2018; Garbin et al., 2010), as summarized in the next section of 
this chapter. Given the principles of experience-dependent neuroplasticity (Lövdén et al., 2013), the 
regions subserving the highly demanding cognitive control processes during bilingual language use 
are also potential targets for expected structural adaptations. This also presumes that, if bilingualism 
follows these principles, different groups of bilinguals with different experiences may yield different 
results that may correspond to nonlinear effects. Indeed, this has been the case in the field of bilin-
gualism (see Pliatsikas, 2019 for a review).
The Dynamic Restructuring Model
If the principles of the expansion-renormalization model hold for bilingualism, it is unlikely that 
increasing efficiency in bilingual language use should result in linearly corresponding increases of 
neural tissue in the relevant brain regions. Recently, a model of bilingualism-related brain changes 
has been proposed that incorporated assumptions of non-linearity: the dynamic restructuring model 
(DRM, Pliatsikas, 2020). The DRM brought together evidence from existing studies on structural 
brain changes in various bilingual populations with qualitatively and quantitatively different sets of 
experiences (for more on structural imaging methodology, see Rossi et al., this volume). According 
to the DRM, structural brain adaptations are governed by the ways bilinguals use their languages, the 
contexts in which they operate, and by the timing of their language experiences (see also Li et al., 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
195
2014). Such an approach is consistent with the new development in the field of bilingualism where 
researchers aim to identify which sets of bilingual experiences give rise to consistent neurocognitive 
effects (e.g., Navarro-Torres et al., 2021), Therefore, the DRM evaluated the existing evidence 
according to the various bilingual factors and experiences that have been hypothesized to have effects 
on cognitive demands, and set forth three interesting observations (Pliatsikas et al., 2020).
First, different groups of bilinguals who had long-standing experience in bilingual language use 
and were using both languages frequently in their daily lives (e.g., immersed bilinguals who live in 
an L2-speaking environment, interpreters, and translators) had similar patterns of structural changes 
irrespective of the onset of L2 acquisition, including simultaneous, early sequential, and late sequen-
tial bilinguals. The reported effects spanned largely similar effects on the shape and volumes of 
subcortical structures (Burgaleta et al., 2016; Pliatsikas et al., 2017), and properties of white matter 
tracts connecting regions that subserve language processing and cognitive control (García-Pentón 
et al., 2014; Mohades et al., 2012). Second, effects in cortical grey matter pertained predominantly to 
sequential bilinguals who had limited to no immersion in bilingual environments, but also to elderly 
adults with a history of lifetime use of multiple languages (e.g., Voits et al., 2022). Third, grey matter 
reductions were observed in interpreters relatively to bilinguals who were not trained as interpreters, 
even though interpreters’ routine is marked by exceptional language control and switching demands 
(Elmer et al., 2014).
Based on these findings, the DRM inferred that structural brain changes brought about by bilin-
gualism are dynamic, likely following phases of increases and decreases throughout the bilingual 
experiential trajectory. The observed direction of these effects and their magnitude will then likely 
differ depending on where on the trajectory the measured bilingual is positioned with respect to L2 
learning and use. Ultimately, the DRM incorporates the principle of expansion-renormalization to 
propose testable predictions of bilingualism-induced non-linear brain adaptations. The model consists 
of three stages during which qualitatively different structural adaptations of grey and white matter are 
observed depending on the duration, intensity, and quality of exposure to the L2.
During the initial exposure, the first stage, vocabulary learning, and the need to control between 
lexical alternatives for the same concepts, sets off additional demands on cognitive control. This stage 
induces cortical grey matter changes in regions related to executive control and short-term memory, 
such as caudate nuclei, inferior frontal gyrus (IFG), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), and medial 
frontal gyrus (MFG), and a network of regions linked to semantic and phonological learning, namely 
hippocampus, inferior parietal lobe (IPL), superior parietal lobe (SPL), anterior temporal lobe (ATL), 
anterior temporal gyrus (ATG), and Heschl’s gyrus (HG).
The second stage, consolidation, is marked by the lack of effects on grey matter typical for the ini-
tial stage as indicated by the absence of effects in the cortex, the caudate nucleus, and hippocampus, 
accompanied by expansions in other subcortical structures, including the basal ganglia and the thal-
amus in highly proficient bilinguals with prolonged engagement with both languages (Pliatsikas, 
2020). The absence of effects in the cortex and the caudate nucleus has been interpreted as evidence 
for reversion of the expansions (or renormalization to baseline) of the regions that expanded in the 
initial stage, a sign that the brain has reached the required level of optimization in learning new 
words and controlling for competing lexical alternatives. Conversely, at this stage, bilinguals face 
increased needs for differentiating between semantic, phonological, and grammatical alternatives. 
Concurrently, they need to monitor the situations when to use each language and, if necessary, 
suppress the non-target language. Bilinguals at this stage demonstrated significant restructuring of 
the left putamen (Abutalebi et al., 2013; Berken et al., 2016) and globus pallidus (Burgaleta et al., 
2016), which have been implicated in articulatory control and phonological selection (Pliatsikas et al., 
2017). Also, the increased lexical selection needs during production at this stage leads to expansion 
of thalamic volumes, which is assumed to enable a more efficient selection mechanism (Abutalebi & 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
196
Green, 2016). The acquired skill to switch and differentiate between two languages more efficiently 
is reflected in increased connectivity between some of the regions underlying the cognitive demands 
at the initial stage. The increased structural connectivity is indexed by reductions in diffusivity, which 
reflects greater connectivity, of white matter tracts connecting IFG, MFG, superior temporal gyrus 
(STG), middle temporal gyrus (MTG), and supramarginal gyrus (SMG) (DeLuca et al., 2020). These 
white matter tracts include the inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus (IFOF) (Kuhl et al., 2016), anterior 
thalamic radiation (ATR) (Cummine & Boliek, 2013), and superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF) 
(Mamiya et al., 2016). Also, reduced diffusivity is reported in corpus callosum (CC), which is another 
white matter tract involved in cognitive control that is strongly connected to ACC (Coggins et al., 
2004). In sum, the consolidation stage is characterized by shifting the focus of neuroplastic change 
from the regions affected at the initial stage, which are now renormalizing, to subcortical regions and 
the white matter, which now start undergoing restructuring.
The final stage, peak efficiency, predicts adaptations in the most experienced groups of bilinguals, 
such as professional interpreters. Efficient and automatic language control stemming from longstanding 
and intensive training in interpreting practices results in maximally efficient connectivity and leads to 
increases in connectivity within the cerebellum (Van de Putte et al., 2018). Importantly, the caudate 
nucleus is thought to renormalize at this stage (Elmer et al., 2014). Furthermore, frontal white matter 
structural connectivity decreases while white matter diffusivity of anterior regions is posited to 
increase. This indicates a shift in reliance from prefrontal to posterior regions. However, this stage 
has received less attention, and it remains unclear whether other parts of the bilingual brain would 
also adapt to deal with both growing bilingual experience and changing demands (Pliatsikas, 2020).
L2 Acquisition and Brain Restructuring
The DRM describes specific trajectories for restructuring of both grey and white matter, which differ 
from each other and appear to happen over extended periods of time. Given that most evidence for 
the classical models of experience-based neuroplasticity has emerged typically from studies looking 
at the acquisition of a particular skill, it follows that similar patterns would be observed in studies 
looking at the effects of language acquisition. This section reviews the available evidence on grey and 
white matter from a handful of studies that tested individuals in language training settings (excluding 
training for interpreters and translators that goes typical language learning, for more information 
on this topic, see Hervais-Adelman & Babcock, 2020; or Pliatsikas, 2020). Special attention here is 
given to recent studies that have not been viewed through the lens of the DRM so far (see Pliatsikas 
(2020) for a consideration of previous language training studies through the lense of the DRM).
Grey Matter
A large part of the beginning of the journey to learn a L2 consists of learning a new vocabulary. This 
brings an array of challenges, such as learning new phonological rules and putting them in practice to 
pronounce the words correctly. Moreover, beginning L2 learners need to assign the newly sounding 
lexical units to their meaning. The newly acquired words in the L2 denote conceptual representations 
of the items and situations from the world around us. It is important to realize that every language sets 
distinctive boundaries of the semantic representations of its language units (see Casaponsa & Thierry, 
this volume). This means that learners of a new language need to build a new semantic representation 
of concepts with which they may be familiar but which also map onto words in each language in often 
very different ways (Neumann et al., 2018).
The challenges of word acquisition, learning how to pronounce the words in a foreign language 
and building new semantic representations, would lead to increases in the volume of the relevant 
grey matter regions, predominantly in the left hemisphere, as predicted for the initial stage of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
197
DRM. Indeed, the earliest study in the field (Osterhout et al., 2008) showed that training in L2 
leads to increases of the SMG, an anatomical component of the IPL, which subserves the semantic 
phonological encoding of newly acquired words into the knowledge system. Such effects have been 
replicated in a study investigating structural brain changes in children who underwent foreign lan-
guage training (Della Rosa et al., 2013).
Bilinguals need to constantly resolve a mental conflict in their minds in choosing the appropriate 
language. This process requires cognitive control, which triggers changes in prefrontal regions that 
enable it, i.e., IFG, MFG, and ACC. These grey matter regions were shown to increase in volume in 
monolinguals trained to read words in three different languages (Stein et al., 2012), which is indi-
cative of the need to develop effective cognitive control processes already in the initial stages of 
language learning. Notably, these effects may not be specific to the spoken language modality: in a 
study testing participants five times over an eight-month training course on American Sign Language, 
Banaszkiewicz and colleagues (Banaszkiewicz et al., 2021) reported increasing grey matter volume 
in the IFG, which peaked towards the end of the training program.
Additional language learning has also been shown to affect the structure of other regions of the 
brain, beyond those subserving cognitive control. For example, Legault and colleagues (2019a) 
reported an increase in grey matter thickness of the STG after a 20-day training course in Mandarin 
Chinese vocabulary, a language that differentiates words by tone. This is significant as the STG 
is an important node for phonological processing with a particular importance for tonal languages 
(Liang & Du, 2018). This suggests that properties of the L2 may influence which regions undergo 
neuroplasticity in the context of language acquisition in line with the predictions for the consolidation 
stage of the DRM.
Another important region that increases in volume as a function of language training is the hippo-
campus (Bellander et al., 2016; Mårtensson et al., 2012). These changes have been traditionally 
linked to the importance of this structure in learning and memory (Voits et al., 2022). However, 
none of the brain structures, including the hippocampus, IFG, and STG, underwent any significant 
grey matter changes in the span of an eleven-week L2 training course in older adults (Nilsson et al., 
2021). Nilsson and colleagues interpreted these results as an indication of the gradual loss of the 
brain’s ability to adapt its structure as we age. Such findings echo behavioral studies that also did 
not find effects of bilingual experiences in seniors on inhibitory control (Antón et al., 2016) and 
switching (Ramos et al., 2017; but see Bak et al., 2014). It also prompts the DRM and other models 
of neuroplasticity to incorporate the age at which a new experience is exercised into the models’ 
predictions (effects of age on L2 are further discussed in Fromont, this volume).
As mentioned above, the duration of an experience is an important factor when predicting struc-
tural brain changes. However, the training studies mentioned only report the effects of relatively short 
duration language training; to the best of our knowledge, only two studies have looked at the effects 
of longer periods of language acquisition (Legault et al., 2019b; Liu et al., 2021). Liu and colleagues 
(2021) acquired data from Chinese college students majoring in English (L2) at two time-points one 
year apart, and reported that grey matter volumes of left ACC and right IFG decreased after a year of 
English learning. In contrast, another longitudinal study on learners of L2 Spanish found increases of 
cortical thickness in ACC and MTG after two semesters of intermediate language courses (Legault 
et al., 2019b). These discrepancies can be explained by the differences in the cumulative number of 
hours of language training in both studies; participants in Liu et al.’s spent approximately three times 
longer in the language course than those in Legault et al. Such an explanation is also rooted in the 
prediction of the DRM’s consolidation phase that sustained and intensive engagement with the L2 
will eventually lead to volumetric decreases of initially expanded brain structures. Another important 
note pertains to the language proficiency at the moment of entering an L2 training, which can serve 
as a proxy of the level of engagement in the L2 (but see Deluca et al., 2019 for arguments against this 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
198
concept). The participants in Lui et al.’s study were already relatively proficient in their L2, which 
presumes that some levels of volumetric increase would already be in place. In contrast, a study on 
complete bilingual novices revealed that the volume of the left IFG, STG/SMG, and ACC were posi-
tively related to the vocabulary size of the trained language (Hosoda et al., 2013). Taken together, 
findings from studies studying long-term training support the view that a long-enough window of 
opportunity to exercise the new skill will eventually lead to selection of the most efficient brain 
networks whereas the superfluous ones will be eliminated (see Korenar et al., 2023a and 2023b for a 
recent direct evidence of this principle).
In all, the reviewed evidence for grey matter suggests that individuals at earlier stages of language 
learning tend to show volumetric increases in regions related to language acquisition and control, 
which recalls the predictions of the DRM for an initial stage of restructuring. Importantly, these 
effects seem to revert (possibly renormalize) in cases of prolonged periods of acquisition, recalling 
the consolidation stage of the DRM.
White Matter
Adaptations in the volume and shape of the grey matter regions have been interpreted to reflect 
accommodation of the additional information that is being acquired by the brain during the course of 
language acquisition. However, because the brain is an interconnected system, it is also necessary to 
account for the effects of language training on the structural connectivity between these regions, an 
index of which is the integrity of myelin in implicated white matter tracts. This is usually measured 
with indices such as Fractional Anisotropy (FA) and Radial Diffusivity (RD), measures of water dif-
fusivity in the brain. Higher FA reflects lower diffusivity, usually interpreted as increased amounts 
of myelin, which provides more efficient structural connectivity between brain regions. In contrast, 
RD measures water diffusivity perpendicular (i.e., crosswise) to axonal fibres. Increases in RD index 
relative loss of myelin, and as a result, greater diffusivity. Evidence of reductions in diffusivity after 
skill training have been interpreted as structural reorganization that addresses increased demands for 
communication between brain regions. In this vein, training studies on participants acquiring an L2 
have reported increases in integrity in white matter tracts that subserve phonological processing, such 
as arcuate fasciculus (AF) and SLF as will be discussed below.
Xiang et al. (2015) investigated white matter after a six-week long language course of Dutch 
in the Netherlands. The authors reported increases in FA around the left AF, suggesting increased 
connectivity. Importantly, high levels of white matter connectivity in this tract shifted to the right 
hemisphere once participants became more proficient, and back to the left side of the brain with fur-
ther increased L2 proficiency. Such observations highlight the dynamicity of white matter changes 
following training in a L2 and that the demands put on the language-related regions can change as a 
function of efficiency in bilingual language use.
Schlegel et al. (2012) provided evidence that L2 learning induces increases in interhemispheric 
connectivity, indexed by increases of the FA in the CC, an effect that has been explained by increased 
cognitive control demands. In this study, participants were tested on nine different occasions, a month 
apart, during completion of L2 training. Additionally, the study reported gradual increases in left 
hemispheric white matter tracts connecting regions subserving language comprehension and pro-
duction such as the IFG, caudate nucleus, and STG, as well as right hemispheric tracts that are 
linked to these language-related brain areas. Increases in connectivity between the IFG and caudate 
nucleus were also reported in a 16-week long training study (Hosoda et al., 2013). Crucially, when 
the participants of that study were tested again a year after the program finished, during which time 
they did not use their newly acquired language, the originally reported effects in the white matter had 
disappeared. Mamiya et al. (2016) reported that the time participants spent in an immersive language 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
199
program was positively related to FA in bilateral SLF, and negatively to RD of this tract. However, 
the effects observed during the immersion program disappeared after the program ended. Such results 
suggest that the effects of bilingualism on white matter are conditioned by the sustained L2 use. 
Therefore, the increased efficiency that led to restructuring of the white matter is no longer needed 
once a bilingual stops using the L2. As a result, the relevant white matter effects revert to baseline.
Although most of the time, white matter changes in the above-mentioned studies pertain to 
months of L2 training, it has been reported that even an hour of intensive vocabulary training leads 
to decreased white matter diffusivity (Hofstetter et al., 2017). This potentially hints at a powerful 
reorganization of the brain triggered by sudden and intensive demands linked to L2 learning. By 
contrast, a recent study on the effects of language training in older participants did not reveal any 
significant white matter changes even after much longer period of L2 training (Nilsson et al., 2021). 
In line with the lack of grey matter effects discussed earlier, this suggests that the progressive loss of 
plasticity in older age pertains also to the adaptability of white matter.
In all, the evidence for white matter changes in training studies generally shows increases after 
some period of training, which do not seem to renormalize. Viewed through the lens of the DRM, 
the absence of renormalization of white matter indicates either that these learners have not reached 
peak efficiency yet or that those increases in white matter integrity are crucial even at high levels of 
language expertise.
Conclusions Regarding the Dynamic Restructuring Model
The DRM posits that the duration and intensity of language learning experiences govern the emer-
gence and character of structural effects in the brain. We reviewed the available evidence from L2 
learning studies on structural changes in grey and white matter. The findings support the view that 
such adaptations are dynamic and yet highly regular when viewed through the prism of experience-
based neuroplasticity. The dynamicity of these effects in the grey matter is reflected in results reporting 
both increases and decreases of the regional brain volumes. On the other hand, evidence suggests that 
white matter increases (seemingly subsequent to grey matter adaptations) but does not renormalize 
(although the structural increases seem to disappear if the L2 is not used). In all, these findings offer 
support for the DRM that effects of L2 acquisition on brain structure will be dynamic, following an 
expansion-renormalization trajectory. These effects are likely conditioned by the quantity but also by 
the quality of bilingual training and experiences.
Future Directions
This chapter shows that longitudinal and training studies in the field of L2 learning have been invalu-
able in informing the DRM on the neurological impact of weeks to years of bilingual language use. 
Indeed, such designs enable the control of extraneous variables more effectively, and they appear to 
be especially relevant for revealing arguably rather subtle effects of L2 acquisition on the brain out-
side of immersive settings. However, commonly used designs that administer two imaging sessions 
(one pre- and one post-language training) cannot provide insights on the non-linear, dynamic trajec-
tory of bilingualism-induced structural brain changes. Therefore, future studies should engage with 
more complex longitudinal study designs with measurements at multiple points in time to unravel 
progression of such changes.
Furthermore, we mentioned that phonological language characteristics impact structural 
brain changes. But obviously, languages do not differ only in their phonology. The level of simi-
larity between languages, i.e., typological proximity has been proposed as a modulating factor of 
levels of cognitive control (Puig-Mayenco et al., 2020). The effects of linguistic proximity on our 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
200
neurocognition could be addressed in a study which investigates groups of bilinguals with a constant 
first language and variably distant L2 (e.g. Czech-Slovak bilinguals vs. Czech-English bilinguals vs. 
Czech-Vietnamese bilinguals). Furthermore, a part of the effect might stem from cultural differences 
rather than linguistic ones (Treffers-Daller et al., 2020). A possible way to disentangle the effects of 
languages and cultures is to study various bilingual communities that use the same languages but 
differ in their sociocultural backgrounds (i.e., comparing Turkish-English bilinguals living in the 
UK coming from Turkey with those coming from Cyprus). The neurocognitive effects of different 
language and cultural pairs is a question that deserves further investigation, with potential import-
ance for the DRM and related models, such as the framework unifying the bilingual experience tra-
jectories (DeLuca et al., 2020), or the bilingual anterior-to-posterior and subcortical shift (Grundy 
et al., 2017).
Note
1	 Note that this model is called differently in the studies we refer to; i.e., the exploration–selection–refinement 
model (Lindenberger & Lövdén, 2019); expansion-partial renormalization hypothesis (Lövdén et al., 2013); 
expansion-renormalization model (Wenger et al., 2017).
Further Readings
This article presents a theoretical model predicting brain changes induced by simultaneous interpreters.
Hervais-Adelman, A., & Babcock, L. (2020). The neurobiology of simultaneous interpreting: Where extreme 
language control and cognitive control intersect. Bilingualism, 23(4), 740–751. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1366728919000324
This study evidences the need to consider that the brain changes brought about bilingualism can be non-linear.
Korenar, M., Treffers-Daller, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2023). Dynamic effects of bilingualism on brain structure map 
onto general principles of experience-based neuroplasticity. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 3428. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-023-30326-3
An accessible summary of the principles of the experience-based neuroplasiticity.
Wenger, E., Brozzoli, C., Lindenberger, U., & Lövdén, M. (2017). Expansion and renormalization of human 
brain structure during skill acquisition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(12), 930–939. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tics.2017.09.008
Acknowledgments
This research has received funding from the European Union‘s Horizon2020 research and innovation programme 
under the Marie Skłodowska Curie grant agreement No 765556. This publication was supported by the grant 
GAUK No. 368120, realized at the Faculty of Arts, Charles University.
References
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D.W. (2016). Neuroimaging of language control in bilinguals: Neural adaptation and 
reserve. Bilingualism, 19(4), 689–698. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728916000225
Abutalebi, J., Rosa, P.A. Della, Castro Gonzaga, A.K., Keim, R., Costa, A., & Perani, D. (2013). The role of the 
left putamen in multilingual language production. Brain and Language, 125(3), 307–315. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2012.03.009
Anderson, J.A.E., Chung-Fat-Yim, A., Bellana, B., Luk, G., & Bialystok, E. (2018). Language and cognitive 
control networks in bilinguals and monolinguals. Neuropsychologia, 117, 352–363. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2018.06.023
Antón, E., Fernández García, Y., Carreiras, M., & Duñabeitia, J.A. (2016). Does bilingualism shape inhibitory con-
trol in the elderly? Journal of Memory and Language, 90, 147–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.04.007
Bak, T.H., Vega-Mendoza, M., & Sorace, A. (2014). Never too late? An advantage on tests of auditory attention 
extends to late bilinguals. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, 485. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00485
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
201
Banaszkiewicz, A., Matuszewski, J., Bola, Ł., Szczepanik, M., Kossowski, B., Rutkowski, P., Szwed, M., 
Emmorey, K., Jednoróg, K., & Marchewka, A. (2021). Multimodal imaging of brain reorganization in hearing 
late learners of sign language. Human Brain Mapping, 42(2), 384–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25229
Bellander, M., Berggren, R., Mårtensson, J., Brehmer, Y., Wenger, E., Li, T.Q., Bodammer, N.C., Shing, Y.L., 
Werkle-Bergner, M., & Lövdén, M. (2016). Behavioral correlates of changes in hippocampal gray matter 
structure during acquisition of foreign vocabulary. NeuroImage, 131, 205–213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu
roimage.2015.10.020
Berken, J.A., Gracco, V.L., Chen, J.K., & Klein, D. (2016). The timing of language learning shapes brain struc-
ture associated with articulation. Brain Structure and Function, 221(7), 3591–3600. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00429-015-1121-9
Burgaleta, M., Sanjuán, A., Ventura-Campos, N., Sebastian-Galles, N., & Ávila, C. (2016). Bilingualism at the 
core of the brain. Structural differences between bilinguals and monolinguals revealed by subcortical shape 
analysis. NeuroImage, 125, 437–445. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.09.073
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Casaponsa, A., & Thierry, G. (this volume). Linguistic relativity and second language. In K. Morgan-Short 
and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Coggins, P.E., Kennedy, T.J., & Armstrong, T.A. (2004). Bilingual corpus callosum variability. 89, 69–75. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0093-934X(03)00299-2
Crawford, L.E., Knouse, L.E., Kent, M., Vavra, D., Harding, O., LeServe, D., Fox, N., Hu, X., Li, P., Glory, C., & 
Lambert, K.G. (2020). Enriched environment exposure accelerates rodent driving skills. Behavioural Brain 
Research, 378, 112309. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2019.112309
Cummine, J., & Boliek, C. A. (2012). Understanding white matter integrity stability for bilinguals on language 
status and reading performance. Brain Structure and Function, 218(2), 595–601. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00
429-012-0466-6
de Sousa Fernandes, M.S., Ordônio, T.F., Santos, G.C., Santos, L.E., Calazans, C.T., Gomes, D.A., & Santos, 
T.M. (2020). Effects of physical exercise on neuroplasticity and brain function: A systematic review in human 
and animal Studies. Neural Plasticity, 2020, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/8856621
Della Rosa, P.A., Videsott, G., Borsa, V.M., Canini, M., Weekes, B.S., Franceschini, R., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). 
A neural interactive location for multilingual talent. Cortex, 49(2), 605–608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2012.12.001
Deluca, V., Rothman, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2019). Linguistic immersion and structural effects on the bilingual 
brain: A longitudinal study. Bilingualism, 22(5), 1160–1175. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728918000883
DeLuca, V., Segaert, K., Mazaheri, A., & Krott, A. (2020). Understanding bilingual brain function and struc-
ture changes? U bet! A unified bilingual experience trajectory model. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 56, 1–29. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100930
Draganski, B., Gaser, C., Kempermann, G., Kuhn, H.G., Winkler, J., Büchel, C., & May, A. (2006). Temporal and 
spatial dynamics of brain structure changes during extensive learning. The Journal of Neuroscience, 26(23), 
6314–6317. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4628-05.2006
Elmer, S., Hänggi, J., & Jäncke, L. (2014). Processing demands upon cognitive, linguistic, and articula-
tory functions promote grey matter plasticity in the adult multilingual brain: Insights from simultaneous 
interpreters. Cortex, 54(1), 179–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.02.014
Garbin, G., Sanjuan, A., Forn, C., Bustamante, J.C., Rodriguez-Pujadas, A., Belloch, V., Hernandez, M., Costa, 
A., & Ávila, C. (2010). Bridging language and attention: Brain basis of the impact of bilingualism on cogni-
tive control. NeuroImage, 53(4), 1272–1278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.05.078
García-Pentón, L., Pérez Fernández, A., Iturria-Medina, Y., Gillon-Dowens, M., & Carreiras, M. (2014). 
Anatomical connectivity changes in the bilingual brain. NeuroImage, 84, 495–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2013.08.064
Grundy, J.G., Anderson, J.A., & Bialystok, E. (2017). Neural correlates of cognitive processing in monolinguals 
and bilinguals. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1396(1), 183–201. https://doi.org/10.1111/
nyas.13333
Guo, M., & Ma, F. (this volume). Cognitive control in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Hervais-Adelman, A., & Babcock, L. (2020). The neurobiology of simultaneous interpreting: Where extreme 
language control and cognitive control intersect. Bilingualism, 23(4), 740–751. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1366728919000324
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michal Korenar and Christos Pliatsikas
202
Hofstetter, S., Friedmann, N., & Assaf, Y. (2017). Rapid language-related plasticity: microstructural changes 
in the cortex after a short session of new word learning. Brain Structure and Function, 222(3), 1231–1241. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-016-1273-2
Hosoda, C., Tanaka, K., Nariai, T., Honda, M., & Hanakawa, T. (2013). Dynamic neural network reorgan-
ization associated with second language vocabulary acquisition: A multimodal imaging study. Journal of 
Neuroscience, 33(34), 13663–13672. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0410-13.2013
Kleim, J.A., & Jones, T.A. (2008). Principles of experience-dependent neural plasticity: Implications for rehabili-
tation after brain damage. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 51(1), 225–239. https://doi.
org/10.1044/1092-4388(2008/018)
Korenar, M., Treffers-Daller, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2023a). Brain structure adapts dynamically to highly 
demanding bilingual experiences: Insights from interpreters and translators. Ampersand, 11, 100148. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.amper.2023.100148
Korenar, M., Treffers-Daller, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2023b). Dynamic effects of bilingualism on brain structure map 
onto general principles of experience-based neuroplasticity. Scientific Reports, 13(1), 3428. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-023-30326-3
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., Dussias, P.E., Bogulski, C.A., & Kroff, J.R. (2012). Juggling two languages in one mind. Psychology 
of Learning and Motivation, 56, 229–262. https://doi.org/10.1016/b978-0-12-394393-4.00007-8
Kuhl, P.K., Stevenson, J., Corrigan, N.M., Van den Bosch, J.J.F., Can, D.D., & Richards, T. (2016). Neuroimaging 
of the bilingual brain: Structural brain correlates of listening and speaking in a second language. Brain and 
Language, 162, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.07.004
Legault, J., Fang, S.Y., Lan, Y.J., & Li, P. (2019a). Structural brain changes as a function of second language 
vocabulary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2018.09.004
Legault, J., Grant, A., Fang, S.Y., & Li, P. (2019b). A longitudinal investigation of structural brain changes during 
second language learning. Brain and Language, 197, 104661. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104661
Li, P., Legault, J., & Litcofsky, K.A. (2014). Neuroplasticity as a function of second language learning: Anatomical 
changes in the human brain. Cortex, 58, 301–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.05.001
Liang, B., & Du, Y. (2018). The functional neuroanatomy of lexical tone perception: An activation likelihood 
estimation meta-analysis. Frontiers in Neuroscience, 12, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2018.00495
Lindenberger, U., & Lövdén, M. (2019). Brain plasticity in human lifespan development: The exploration–
selection–refinement model. Annual Review of Developmental Psychology, 1(1), 197–222. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev-devpsych-121318-085229
Lindenberger, U., Wenger, E., & Lövdén, M. (2017). Towards a stronger science of human plasticity. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 18(5), 261–262. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2017.44
Liu, C., Jiao, L., Timmer, K., & Wang, R. (2021). Structural brain changes with second language learning: A 
longitudinal voxel-based morphometry study. Brain and Language, 222, 105015. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2021.105015
Lövdén, M., Wenger, E., Mårtensson, J., Lindenberger, U., & Bäckman, L. (2013). Structural brain plasticity in 
adult learning and development. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 37(9), 2296–2310. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2013.02.014
Mamiya, P.C., Richards, T.L., Coe, B.P., Eichler, E.E., & Kuhl, P.K. (2016). Brain white matter structure and 
COMT gene are linked to second-language learning in adults. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the United States of America, 113(26), 7249–7254. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606602113
Mårtensson, J., Eriksson, J., Bodammer, N. C., Lindgren, M., Johansson, M., Nyberg, L., & Lövdén, M. (2012). 
Growth of language-related brain areas after foreign language learning. NeuroImage, 63(1), 240–244. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.06.043
Mesa-Gresa, P., Ramos-Campos, M., & Redolat, R. (2021). Behavioral impact of experience based on envir-
onmental enrichment: Influence of age and duration of exposure in male NMRI mice. Developmental 
Psychobiology, 63(5), 1071–1081. https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.22093
Mohades, S.G., Struys, E., Van Schuerbeek, P., Mondt, K., Van De Craen, P., & Luypaert, R. (2012). DTI reveals 
structural differences in white matter tracts between bilingual and monolingual children. Brain Research, 
1435, 72–80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2011.12.005
Navarro-Torres, C.A., Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Kroll, J. ., & Green, D.W. (2021). Research on bilingualism as dis-
covery science. Brain and Language, 222, 105014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105014
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Acquisition and Neuroplasticity
203
Neumann, N., Domin, M., Erhard, K., & Lotze, M. (2018). Voxel-based morphometry in creative writers: Grey 
matter increase in a prefronto-thalamic-cerebellar network. European Journal of Neuroscience, 48(1), 1647–
1653. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejn.13952
Nilsson, J., Berggren, R., Garzón, B., Lebedev, A.V., & Lövdén, M. (2021). Second language learning in older 
adults: Effects on brain structure and predictors of learning success. Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience, 13, 
1–13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnagi.2021.666851
Osterhout, L., Poliakov, A., Inoue, K., McLaughlin, J., Valentine, G., Pitkanen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & 
Hirschensohn, J. (2008). Second-language learning and changes in the brain. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
21(6), 509–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2008.01.001
Pliatsikas, C. (2020). Understanding structural plasticity in the bilingual brain: The dynamic restructuring model. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(2), 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728919000130
Pliatsikas, C., DeLuca, V., Moschopoulou, E., & Saddy, J.D. (2017). Immersive bilingualism reshapes the core 
of the brain. Brain Structure and Function, 222(4), 1785–1795. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-016-1307-9
Pliatsikas, C., DeLuca, V., & Voits, T. (2019). The many shades of bilingualism: Language experiences modu-
late adaptations in brain structure. Language Learning, 70(S2), 133–149. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12386
Puig-Mayenco, E., González Alonso, J., & Rothman, J. (2020). A systematic review of transfer studies in third 
language acquisition. Second Language Research, 36(1), 31–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658318809147
Ramos, S., Fernández García, Y., Antón, E., Casaponsa, A., & Duñabeitia, J.A. (2017). Does learning a language 
in the elderly enhance switching ability? Journal of Neurolinguistics, 43, 39–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jne
uroling.2016.09.001
Rossi, E., Voits, T., & DeLuca, V. (this volume). Using structural neuroimaging to investigate second language. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Schlegel, A.A., Rudelson, J.J., & Tse, P.U. (2012). White matter structure changes as adults learn a second lan-
guage. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 24(8), 1664–1670. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00240
Stein, M., Federspiel, A., Koenig, T., Wirth, M., Strik, W., Wiest, R., Brandeis, D., & Dierks, T. (2012). Structural 
plasticity in the language system related to increased second language proficiency. Cortex, 48(4), 458–465. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2010.10.007
Tao, L., Wang, G., Zhu, M., & Cai, Q. (2021). Bilingualism and domain-general cognitive functions from a 
neural perspective: A systematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 125, 264–295. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2021.02.029
Teixeira-Machado, L., Arida, R.M., & de Jesus Mari, J. (2019). Dance for neuroplasticity: A descriptive sys-
tematic review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 96, 232–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubio
rev.2018.12.010
Treffers-Daller, J., Ongun, Z., Hofweber, J., & Korenar, M. (2020). Explaining individual differences in execu-
tive functions performance in multilinguals: The impact of code-switching and alternating between multicul-
tural identity styles. Frontiers in Psychology, 11. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.561088
Van de Putte, E., De Baene, W., García-Pentón, L., Woumans, E., Dijkgraaf, A., & Duyck, W. (2018). Anatomical 
and functional changes in the brain after simultaneous interpreting training: A longitudinal study. Cortex, 99, 
243–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2017.11.024
Voits, T., Robson, H., Rothman, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2022). The effects of bilingualism on hippocampal 
volume in ageing bilinguals. Brain Structure and Function, 227(3), 979–994. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00
429-021-02436-z
Wenger, E., Brozzoli, C., Lindenberger, U., & Lövdén, M. (2017). Expansion and renormalization of human 
brain structure during skill acquisition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 21(12), 930–939. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.tics.2017.09.008
Wenger, E., Papadaki, E., Werner, A., Kühn, S., & Lindenberger, U. (2021). Observing plasticity of the auditory 
system: Volumetric decreases along with increased functional connectivity in aspiring professional musicians. 
Cerebral Cortex Communications, 2(2), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1093/texcom/tgab008
Woollett, K., & Maguire, E.A. (2011). Acquiring “the knowledge” of London’s layout drives structural brain 
changes. Current Biology, 21(24), 2109–2114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2011.11.018
Xiang, H., van Leeuwen, T.M., Dediu, D., Roberts, L., Norris, D.G., & Hagoort, P. (2015). L2-proficiency-
dependent laterality shift in structural connectivity of brain language pathways. Brain Connectivity, 5(6), 
349–361. https://doi.org/10.1089/brain.2013.0199
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

204
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-19
15
LINGUISTIC RELATIVITY AND 
SECOND LANGUAGE
How learning a Second Language May  
Reshape Cognition
Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
Introduction and Definitions
Today, the world counts more than 7,000 languages, which can be grouped into approximately 150 
families (Eberhard et al., 2019). Languages can vary considerably from one another across all lin-
guistic representation levels (Evans & Levinson, 2009), including the number and nature of phonemes 
and graphemes, labels—auditory or written—used to classify objects or colors, and grammatical 
properties such as gender or aspect. The fact that each language has its own manifold characteristics 
and rules, which must be respected when we use it to communicate, has led linguists such as Sapir 
and Whorf (1956) to question whether individuals’ behavior and their way of thinking could reflect 
the characteristics of their language.
The idea of an influence of language structure on thought has been extensively debated over the 
last century, and especially in the fields of linguistics, anthropology, philosophy, and more recently 
cognitive neuroscience (Athanasopoulos & Casaponsa, 2020; Everett, 2013; Lucy, 2016; Thierry, 
2016). The Whorfian theory of linguistic relativity stems from the idea that the constant use of gram-
matical and structural characteristics idiosyncratic to a particular language orients attention and 
thereby “shapes the way” we perceive and think about the environment. As Whorf puts it: “users of 
markedly different grammars are pointed by their grammars toward different types of observations 
and different evaluations of externally similar acts of observation, and hence are not equivalent as 
observers but must arrive at somewhat different views of the world” (Whorf, 1956, p. 221). Sadly, 
Whorf died in his early forties, a few years after his mentor Sapir who also died prematurely at the 
age of 55. Neither of them had the chance to articulate their theoretical views in a way that would 
not leave the door wide open to interpretation. Whorf posthumously became the target of repeated, 
vitriolic attacks portraying him as a dilettante (Pullum, 1991), as irrational (Pinker, 2003), or even 
immoral (McWhorter, 2014). However, character denigration is not a valid ground for dismissal and 
the debate should focus on formal scientific testing of the theory.
Our purpose here will not be to extensively discuss the validity of Whorf’s views, which has 
received substantial empirical support in recent times (see Athanasopoulos & Casaponsa, 2020; 
Lupyan, 2012; Lupyan et al., 2020; Thierry, 2016), but rather to offer an account of how learning a 
second language (L2) may shift and reshape one’s perception and conceptualization of the world. We 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
205
therefore explore the idea that learning an additional language entails far more than the acquisition of 
language elements, structures and systems, but also new ways of thinking about and interacting with 
the world around us.
First, let us consider a few useful definitions:
	•
Language: Crystal and Robins (2018) define language as “a system of conventional spoken, 
manual (signed), or written symbols by means of which human beings, as members of a social 
group and participants in its culture, express themselves.” The term “conventional” implies some 
degree of arbitrariness: Language is usually not considered to make direct (analogic) references to 
the perceptual world, it uses arbitrary code making symbolic references to objects and concepts.
	•
Native language (L1): The first and generally main language(s) of exposure from birth, that is, the 
language(s) one is first exposed to and starts learning from the environment during early devel-
opment. Generally, a native language is the main language spoken by parents of a child, but there 
can be many variations relating to language diversity in the environment, migration, childcare, or 
education.
	•
Second language (L2): Language acquired by an individual after the foundations of the native 
language(s) have been laid (i.e., the case of sequential bilinguals). The term may also be used to 
describe the lesser used of two languages acquired simultaneously.
	•
Bilingualism: Broadly speaking, bilinguals are individuals who have a functional command of 
two languages.
	•
Embodiment: As Lakoff and Johnson (1999, pp. 41) put it: “Reason is not disembodied, as the 
tradition has largely held, but arises from the nature of our brains, bodies, and bodily experi-
ence.” In other words, the mind is built based on biophysiological, perceptual experiences of 
the world, rather than abstract representations detached from a physical input. This view, widely 
shared amongst the scientific community of cognitivists and neuroscientists, is often referred to as 
cognitive embodiment (see also Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume).
	•
Linguistic relativity: The linguistic relativity hypothesis, also known as Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 
postulates a link between language structure (mostly at lexical and syntactic levels) and mental 
representations (mostly at perceptual, attentional, and conceptual levels). In its broadest sense, 
linguistic relativity is concerned with a possible shaping of perception and (nonverbal) conceptu-
alization by language. Linguistic relativity must be distinguished from the more extreme account 
of language determinism, which argues that language forms and structures are the foundation of 
thought and perception and thus, that nonverbal conceptual representations in fact do not exist. 
The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis has recently regained interest in the wake of findings from cognitive 
neuroscience regarding the neurophysiological bases of language and embodied cognition (Li 
et al., 2019; Pulvermüller, 2005).
	•
Event-related potentials (ERPs): This method, derived from electroencephalography, allows the 
researcher to isolate a prototypical response of the brain (potentials) to a particular set of stimuli 
(events) presented in a time-controlled fashion (see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume).
Historical Perspective and Theoretical Accounts:  
Language, Thought and the Brain
The world’s linguistic diversity alluded to in the introduction (Eberhard et al., 2019; Evans & 
Levinson, 2009) makes it immediately obvious that objects and actions, whether concrete or abstract, 
and their properties, are denoted by different words or labels in different languages. Such cross-
language variation concerns not only the nature of words qualifying objects and actions, such as 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
206
color or manner of motion (e.g., nouns and adjectives) but also grammatical properties (e.g., gender 
and aspect), which can convey functional relationships between agents and objects as well as con-
textual information about space and time. Languages also vary considerably in terms of supra-lexical 
syntax, for instance in their use of connectives or word order, leading to markedly diverse sentence 
organization.
This simple observation has led academics to question whether people’s mental representations 
and behavior could reflect linguistic characteristics specific to their language. Beyond the philosoph-
ical debate triggered by the idea of a relationship between language and thought, scientific evidence 
in the field of cognitive neuroscience indicates that the terms and grammatical constructs we use to 
communicate have a measurable impact on non-linguistic cognitive processes such as color percep-
tion (Athanasopoulos et al., 2010; Mo et al., 2011; Thierry et al., 2009; Xia et al., 2019), object cat-
egorization (Boutonnet et al., 2012; Boutonnet et al., 2013, Boutonnet & Lupyan, 2015; Casaponsa 
et al., 2022), the passage of time (Boroditsky et al., 2011; Bylund & Athanasopoulos, 2017; Li et al., 
2018; Li et al., 2019), action conceptualization (Athanasopoulos & Bylund, 2013; Athanasopoulos 
et al., 2015; Bylund et al., 2013; Flecken et al., 2015; Francken et al., 2015; Kersten et al., 2010), and 
emotional processing (Barrett et al., 2007; Jonczyk et al., 2016; Lindquist et al., 2006; Wu & Thierry, 
2012). Therefore, understanding how the brain organizes and processes linguistic information and 
how this information is integrated with other non-linguistic processes is especially important if we 
want to measure the impact of learning a L2 and improve learning efficiency.
Starting from a Hebbian perspective on learning (Hebb, 1949) and the idea that the nervous system 
is highly adaptative, cognitive processes such as perception, memory, reasoning, decision making, 
and language must necessarily be distributed across interactive assemblies of neurons rather than 
packed into discrete functional modules. Through experience, interconnections and associations 
between neurons are constantly modified and updated, restructuring the way in which our brain 
processes and stores information. For example, when we learn how to play an instrument, such as the 
piano, distant motor, visual, and auditory areas of the cortex become functionally related through the 
association of pressing a given key with a finger, a visually perceived note, and the sound produced 
by the piano. With only five hours of training involving key presses and hearing the associated sound, 
neuronal restructuring means that hearing a particular note is enough to specifically elicit activation 
in the motor cortex controlling the fingers (Lahav et al., 2007). Similar mechanisms obtain when 
we learn a language, resulting in fast and resilient associations between the sound of words and 
their meaning, as well as sensory attributes intrinsically connected to the association through neural 
subnets (embodiment). For example, seeing the word “coffee” activates brain areas involved in visual 
word form recognition and comprehension as well as sensory areas such as olfactory or visual cor-
tices (Pulvermüller & Fadiga, 2010). In the same vein, verb forms such as “running” will not only 
stimulate brain areas involved in language, but also areas of the sensorimotor cortex, providing some 
of the strongest empirical evidence in support of embodied cognition (Pulvermüller et al., 2001; 
Pulvermüller et al., 2005; see Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume).
We should, therefore, abandon theoretical conceptualizations of language as an encapsulated 
“module,” somewhat functionally independent from other cognitive systems. With Pulvermüller 
(2005) and Barsalou (2008), we take the view that lexical-grammatical subsystems and “non-verbal” 
cognitive systems are reciprocally and intimately connected in the human brain (Athanasopoulos 
& Casaponsa, 2020; Thierry, 2016). This implies that mental representations are distributed across 
neural networks that implement both linguistic information and their sensorimotor attributes. 
Conceptual representations, then, could arise from synchronization of neural firing patterns within 
and between multimodal and multisensory cell assemblies. Here, we consider in some detail the 
extent to which connections between our native language and other cognitive representations are 
penetrable and modified when we learn a L2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
207
One notable attempt at modelling interactions between language and non-verbal representations 
in long-term memory is Lupyan’s (2012) label feedback hypothesis. Lupyan posits that word 
representations (or labels) are crystallized independently from the concepts they refer to during 
learning, and that links between conceptual representations and labels are progressively strengthened 
over time. Eventually, a new word becomes well connected with the concept it refers to such that 
label representations are systematically activated when a concept is accessed and that, in turn, 
the corresponding concept becomes more salient for perception and attention. This proposal does 
not differ significantly from more general connectionist models of language processing, although 
it focusses rather selectively on the lexical (word/label) level of representation and thus does not 
readily account for relativistic effects relating to grammatical properties such as gender or aspect, 
let alone supra-lexical syntax (Sato & Athanasopoulos, 2018). In fact, a more general model of 
language-cognition interaction based on a Hebbian conception of the human brain (Pulvermüller, 
1999) makes predictions similar to those made by Lupyan’s label-feedback hypothesis, albeit based 
on synchronized activity in Hebbian cell assemblies, some representing word forms and others con-
ceptual associations, be they strongly embodied or not.
Evidence for Linguistic Relativity Effects in Second Language Learning
Much more so than L1 acquisition, L2 learning requires the integration of new representations into 
a network of pre-existing ones. When we learn a new language, we must acquire new phonological 
and orthographic rules, new word forms, new syntactic and grammatical patterns, but also nego-
tiate how the new information will coexist alongside native language representations. For example, 
learning the grammatical aspect of actions in progress conveyed by the progressive or gerund in 
Spanish should be easier for a native speaker of English (which also has a progressive form) than 
for a native speaker of German (which does not). But we argue here that learning a L2 is also 
about learning a new way of perceiving and thinking. A German learner of Spanish needs to both 
acquire a new grammatical device (e.g., the progressive) and adopt the corresponding conceptual-
isation of action unfolding over time (see Bylund & Athanasopoulos, 2015; Flecken et al., 2015; 
Pavlenko, 2014). In this section, we review examples of cognitive processes affected by language 
and how L2 learners might change the way they conceptualize and perceive their environment as 
a consequence.
Words, Perception, and Categorization
Color Categories
Thierry et al. (2009) conducted one of the first studies looking into early and automatic effects of 
terminology on color perception. They tested English monolinguals and Greek-English bilinguals 
(all native speakers of Greek living in the United Kingdom) in an oddball paradigm known to elicit 
modulations of the visual mismatch negativity (vMMN), an index of pre-attentive change detec-
tion caused by a stimulus presented rarely (deviant) with in a stream of stimuli presented frequently 
(standards). Participants had to report squares and ignore round shapes. Stimulus color, which was 
not mentioned and task-irrelevant, varied such that light blue or green was a deviant and dark blue 
or green was a standard (and reciprocally in another block). The authors predicted that the existence 
of two basic terms in Greek for light blue (ghalazio) and dark blue (ble) would lead to differential 
vMMN modulation in Greek between 100–200 ms post stimulus onset. Indeed, compared to Greek-
English bilinguals, the vMMN was smaller in English monolinguals, who only have one basic term 
for blue, while green contrasts elicited similar vMMN effects in the two groups (Greek also has only 
one term for green, prasino). When the data was subsequently split into two groups based on the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
208
length of stay in the United Kingdom, short stay (< two years) bilinguals showed a stronger light blue/
dark blue differentiation effect than long stay bilinguals (Athanasopoulos et al., 2010).
Categorical perception thus seems affected by distinctions made by language terminology, and it 
can be reshaped by language experience. Subsequent studies have investigated whether visual per-
ceptual restructuring can be observed with short periods of vocabulary learning (e.g., Clifford et al., 
2012; Zhong et al., 2015; Zhou et al., 2010). With only five half-hour sessions of associating words 
with new color subcategories, Kwok et al. (2011) detected structural changes in cortical areas under-
pinning color perception, the same areas shown to activate jointly with language networks during 
color and shape association tasks (Siok et al., 2009; Tan et al., 2008). Thus, minimal experience with 
new labels to refer to colors leads to quick changes in categorical perception at a neurophysiological 
level. This evidence stands in contrast with the study by Athanasopoulos et al. (2010) where changes 
in color perception only emerged after 2 years of L2 immersion. Note however, that the latter study 
concerned category fusion (e.g., from ghalazio and ble to “blue”) as opposed to category refine-
ment (from one category in L1 to two via learning of new labels). Indeed, beyond the fact that new 
information is generally learnt faster than old information is forgotten, especially in the case of long-
established knowledge, it is also arguably more ecologically valid to learn a new (relevant) category 
fast than forget an old one.
Object Categories
Spanish has two terms to distinguish glasses with and without a stem, copa and vaso, respect-
ively, while in other languages, such as English, both objects are usually designated as “glass.” 
Reciprocally, the word taza in Spanish encompasses two categories of objects in English: cups and 
mugs. Given that categorizing objects in the environment is one of our most fundamental cogni-
tive abilities (Lakoff et al., 1987), the link between terminology and object categorization seems 
obvious. Categorization is an effective way of relating new objects and experiences to previous 
ones and therefore not only to memorize them but also associate them with meaning. This process 
is mostly implicit and automatic. If we come across an animal standing on two legs with a beak and 
feathers, we would likely categorize it as a kind of “bird.” If it is bigger than a cat and its feathers 
are colorful, we might categorize it as “pheasant” or “peacock,” even if we are unsure what such 
birds look like. Similarly, when a native speaker of Spanish encounters a cup-looking object, they 
may assign it to the taza category, whereas a native speaker of English could assign the same 
object to the “mug” category, based on properties such as size, proportions, thickness, material, et 
cetera. If systematic use of terms contributes to consolidating neural associations between mental 
representations of objects held in long-term memory, we can predict that objects assigned to these 
categories will be perceived as more different by a speaker of English than a speaker of Spanish.
Boutonnet et al. (2013) tested this prediction in an ERP oddball paradigm using the vMMN in a 
visual object recognition task. Rare presentations of a cup amongst frequent instances of a mug failed 
to elicit, in native speakers of Spanish, the vMMN effect that was elicited by the same contrast in 
native speakers of English. To be clear, Spaniards could still tell the two objects apart—otherwise the 
results would support linguistic determinism—but their brain failed to meaningfully engage with the 
distinction during early perception. Consistent with the idea conveyed by Whorf, the authors argued 
that the two objects differently attract attention in speakers of English but not in native speakers of 
Spanish. What happens, then, when new categories are learnt, as is the case when the L2 makes cat-
egorical distinctions that do not exist in L1?
Maier et al. (2014) asked participants to learn new words to label invented objects (i.e., pseudo-
objects). Some labels were associated with two different pseudo-objects, de facto belonging to the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
209
same category, while other labels were associated with only one object. Two days after training, which 
lasted only 45 minutes, P1 ERP modulations suggested that participants perceived objects belonging 
to the same category as more similar than objects belonging to a different category. Learning of 
new categories mediated by vocabulary thus modulates perceptual processing very quickly (see also 
Rabovsky et al., 2012; Yu et al., 2017a, 2017b). However, learning in this experiment was highly 
artificial and the objects had no pre-existing representation in memory or linguistic representation 
already associated with them, which is markedly different from the natural conditions in which a L2 
is learned.
Pan and Jared (2020) tested the premises of the label-feedback hypothesis (Lupyan, 2012) in 
Chinese-English bilinguals using a vMMN paradigm with pictures of birds: a robin and an ostrich, 
whose Chinese labels both contain the character for bird, and a penguin and a pigeon, whose Chinese 
labels do not overlap. As predicted by the label-feedback hypothesis, the vMMN effect elicited by 
the robin/ostrich contrast was smaller than that elicited by the penguin/pigeon contrast, in a group 
of short-stay bilinguals (who had lived in Canada for <1.5 years). In a group of long-stay bilinguals 
(having lived in Canada for 2–9 years), the vMMN difference between the two contrasts tended to 
disappear, providing converging evidence with Athanasopoulos et al.’s (2010) observation in the 
domain of color.
Recently, our group conducted an adaptation of Boutonnet et al. (2013)’s ERP oddball paradigm in 
Spanish–English bilinguals using arrays of cups and mugs rather than single objects. Modulation of 
the vMMN by oddball arrays of peripherally presented objects, suggests that bilinguals (who learned 
L2 English at age 6 or later) become sensitive to category distinctions made in the L2 while retaining 
the distinctions made by the native language. We did not find any sign of category fusion, which is 
a tendency to perceive objects as more similar when a single term in L2 is associated with two cat-
egories dissociated in L1. Together the examples reviewed above point to fast and early effects of 
word learning on visual object processing, which suggests that L2 learning may have a general effect 
on perception in line with predictions from linguistic relativity (see Lucy, 2016). The next section 
reviews examples of linguistic relativity effects driven by the learning of L2 grammar.
Grammar and Conceptualization
Grammatical Gender and Object Conceptualization
Learning a L2 is far from limited to acquiring new vocabulary. Unless one has particularly poor ver-
batim memory, L2 grammatical properties and syntax are arguably more difficult to learn than new 
words, especially when such properties are absent in the native language (e.g., grammatical tense 
in Chinese) or when syntactic rules function differently in the two languages. Individuals whose 
native language does not have grammatical gender, for instance, find it particularly challenging when 
learning French, Spanish or German (Franceschina, 2005; Grüter et al., 2012; Sabourin & Stowe, 
2008; see also Biondo et al., this volume, and Sabourin & Manning, this volume).
Contrary to conceptual gender (i.e., the gender of people and animals), grammatical gender of 
nouns is mostly arbitrary in nature and mappings between object and gender differ widely between 
languages. The French word monde, meaning “world” is masculine (le monde), as it is in Spanish (el 
mundo), but it is feminine in German (die Welt). English learners of French or Spanish will need to 
not only learn the word for “world” in the L2 but also its grammatical gender, which will dictate its 
form and agreement with other words in a sentence (determiner, verbs, adjectives, etc.). By contrast, 
German learners of French or Spanish will need to learn the word and the fact that it has a different 
gender in the L2.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
210
One interesting question, then, given the obvious links between semantic and grammatical gender, 
is whether the constant use of male and female references when speaking of objects influences object 
conceptualization. Boutonnet et al. (2012) sought to determine whether Spanish–English bilinguals 
tested in a L2 English context would implicitly access the grammatical gender of objects presented to 
them as pictures (non-verbally), when they are engaged in a semantic categorization task. Participant 
were asked to indicate via button press whether the last of three objects presented in a row was from 
the same semantic category as the first two (as in, Tomato–Celery–Asparagus vs. Tomato–Celery–
Truck). Unbeknownst to participants, the grammatical gender of the last object in Spanish was either 
consistent with that of the two first objects or not. In addition to expected modulations of the N400 
by semantic priming (e.g., Kutas & Federmeier, 2011), bilinguals showed a Left Anterior Negativity 
(Friederici et al., 1993; see also Dickson & Pelzl, this volume) for objects with a grammatical gender 
inconsistent with that of the first two. Thus, Spanish-English bilinguals automatically, and presum-
ably unconsciously, access grammatical gender information about everyday objects while immersed 
in a L2 context. The question then is whether they perceive concepts such as moon and sun in the 
same way as native speakers of English, given that Spanish grammar systematically associates moon 
with femininity (la luna) and the sun with masculinity (el sol).
The question of grammatical gender–semantic representation interactions has not yet been exten-
sively addressed in L2 learners, possibly owing to the difficulty of controlling linguistic characteristics 
simultaneously in the two languages of a bilingual while measuring semantic interference of gram-
matical gender in a non-verbal task. Sato et al. (2020) sought to understand such interactions by 
measuring automatic responses of the brain to masculine and feminine faces primed by different 
sets of objects during a semantic categorization task. Objects were either stereotypically congruent 
or incongruent with the gender of the target face (e.g., a skirt or a tie). Unbeknown to participants, 
the authors also manipulated grammatical gender congruency in the participants’ native language, 
French. Behaviorally, French–English bilinguals living in the UK and tested in English performed 
similarly as native English speakers, displaying also similar N300 modulations by conceptual gender 
priming (gender stereotypes). However, in contrast to English natives, bilingual participants impli-
citly matched the grammatical gender of the objects with the gender of faces, as shown by early per-
ceptual modulations (indexed by N1 amplitude). Thus, grammatical gender representations appear 
to be spontaneously accessed in a non-verbal context, which is likely to interfere with conceptual-
semantic processing of visual objects.
Grammatical Aspect and Motion Conceptualization
Another grammatical characteristic that varies considerably across languages and which could affect 
perception and conceptualization is grammatical aspect. Athanasopoulos and Bylund (2013) tested 
the relationship between the characteristics of the native language and the perception of motion 
events in native speakers of English and native speakers of German. When German speakers describe 
an event depicted in a video clip (e.g., a woman walking towards a car), they tend to describe not 
only the action itself, but also the goal of the action (i.e., the fact that the woman walks towards 
a car), while English speakers tend to focus primarily on the action itself (i.e., the fact that the 
woman is walking). English and Spanish, contrary to German, have grammatical aspect. English, for 
instance, denotes unfolding actions using a gerund (e.g., children are running), whereas German lacks 
such progressive form. Athanasopoulos and Bylund (2013) confirmed their prediction that German 
speakers refer more to the goal of an action (e.g., children run to school) than English speakers when 
describing pictures. However, these observations were made in a context of language production 
(picture description) and could boil down to an effect of language-on-language, failing to capture 
how non-verbal representations are affected by linguistic constructs when language is not primarily 
involved (e.g., Thierry, 2016; Wessel-Tolvig & Paggio, 2016).
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
211
Nevertheless, Flecken et al. (2015) found converging evidence for effects of grammar on event 
conceptualization in a non-verbal, perceptual task. They used a P300 oddball paradigm, comparing 
brain responses to target pictures matching a preceding short animation in terms of either end point 
or trajectory in native English and native German speakers. The limitation mentioned above was also 
later addressed behaviorally using the ABX paradigm, in which participants are only required to com-
pare events “visually” and decide which of two events (A/B) is most comparable to a third one (X), 
without resorting to a verbal description (e.g., Athanasopoulos et al., 2015). Athanasopoulos et al. 
(2015) not only showed greater focus on the goal of an unfolding action in native speakers of German 
compared to speakers of English, but also a shift from a German-like to an English-like pattern of 
behavior when bilingual participants switched from a verbal interference task conducted in English to 
one conducted in German. These results suggest that conceptualization depends on the language con-
text and that shifts in conceptualization can be observed in real time, as the language context changes 
(see also Bylund & Athanasopoulos, 2015).
Other Factors to Consider
Together, the studies reviewed above establish that learning new lexical forms fosters neuroplasticity 
beyond linguistic representations. Such plasticity likely depends on several factors known to be 
involved in language learning: (a) developmental maturity and age of acquisition: the sooner we 
engage in learning, the greater the restructuring of the cognitive architecture (e.g., Kersten et al., 
2010); (b) generic cognitive ability, such as intelligence, attention, and working memory (e.g., 
Casaponsa et al., 2015); and (c) the learning context, such as method, duration and rate of exposure 
(e.g., Athanasopoulos et al., 2015).
In addition to acquiring new language forms and structures, L2 learners have to manage constant 
and implicit activation of first language representations, which happen unconsciously and automat-
ically (Thierry & Wu, 2007; Vaughan-Evans et al., 2015; Wu & Thierry, 2010), whether they are 
helpful, as in the case of cognates (Casaponsa et al., 2015) or counterproductive, as in the case of 
interlingual homographs or false friends. However, language co-activation is not always found, as 
has been observed in the case of affective words (Jończyk et al., 2016; Wu & Thierry, 2012), but 
also when equivalence across language involves complex mapping, as is the case of tense in Chinese 
learners of English (Li et al., 2018; Li et al., 2023). In other words, the degree of correspondence 
between L1 and L2 in terms of, for example, translation equivalents and grammatical forms, may 
modulate the magnitude of linguistic relativity effects.
Finally, it is noteworthy that linguistic relativity likely concerns L2 learners to a greater degree 
than monolinguals, who probably seldom face the question of perceiving or conceptualizing the 
world under a “different light.” For instance, a monolingual trainee might need to acquire extensive 
new vocabulary as they grow their expertise in a particular field of knowledge such as surgery or 
architecture, but any linguistic relativity effect will be restricted to the acquisition of new (open-class) 
words. It is highly unlikely that such individuals will learn new grammatical classes of (closed-class) 
words or novel syntactic patterns. Learning a second language, therefore, is likely to come hand-in-
hand with stronger relativity effects, due to simultaneous learning of (many) new words together with 
new grammatical mechanisms and rules of syntax that shape the way we perceive and conceptualize 
our environment.
Innovations, Current Trends, and Future Directions
In the laboratory, participants can acquire new categories based on the acquisition of new words, via 
reorganization of links between cell assemblies dealing with perception and language representations. 
However, Athanasopoulos et al. (2010) showed in the case of color perception that category fusion 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
212
does not seem to happen until two years of immersion in a foreign-speaking country have passed. 
Further investigation using objective measures of change detection at a perceptual and conceptual 
levels (e.g., mismatch negativity, P300, N400) is required that can measure longitudinally how cat-
egory boundaries may be blurred over time as an individual learns a L2.
Preliminary evidence from our group suggests that expansion may not be measurable in the case of 
object categories, possibly because it is more informative to segment the world in as many categories 
as possible (category refinement), whereas regrouping previously learned categories under the same 
umbrella (category fusion) is arguably less useful. For instance, an English learner of Spanish will 
find it easier to learn the terms copa and vaso than the term taza. Indeed, learning to consider cups 
and mugs as belonging to one class of objects comes down to “forgetting” the distinction between 
cups and mugs and, as argued throughout this chapter, this would require forgetting the distinction 
made in the native language between the words “cup” and “mug.” While this is theoretically possible, 
for instance in the case of severe attrition following a change of linguistic environment or language-
selective aphasia, this should be observed in exceptional situations only and needs further investiga-
tion. This will require measures of implicit, unconscious information processing, using neuroscientific 
methods such as electrophysiology and magnetoencephalography, because participants and patients 
may not be able to overtly report perceptual differences, and such differences might not be detectable 
behaviorally either.
Such investigations could benefit from new methodological developments offering more sensitive 
and individually reliable measures, such as frequency tagging. Frequency tagging is an EEG tech-
nique capitalizing on brain entrainment to specific stimulus presentation frequencies. If two stimulus 
categories are visually and/or auditorily presented at two defined frequencies, different neural assem-
blies may latch on the two frequencies based on their “interest” in the particular stimuli, and thus 
start oscillating accordingly. While it is technically challenging to implement, this method has sev-
eral potentially groundbreaking advantages: no task/response required, fast presentation rate meaning 
short experiment duration, statistical validity at the individual participant level, to name only a few. 
This latter advantage is crucial as it may allow correlating performance to individual proficiency in or 
exposure to L2.
Another area for future investigation concerns the speed at which the linguistic relativity effect can 
be “switched” on and off. To our knowledge, no immediate perceptual modulation by language con-
text has yet been demonstrated in the literature. Future studies could test whether early, pre-attentive 
color perception can be modulated in real time by language of operation within the same L2 learners, 
possibly using oddball paradigm and the visual mismatch negativity as index combined with lan-
guage cues, in order to set the language context in different blocks.
Further Readings
Comprehensive review of the Whorfian hypothesis on the intersection between language, cognition, and 
neuroscience:
Athanasopoulos, P., & Casaponsa, A. (2020). The Whorfian brain: Neuroscientific approaches to linguistic  
relativity. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 37(5–6), 393–412. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2020.1769050
Theoretical review highlighting how linguistic labels can influence visual perception of the world around us:
Lupyan, G., Rahman, R.A., Boroditsky, L., & Clark, A. (2020). Effects of language on visual perception. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 24(11), 930–944. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.08.005
First review emphasizing the need for neurolinguistic empirical evidence to support the Whorfian hypothesis:
Thierry, G. (2016). Neurolinguistic relativity: How language flexes human perception and cognition. Language 
Learning, 66 (3): 690–713. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12186
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
213
Acknowledgments
A.C. was supported by the British Academy/Leverhulme Small Research Grant (SG171343). G.T. was supported 
by the Polish National Agency for Academic Exchange (NAWA) under the NAWA Chair Program (PPN/
PRO/2020/1/00006).
References
Athanasopoulos, P., & Bylund, E. (2013). Does grammatical aspect affect motion event cognition? A cross-
linguistic comparison of English and Swedish speakers. Cognitive Science, 37(2), 286–309. https://doi.org/
10.1111/cogs.12006
Athanasopoulos, P., Bylund, E., Montero-Melis, G., Damjanovic, L., Schartner, A., Kibbe, A., Riches, N., & 
Thierry, G. (2015). Two languages, two minds: Flexible cognitive processing driven by language of oper-
ation. Psychological Science, 26(4), 518–526. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797614567509
Athanasopoulos, P., & Casaponsa, A. (2020). The Whorfian brain: Neuroscientific approaches to linguistic rela-
tivity. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 37(5–6), 393–412. https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2020.1769050
Athanasopoulos, P., Dering, B., Wiggett, A., Kuipers, J.R., & Thierry, G. (2010). Perceptual shift in bilin-
gualism: Brain potentials reveal plasticity in pre-attentive colour perception. Cognition, 116(3), 437–443. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.05.016
Barrett, L.F., Lindquist, K.A., & Gendron, M. (2007). Language as context for the perception of emotion. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 11(8), 327–332. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2007.06.003
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Cognitive and neural contributions to understanding the conceptual system. Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 17(2), 91–95. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8721.2008.00555.x
Biondo, N., Molinaro, N., & Mancini, S. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language morpho-
logical system: the role of grammar-related and speaker-related factors. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Boroditsky, L., Fuhrman, O., & McCormick, K. (2011). Do English and Mandarin speakers think about time dif-
ferently? Cognition, 118(1), 123–129. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.09.010
Boutonnet, B., Athanasopoulos, P., & Thierry, G. (2012). Unconscious effects of grammatical gender during 
object categorisation. Brain Research, 1479, 72–79. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2012.08.044
Boutonnet, B., Dering, B., Viñas-Guasch, N., & Thierry, G. (2013). Seeing objects through the language glass. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25(10), 1702–1710. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00415
Boutonnet, B., & Lupyan, G. (2015). Words jump-start vision: A label advantage in object recognition. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 35(25), 9329–9335. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5111-14.2015
Bylund, E., & Athanasopoulos, P. (2015). Televised Whorf: Cognitive restructuring in advanced foreign lan-
guage learners as a function of audiovisual media exposure. The Modern Language Journal, 99(S1), 123–
137. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2015.12182.x
Bylund, E., & Athanasopoulos, P. (2017). The Whorfian time warp: Representing duration through the lan-
guage hourglass. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 146(7), 911. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/
10.1037/xge0000314
Bylund, E., Athanasopoulos, P., & Oostendorp, M. (2013). Motion event cognition and grammatical 
aspect: Evidence from Afrikaans. Linguistics, 51(5), 929–955. https://doi.org/10.1515/ling-2013-0033
Casaponsa, A., Antón, E., Pérez, A., & Duñabeitia, J. A. (2015). Foreign language comprehension achievement: Insights 
from the cognate facilitation effect. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 588. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00588
Casaponsa, A., García-Guerrero, M. A., Martínez, A., Ojeda, N., Thierry, G., & Athanasopoulos, P. (2022). 
Electrophysiological evidence for a Whorfian double dissociation of categorical perception across two 
languages. PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/fdr3u
Clifford, A., Franklin, A., Holmes, A., Drivonikou, V.G., Özgen, E., & Davies, I.R. (2012). Neural correlates of 
acquired color category effects. Brain and Cognition, 80(1), 126–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2012.04.011
Crystal, D., & Robins, R.H. (2018). Language. In Encyclopaedia britannica. Retrieved from www.britannica.
com/contributor/Robert-Henry-Robins/2482
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Eberhard, D.M., Simons, G.F., & Fennig, C.D. (2019). Ethnologue: Languages of the world. Twenty-second 
edition. SIL International. www.ethnologue.com
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
214
Evans, N., & Levinson, S.C. (2009). The myth of language universals: language diversity and its importance 
for cognitive science. Behavioral and Brain Science, 32(5), 429–48. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0140525x0
999094x
Everett, C. (2013). Linguistic Relativity: Evidence across languages and cognitive domains. De Gruyter Mouton. 
https://doi.irg/10.1515/9783110308143
Friederici, A.D., Pfeifer, E., & Hahne, A. (1993). Event-related brain potentials during natural speech pro-
cessing: Effects of semantic, morphological and syntactic violations. Cognitive Brain Research, 1(3), 183–
192. https://doi.org/10.1016/0926-6410(93)90026-2
Flecken, M., Athanasopoulos, P., Kuipers, J.R., & Thierry, G. (2015). On the road to somewhere: Brain potentials 
reflect language effects on motion event perception. Cognition, 141, 41–51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2015.04.006
Francken, J.C., Kok, P., Hagoort, P., & De Lange, F.P. (2015). The behavioral and neural effects of language on 
motion perception. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(1), 175–184. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00682
Franceschina, F. (2005). Fossilized second language grammars: The acquisition of grammatical gender. John 
Benjamins Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1075/lald.38
Hebb, D.O. (1949). The Organization of Behavior: A Psychological Theory. Wiley & Sons.
Grüter, T., Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2012). Grammatical gender in L2: A production or a real-time 
processing problem? Second Language Research, 28(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312437
Jończyk, R., Boutonnet, B., Musiał, K., Hoemann, K., & Thierry, G. (2016). The bilingual brain turns a blind 
eye to negative statements in the second language. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 16(3), 
527–540. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13415-016-0411-x
Kersten, A.W., Meissner, C.A., Lechuga, J., Schwartz, B.L., Albrechtsen, J.S., & Iglesias, A. (2010). English 
speakers attend more strongly than Spanish speakers to manner of motion when classifying novel objects and 
events. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 139(4), 638. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020507
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component of 
the event related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 621. https://doi.org/10.1146/annu
rev.psych.093008.131123
Kwok, V., Niu, Z., Kay, P., Zhou, K., Mo, L., Jin, Z., … & Tan, L.H. (2011). Learning new color names produces 
rapid increase in gray matter in the intact adult human cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108(16), 6686–6688. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1103217108
Lakoff, G. and Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to western 
thought. Basic Books.
Lakoff, G. (1987). Women, fire, & dangerous things: What categories reveal about the mind. University of 
Chicago Press.
Lahav, A., Saltzman, E., & Schlaug, G. (2007). Action representation of sound: audiomotor recognition network 
while listening to newly acquired actions. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(2), 308–314. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.4822-06.2007
Li, Y., Casaponsa, A., Wu, Y.J., & Thierry, G. (2019). Back to the future? How Chinese-English bilinguals switch 
between front and back orientation for time. NeuroImage, 203, 116180. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroim
age.2019.116180
Li, Y., Casaponsa, A., Jones, M., & Thierry, G. (2023). Chinese learners of English are conceptually blind to tem-
poral differences conveyed by tense. Language Learning.https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12584
Li, Y., Jones, M., & Thierry, G. (2018). Timeline blurring in fluent Chinese-English bilinguals. Brain Research, 
1701, 93–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2018.07.008
Lindquist, K.A., Barrett, L.F., Bliss-Moreau, E., & Russell, J.A. (2006). Language and the perception of emotion. 
Emotion, 6(1), 125–138. https://doi.org/10.1037/1528-3542.6.1.125
Lucy, J. (2016). The implications of linguistic relativity for language learning. In R. Alonso Alonso (Ed.), 
Crosslinguistic influence in second language acquisition (pp. 53–70). Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/
10.21832/9781783094837-006
Lupyan, G. (2012). Linguistically modulated perception and cognition: The label-feedback hypothesis. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 3, 54. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00054
Lupyan, G., Rahman, R.A., Boroditsky, L., & Clark, A. (2020). Effects of language on visual perception. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 24(11), 930–944. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2020.08.005
McWhorter, J. H. (2014). The language hoax: Why the world looks the same in any language. Oxford 
University Press.
Maier, M., Glage, P., Hohlfeld, A., & Abdel Rahman, R. (2014). Does the semantic content of verbal categories 
influence categorical perception? An ERP study. Brain and Cognition, 91, 1–10. https://doi.org/https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.bandc.2014.07.008
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Linguistic Relativity and Second Language
215
Mo, L., Xu, G., Kay, P., & Tan, L.H. (2011). Electrophysiological evidence for the left-lateralized effect of lan-
guage on preattentive categorical perception of color. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108 
(34), 14026–30. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.111186010
Pan, X., & Jared, D. (2021). Effects of Chinese word structure on object perception in Chinese–English 
bilinguals: Evidence from an ERP visual oddball paradigm. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(1), 
111–123. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728920000206
Pavlenko, A. (2014). The bilingual mind: And what it tells us about language and thought. Cambridge University 
Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139021456
Pinker, S. (2003). The language instinct: How the mind creates language. Penguin.
Pullum, G.K. (1991). The great Eskimo vocabulary hoax and other irreverent essays on the study of language. 
University of Chicago Press.
Pulvermüller, F. (2005). Brain mechanisms linking language and action. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 6(7), 
576–582. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1706
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain's language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(2), 253–279. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X9900182X
Pulvermüller, F., & Fadiga, L. (2010). Active perception: sensorimotor circuits as a cortical basis for language. 
Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11(5), 351. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2811
Pulvermüller, F., Härle, M., & Hummel, F. (2001). Walking or talking? Behavioral and neurophysiological 
correlates of action verb processing. Brain and Language, 78(2), 143–168. https://doi.org/10.1006/
brln.2000.2390
Pulvermüller, F., Hauk, O., Nikulin, V. V., & Ilmoniemi, R. J. (2005). Functional links between motor 
and language systems. European Journal of Neuroscience, 21(3), 793–797. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1460-9568.2005.03900.x
Rabovsky, M., Sommer, W., & Abdel Rahman, R. (2012). Depth of conceptual knowledge modulates visual 
processes during word reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 24(4), 990–1005. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn_a_00117
Sabourin, L., & Manning, G. (this volume). Cross-linguistic transfer in second language neurocognition. In 
K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Sabourin, L., & Stowe., L.A. (2008). Second language processing: When are first and second languages processed 
similarly? Second Language Research, 24(3), 397–430. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676583080901
Sato, S., & Athanasopoulos, P. (2018). Grammatical gender affects gender perception: Evidence for the structural-
feedback hypothesis. Cognition, 176, 220–231. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.014
Sato, S., Casaponsa, A., & Athanasopoulos, P. (2020). Flexing gender perception: Brain potentials reveal the cog-
nitive permeability of grammatical information. Cognitive Science, 44(9), e12884. https://doi.org/10.1111/
cogs.12884
Siok, W.T., Kay, P., Wang, W.S., Chan, A.H., Chen, L., Luke, K.K., & Tan, L.H. (2009). Language regions of 
brain are operative in color perception. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(20), 8140. 
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0903627106
Tan, L.H., Chan, A.H., Kay, P., Khong, P.L., Yip, L.K., & Luke, K.K. (2008). Language affects patterns of brain 
activation associated with perceptual decision. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(10), 
4004–4009. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0800055105
Thierry, G. (2016). Neurolinguistic relativity: How language flexes human perception and cognition. Language 
Learning, 66 (3), 690–713. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12186
Thierry, G., & Wu, Y. J. (2007). Brain potentials reveal unconscious translation during foreign language com-
prehension. Proceeding of National Academy of Sciences, 104, 12530–12535. https://doi_10.1073_pnas.060
9927104
Thierry, G., Athanasopoulos, P., Wiggett, A., Dering, B., & Kuipers, J.R. (2009). Unconscious effects of language-
specific terminology on preattentive color perception. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106 
(11), 4567–70. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0811155106
Vaughan-Evans, A., Thierry, G., Kuipers, J.-R., & Jones, M. W. (2014). Anomalous transfer of syntax 
between languages. The Journal of Neuroscience, 34(24), 8333–8335. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO
SCI.0665-14.2014
Wessel-Tolvig, B., & Paggio, P. (2016). Revisiting the thinking-for-speaking hypothesis: Speech and gesture 
representation of motion in Danish and Italian. Journal of Pragmatics, 99, 39–61. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pragma.2016.05.004
Whorf, B.L. (1956). Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (J.B. Carroll, 
Ed.). MIT Press.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aina Casaponsa and Guillaume Thierry
216
Wu, Y. J., & Thierry, G. (2010). Chinese–english bilinguals reading english hear chinese. Journal of Neuroscience, 
30(22), 7646–7651. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1602-10.2010
Wu, Y.J., & Thierry, G. (2012). How reading in a second language protects your heart. Journal of Neuroscience, 
32(19), 6485–6489. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6119-11.2012
Xia, T., Xu, G., & Mo, L. (2019). Bi-lateralized Whorfian effect in color perception: Evidence from Chinese 
Sign Language. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 49, 189–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2018.07.004
Yu, M., Li, Y., Mo, C., & Mo, L. (2017a). Newly learned categories induce pre-attentive categorical perception 
of faces. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 14006. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-14104-6
Yu, M., Mo, C., Zeng, T., Zhao, S., & Mo, L. (2017b). Short-term trained lexical categories affect preattentive 
shape perception: Evidence from vMMN. Psychophysiology, 54(3), 462–468. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psyp.12797
Zappa, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (this volume). Embodied second language processing and learning from a 
neurocognitive perspective. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Zhong, W., Li, Y., Li, P., Xu, G., & Mo, L. (2015). Short-term trained lexical categories produce preattentive cat-
egorical perception of color: Evidence from ERPs. Psychophysiology, 52(1), 98–106. https://doi.org/10.1111/
psyp.12294
Zhou, K., Mo, L., Kay, P., Kwok, V.P., Ip, T.N., & Tan, L.H. (2010). Newly trained lexical categories produce 
lateralized categorical perception of color. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(22), 9974–
9978. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005669107
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

217
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-20
16
NEUROCOGNITION OF SOCIAL 
LEARNING OF SECOND 
LANGUAGE
How Can Second Language be Learned as  
First Language?
Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
Introduction
Both folk wisdom and scientific knowledge have pointed to the apparent differences between chil-
dren and adults in language learning, especially with regard to how native language (L1) acqui-
sition versus second language (L2) learning differ. As compared with child L1 learning, adult L2 
learning not only tends to be less successful, but also displays highly variable learning outcomes 
across individuals. According to the critical period hypothesis (Lenneberg, 1967), such differences 
are due to biological constraints including the timing of maturation of brain functions (e.g., hemi-
spheric lateralization). In contrast to the original critical period hypothesis, Johnson and Newport 
(1989) suggested the possibility of a cognitive account of how mechanisms of learning differ 
in children versus adults, with particular reference to the way linguistic input is processed and 
analyzed. More recent theories further suggest that the learning principles may not be fundamen-
tally different between L1 and L2, but the context, conditions, and environmental support to chil-
dren and adults are very different (i.e., different ecosystems; see Claussenius-Kalman et al., 2021), 
along with different methods and manners of learning. For example, most adult learners do not have 
the same opportunities for language learning as children (Caldwell-Harris & MacWhinney, 2023; 
MacWhinney, 2012).
In this chapter, we attempt to provide a framework to address the issue of whether and how L2 
learning by adults can occur like L1 learning by children. The framework called social L2 learning 
(SL2) assumes that L2 learning, especially beyond the sensitive period, may benefit from social inter-
action and enriched exposure in real-life, as in L1 learning. SL2 also highlights the neurocognitive 
correlates of perception, action, and multimodal processing of information relevant to the target L2 
environment in real-world or simulated contexts (see Li & Jeong, 2020 for the details). In this chapter, 
we first provide the key dimensions of the context and conditions under which children and adults 
learn. Then, we will highlight in particular the social and affective dimensions of language learning, 
along with the underlying cognitive and neural correlates that reflect learning differences.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
218
Benefits of Social-Based Language Learning: Some Theoretical Considerations
The remarkable ability for an infant to acquire any human language has led some scholars, most not-
ably Chomsky (1981), to argue for an innate “language acquisition device” or “universal grammar.” 
Because this theoretical approach focuses only on innate mechanisms as the core principles that pre-
pare humans to learn a language (the capacity or competence), they ignore the learning process itself. 
In other words, the learning process could be impacted by a host of environmental and social factors, 
but these factors are performance-related, and are external to the linguistic competence of the indi-
vidual. However, as cognitive science breaks the boundaries of language and cognition and abandons 
the “modularity” hypothesis of Fodor (1983) that posits that language is an independent and separate 
module from the rest of cognition (perception, memory, vision), it is important for us to look at how 
children actually acquire language from the social environment and through social interactions (e.g., 
Kuhl, 2004).
When we start to look at social-based language learning process, we quickly see that adults learn 
languages with very different methods and conditions that differ from children learning their L1 (for 
information on child L2 neurocognition, see Ortiz Villalobos et al., this volume). An L1 is naturally 
learned and acquired in a safe interpersonal space where the child integrates multidimensional linguistic 
forms (e.g., spelling, grammar, pronunciation) with their meanings, integrates multimodal information 
from auditory, visual, and tactile channels, and incorporates the actions and intentions of parents and 
peers (Bloom, 2000; Tomasello, 2003). Such learning allows children to integrate the rich sensory and 
perceptual experiences of the environment, interacting with objects and people, and performing actions.1 
By contrast, perhaps most often, L2 acquisition in adults takes place in an instructional context, that is, 
the classroom. For example, in Asian countries, learners of English as a foreign language are often asked 
to perform mechanical memory-based grammar drills, word translations, comprehension checks, and 
reading aloud, with limited input and practical language use in the social context and limited interpersonal 
social interactions. These traditional learning experiences may weakly connect word forms, meanings, 
and concepts, resulting in poor semantic representations that may be parasitic on L1 representations (see 
Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume, for more L2 neurocognition and L2 learning contexts).
Below we draw from conceptual frameworks in psycholinguistics, memory, and cognitive theories 
to discuss first how L1 is learned and then what the benefits are when L2 is learned like L1.
Social Interaction
In the New Science of Learning framework, language learning is a social-based process, supported 
by computational mechanisms and a neural circuit that supports and links cognition, perception, 
and action (Meltzoff et al., 2009). Children rely on a multitude of social cues such as eye gazes, 
facial expressions, and the intention of others, in order to understand what they need to learn and 
when. Computation models based on data from mother–child interactions, which consider social 
cues tend to perform better than models without those cues (Li & Zhao, 2017; Yu & Ballard, 2007). 
In social interaction, joint attention (i.e., two social partners looking at the same object) is essen-
tial for early language learning and social skill development (Sanchez-Alonso & Aslin, 2022, for a 
review). During joint attention, a child is susceptible to eye gazes from his/her parents/caregivers 
and adjusts his/her attention. For example, Yu and Smith (2016) found that parents’ gaze toward toys 
positively facilitated infants’ attention to the toys and guided them to avoid distractions. For joint 
attention to play a significant role, contingent, reciprocal interaction between infants and parents is 
the key: Reciprocal interaction improves a range of skills such as sustained attention and social skills 
(i.e., self-regulating and engaging conscious control of one’s attention).
Social interaction is imperative when infants and toddlers learn languages (Hakuno et al., 2017; 
Kuhl et al., 2003). A baby’s ability to recognize the differences between the sounds of all languages 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
219
declines between 6 and 12 months of age (Kuhl, 2004). Kuhl et al. investigated sufficient conditions 
when such a decline in foreign-language phonetic perception may be delayed. Only infants exposed 
to a live tutor, not the recorded video or audiotape conditions, showed similar discrimination ability 
to native speakers. Although the presence of a live person is a clear advantage (compared to recorded 
videos), children can also learn languages from video chat with a partner, as long as they can interact 
with their partner, suggesting the importance of social contingency for learning (Myers et al., 2017).
While interacting with others, children are sensitive to the speaker’s goal and communicative 
intentions, and use these cues to infer word meanings (Frank & Goodman, 2014). This ability is 
related to theory of mind and social reasoning skills. Although research with adults is still limited, 
recent studies have shown that for adults as well, face-to-face interactions, social response contin-
gency, and social signals from others can lead to more effective learning by promoting higher levels 
of attention, motivation, and emotional arousal (Caldwell-Harris et al., 2014; Verga & Kotz, 2017, 
2019). This line of research indicates the importance of social interaction in language learning and 
other types of learning, regardless of age.
Embodied Cognition
Action-based experiences, such as those that occur during L1 acquisition, are likely to help the 
child build sensory and motor-based semantic representations in the brain. Based on embodied 
cognition theory (Barsalou, 2008), our mental representation of concepts, objects, and behaviors 
is embedded in our experiences of the body (e.g., mouth, hands, feet), as well as our experiences 
in specific modalities (e.g., auditory, visual, tactile). Therefore, semantic/conceptual knowledge 
appears to be represented in the distributed networks associated with experiential information 
such as perception, sensation, movement, hearing, and emotion in real-life (see Meteyard et al., 
2012 for a review). Behavioral and neurocognitive studies have so far mainly examined native 
L1 speakers in providing supportive evidence for the embodied cognition hypothesis (e.g., Aziz-
Zadeh & Damasio, 2008; Gianelli & Dalla Volta, 2015). The limited number of neurocognitive L2 
and bilingual studies have reported that, unlike in L1, the sensory-motor areas were not strongly 
engaged in processing action-related words and sentences in the L2 (Xue et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 
2020). This finding suggests that the L2 representation in bilinguals (especially late learners) is 
less embodied than their L1 representations. Different learning conditions, such as the age at 
which learners begin to learn L2 (i.e., age of acquisition), limited real-life experiences (i.e., L2 
exposure), and L2 proficiency levels, may all influence the degree of L2 embodiment (Hernandez 
& Li, 2007; Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume).
There is still little evidence that body-specific and modality-specific experiences during learning 
would affect L2 representation, although a few recent studies have provided some initial evidence 
for embodiment effects in the brain (Legault, Fang, et al., 2019; Mayer et al., 2015). For example, 
Mayer et al. (2015) compared L2 vocabulary learning under three conditions: performing gestures, 
viewing pictures, and no-enrichment control. When performing a translation task inside fMRI (func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging; see Kousaie & Klein, this volume for more on this neuroimaging 
method) after learning, participants who learned words with pictures showed activity in the right 
lateral occipital cortex, whereas those who learned words with gestures had more activity in the 
posterior superior temporal sulcus and in the premotor area, regions that have been implicated in 
multimodal and action-based information processing. Critically, brain activation in superior temporal 
sulcus and premotor cortex was significantly correlated with behavioral performance. The L2 learners 
showed significantly greater retention for words learned with gestures than those with pictures, even 
after two to six months. These results indicate that body-specific activities are essential for adult L2 
learning and are consistent with sensorimotor-based neural explanations of semantic representation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
220
Multimodal Learning and Elaborative Processing
The disparity between L1 and L2 during learning with respect to both qualitative and quantitative 
information processing may lead to different degrees of the richness of semantic representation in the 
acquisition of two languages, which profoundly impacts successful memory retrieval, as suggested 
by previous memory research (Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Tulving & Thomson, 1973). According to 
the “encoding specificity principle” (Tulving & Thomson,1973), semantic memories have the best 
chance of being retrieved if recalled in the context in which they were initially encoded than other-
wise. A similar memory hypothesis, “level of processing theory” (Craik & Lockhart, 1972), also 
suggests that more elaborate semantic processing during learning leads to more successful retrieval 
than shallow or superficial processing of the same items.
Social learning involves elaborative semantic processing using various social cues and multimodal 
information for language acquisition. The “dual coding theory” (Paivio, 1990) and the “multimedia 
learning theory” (Mayer, 2014) both support the notion that the elaborate processing of multi-
modal information enhances the quality of semantic memory. Specifically, Mayer and colleagues 
have postulated several principles that account for why people learn better and build better mental 
representations with multimodal information (text, video, animation) than with information of only 
one modality. For example, processing text with pictures and images is more effective than that of 
text alone, indicating the multimodal advantage in both behavior and in the brain (e.g., Liu et al., 
2020). Furthermore, recent cognitive neuroscience research suggests that deep/elaborative encoding 
(involving active discovery, multiple sources of information, and social/emotional processing) boosts 
cortical activity during encoding, and this cortical activation plays a vital role in retaining information 
in long-term memory (see Hebscher et al., 2019, for a review). This perspective is consistent with 
emerging brain evidence that elaborative SL2 leads to the successful long-term effect of learning 
(Jeong et al., 2021; Legault, Fang, et al., 2019; Mayer et al., 2015). This evidence will be reviewed 
in more detail below.
Emergentist Perspectives of Language Learning
The competition model provides social-based and emergentist explanations of the distinctions between 
L1 and L2 learning (Hernandez & Li, 2007; MacWhinney, 2012; see a recent volume in emergentist 
approaches to language; MacWhinney et al., 2022). According to MacWhinney (2012), adult lan-
guage learning is susceptible to several major “risk factors” that may be particularly strong in late 
adults. Such risk factors include (a) thinking in L1 only, which implies the need to translate from L2 
to L1 rather than directly using L2; (b) social isolation, which means learning occurs in an individual 
or within-group communities; and (c) the lack of perception–action embodied contexts due to lack 
of real-life experiences in language learning. In particular, the lack of perception–action embodied 
contexts may explain why adult learners’ parasitic L2-on-L1 representations are strengthened to 
a high level (Zhao & Li, 2010). However, if adults are offered rich environmental support in the 
learning context, similar to children, their L2 learning may be better positioned to fend off these risk 
factors. This can result in the development of inner speech in L2, social integration, and independent 
representations of L2, separate from L1 (Li, 2013; Li & Jeong, 2020).
Added to the risk factors facing adults is a consolidated L1, often precluding the L2 of adults, espe-
cially late adult learners, from reaching a level of native competency. Adults usually begin learning 
L2 after establishing their L1, which facilitates the association of L2 to L1 translation, but greater 
experience in learning and use of L2 in real-life situations may enhance the direct connection between 
L2 words and objects/concepts (see Kroll & Stewart, 1994). Research findings that study-abroad 
experiences of late learners tend to weaken the interference of L1 on L2 may support the importance 
of social experiences in language learning (Linck et al., 2009).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
221
Such series of empirical and theoretical studies imply that language learning does not occur solely 
as an individual cognitive activity; by contrast, language experience in real life is deeply involved in 
learning and processing L2 through interaction with others. This notion is consistent with historical 
and recent trends in various fields of language studies: sociocultural theory (Lantolf, 2006), usage-
based learning (Ellis, 2019), interaction hypotheses (Mackey et al., 2012), and neuroemergentism 
(Claussenius-Kalman et al., 2021). All of these perspectives emphasize the characteristics and 
conditions of social interaction and learning environments.
Neural Representations of Social L2 Learning
Different Brain Networks for L1 vs. L2
Although it is clear that L2 researchers are now paying more attention to the role of social learning, 
relatively few studies in the past have tapped into the neural substrates of SL2. Many neuroimaging 
studies have been performed in the domain of L2 learning, but so far, most of them have focused 
on brain changes as a result of L2 learning experiences (see Abutalebi et al., 2005; Li et al., 2014, 
for reviews). In addition, most published neuroimaging studies have relied on traditional learning 
tasks, such as rote memorization and translation training, either in the classroom or lab-based inten-
sive training settings (e.g., Breitenstein et al., 2005; Grant et al., 2015; Qi et al., 2015; Yang et al., 
2015). Generally, findings from these studies suggest that classic language-related brain networks 
(e.g., frontoparietal area) and memory-related brain regions (e.g., hippocampus) in the left hemi-
sphere are involved in learning and consolidating linguistic information. Such findings, however, 
may be insufficient to reveal the potential differences between L1 and L2 brain networks when 
the two languages are learned differently. Despite the argument that the same neural substrates 
may be recruited for L2 as for L1 processing (Abutalebi et al., 2005; Abutalebi & Green, 2007), 
there is now growing evidence that L1 vs. L2 processing and representation may involve the 
same regions but different brain network configurations or computations (Li, 2013; Xu et al., 
2017). Specifically, new brain data suggest that the connectivity patterns in semantic representa-
tion may significantly differ between L1 and L2. For example, Zhang et al. (2020) showed that the 
processing of nouns and verbs in L1 engages a more integrated network that connects language 
areas with sensorimotor processing and semantic integration regions (e.g., caudate nucleus and 
supramarginal gyrus), whereas such connections are weak or absent in L2 processing even for 
highly proficient L2 speakers.
In contrast to the results of previous studies of traditional learning, recent studies on social-based 
L2 learning are beginning to provide new evidence that such L1–L2 differences may be attenuated, 
as SL2 positively influences successful learning of the L2 and enhances the semantic representation 
of the L2 with embodied, multimodal, and richer contextual information. Furthermore, the cognitive 
demands during social learning similar to L1 may influence the development of the brain systems 
underlying L2 knowledge (see Li & Jeong, 2020, for a review), making L1 and L2 representations 
more on a par with each other. In what follows, we provide an overview of some neural evidence on 
how adult foreign language learning can be optimally facilitated by incorporating some features of 
social learning.
Role of the Right Hemisphere: Temporal-Parietal Junction and Adjacent Regions
Previous studies on SL2 have consistently reported that the activation of the right-hemisphere brain 
regions, including social cognition and action perception areas as well as both cortical and subcortical 
areas, play an essential role in SL2 (e.g., Jeong et al., 2021; Jeong et al., 2010; Legault, Fang, et al., 
2019; Verga & Kotz, 2019; see Li & Jeong, 2020, for a review) (see Figure 16.1).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
222
Most of these previous studies on SL2 showed involvement of the right temporal-parietal junction  
(TPJ) and adjacent areas such as the right inferior parietal lobule, including supramarginal gyrus  
(SMG) and angular gyrus. The right TPJ has been implicated as a multimodal association area that  
integrates multisensory information (Carter & Huettel, 2013). This region has long been recognized  
as one of the social cognition areas associated with the perception of various social stimuli, attention  
to social cues, and higher cognitive processing of social reasoning such as theory of mind (i.e.,  
thinking about the beliefs, emotions, and intentions of others) (e.g., Deen et al., 2015). For example,  
Jeong et al. (2010), one of the initial studies on SL2, trained Japanese native speakers to learn Korean  
words under the following two conditions: (a) L1 translation and (b) simulated video. The stimulated  
videos included joint activities using target words in real-life situations (e.g., a video showing an  
actor trying to move a heavy bag and asking another actor for help, using the L2 target Korean word  
dowajo which means help me in English). After participants had remembered all the target words,  
they performed a retrieval task (i.e., testing) inside the MRI scanner. Results showed that the right  
SMG became more activated when retrieving words learned through simulated videos than words  
learned through translation. Also, brain activity in the right SMG for processing L2 words encoded  
via stimulated videos was similar to processing the participants’ L1 words (learned through daily life  
as a child). Jeong et al. interpreted these results as suggesting that L2 words learned through real- 
life situations might be processed similarly to L1 words in the brain, even when the learning was  
conducted through simulated videos in relatively short sessions.
In a follow-up study, Jeong et al. (2021) used the same learning conditions (simulated video vs. 
L1 translation) to determine the extent to which the qualitative and quantitative involvement of brain 
systems during actual form-meaning mapping (i.e., encoding) affects the acquisition of semantic 
representations of L2 words. The left inferior frontal gyrus (one of the core language-related areas) 
was activated during learning in both social learning and L1 translation conditions. In contrast, the 
Figure 16.1  The Neural Network Underlying Social L2 Learning.
Notes: The left hemisphere regions (blue) control lexical-semantic processing, whereas the right hemisphere cortical 
plus the subcortical regions (green) engage in social learning. IFG = inferior frontal gyrus; SMG = supramarginal gyrus; 
AG = angular gyrus; LG = lingual gyrus; CN = caudate nucleus; MTG/ITG = middle temporal gyrus/inferior temporal 
gyrus. (From Li & Jeong, 2020; reproduced with permission from Springer Nature.)
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
223
social learning condition uniquely induced neural activation in the right inferior parietal lobule, the 
posterior superior temporal sulcus, and the posterior middle temporal gyrus. These areas may have 
been engaged due to processing of multiple perceptual, action-related, social, and emotional cues in 
the simulated real-life video condition. Consistent with the encoding theories mentioned earlier, such 
elaborative cognitive processes during learning may have led to the more enriched semantic represen-
tation of L2 words.
Notably, successful learners in the social learning condition recruited the right TPJ, motor areas 
(post and precentral areas), and right hippocampus more strongly than did less successful learners. 
In Jeong et al. (2021), those who had higher activation in the right TPJ, motor areas, and right hippo-
campus during the initial stage of learning performed significantly better on a delayed vocabulary 
test where they applied target words to novel social situations. In contrast, those who encoded L2 
words through L1 translation did not perform as well in novel contexts when recalling the L2 words. 
They may have relied on rote associative memory processes for L1–L2 word pairs in the translation 
condition, resulting in surface and weaker encoding of words. It is interesting to note that the L1-
translation learners recruited only limited brain areas (e.g., left inferior frontal gyrus) as compared 
with the SL2 learners during encoding. Thus, SL2 may be a successful learning process that can lead 
to an integrated brain network to support multimodal integration, social reasoning, motor simulation, 
and long-term memory.
The crucial role of the right inferior parietal lobule, including both SMG and angular gyrus, in 
social learning has also been supported by experiments with virtual reality (VR)-based interactive 
learning of L2 words. Legault, Fang et al. (2019) investigated the differential effects of different 
learning contexts on structural brain changes. Two groups of English L1 speakers participated in 
Chinese vocabulary learning with a paired picture–word association or VR environment training 
for 20 days. The VR group engaged in an interactive 3D environment in which they dynamically 
interacted with target words such as objects and animals. It was found that intensive VR vocabu-
lary learning enhanced the cortical thickness of the right SMG compared to L2-picture associative 
learning (within the same amount of time and learning the same material). Furthermore, its cortical 
thickness showed a positive correlation with better scores at a delayed retention test.
Verga and Kotz (2019) reported that the right SMG was more activated in simulated partner-based 
word learning than individual-based learning when their participants explored the meanings of target 
words with contextual information. Also, during partner-based learning, activity in the right lin-
gual gyrus and right caudate nucleus, known as the visuospatial attentional network, correlated with 
better temporal coordination between a learner and a partner. Furthermore, learners with greater right 
inferior frontal gyrus activity showed better learning outcomes during the partner-based learning 
condition, but there was no such correlation in the individual-based learning condition. Unlike L2 
classroom learning contexts in which social cues are generally not present, these findings suggest that 
awareness of partners during social interaction facilitates L2 learning success by directing learners’ 
attention to the correct L2 referent from alternative mappings, in a similar way as social cues can 
enhance L1 acquisition (e.g., Kuhl, 2004; Yu & Smith, 2016). This effect is further identified in an 
fMRI study (Jeong et al., 2011) that showed that L2 learners are more responsive to a live person 
than a recorded person when communicating in L2 (cf. Kuhl et al., 2003). The live person condition 
activated more brain regions associated with L1 communication than the recorded person condition.
There is also supportive evidence that adaptive and social enriched exposure can change the sub-
stantial neural plasticity of L2 phonetic perception in adulthood (Zhang et al., 2009). Zhang et al. 
stimulated multimodal and enriched exposure of English sound categories (/r/ and /l/) to Japanese 
adults who had received limited English exposure. They used a computer-adaptive training program 
with visible facial articulation cues, acoustic exaggeration, and high multiple-talker variability. They 
measured brain changes by magnetoencephalography with an oddball task before and after intensive 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
224
training for two weeks. Enriched exposure induced significant improvement of speech discrimination 
scores, and enhanced neural sensitivity to phonetic distinction and neural efficiency during passive 
listening. Furthermore, behavioral improvement was positively correlated with increased neuro-
physiological response. This finding suggests that enriched exposure develops new memory traces of 
L2 phonetic representations in the adult brain.
In summary, the previous findings suggest that SL2 may result in stronger activation of brain regions 
or networks linked to multimodal, visual, and spatial processing, social, affective, and perception-
action-related processing, enhancing the rich semantic representation of L2 (Jeong, et al., 2021; Jeong, 
et al., 2010; Legault, Fang, et al., 2019; Verga & Kotz, 2019). Contrary to the notion that a child’s 
brain, not an adult’s, is sensitive to social cues in learning, such studies show that the adult brain also 
exhibits significant neuroplasticity and changes in response to social learning even during short-term 
training. When L2 words are initially learned in a socially interactive condition (even in a simulated 
context, Jeong et al., 2010), those words could be stored and processed in the same brain area as 
L1 words.
Practical Applications in Technology-Enhanced Social L2 Learning
The theoretical and empirical evidence reviewed so far suggests that social learning not only posi-
tively impacts L2 learning success but also leads to the neural representation of L2 more similar to 
that of L1 due to its enriched, embodied, and multimodal information. However, it is often difficult 
to provide adults directly with a rich social learning environment similar to what children receive 
for L1 acquisition. One way is for adults to study abroad. Although it is undoubtedly effective for 
L2 learning, studying abroad is not practical or feasible for everyone due to its costs, time, and 
family separation. Li and Lan (2021a) suggest that digital language learning (DLL) can be one of the 
best solutions for providing an environment conducive to social learning (e.g, VR, mobile-assisted 
language learning, game-based language learning, and even robot-assisted language learning). For 
example, Legault, Fang et al. (2019) is a VR study that found that simulated physical interaction with 
objects allowed participants to acquire L2 words like in L1 contexts, leading to a positive impact on 
the learner’s brain functionally and anatomically.
Another potential use of DLLs is to facilitate the affective and emotional processing of L2, which 
is often lacking in the traditional language classroom. Recently developed DLL tools and platforms 
may provide L2 learners with reciprocal feedback and social reward during learning. For example, 
automatic feedback may be embedded in mobile-assisted language learning apps, avatars with 
emotional expressions can be built in VR platforms, and performance-contingent rewards can be 
a feature of game-based language learning (Park et al., 2019). Social interaction is one of the most 
crucial contributors to L2 learning motivation in applied linguistics (MacIntyre et al., 2011). This is 
supported by a brain imaging study (Ripollés et al., 2014) that shows that feedback during learning 
increased activation of the reward system in the brain, which in turn fostered motivation to learn.
Adult L2 learning is affected by individual cognitive abilities and learner characteristics (e.g., L1 
background, age, proficiency, motivation, aptitude, working memory; for more on L2 neurocognition 
and individual differences, see Luque & Covey, this volume). DLL learning may be able to provide 
methods for both revealing and reducing these individual differences due to the design features and 
its connection to big data analytics. For example, Legault et al. (2019) found that the outcome of 
learning for successful learners was high in both VR and non-VR conditions, but for less successful 
learners, the VR condition significantly facilitated their learning. In other words, VR learning assisted 
and facilitated L2 learning for learners who are typically “struggling” in the language classroom. 
Thus, it appears that VR may benefit some individual learners more than others.
This last example points to a future research direction for understanding the interaction between 
technology and the learner (see Li & Lan, 2021b), which will enable us to develop learning platforms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
225
to accommodate the characteristics and needs of individual learners with the specific design features 
of VR and DLL more generally. With DLL tools, students do not have to limit their language learning 
experience in the classroom, and can learn L2 anywhere and anytime. For researchers, this provides a 
unique opportunity to study and track individual learners in terms of their cognitive and linguistic abil-
ities and profiles over time, and develop curriculum that is tailor-made to individual students’ learning 
to promote learning success. This will ride on the tide of the so-called “personalized learning,” for not 
only language learning but education in general. Consequently, big data analytics based on machine 
learning and artificial intelligence will also have a prominent place in L2 learning and education (see 
a recent call for integration in Luan et al., 2020).
Future Directions
In this chapter, we have provided an overview of the framework of SL2 and the theoretical models 
and hypotheses that support social learning for language acquisition in general, and we reviewed the 
neural evidence that supports the SL2 framework, showing significantly different brain networks 
may be implicated in social-based learning as compared with those in traditional classroom-based 
learning. Further, we suggested that it is possible to leverage the rapidly developing digital technolo-
gies to simulate the conditions of social learning, which may produce the relevant neural and cogni-
tive changes in the brain.
There are a number of new exciting avenues along which we can pursue future studies in this 
domain. The first avenue is to examine the neural basis of social interaction at the interpersonal level. As 
discussed in Li and Jeong (2020; see their Figure 1), whereas previous research has focused primarily 
on the structure and function of individual brains (i.e., single brain), the hyperscanning approach (i.e., 
inter-brain) allows the investigation of real-time dynamics between two or more interacting brains 
during social interaction (e.g., Redcay & Schilbach, 2019). Recent advances in both imaging tech-
nologies and the data analytics have enabled us to pursue this exciting research direction (e.g., Noah 
et al., 2020; Piazza et al., 2020). The second possibility is to study the role of motivation and emotion 
as important ingredients of learning to accelerate SL2. It is essential to understand how SL2 influences 
affective processing (e.g., emotion and motivation) and how it interacts with the limbic and subcor-
tical reward systems of the brain during SL2. The third avenue is to use machine learning approach 
to analyze large-scale real-time interaction data to identify individual learner profiles, with the aim 
of providing personalized learning (e.g., through feedback and reciprocal interpersonal interactions) 
as in real social learning (see also Li & Lan, 2021a). Adult L2 learning can be expected to develop 
to greater levels of success than in traditional learning contexts if we can capitalize on technology-
enhanced language learning and optimized social learning that incorporates key dimensions of indi-
vidual differences. Finally, to understand different aspects of L2 learning from multi-level language 
systems, future studies should extend their focus from the lexico-semantic level to phonological, mor-
phological, syntactic, and discourse levels with the SL2 approach (Hagoort, 2019).
Note
	1	 This is what distinguishes a human child from a Large Language Model (LLM) such as ChatGPT. LLMs 
can approximate human language performance by analyzing and aggregating large-scale text data but do not 
interact with objects and people in a social context as humans do, and do not display a developmental trajec-
tory in language or knowledge acquisition.
Further Readings
This article provides a first attempt at integrating the theoretical, empirical, and neural bases of SL2 framework.
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: Grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5, Article 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
226
This article provides an overview of the current trends and future promises of DLL for L2 from a neurocognitive 
approach. (see also the accompanying article that discusses the interaction between technology and the learner: Li 
& Lan 2021b in the References below)
Li, P., & Lan, Y.J. (2021a). Digital language learning (DLL): Insights from behavior, cognition, and the brain. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 25(3), 361–378. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921000353
This article highlights the significant role of social interaction in facilitating sustained attention and language 
acquisition in young children.
Yu, C., & Smith, L.B. (2016). The social origins of sustained attention in one-year-old human infants. Current 
Biology, 26(9), 1235–1240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.026
References
Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S.F., & Perani, D. (2005). Functional neuroimaging of the bilingual brain. In J.F. Kroll & 
A. de Groot (Eds.), Handbook of bilingualism: Psycholinguistic approaches (pp. 497–515). Oxford, Oxford 
University Press.
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D. (2007). Bilingual language production: The neurocognition of language representation 
and control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 20(3), 242–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2006.10.003
Aziz-Zadeh L., & Damasio, A. (2008). Embodied semantics for actions: Findings from functional brain imaging. 
Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102(1–3), 35–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jphysparis.2008.03.012
Barsalou, L.W. (2008). Grounding symbolic operations in the brain’s modal systems. In G.R. Semin & E.R. 
Smith (Eds.), Embodied grounding: Social, cognitive, affective, and neuroscientific approaches (pp. 9–42). 
Cambridge University Press.
Bloom, P. (2000). How children learn the meanings of words. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. https://doi.org/
10.7551/mitpress/3577.001.0001
Bowden, H., & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Breitenstein, C., Jansen, A., Deppe, M., Foerster, A.-F., Sommer, J., Wolbers, T., & Knecht, S. (2005). 
Hippocampus activity differentiates good from poor learners of a novel lexicon. NeuroImage, 25(3), 958–
968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.019
Caldwell-Harris, C.L. (2014). Emotionality differences between a native and foreign language: Theoretical 
implications. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, Article 1055. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01055
Caldwell-Harris, C.L., & MacWhinney, B. (2023). Age effects in second language acquisition: Expanding the 
emergentist account. Brain and Language, 241, 105269. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2023.105269
Carter, M.R., & Huettel, S.A. (2013). A nexus model of the temporal-parietal junction. Trends in cognitive 
sciences, 17, 328–36. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.05.007
Chomsky, N. (1981). Lectures on Government and Binding. Foris.
Claussenius-Kalman, H., Hernandez, A., & Li, P. (2021). Expertise, ecosystem, and emergentism: Dynamic devel-
opmental bilingualism, Brain and Language, 222, Article 105013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105013
Craik, F.I., & Lockhart, R.S. (1972). Levels of processing: A framework for memory research. Journal of Verbal 
Learning & Verbal Behavior, 11(6), 671–684. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(72)80001-X
Deen, B., Koldewyn, K., Kanwisher, N., & Saxe, R. (2015). Functional organization of social perception and 
cognition in the superior temporal sulcus. Cerebral Cortex, 25(11), 4596–4609. https://doi.org/10.1093/cer
cor/bhv111
Ellis, N.C. (2019). Essentials of a theory of language cognition. The Modern Language Journal, 103, 39–60. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12532
Fodor, J.A. (1983). The modularity of mind. MIT Press. https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/4737.001.0001
Frank, M.C., & Goodman, N.D. (2014). Inferring word meanings by assuming that speakers are informative. 
Cognitive Psychology, 75, 80–96. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2014.08.002
Gianelli, C., & Dalla Volta, R. (2015). Does listening to action-related sentences modulate the activity of the 
motor system? Replication of a combined TMS and behavioral study. Frontiers in Psychology, 5, Article 
1511. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.01511
Grant, A.M., Fang, S.-Y.Y., & Li, P. (2015). Second language lexical development and cognitive control: A lon-
gitudinal fMRI study. Brain and Language, 144, 35–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2015.03.010
Hagoort, P. (2019). The neurobiology of language beyond single-word processing. Science, 366(6461), 55–58. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aax0289
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
227
Hakuno, Y., Omori, T., Yamamoto, J., & Minagawa, Y. (2017). Social interaction facilitates word learning in pre-
verbal infants: Word–object mapping and word segmentation. Infant Behavior and Development, 48, 65–77. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2017.05.012
Hebscher, M., Wing, E., Ryan, J., & Gilboa, A. (2019). Rapid cortical plasticity supports long-term memory for-
mation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 23(12), 989–1002. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2019.09.009
Hernandez, A., & Li, P. (2007). Age of acquisition: Its neural and computational mechanisms. Psychological 
Bulletin, 133(4), 638–650. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.4.638
Jeong, H., Hashizume, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Yokoyama, S., Shiozaki, S. & Kawashima, R. (2011). Testing 
second language oral proficiency in direct and semidirect settings: A social-cognitive neuroscience perspec-
tive. Language Learning, 61(3), 675–699. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2011.00635.x
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Wakusawa, K., Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Learning second 
language vocabulary: Neural dissociation of situation-based learning and text-based learning. NeuroImage, 
50(2), 802–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.038
Jeong, H., Li, P., Suzuki, W., Kawashima, R., & Sugiura, M. (2021). Neural mechanisms of language learning 
from social contexts. Brain and Language, 212, Article 104874. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104874
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: The influence of mat-
urational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60–99. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90003-0
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for asym-
metric connections between bilingual memory representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 33, 149–
174. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1994.1008
Kuhl, P.K. (2004). Early language acquisition: Cracking the speech code. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 5(11), 
831–843. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1533
Kuhl, P., Tsao, F.M., & Liu, H.M. (2003). Foreign-language experience in infancy: Effects of short-term exposure 
and social interaction on phonetic learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 100(15), 9096–
9101. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1532872100
Lantolf, J. (2006). Sociocultural theory and L2: State of the art. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 28, 
67–109. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263106060037
Legault, J., Fang, S., Lan, Y., & Li, P. (2019). Structural brain changes as a function of second language vocabu-
lary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2018.09.004
Legault, J., Zhao, J., Chi, Y-A., Chen, W., Klippel, A., & Li, P. (2019). Immersive virtual reality as an effective 
tool for second language vocabulary learning. Languages, 4(1), Article 13. https://doi.org/10.3390/languages
4010013
Lenneberg, E.H. (1967). Biological foundations of language. Oxford, UK: Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1080/21548
331.1967.11707799
Li, P. (2013). Computational modeling of bilingualism. A special issue of Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 
16(2), 241–366. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728913000059
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: Grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5, Article 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
Li, P., & Lan, Y.J. (2021a). Digital language learning (DLL): Insights from behavior, cognition, and the brain. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 25(3), 361–378. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921000353
Li, P., & Lan, Y.J. (2021b). Understanding the interaction between technology and the learner: The case of DLL. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(3), 402–405.
Li, P., Legault, J., & Litcofsky, K.A. (2014). Neuroplasticity as a function of second language learning: Anatomical 
changes in the human brain. Cortex, 58, 301–24. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.05.001
Li, P., & Zhao, X. (2017). Computational modeling. In A. de Groot & P. Hagoort (Eds.), Research methods in 
psycholinguistics and the neurobiology of language: A practical guide (pp. 208–229). John Wiley & Sons.
Linck, J., Kroll, J., & Sunderman, G. (2009). Losing access to the native language while immersed in a second 
language: Evidence for the role of inhibition in second-language learning. Psychological Sciences, 20(12), 
1507–1515. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02480.x
Liu, C., Wang, R., Li, L., Ding, G., Yang, J., & Li, P. (2020). Effects of encoding modes on memory of naturalistic 
events. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 53, Article 100863. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2019.100863
Luan, H., Geczy, Z., Gobert, J., C., Yang., S., Ogata, H., Baltes, J., Guerra, R., Li, P., & Tsai, C.C. (2020). 
Challenges and future directions of big data and artificial intelligence in education. Frontiers in Psychology, 
11, Article 580820. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.580820
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Hyeonjeong Jeong and Ping Li
228
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
MacIntyre, P.D., Burns C., & Jessome A. (2011). Ambivalence about communicating in a second language: A 
qualitative study of French immersion students’ willingness to communicate. Modern Language Journal, 
95(1), 81–96. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-4781.2010.01141.x
Mackey, A., Abbuhl, R., & Gass, S. (2012). Interactionist approach. In S. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), The Routledge 
handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 7–24). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781410612564
MacWhinney, B. (2012). The logic of the Unified Model. In S. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), The Routledge hand-
book of second language acquisition (pp. 211–227). Routledge.
MacWhinney, B., Kempe, V., Brooks, P., & Li, P. (2022). Emergentist approaches to language. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 12, Article 6580. https://doi.org/10.3389/978-2-88974-483-1
Mayer, K.M., Yildiz, I.B., Macedonia, M., & von Kriegstein, K. (2015). Visual and motor cortices differentially 
support the translation of foreign language words. Current Biology, 25(4), 530–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2014.11.068
Mayer, R.E. (2014). Principles based on social cues in multimedia learning: Personalization, voice, image, and 
embodiment principles. In Mayer, R.E. (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning (pp. 345–
370). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139547369.017
Meltzoff, A., Kuhl, P., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T. (2009). Foundations for a new science of learning. Science, 
325, 284–288. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1175626
Meteyard, L., Cuadrado, S.R., Bahrami, B., & Vigliocco, G. (2012). Coming of age: A review of embodiment and 
the neuroscience of semantics. Cortex, 48, 788–804. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2010.11.002
Myers, L., LeWitt, R., Gallo, R., & Maselli, N. (2017). Baby FaceTime: Can toddlers learn from online video 
chat? Developmental Science, 20, e12430. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12430
Noah, J.A., Zhang, X., Dravida, S., Ono, Y., Naples, A., McPartland, J.C., & Hirsch, J. (2020). Real-time eye-to-
eye contact is associated with cross-brain neural coupling in angular gyrus. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
14, Article 19. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2020.00019
Ortiz Villalobos, V., Kovelman, I., & Satterfield, T. (this volume). The neurocognition of child second language 
development. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Paivio, A. (1990). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/
10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195066661.001.0001
Park, J., Kim, S., Kim, A., & Yi, M.Y. (2019). Learning to be better at the game: Performance vs. completion 
contingent reward for game-based learning. Computers & Education, 139, 1–15. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.compedu.2019.04.016
Piazza, E.A., Hasenfratz, L., Hasson, U., & Lew-Williams, C. (2020). Infant and adult brains are coupled to the 
dynamics of natural communication. Psychological Science, 31(1), 6–17. https://doi.org/10.1177/095679761
9878698
Qi, Z., Han, M., Garel, K., Chen, E., & Gabrieli, J. (2015). White-matter structure in the right hemisphere 
predicts Mandarin Chinese learning success. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 33, 14–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneuroling.2014.08.004
Redcay, E., & Schilbach, L. (2019). Using second-person neuroscience to elucidate the mechanisms of social 
interaction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 20, 495–505. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-019-0179-4
Ripollés, P., Marco-Pallarés, J., Hielscher, U., Mestres-Missé, A., Tempelmann, C., Heinze, H.-J.J., Rodríguez-
Fornells, A., & Noesselt T. (2014). The role of reward in word learning and its implications for language 
acquisition. Current biology, 24(21), 2606–11. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2014.09.044
Sanchez-Alonso, S., & Aslin, R. (2022). Towards a model of language neurobiology in early development. Brain 
and Language, 224, Article 105047. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105047
Tomasello, M. (2003). Constructing a language: A usage-based theory of language acquisition. Harvard 
University Press.
Tulving, E., & Thomson, D.M. (1973). Encoding specificity and retrieval processes in episodic memory. 
Psychological Review, 80(5), 352–373. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0020071
Verga, L., & Kotz, S.A. (2017). Help me if I can’t: Social interaction effects in adult contextual word learning. 
Cognition, 168, 76–90. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2017.06.018
Verga, L., & Kotz, S.A. (2019). Spatial attention underpins social word learning in the right fronto-parietal net-
work. NeuroImage, 195, 165–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.071
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Social Learning of Second Language
229
Xu, M., Baldauf, D., Chang, C.Q., Desimone, R., & Tan, L.H. (2017). Distinct distributed patterns of neural 
activity are associated with two languages in the bilingual brain. Science Advances, 3(7), Article e1603309. 
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.1603309
Xue, J., Marmolejo-Ramos, F., & Pei, X. (2015). The linguistic context effects on the processing of body–object 
interaction words: An ERP study on second language learners. Brain Research, 1613, 37–48. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2015.03.050
Yang, J., Gates, K., Molenaar, P., & Li, P. (2015). Neural changes underlying successful second language 
word learning: An fMRI study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 33, 29–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneurol
ing.2014.09.004
Yu, C., & Ballard, D. (2007). A unified model of early word learning: Integrating statistical and social cues. 
Neurocomputing, 70(13–15), 2149–2165. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neucom.2006.01.034
Yu, C., & Smith, L.B. (2016). The social origins of sustained attention in one-year-old human infants. Current 
Biology, 26(9), 1235–1240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.026
Zappa, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (this volume). Embodied second language processing and learning from a 
neurocognitive perspective. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Zhang, Y., Kuhl, P.K., Imada, T., Iverson, P., Pruitt, J., Stevens, E.B., Kawakatsu, M., Tohkura, Y., & Nemoto, Y. 
(2009). Neural signatures of phonetic learning in adulthood: A magnetoencephalography study. Neuroimage, 
46, 226–240. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.028
Zhang, X., Yang, J., Wang, R., & Li, P. (2020). A neuroimaging study of semantic representation in first and 
second languages. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(10), 1223–1238. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2020.1738509
Zhao, X., & Li, P. (2010). Bilingual lexical interactions in an unsupervised neural network model. 
International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 13, 505–524. https://doi.org/10.1080/13670
050.2010.488284
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

PART IV
Underlying Factors and Individual 
Differences in the Neurocognition 
of Second Language
 
 

 

233
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-22
17
GENETIC FACTORS IN SECOND 
LANGUAGE NEUROCOGNITION
Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
Introduction, Critical Definitions, and Historical Perspectives
In a second language classroom, there will be some students who can quickly and easily learn new 
vocabulary and grammar, and there will be other students who struggle to acquire the second lan-
guage. Similarly, within a family that uses multiple languages, there may be some children who easily 
switch between languages to match the speaker and the context, and there may be other children who 
insist on using only one language regardless of context. Much of the existing research on second 
language acquisition has focused on the environments that make it easy to learn a second language 
(De Houwer, 2011; Hammer et al., 2014; Hoff & Core, 2013), but even within specific environments, 
there are individual differences in who is most successful at acquiring a second language (Li, et al., 
2022; see also Luque & Covey, this volume). Recently, some researchers have begun to investigate 
how individual genetic differences may also play a role in second language acquisition and bilin-
gualism. In situations where second language acquisition is necessary or desired, understanding how 
individual genetic differences play a role in second language acquisition can ensure that resources are 
allocated efficiently to the second language learners who need the most support.
One foundational approach in genetics research is twin studies. These studies capitalize on the 
similarities and differences between identical and fraternal twins. In theory, identical twins are close 
to 100% similar in genetics, whereas fraternal twins are closer to 50% similar in genetics. Both iden-
tical and fraternal twins likely have some similar environments and some unique environments, so 
the key difference between identical and fraternal twins is their genetics. If identical twins are more 
similar in a trait, such as second language acquisition, than fraternal twins, then this trait is considered 
“heritable.” Twin studies often result in “heritability estimates,” which represent the amount of vari-
ability in that trait that seems to be explained by genetic similarity. Multiple studies have reported 
heritability estimates in second language acquisition ranging from 36–72% (Coventry et al., 2012; 
Dale et al., 2010; Dale et al., 2012; Rimfeld et al., 2015; Vinkhuyzen et al., 2009), which provides 
some initial evidence that genetics plays a role in second language acquisition.
A limitation of twin studies is that, although they provide broad estimates of the role of gen-
etics in a given trait, they do little to pinpoint specific genetic variants that may be involved in the 
trait. Simply knowing that second language acquisition is heritable does not provide a clear path for 
improving outcomes. Ideally, research should identify the “genotypes” (i.e., specific genetic variants) 
that lead to the “phenotype” (i.e., observable trait) of successful second language acquisition.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
234
An early project that sought to uncover a specific genotype associated with native language acqui-
sition focused on a family with speech and language difficulties known as the KE family. Within three 
generations of this family, approximately half of the family members showed difficulties producing 
fluent speech. Researchers identified a FOXP2 gene mutation that had a dominant monogenic inher-
itance pattern (i.e., a single genetic variant impacting all individuals who inherit it) as the critical 
determinant of which family members had these speech and language difficulties and which family 
members were unaffected (Enard et al., 2002; Hurst et al., 1990). Further research has not identified 
the FOXP2 mutation as a common cause of speech or language difficulties (Meaburn et al., 2002; 
Newbury et al., 2002), but the KE family research was pivotal in suggesting that a specific genetic 
mutation could be related to language.
The case of the KE family represents a simple and straightforward pattern of inheritance: all family 
members who inherited the genetic mutation demonstrated speech and language difficulties. The rela-
tionship between genetics and language skills is often less simple and straightforward; differences 
between someone with high language skills and lower language skills are likely caused by a combin-
ation of language used in the environment and a large number of genetic variants, each with a small 
effect size. In combination, the language environment and many different genetic variants can explain 
who develops high language skills and who develops low language skills. Research uncovering the 
multitude of genetic variants that could impact language development is just beginning, but some 
early evidence suggests an association between dopamine-related genetic variants and second lan-
guage acquisition (described in the next section).
Theoretical Perspectives and Approaches
There are at least tens of millions of genetic variants in the human genome (Consortium, 2015), so 
identifying those that are related to bilingualism or second language acquisition requires one of two 
approaches. The first is known as a genome-wide association study, in which thousands of subjects 
provide DNA samples and researchers compare many genetic variants, with corrections for multiple 
comparisons, to determine which genetic variants are associated with the outcome of interest (Wang 
et al., 2005). The second is a candidate gene study, in which researchers use a hypothesis-driven 
approach to select a single genetic variant, and then assess its relation to an outcome (Tabor et al., 
2002). There are parallels to these approaches in cognitive neuroscience research. One approach is to 
collect data from a large sample and conduct “whole-brain” analyses, in which data from every voxel 
in the brain is modeled and a correction for multiple comparisons is applied. The other approach is to 
conduct “region-of-interest” analyses, in which analyses are restricted to hypothesis-driven regions 
of the brain. In a broader sense, both single-gene and region-of-interest studies could be considered 
“confirmatory,” whereas genome-wide and whole-brain studies could be considered “exploratory.”
To date, research on the genetics of bilingualism has mostly taken a hypothesis-driven, confirma-
tory approach. In 2012, Wong and colleagues posited several dopamine-related genes as potential  
predictors of second language learning because of their role in basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex  
circuits and the corresponding procedural learning networks, which have been associated with  
learning grammar (e.g., Ullman, 2004). They identified genetic variants within the dopamine system  
as (a) those on the genes that encode for dopamine receptors (DRD1, DRD2, DRD3, DRD4, and  
DRD5); (b) those on the gene that encodes for the dopamine transporter (DAT1); (c) those on the  
gene that encodes for the Catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) enzyme, which breaks down dopa-
mine; and (d) those that code for the Dopamine-and-cAMP-regulated neuronal phosphoprotein  
(DARPP-32), which affects the functioning of dopamine receptors in the basal ganglia. Given that  
there are multiple genes associated with this dopamine system (see Figure 17.1), and that they likely  
interact (e.g., overall dopamine levels in the brain depend on the number of dopamine receptors in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
235
combination with how well dopamine is transported, how quickly it is broken down, and how well  
the receptors function), even this relatively simple theory—that dopamine-related genes may predict  
procedural learning of language (i.e., grammar), results in potentially complex hypotheses.
The importance of the basal ganglia-prefrontal cortex dopamine system in bilingualism and second 
language acquisition is also supported by other theories. Stocco’s conditional routing model suggests 
that basal ganglia and prefrontal cortex connectivity is associated with overriding an automatic 
response in favor of a controlled response (Stocco et al., 2010), and additional research has extended 
this model to explain bilingual language switching as a specific example of using cognitive control to 
override an ongoing/automatic response (i.e., one language) in favor of a different response (i.e., the 
other language) (Stocco et al., 2014; Yamasaki et al., 2019). In addition, the sensorimotor hypothesis 
(Hernandez & Li, 2007) suggests that developmental changes in the connectivity between the basal 
ganglia and the prefrontal cortex can explain a shift from sensorimotor to cognitive approaches for 
second language learning. This hypothesis is focused on the importance of basic auditory percep-
tion for learning a language during early childhood (i.e., sensorimotor approach) and the importance 
of building off of first language knowledge to acquire a second language (i.e., cognitive approach) 
for later second language acquisition. Finally, the declarative/procedural model describes the basal 
ganglia as a key brain region for implicit, procedural language learning, such as the acquisition of 
grammar in a second language (Ullman, 2016, see also Ullman & Morgan-Short, this volume). These 
Figure 17.1  Dopamine-Related Genes in the Prefrontal Cortex and Basal Ganglia.
Notes: A) Prefrontal cortex–Genes code for dopamine receptors (DRD1-DRD5) on the post-synaptic neurons (* indicates 
lower density of DRD2, DRD3, and DRD4 receptors in the prefrontal cortex compared to the basal ganglia); transporter 
(DAT), which eliminates dopamine (DA) from the synapse; and the catabolizer enzyme Catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(COMT), which breaks down the dopamine molecules after reuptake. B) Basal ganglia–Genes code for dopamine 
receptors (DRD1-DRD5) on the post-synaptic neuron; dopamine transporter (DAT), which eliminates DA from the syn-
apse; and Dopamine-and-cAMP-regulated neuronal phosphoprotein (DARPP-32), which is regulated by cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate (cAMP), through protein kinase A (PKA), and calcium (CA2+), through protein phosphate 2B (calcineurin) 
and affects the functioning of dopamine receptors.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
236
theories suggest that second language acquisition is likely related, in some way, to dopamine systems 
in the brain. Therefore, genetic variants associated with differences in these dopamine systems have 
been a target for identifying some of the genetic variants associated with second language acquisition.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
The studies reviewed here represent, to our knowledge, all of the published research on the dopamine-
related genetic variants associated with bilingualism and second language acquisition to date. This 
research has focused on two central hypotheses (described under each subheading below). The 
first is that dopamine-related genetic variants can explain differences in bilingual proficiency, and 
dopamine-related genetic variants can inform theories about bilingual language control and cognitive 
control
Dopamine-Related Genetic Variants and Proficiency
A few studies have examined whether dopamine-related genetic variants are related to proficiency 
within bilinguals. Mamiya and colleagues (2016) examined how white matter tracts correlated with 
amount of time Chinese–English bilinguals spent in foreign language (i.e., English) immersion 
classes. They found that more time spent in the immersion classroom was related to greater white 
matter integrity, and that there was less white matter integrity in students who were no longer enrolled 
in immersion classes (for more about changes in brain structure and L2, see Korenar & Pliatsikas, 
this volume). Further, they found that this relationship was not present in students with the Met/Met 
genotype of the Val158Met polymorphism of the COMT gene, which is associated with lower levels 
of COMT enzyme activity, resulting in higher levels of prefrontal dopamine. These findings suggest 
that the neural changes that accompany second language learning may depend on genetic factors 
related to prefrontal dopamine.
Our research team also investigated whether dopamine-related genetic variants were related to 
bilingual proficiency for Spanish-English bilinguals (i.e., heritage/native Spanish-speakers who 
learned English as a second language) (Vaughn & Hernandez, 2018). We focused on the same 
Val158Met polymorphism on the COMT gene (described above), along with the ANKK1 TaqIA 
polymorphism on the DRD2 gene, and age of English acquisition to predict “bilingual proficiency.” 
We calculated “bilingual proficiency” as the sum of English and Spanish proficiency multiplied 
by a balance coefficient, which gave a boost to bilinguals who had more similar levels of profi-
ciency across two languages. The purpose of using this measure of bilingual proficiency was to give 
bilinguals credit not only for successfully acquiring a second language, but also for maintaining a 
high level of proficiency in their native language. We considered bilinguals who could achieve high 
levels of proficiency in both languages as the “most bilingual,” whereas bilinguals who achieved high 
proficiency only in one language and bilinguals who achieved relatively low levels of proficiency in 
both languages scored lower on this measure.
We were interested in whether carriers of the A1 allele were able to achieve higher levels of 
bilingual proficiency than non-carriers. We also investigated the COMT genetic variant (Val158Met) 
based on research by Garcia-Garcia and colleagues (2011), who found that optimal cognitive per-
formance was related to a balance of subcortical and prefrontal dopamine levels. The DRD2 variant 
is associated with subcortical dopamine, while the COMT variant is associated with prefrontal dopa-
mine. Carriers of the A1 allele have higher levels of subcortical dopamine than non-carriers, and 
carriers of the Met allele of the COMT genotype have higher levels of prefrontal dopamine than 
carriers of the Val allele. Therefore, balanced levels of subcortical and prefrontal dopamine would be 
present in carriers of the Val allele who also carry the A1 allele and in carriers of the Met allele who 
do not carry the A1 allele.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
237
Finally, we predicted that the relationship between genotype and bilingual proficiency could also 
depend on age of English acquisition. The sensorimotor hypothesis (Hernandez & Li, 2007) suggests 
that when a language is acquired early in life, it relies more on subcortical brain regions, but when a 
language is acquired later in life, it relies more on frontal brain regions. Therefore, subcortical dopa-
mine (i.e., A1 allele) may be more important for bilingual proficiency when the second language is 
acquired early in life, and prefrontal dopamine (i.e., Met/Val alleles) may be more important for bilin-
gual proficiency when the second language is acquired later in life.
Results reveled a significant three-way interaction between the DRD2 genotype (A1 carrier 
or non-carrier), the COMT genotype (Met/Val), and age of English acquisition (see Figure 17.2). 
Around age five, genotype did not seem to matter for bilingual proficiency; all bilinguals who 
learned English around age five achieved moderate levels of bilingual proficiency. At younger and 
older ages, genotype seemed to matter more. For bilinguals who acquired two languages before 
the age of five, those with more subcortical dopamine (i.e., A1 carriers) seemed to have the highest 
levels of bilingual proficiency. For bilinguals who acquired two languages after the age of five, those 
with more balanced levels of subcortical and prefrontal dopamine had the highest levels of bilingual 
proficiency.
Overall, these studies suggest that second language learning in adulthood may be related to genetic  
variants associated with prefrontal-dopamine (i.e., COMT genotype). The research by Mamiya and  
colleagues (2016) suggests that COMT genotype could mediate the relationship between white matter  
adaptations and second language learning in adulthood, which would mean that research examining  
white matter properties associated with second language learning may want to account for variability  
in participants associated with COMT genotype. The research by Vaughn and colleagues (2018) also  
Figure 17.2  Summary of the Results from Vaughn and Hernandez (2018).
Notes: The results of this study highlight that there is not one genetic variant that makes someone a successful bilingual. 
As outlined by Wong and colleagues (2012), even if we focus on dopamine as a target neurotransmitter for learning new 
languages, there are many genetic variants that impact the functioning of the dopamine system. Our 2018 study further 
highlights that the importance of different genetic variants may change over time in relation to either brain development or 
environmental influences. For example, in our study, genetic differences did not seem to matter for bilinguals who learned 
English at age five. This could be because this period marks an important shift from subcortical to frontal language pro-
cessing, in line with the sensorimotor hypothesis, or it could simply be that bilinguals who learn English at this age are 
the most likely to be immersed in English in school, and therefore the language environment is more important for their 
ultimate bilingual proficiency than their individual genetic differences.
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
238
suggests that early childhood second language learning is associated with subcortical dopamine (i.e.,  
DRD2 genotype), which aligns well with both the sensorimotor hypothesis (Hernandez & Li, 2007)  
and the procedural/declarative model of language learning (Ullman, 2004).
Dopamine-Related Genetic Variants, Bilingual Language Control,  
and Cognitive Control
Some key theories regarding bilingualism state that people who know and use two languages need 
to control which language is used at any given time (i.e., “language control”) (Kroll et al., 2008; for 
more on cognitive control and L2, see Guo & Ma, this volume). Experience with language control 
strengthens the brain networks underlying control more generally (i.e., “domain-general control”), 
which may lead to an advantage for bilinguals over monolinguals in tasks that require cognitive con-
trol (Abutalebi & Green, 2007; Bialystok, 2017; cf. Paap & Greenberg, 2013; Nichols et al., 2020). 
These theories highlight language use as the driving influence for neural changes in the domain-
general control networks of the brain that then lead to behavioral changes observed in tasks that 
require cognitive control. In other words, when the environment requires more language control 
(e.g., environments in which only one language is understood by others; or environments in which 
the language being used could change when a new person enters the conversation), the brain adapts to 
that environment and becomes more efficient at language and cognitive control (Green & Abutalebi, 
2013). An alternative that is not considered in these theories is that bilinguals who have better cog-
nitive control skills (e.g., because of genetic variation) may already have more efficient domain-
general control networks in the brain, and therefore may be the best able to learn and flexibly use 
two languages (Li & Grant, 2015). This aligns well with research suggesting that genetic influences 
increase with age because children, adolescents, and adults increasingly choose and shape their own 
environments (Haworth et al., 2010; Rimfeld et al., 2015; Tucker-Drob et al., 2013).
In 2015, Hernandez and colleagues published one of the first studies identifying a genetic variant 
associated with bilingualism (Hernandez et al., 2015). As part of a larger research project focused on 
the neural substrates of language control and cognitive control for Spanish–English bilingual (i.e., 
heritage/native Spanish-speakers who learned English as a second language) and English monolin-
gual young adults, the researchers collected DNA samples from each participant. This study was 
motivated by research from Stelzel and colleagues (2010), who found that genotype of the DRD2/
ANKK1 TaqIA single-nucleotide polymorphism (i.e., SNP, a genetic difference that can be identified 
across individuals based on differences in a single nucleotide at a single location within the DNA 
sequence) predicted frontal lobe activity during a cognitive control task (i.e., task switching). In the 
study by Stelzel and colleagues (2010), carriers of the A1 allele (i.e., one of the two versions of the 
SNP) from the DRD2/ANKK1 TaqIA SNP had better cognitive control task performance and reduced 
frontal lobe activity for task switching. Surprisingly, within the sample of students recruited from the 
University of Houston for Hernandez et al. (2015), bilinguals carried the A1 allele at twice the rate of 
monolinguals. Approximately two-thirds of bilingual participants carried the A1 allele, whereas only 
approximately one-third of monolingual participants carried the A1 allele. In the broader population 
of both Hispanic and non-Hispanic ethnicities, approximately one-third of people carry the A1 allele 
(Phan et al., 2020). Therefore, we concluded that the bilingual college students who participated in 
this research did not represent the broader population of Hispanic Americans.
There are two ways we have considered interpreting this finding. The first is that this genetic 
variant associated with cognitive flexibility might support academic success for bilingual students. 
In other words, bilinguals with this genetic variant might be more likely to enroll in college than 
bilinguals who do not carry the A1 allele. The second interpretation is that this genetic variant 
associated with cognitive flexibility may support bilingual skills, making these students more com-
fortable with volunteering for a study on bilingualism. In other words, bilinguals with this genetic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
239
variant may be more likely to volunteer as a bilingual research participant than bilinguals who do not 
carry the A1 allele. Again, this is in line with research that suggests that older children, adolescents, 
and adults increasingly choose and shape their own environments in a way that may fit best with their 
genetic variants (Haworth et al., 2010; Rimfeld et al., 2015; Tucker-Drob et al., 2013).
Whether either of these interpretations is correct or whether there is another explanation, the 
results of this initial study (Hernandez et al., 2015) suggested that bilingual participants differed from 
our monolingual participants in a genetic variant associated with cognitive control. This raised some 
concerns about the “bilingual advantage,” which assumes that differences between bilinguals and 
monolinguals in cognitive control skills are a result of their language experiences. Our results are not 
necessarily incompatible with the bilingual advantage, but suggest that there may be variables other 
than language experience that explain differences between bilinguals and monolinguals in cognitive 
control skills.
To test how bilingualism and genes involved in dopamine influence brain activity, we conducted 
a follow-up fMRI study with a subset of the Spanish–English bilinguals from the Hernandez and 
colleagues (2015) sample. We analyzed the bilingual fMRI data during cognitive control and language 
control tasks to investigate whether DRD2/ANKK1 TaqIA polymorphism genotype could explain 
individual differences within bilinguals in fMRI activity (Vaughn et al., 2016). We asked bilingual 
participants to complete three fMRI tasks: one task switching/working memory task; one inhibition 
task; and one language switching/control task. Based on previous research by Stelzel and colleagues 
(2010), we expected that carriers of the A1 allele would show reduced activity in the inferior frontal 
gyrus (IFG) for the more cognitively demanding task conditions (e.g., task switching; inhibition; 
and language switching). We also expected that carriers of the A1 allele might show reduced activity 
in the anterior cingulate cortex (ACC) for the more cognitively demanding task conditions because 
Fossella and colleagues (2006) found that this was the case during a different cognitive control task 
(i.e., the attentional networks task).
An important aspect of this study (Vaughn et al., 2016) was to determine whether differences 
in task performance within bilinguals were explained by genotype or by language background 
(i.e., age of English acquisition, English proficiency, and Spanish proficiency) or a combination of 
both. We used multiple regression to examine the unique contributions of genotype and language 
background to performance on the three tasks. If we found that genotype was the only significant 
predictor of fMRI activity in the IFG and ACC during these tasks, this would suggest that we 
may be confounding bilingualism with key genetic differences in studies that compare bilinguals 
and monolinguals on cognitive control tasks. In other words, if bilinguals and monolinguals 
differ in dopamine-related genetic variants and, within bilinguals, the dopamine-related genetic 
variants explain neural activity above and beyond language background, future research comparing 
bilinguals and monolinguals on cognitive control tasks would need to carefully control for genetic 
differences to ensure that the differences between bilinguals and monolinguals reflect differences 
in language experience rather than genetics. Alternatively, if we found that language background 
was the only significant predictor of fMRI activity, we would conclude that variation in the DRD2/
ANKK1 TaqIA SNP is not particularly important for explaining individual differences in the brain 
within bilingual samples.
The results of this study (Vaughn et al., 2016) did not neatly align with either of these conclusions, 
and instead revealed some nuance in the relationship between the DRD2/ANKK1 TaqIA poly-
morphism, language background, and fMRI activity. Broadly, we found that genotype predicted fMRI 
activity in the ACC during task switching and in the IFG during language control (see Figure 17.3). In 
both tasks, carriers of the A1 allele had greater fMRI activity than non-carriers, which runs counter to 
the findings by Stelzel and colleagues (2010) and Fossella and colleagues (Fossella et al., 2006). We 
also found that language background was related to fMRI activity in the ACC during the inhibition 
task and in the IFG during the language control task. Together, these results suggest that this genetic 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
240
variant may play some role in both language control and cognitive control. Based on these data, how-
ever, we cannot conclude that carrying the A1 allele facilitates language control, which then improves 
cognitive control, leading to a bilingual advantage.
Similarly, Liu and colleagues (2022) recently examined COMT genotypes in relation to bilinguals’ 
neural activity measured using EEG during a language switching task and the Iowa Gambling Task, 
which involves cognitive control. Participants were Chinese–English bilinguals who learned Chinese 
as a native language and English between ages three and thirteen. The researchers found a dissoci-
ation, such that bilinguals who had the Val/Val genotype had poorer cognitive control as measured by 
the Iowa Gambling Task, but bilinguals who had the Met/Met genotype had poorer language control 
as measured by the language switching task. Surprisingly, bilinguals with the Met/Met genotype also 
had better performance on the Iowa Gambling task. Like the results from Vaughn and colleagues 
(2016), these results suggest that dopamine-related genes may play a role in both cognitive control 
and language control for bilinguals, but there is no evidence that the same genotypes are related to 
better performance on both language control and cognitive control tasks.
Together, this set of studies raises questions about the relationship between bilingualism, language  
control, and cognitive control. Previous research has suggested that because bilinguals need to exert  
Figure 17.3  Relationship Between Genotype of the ANKK1 TaqIa Polymorphism on the DRD2 Gene and 
fMRI Activity in the IFG During a Language Control Task and in the ACC During a Cognitive 
Control Task.
Note: Figure created based on the supplemental material from Vaughn et al. (2016).
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
241
language control in order to produce the context-appropriate language, they may have an advantage  
in cognitive control tasks through the enhancement of a domain-general control network that supports  
both language control and cognitive control. The studies reviewed here suggest that dopamine-related  
genetic variants are differently related to performance on language control and cognitive control tasks  
for bilinguals. More research is needed to understand whether these results can be compatible with a  
domain-general control network, or whether they suggest that there are different neural mechanisms  
that support language control and cognitive control within bilinguals.
Pedagogical Implications
It is still early to determine the exact pedagogical implications from this line of research. In the 
long term, one might expect that this research could lead to “personalized learning,” similar to 
“personalized medicine,” in which medical treatment is designed to fit a specific person, rather 
than taking a one-size-fits-all approach. Personalized learning would mean that education is 
tailored to optimize learning for each person based on their unique characteristics (e.g., genotypes) 
(Wong et al., 2017). Much more research is needed on different dopamine-related genetic variants 
and how they interact with each other and the environment before we can begin to personalize 
second language learning based on genetics. In the short term though, the research reviewed above 
highlights that in even a fixed learning environment, there will still be variability in second lan-
guage proficiency across learners. Research suggests that people self-select environments that fit 
well with their genetics (Haworth et al., 2010; Tucker-Drob et al., 2013), so if someone is not 
feeling successful at learning or using a second language, they may avoid situations that require 
the second language.
Current Trends and Future Directions
Genome-Wide Association Studies
As highlighted throughout this chapter, the existing research on the genetics of second language 
acquisition has been hypothesis-driven and focused only on dopamine-related genetic variants. 
There is still a lot of work to be done targeting these dopamine-related genetic variants, but it is 
important not to become so focused on the dopamine system that we miss other important gen-
etic variants. In cognitive neuroscience research, region-of-interest analyses are complemented by 
whole-brain analyses that might identify new brain regions that should be explored and considered 
in later research and theories. The same is true for candidate gene studies and genome-wide associ-
ation studies. If they are well-powered, genome-wide association studies can identify new genetic 
variants that can be explored and considered in subsequent research and theories. As is the case with 
most research on bilingualism, researchers who wish to conduct genome-wide associations studies 
should be thoughtful about whether they collect DNA samples from a diverse population of bilinguals 
(e.g., different first and second languages; different language environments; different ages of second 
language learning; etc.) or from a well-controlled population of bilinguals (e.g., Spanish–English 
bilinguals in the southwest U.S.), as these choices can impact internal and external validity (i.e., a 
large, diverse sample would improve external validity, whereas, a well-controlled population would 
improve internal validity).
Assessing Dopamine Levels
Dopamine-related genetic variants can provide information about the general level of dopamine in 
the brain, but future research should also consider more moment-to-moment measures of dopamine 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
242
levels. PET scanning can assess dopamine levels in the brain (Stelzel et al., 2013; Volkow et al., 1996), 
but these days, PET scanning is less common than fMRI for research. In a meta-analysis on bilingual 
neuroimaging, Cargnelutti and colleagues (2019) identified 53 fMRI studies and only four PET studies. 
Because PET research is less common, it would be ideal to assess dopamine levels during fMRI or 
during behavioral tasks outside of the scanner. There is some research suggesting that spontaneous eye 
blink rates, which can be measured using video recordings or eye tracking, may indicate dopamine 
levels (Barkley-Levenson & Galvan, 2017; Eckstein et al., 2017), but there are also questions about 
the validity of this measure (Dang et al., 2017; Sescousse et al., 2018). Another recently proposed 
method for assessing dopamine functioning during MRI is to use neuromelanin-sensitive MRI 
because neuromelanin is produced during dopamine metabolism (Carter, 2021; Cassidy et al., 2019; 
Reneman et al., 2021). Measures of moment-to-moment dopamine functioning can validate research 
on dopamine-related genetic variants (i.e., do individuals with different genetic variants also differ in 
their dopamine levels during a task?) and provide a fine-grained look at individual differences during 
task performance (i.e., moment-to-moment dopamine levels may provide new insight into neuronal 
activity during task performance). If dopamine is indeed a critical part of second language acquisi-
tion and use, measures of moment-to-moment dopamine functioning will be important for developing 
robust theories that tie together genetics, brain function, and language and cognition.
Longitudinal Research
Research suggests that the heritability of traits increases with age because older children, adolescents, 
and adults have increasing control over their environments, and are therefore able to self-select envir-
onments that best match their genetics (Haworth et al., 2010; Tucker-Drob et al., 2013). Consequently, 
research with adults may be better able to capture the relationship between genetic variants and 
second language acquisition than research at earlier ages, but as our 2015 study highlights, it may also 
lead to a biased sample of “successful” bilinguals, as bilinguals who struggle more with their second 
language may choose not to volunteer for research studies on bilingualism. Infants, on the other 
hand, do not have much say in whether their environment contains one or two languages. Therefore, 
longitudinal research that begins in infancy would have the best chance at identifying which genetic 
variants are associated with later “opting out” of second language acquisition or bilingualism.
Further Readings
A review article that provides an introduction to the field of cognitive neurogenetics.
Green, A. E., Munafò, M. R., DeYoung, C. G., Fossella, J. A., Fan, J., & Gray, J. R. (2008). Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 9(9), 710–720. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2461
This article provides a perspective on personalized language learning.
Wong, P. C., Vuong, L. C., & Liu, K. (2017). Personalized learning: From neurogenetics of behaviors to 
designing optimal language training. Neuropsychologia, 98, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2016.10.002
This article provides a detailed explanation of the genetic variants involved in the dopamine system and their 
relation to language learning.
Wong, P. C., Morgan-Short, K., Ettlinger, M., & Zheng, J. (2012). Linking neurogenetics and individual 
differences in language learning: The dopamine hypothesis. Cortex, 48(9), 1091–1102. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2012.03.017
These two papers describe a neuroemergentist theory on the development of bilingual language control and cog-
nitive control.
Hernandez, A. E., Claussenius-Kalman, H. L., Ronderos, J., & Vaughn, K. A. (2018). Symbiosis, parasitism and 
bilingual cognitive control: a neuroemergentist perspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 2171. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02171
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
243
Claussenius-Kalman, H., Hernandez, A. E., & Li, P. (2021). Expertise, ecosystem, and emergentism: Dynamic 
developmental bilingualism. Brain and Language, 222, 105013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105013
This article provides a related perspective about the interaction between bilingualism and prenatally determined 
neuroanatomy.
Del Maschio, N., Sulpizio, S., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Thinking outside the box: The brain-bilingualism relation-
ship in the light of early neurobiological variability. Brain and Language, 211, 104879. https://doi.org/https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104879
Acknowledgments
Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Institutes of Health to the National Institute 
on Aging under Award Number R21AG063537 as well as to the National Institutes of Child Health and 
Human Development under the Award Number P50HD052117.
References
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D. (2007). Bilingual language production: The neurocognition of language representation 
and control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 20(3), 242–275. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2006.10.003
Barkley-Levenson, E., & Galvan, A. (2017). Eye blink rate predicts reward decisions in adolescents. 
Developmental Science, 20(3), e12412. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12412
Bialystok, E. (2017). The bilingual adaptation: How minds accommodate experience. Psychological Bulletin, 
143(3), 233. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000099
Cargnelutti, E., Tomasino, B., & Fabbro, F. (2019). Language brain representation in bilinguals with different 
age of appropriation and proficiency of the second language: A meta-analysis of functional imaging studies. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 154. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00154
Carter, C.S. (2021). Further evidence that MRI based measurement of midbrain neuromelanin may serve as a 
proxy measure of brain dopamine activity in psychiatric disorders. Neuropsychopharmacology, 46(7), 1231–
1232. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41386-020-00944-w
Cassidy, C.M., Zucca, F.A., Girgis, R.R., Baker, S.C., Weinstein, J.J., Sharp, M.E., Bellei, C., Valmadre, A., 
Vanegas, N., Kegeles, L.S., Brucato, G., Kang, U.J., Sulzer, D., Zecca, L., Abi-Dargham, A., & Horga, G. 
(2019). Neuromelanin-sensitive MRI as a noninvasive proxy measure of dopamine function in the human 
brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(11), 5108–5117. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.1807983116
Claussenius-Kalman, H., Hernandez, A.E., & Li, P. (2021). Expertise, ecosystem, and emergentism: Dynamic 
developmental bilingualism. Brain and Language, 222, 105013. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105013
Consortium, G.P. (2015). A global reference for human genetic variation. Nature, 526(7571), 68.
Coventry, W., Antón-Méndez, I., Ellis, E.M., Levisen, C., Byrne, B., Van Daal, V.H., & Ellis, N.C. (2012). The 
etiology of individual differences in second language acquisition in Australian school students: A behavior-
genetic study. Language Learning, 62(3), 880–901. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00718.x
Dale, P.S., Harlaar, N., Haworth, C.M., & Plomin, R. (2010). Two by two: A twin study of second-language 
acquisition. Psychological Science, 21(5), 635–640. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797610368060
Dale, P.S., Harlaar, N., & Plomin, R. (2012). Nature and nurture in school-based second language achievement. 
Language Learning, 62, 28–48. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00705.x
Dang, L.C., Samanez-Larkin, G.R., Castrellon, J.J., Perkins, S.F., Cowan, R.L., Newhouse, P.A., & Zald, D.H. 
(2017). Spontaneous eye blink rate (EBR) is uncorrelated with dopamine D2 receptor availability and unmodu-
lated by dopamine agonism in healthy adults. eNeuro, 4(5). https://doi.org/10.1523/ENEURO.0211-17.2017
De Houwer, A. (2011). Language input environments and language development in bilingual acquisition. Applied 
Linguistics Review, 2(2011), 221–240. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110239331.221
Del Maschio, N., Sulpizio, S., & Abutalebi, J. (2020). Thinking outside the box: The brain-bilingualism rela-
tionship in the light of early neurobiological variability. Brain and Language, 211, 104879. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104879
Eckstein, M.K., Guerra-Carrillo, B., Singley, A.T.M., & Bunge, S.A. (2017). Beyond eye gaze: What else can 
eyetracking reveal about cognition and cognitive development? Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 
69–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2016.11.001
Enard, W., Przeworski, M., Fisher, S.E., Lai, C.S., Wiebe, V., Kitano, T., Monaco, A.P., & Pääbo, S. (2002). 
Molecular evolution of FOXP2, a gene involved in speech and language. Nature, 418(6900), 869–872. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01025
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
244
Fossella, J., Green, A.E., & Fan, J. (2006). Evaluation of a structural polymorphism in the ankyrin repeat and 
kinase domain containing 1 (ANKK1) gene and the activation of executive attention networks. Cognitive, 
Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 6(1), 71–78. https://doi.org/10.3758/CABN.6.1.71
Garcia-Garcia, M., Barceló, F., Clemente, I., & Escera, C. (2011). COMT and ANKK1 gene–gene interaction 
modulates contextual updating of mental representations. Neuroimage, 56(3), 1641–1647. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.053
Green, A.E., Munafò, M.R., DeYoung, C.G., Fossella, J.A., Fan, J., & Gray, J.R. (2008). Using genetic data in 
cognitive neuroscience: from growing pains to genuine insights. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(9), 710–
720. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2461
Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515–530. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.796377
Guo, M., & Ma, F. (this volume). Cognitive control in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
& J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Hammer, C.S., Hoff, E., Uchikoshi, Y., Gillanders, C., Castro, D.C., & Sandilos, L.E. (2014). The language 
and literacy development of young dual language learners: A critical review. Early Childhood Research 
Quarterly, 29(4), 715–733. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2014.05.008
Haworth, C.M., Wright, M.J., Luciano, M., Martin, N.G., de Geus, E.J., Van Beijsterveldt, C.E., Bartels, M., 
Posthuma, D., Boomsma, D.I., Davis, O.S.P., Kovas, Y., Corley, R.P., DeFries, J.C., Hewitt, J.K., Olson, R.K., 
Rhea, S.A., Wadsworth, S.J., Iacono, W.G., McGue, M., … . Davis, O.S. (2010). The heritability of general 
cognitive ability increases linearly from childhood to young adulthood. Molecular Psychiatry, 15(11), 1112–
1120. https://doi.org/10.1038/mp.2009.55
Hernandez, A.E., Claussenius-Kalman, H.L., Ronderos, J., & Vaughn, K.A. (2018). Symbiosis, parasitism and 
bilingual cognitive control: a neuroemergentist perspective. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 2171. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2018.02171
Hernandez, A.E., Greene, M.R., Vaughn, K.A., Francis, D.J., & Grigorenko, E.L. (2015). Beyond the bilingual 
advantage: The potential role of genes and environment on the development of cognitive control. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 35, 109–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2015.04.002
Hernandez, A.E., & Li, P. (2007). Age of acquisition: its neural and computational mechanisms. Psychological 
Bulletin, 133(4), 638. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.133.4.638
Hoff, E., & Core, C. (2013). Input and language development in bilingually developing children. Seminars in 
Speech and Language, 34(04), 215–226. https://doi.org/10.1055/s-0033-1353448
Hurst, J. A., Baraitser, M., Auger, E., Graham, F., & Norell, S. (1990). An extended family with a dominantly 
inherited speech disorder. Developmental Medicine & Child Neurology, 32(4), 352–355.
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from 
the Dynamic Restructuring Model. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., Bobb, S.C., Misra, M., & Guo, T. (2008). Language selection in bilingual speech: Evidence for inhibi-
tory processes. Acta Psychologica, 128(3), 416–430. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2008.02.001
Li, P., & Grant, A. (2015). Identifying the causal link: Two approaches toward understanding the relation-
ship between bilingualism and cognitive control. Cortex, 73, 358–360. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2015.07.013
Li, S., Hiver, P., & Papi, M. (2022). Individual differences in second language acquisition: theory, research, and 
practice. In S. Li, P. Hiver, & M. Papi (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
individual differences (pp. 3–34). Routledge.
Liu, D., Schwieter, J.W., Liu, W., Mu, L., & Liu, H. (2022). The COMT gene modulates the relationship between 
bilingual adaptation in executive function and decision-making: an EEG study. Cognitive Neurodynamics, 
1–15. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11571-022-09867-2
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Mamiya, P.C., Richards, T.L., Coe, B.P., Eichler, E.E., & Kuhl, P.K. (2016). Brain white matter structure and 
COMT gene are linked to second-language learning in adults. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 113(26), 7249–7254. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1606602113
Meaburn, E., Dale, P., Craig, I., & Plomin, R. (2002). Language-impaired children: No sign of the FOXP2 muta-
tion. Neuroreport, 13(8), 1075–1077. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200206120-00020
Newbury, D.F., Bonora, E., Lamb, J.A., Fisher, S.E., Lai, C.S., Baird, G., Jannoun, L., Slonims, V., Stott, C.M., 
Merricks, M.J., Bolton, P.F., Bailey, A.J., Monaco, A.P., & the International Molecular Genetic Study of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Genetic Factors in Second Language Neurocognition
245
Autism Consortium. (2002). FOXP2 is not a major susceptibility gene for autism or specific language impair-
ment. The American Journal of Human Genetics, 70(5), 1318–1327. https://doi.org/10.1086/339931
Nichols, E.S., Wild, C.J., Stojanoski, B., Battista, M.E., & Owen, A.M. (2020). Bilingualism affords no general 
cognitive advantages: A population study of executive function in 11,000 people. Psychological Science, 
31(5), 548–567. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797620903113
Paap, K.R., & Greenberg, Z.I. (2013). There is no coherent evidence for a bilingual advantage in executive pro-
cessing. Cognitive Psychology, 66(2), 232–258. https://doi.org/0.1016/j.cogpsych.2012.12.002
Phan, L., Jin, Y., Zhang, H., Qiang, W., Shekhtman, E., Shao, D., Revoe, D., Villamarin, R., Ivanchenko, E., 
Kimura, M., Wang, Z.Y., Hao, L., Sharopova, N., Bihan, M., Strucke, A., Lee, M., Popova, N., Wu, W., …. 
Kattman, B.L. (2020). ALFA: Allele Frequency Aggregator. National Center for Biotechnology Information, 
U.S. National Library of Medicine. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/snp/docs/gsr/alfa/
Reneman, L., Van der Pluijm, M., Schrantee, A., & Van de Giessen, E. (2021). Imaging of the dopamine system 
with focus on pharmacological MRI and neuromelanin imaging. European Journal of Radiology, 140, 
109752. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejrad.2021.109752
Rimfeld, K., Dale, P.S., & Plomin, R. (2015). How specific is second language-learning ability? A twin study 
exploring the contributions of first language achievement and intelligence to second language achievement. 
Translational Psychiatry, 5(9), e638–e638. https://doi.org/10.1038/tp.2015.128
Sescousse, G., Ligneul, R., Van Holst, R.J., Janssen, L.K., de Boer, F., Janssen, M., Berry, A.S., Jagust, W.J., 
& Cools, R. (2018). Spontaneous eye blink rate and dopamine synthesis capacity: preliminary evidence for 
an absence of positive correlation. European Journal of Neuroscience, 47(9), 1081–1086. https://doi.org/
10.1111/ejn.13895
Stelzel, C., Basten, U., Montag, C., Reuter, M., & Fiebach, C.J. (2010). Frontostriatal involvement in task 
switching depends on genetic differences in d2 receptor density. Journal of Neuroscience, 30(42), 14205–
14212. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1062-10.2010
Stelzel, C., Fiebach, C.J., Cools, R., Tafazoli, S., & D’Esposito, M. (2013). Dissociable fronto-striatal effects of 
dopamine D2 receptor stimulation on cognitive versus motor flexibility. Cortex, 49(10), 2799–2811. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2013.04.002
Stocco, A., Lebiere, C., & Anderson, J.R. (2010). Conditional routing of information to the cortex: A model of the basal 
ganglia’s role in cognitive coordination. Psychological Review, 117(2), 541. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0019077
Stocco, A., Yamasaki, B., Natalenko, R., & Prat, C.S. (2014). Bilingual brain training: A neurobiological frame-
work of how bilingual experience improves executive function. International Journal of Bilingualism, 18(1), 
67–92. https://doi.org/10.1177/1367006912456617
Tabor, H.K., Risch, N.J., & Myers, R.M. (2002). Candidate-gene approaches for studying complex genetic 
traits: practical considerations. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3(5), 391–397. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg796
Tucker-Drob, E.M., Briley, D.A., & Harden, K.P. (2013). Genetic and environmental influences on cognition 
across development and context. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22(5), 349–355. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0963721413485087
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative/procedural model. 
Cognition, 92(1–2), 231–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.008
Ullman, M.T. (2016). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiological model of language learning, know-
ledge, and use. In G. Hickok & S.A. Small (Eds.) Neurobiology of language (pp. 953–968). Academic Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794-2.00076-6
Ullman, M.T., & Morgan-Short, K. (this volume). How the declarative and procedural memory brain circuits 
support second language: Electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological evidence. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Vaughn, K.A., & Hernandez, A.E. (2018). Becoming a balanced, proficient bilingual: Predictions from age of 
acquisition & genetic background. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 46, 69–77. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneurol
ing.2017.12.012
Vaughn, K.A., Nuñez, A.I.R., Greene, M.R., Munson, B.A., Grigorenko, E.L., & Hernandez, A.E. (2016). 
Individual differences in the bilingual brain: The role of language background and DRD2 genotype in verbal 
and non-verbal cognitive control. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 40, 112–127. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneurol
ing.2016.06.008
Vinkhuyzen, A.A., Van der Sluis, S., Posthuma, D., & Boomsma, D.I. (2009). The heritability of aptitude and 
exceptional talent across different domains in adolescents and young adults. Behavior Genetics, 39(4), 380–
392. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10519-009-9260-5
Volkow, N.D., Fowler, J.S., Gatley, S.J., Logan, J., Wang, G.-J., Ding, Y.-S., & Dewey, S. (1996). PET evaluation 
of the dopamine system of the human brain. Journal of Nuclear Medicine, 37(7), 1242–1256.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Kelly A. Vaughn, Anushka Oak, and Arturo E. Hernandez
246
Wang, W.Y., Barratt, B.J., Clayton, D.G., & Todd, J.A. (2005). Genome-wide association studies: theoretical and 
practical concerns. Nature Reviews Genetics, 6(2), 109–118. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrg1522
Wong, P.C.M., Morgan-Short, K., Ettlinger, M., & Zheng, J. (2012). Linking neurogenetics and individual 
differences in language learning: The dopamine hypothesis. Cortex, 48(9), 1091–1102. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2012.03.017
Wong, P.C.M., Vuong, L. C., & Liu, K. (2017). Personalized learning: From neurogenetics of behaviors to 
designing optimal language training. Neuropsychologia, 98, 192–200. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2016.10.002
Yamasaki, B.L., Stocco, A., Liu, A.S., & Prat, C. S. (2019). Effects of bilingual language experience on basal 
ganglia computations: A dynamic causal modeling test of the conditional routing model. Brain and Language, 
197, 104665. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104665
 
 
 
 
 

247
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-23
18
AGE AND PROFICIENCY 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Lauren A. Fromont
Introduction and Critical Definitions
When can one tell that they master a second (third, fourth…) language? Popular culture might 
say: “When one can speak (and understand) like a native speaker.” This brings a second, more dif-
ficult question: How does one get there? (and another, related one: What does it even mean to be 
native or native-like?). Although we can name a long list of relevant factors for learning languages 
(see Luque & Covey, this volume), their relative importance in promoting “native-likeness” remains 
under debate. In particular, age of acquisition on the one hand, and proficiency on the other, have 
received considerable attention in second language (L2) research, and thus, they are focus of this 
chapter.
Age of Acquisition
Age of acquisition (AoA) of a L2 is a determining factor in reaching a “first language-like” attainment 
level: the later one learns a L2, the less likely one is to achieve native-like proficiency. There are a 
number of explanations as to why learning a language early in life is usually associated with high 
attainment (e.g., Caffarra et al., 2015). Some relate to the individuals’ linguistic experience. First, the 
interplay between first language (L1) and L2 through time may play a role: The L1 becomes more 
entrenched as the individual gains experience, and therefore may impact the learning process of the 
L2 grammar (Hernandez et al., 2005). Second, linguistic circumstances in childhood may be more 
beneficial for L2 learning (Hyltenstam & Abrahamsson, 2003; Lu et al, 2016; Row & Snow, 2020; but 
see Flege, 2019). These can relate to characteristics inherent to the learners (e.g., higher motivation to 
acquire the L2 compared to adults), or to their environment (e.g., better linguistic input, more oppor-
tunities to interact with native speakers). Other explanations, of greater interest within the context of 
the present chapter, are biological in nature. It has been claimed that biological changes that occur 
typically during puberty are responsible for the increased difficulty in learning an L2 later in life. 
Those changes span from the completion of the lateralization that happens during puberty to increases 
in estrogen or testosterone (see Hyltenstam & Abrahamsson, 2003, for a review), and, of course, 
decreased in brain plasticity (Pallier et al., 2003). Brain plasticity refers to the ability of the brain 
to change its activity in response to stimuli, by reorganizing its structure or connections. Hormonal 
change during puberty seems to lead to a decrease in brain plasticity, therefore affecting the learning of 
higher-order cognitive abilities, such as language (for a biological perspective, see Laube et al., 2020).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
248
Proficiency
Readers who are less familiar with the debates surrounding the neurocognitive substrates of L2 
learning may be puzzled by the fact that proficiency is often pitched against AoA when trying to 
account for native-likeness. Isn’t proficiency precisely what we are trying to measure? Not really: In 
the neurocognition of language, we are mostly interested in the underlying mechanisms of language 
processing. In fact, the loss of plasticity described above may lead to mechanisms that are quali-
tatively different between any L2 learner (regardless of their proficiency) and a given L1 speaker. 
In order to evaluate whether the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying L2 processing are mainly 
dependent on AoA, it is therefore important to assess for proficiency. Assessing proficiency is quite 
controversial (Leclercq et al., 2014). Park et al. (2022) studied proficiency assessment practices in 
500 L2 research studies between 2012 and 2019. They showed that although around 90% of studies 
do report proficiency, only around 42% use an independent measure to evaluate it, and most of the 
studies use the “academic” or institutional level. Although an extended battery of offline measures 
exists, including, lexical decisions tasks (Meyer & Schvaneveldt, 1971), c-tests (where participants 
are asked to complete deleted parts of a paragraph; Klein-Braley & Raatz, 1984), and standardized 
tests such as the Test of English as a foreign language–TOEFL®, these are not always available in 
minority languages. Neurolinguists also rely on independent measures, such as performance on an 
acceptability judgment task, which consists of asking a participant whether they consider a given sen-
tence “acceptable” in a specific language. Originally implemented as informal judgments in genera-
tive linguistics, acceptability judgment tasks are now widely used in experiments while brain activity 
is recorded (see Sprouse & Almeida, 2017, for a comprehensive account of acceptability judgment 
tasks). However, one must keep in mind that both types of measures do not reflect the variety of 
communication situations happening in the real world. Therefore, proficiency is sometimes assessed 
using, for example, the amount of exposure to an L2 (Ojima et al., 2005). This measure, however, 
correlates with AoA if taken along the lifespan.
On Age of Acquisition vs. Proficiency: Preliminary Remarks
It is important to note a few things before further examining AoA and proficiency effects in L2 pro-
cessing. First, there is very little dispute over the effects of AoA in L2 acquisition. What we all intui-
tively know holds: It is easier to learn an L2, and to get good at it, if we start early. When discussing 
the importance of AoA, we might want to rephrase the question as such: Is it due to biological factors 
(“true” AoA) or to other factors that may be confounded with AoA? In thinking about the second 
category, the list gets very long. We may refer to inherent motivation, or to quality and quantity of 
linguistic exposure, all of which are mentioned to be higher early in life (Hyltenstam & Abrahamsson, 
2003). But we must also keep in mind that high proficiency is also generally negatively correlated 
with AoA (Steinhauer, 2014). This point will be discussed when reviewing the empirical evidence, 
but should be kept in mind throughout the whole chapter.
It is also apparent that AoA does not affect all linguistic domains the same way (Birdsong, 
2006; Hahne, 2001; Newport et al., 2001). While lexical-semantics—i.e., the acquisition of new 
vocabulary—seems relatively unaffected (after all, native speakers also need to learn new words in 
their L1), many findings report AoA effects in L2 phonology, morphology, and syntax (for a review 
of these domains, see Myers & Fuhrmeister, this volume; Biondo et al., this volume; Alemán Bañon 
et al., this volume, respectively). Therefore, these domains are usually the focus of the discussion 
surrounding AoA. In the present chapter, we will focus on morpho-syntactic processing in particular.
Thirdly, it is important to reflect on the concept of “native-likeness” or “L1 attainment.” Although 
it is undeniable that one primary objective of L2 learning is to get close to a native speaker’s level, we 
must also reconsider the validity of the “standard L1 speaker profile” (for example, see Freunberger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
249
et al., 2022; Singleton & Leśniewska, 2021). Native speakers too, vary immensely in the usage 
and exposure of their L1.1 Although there is virtually no argument of this variability, in almost all 
L2 studies, L1 “controls” have been analyzed as a single, monolithic group in a way that ignores 
interindividual variability (Fromont, Royle, & Steinhauer, 2020).
Considering the definitions and critical issues described above, the structure of this chapter is as 
follows. After describing two hypotheses that insist on the importance of AoA (the critical period 
hypothesis, Johnson & Newport, 1989; Lenneberg, 1967; Newport, Bavelier, & Neville, 2001) and 
proficiency (the convergence hypothesis, Steinhauer, 2014) in accounting for L2 processing, we will 
review the corresponding empirical evidence focusing on event-related potentials studies. In par-
ticular, we will address the challenge of assessing the importance of often correlated factors in L2 
processing, and unveil relevant evidence focusing on interindividual variability, both in L1 and L2 
speakers.
Historical Perspectives: Early Insights from Linguistics and Education Sciences
Although the idea that AoA is instrumental to native-like attainment was brought up in 1959 by 
neurolinguists Penfield and Roberts, who at the time claimed that the brain started to lose its plasti-
city at the age of nine, it was largely popularized by the pivotal figure of linguistics Noam Chomsky. 
In 1968, Chomsky focused on L1 acquisition to demonstrate that a native language, guided by 
innate properties common to all human languages, is acquired easily and implicitly. Children are 
hypothesized to follow a common trajectory and eventually reach the target “adult” grammar. This 
process has been mirrored—and extended—to understand early vs. late L2 learning (Johnson & 
Newport, 1989). Indeed, researchers espousing this position have claimed that L2 learners, may not 
benefit from the mechanisms that facilitate L1 acquisition.2 Thus, late L2 learning may be explicit 
and difficult, and the target (now defined as “native”) grammar may never fully be reached (e.g., 
DeKeyser, 2010).
Fewer people know that, despite the importance given to AoA, several early studies showed con-
trary findings. For example, Burstall et al.’s research (1974), one of the first large-scale and longi-
tudinal empirical studies addressing the age effect on L2 learning, focused on the feasibility and 
desirability of teaching and learning a foreign language in primary grades. Although AoA was not 
the primary focus of the research, looking at the results of several language tasks, Burstall observed 
that the L2 learners that started at an earlier onset were on par with their peers who started learning 
later. This suggests that AoA did not affect listening and speaking (even phonological) skills of the 
children in a L2.
These historical considerations show that the debate around AoA with other factors has been 
active since the popularization of neuro- and psycholinguistics as a research field. However, later 
technical advances in electrophysiology and neuro-imaging have been instrumental for observing 
the neurocognitive correlates of L2 processing and addressing the hypothesis that L2 processing is 
different from L1’s due to a loss of brain plasticity.
Theories on Age of Acquisition and L2 Proficiency and Native-like Attainment
For the purposes of this chapter, we will distinguish between hypotheses that insist on the importance 
of AoA in explaining native-like attainment, and the ones that focus on the importance of proficiency.
The Earlier, the Better: The Critical Period Hypothesis
As noted earlier, there is a broad consensus that AoA is important when it comes to L2 learning. In 
general, later-life language learning is associated with lower attainment attributed—at least partly—to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
250
biological factors such as decline in brain plasticity. The critical period hypothesis (CPH; Newport, 
Bavelier, & Neville, 2001; Johnson & Newport, 1989; Lenneberg, 1967) states that there is an early 
time window in life when the brain can establish the neural connections that will enable optimal 
grammatical processing.
Although there is virtually no argument that there is a critical period for L1 acquisition, whether 
or not it should apply to all the languages one learns in one’s lifespan is still under debate. Proponents 
of the CPH in the context of L2 learning predict native-like processing in one’s L2 would be contin-
gent upon early exposure (e.g., Bylund et al., 2021; DeKeyser, 2010; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996). 
In other words, an individual who speaks and understands their L2 as well as a native speaker must 
rely on completely different cognitive mechanisms to process said L2. The exact span of the crit-
ical period is unclear: Although it is generally limited to the onset of puberty (Vanhove, 2013), a 
compelling large-scale study has suggested that it extends until around 17 years (Chen et al., 2021; 
Hartshorne et al., 2018; but see, Van der Slik et al., 2022).3 As previously mentioned, it is important 
to note that not all linguistic domains are equally affected by this factor. The processing of phon-
ology, morphology, and syntax are known to be particularly sensitive to AoA. On the other hand, late 
L2 learners’ lexical-semantic processing is generally quite comparable to L1 speakers’ (Clahsen & 
Felser, 2006).
Proficiency Matters: The Convergence Hypothesis
The convergence hypothesis (Steinhauer et al., 2009) suggests that distinct neurocognitive processing 
mechanisms characterize proficiency levels, and that ultimately, highly proficient L2 learners may 
converge on native-like profiles. At early learning stages (low-proficiency level), L2 learners rely on 
frequency-based mechanisms to process syntax. As proficiency increases, L2 learners start applying 
grammatical rules.
This hypothesis is related to an influential model in L2 processing: the declarative/procedural 
model (Ullman, 2001, 2004, 2020). According to this model, two learning and memory systems 
underlie language processing: the declarative system subserves the processing of lexical-semantic 
information, whereas the procedural system plays a crucial role in computation (required in phon-
ology, morphology, syntax). During language acquisition, the L2 would rely more on the declarative 
system for grammatical processing at first. As proficiency increases, the procedural system plays a 
more important role and rule-driven combinatorial processes are preferentially used during gram-
matical structure building. Note that, since this model defines proficiency as the general amount of 
L2 experience (Ullman, 2005), this factor remains conflated with AoA. The convergence hypothesis 
focuses on the actual linguistic level of individual, and predicts that proficiency will drive some 
changes in neurocognitive mechanisms underlying L2 processing, regardless of AoA.
The convergence hypothesis does not predict a unique learning trajectory common to all L2 users, 
because learning may depend on other factors. For example, the degree of similarity between L1 and 
L2 may lead to transfer effects that explain why a given structure, however complex it may be, can be 
integrated in a native-like manner early on during the learning process (Steinhauer, 2014).
Predictions of the Critical Period and the Convergence hypotheses
The predictions of the critical period and convergence models described above can be examined 
through the use of event-related potential (ERP) components. ERPs potentials are obtained by 
recording the brain activity from electrodes placed on the participant’s scalp, and averaging that 
activity respective to a specific stimulus or input (e.g., a word onset or apparition on a screen). They 
offer two major advantages for studying online sentence processing: (a) they have excellent tem-
poral resolution, and (b) they are a fined-grained measure that allow researchers to draw qualitative 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
251
differences (or similarities) about the underlying cognitive processes of sentence processing in different 
populations, even when their behavior is indistinguishable. In past decades, ERP research has sig-
nificantly contributed to the development of dynamic sentence processing models. ERP components 
are characterized by their polarity (positive or negative), latency (in ms), and topographical distribu-
tion on the scalp (see Disckson & Pelzl, this volume, for an extended account on ERPs). In sentence 
processing, we usually consider the N400, the LAN, and the P600 as the three basic components of 
interest (see, e.g., Swaab et al., 2012, for a general description that inspired this paragraph). The N400 
is a centrally (sometimes broadly) distributed negative deflection that occurs between 300 and 500 
ms after word presentation. It is observed in response to a range of experimental manipulations on 
lexical-semantic processing: from word frequency to the integration of world knowledge information 
(see Federmeier, 2021; Kutas & Federmeier, 2011, for a review). It is also described as the component 
reflecting processes relying on the declarative memory (Ullman, 2001). The left anterior negativity, 
or LAN, is observed around 300–500 ms, usually at left anterior sites (even though its topography 
varies depending on the modality of the experiment). LAN effects are mostly elicited in response to 
agreement violations, and more generally associated with the processing of local syntactic structures. 
The P600 effect is a long-lasting (up to 1000 ms) and posterior positivity that starts around 500 ms, 
and has been observed in response to a range of syntactic manipulations.
Considering these components, the general prediction is that native speakers elicit a N400 in 
response to errors or incongruencies of lexical-semantic nature, and a (LAN)-P600 in response to 
syntactic violations (e.g., agreement error, wrong syntactic category). The LAN component is in 
parenthesis to reflect the fact that it mostly appears in response to morphosyntactic errors but not 
to purely syntactic ones, and also because its validity has been put into question (see the discussion 
between Tanner, 2015, and Molinaro et al., 2015). Both hypotheses described above would agree that 
late L2 learners would also show modulations of the N400 in response to semantic errors. Syntax is 
the domain that divides proponents of AoA vs. proficiency as a driving factor in cognitive mechanisms 
underlying L2 processing. The CPH would predict that, regardless of proficiency, late L2 learners 
will rely on different mechanisms compared to L1 speakers. For example, they may elicit a N400 
component, showing their reliance on heuristics to process rule-based linguistic aspects. The con-
vergence theory would predict that, with enough proficiency, late learners may converge on similar 
mechanisms as L1 speakers. Low proficiency L2-learners may either show no ERP responses or elicit 
an N400 in response to morpho-syntactic violations, reflecting the fact that these participants process 
the violations as lexical anomalies. However, as proficiency increases and linguistic rules become 
more grammaticalized, ERP signatures are expected to transform to broadly distributed P600-like 
effects, and finally converge toward a native-like response (e.g., a biphasic LAN-P600 effect).
Empirical Evidence on the Critical Period and the Convergence Hypotheses
Evidence Supporting the Critical Period Hypothesis and Limitations
As specified in the introduction, AoA does not influence all linguistic domains equally. For example, 
lexical-semantic processing seems relatively unaffected by AoA (Birdsong, 2006; Vanhove, 2013), 
even though N400 effects may be somewhat delayed or smaller in late L2-learners (Clahsen & Felser, 
2006; Mueller, 2005; see also Tokowicz, & Tkacikova, this volume). These results show quantitative 
(same component varying in latency and amplitude), rather than qualitative (distinct ERP compo-
nent) differences between L1 and L2 speakers. This suggests that in the lexical-semantic domain, 
both groups indeed rely on similar neurocognitive mechanisms. The real domain of interest within 
sentence processing is morpho-syntax.
Early ERP work on syntactic-category processing supported the CPH. In a seminal study, Weber-
Fox and Neville (1996) investigated brain responses to syntactic category violations (e.g., Max’s *of 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
252
proof the theorem. vs. Max’s proof of the theorem) and lexical-semantic violations (Max’s *event of 
the theorem. vs. Max’s proof of the theorem.). Participants were L2 speakers of English (Mandarin 
Chinese L1) who were divided into five groups according to their AoA (1–3; 4–6; 7–10;11–13; >16), 
and a group of monolingual English speakers. In the lexical-semantic condition, N400 effects were 
reliably observed across groups. In the syntax condition, ERP profiles for syntax violations appeared 
less native-like with increasing AoA. Only the lowest AoA group elicited a LAN-like/P600 response 
similar to native speakers, and participants who learned English after 16 did not even display a P600 
component. As predicted by the CPH, these findings suggest that late learners (AoA > 16) rely on 
totally different mechanisms than native speakers to process local syntactic structures, but show no 
qualitative difference in lexical-semantic processing. Similarly, auditory ERP studies that attempted 
to combine lexical-semantic anomalies and syntactic-category errors on the same target word (Hahne 
& Friederici, 2001) reported that L2-learners displayed late semantic N400s in response to these 
combined anomalies, whereas L1-speakers displayed a “syntactic” early LAN (ELAN)4 but no N400, 
presumably because syntactic violations block any lexical-semantic processing in native speakers 
(i.e., the “semantic blocking” effect, Hahne & Friederici, 2001). Therefore, late (adult) L2 learners 
appeared to rely more on lexical-semantic cues than syntax-guided native speakers, and seemed to 
never rely on rapid/automatic mechanisms to process morpho-syntax, as demonstrated by the absence 
of (E)LANs. At the time, this was considered very compelling evidence in favor of the CPH, and 
also fell in line with the dominant “syntax-first” sentence processing model developed by Friederici 
(2002).
More recently, a study by Meulman et al (2015) used generalized additive models to investigate 
AoA effects in gender processing in a more “data driven” approach. They observed that whereas 
participants with AoAs until around 20 years old showed gradually smaller P600 as their AoA 
increased, learners with later AoAs showed a different component (namely, a posterior negativity), 
indicating that (at least partially) different groups of neurons are involved, in turn suggesting different 
processing mechanisms.
However, in these studies, AoA was confounded with proficiency. For example, in the Weber-Fox 
and Neville (1996) study, the scores on several offline proficiency measures (such as CELF and sen-
tence structure subsets), as well as online acceptability judgment scores negatively correlated with 
AoA, and the same was true for the more recent Meulman et al. (2015) study as well. In other words, 
the earlier learners were also the more proficient participants. In these conditions, it remains unclear 
whether the observed ERP differences are really attributable to AoA (as the authors concluded) or 
to proficiency levels. In the next section, we will focus on studies that show that late L2 learners 
can converge toward L1 profiles with sufficient proficiency (Caffarra et al., 2015; Steinhauer, 2014; 
Steinhauer et al., 2009).
Evidence Supporting the Convergence Hypothesis and Limitations
By design, there are two ways of assessing the effect of proficiency while avoiding the confound with 
AoA: (a) keep AoA constant, and (b) train the participants on a language (artificial or real) they have 
not previously been in contact with.
In a study focusing on L2-learners of an artificial language, Friederici et al. (2002) divided their 
participants into two groups: one that received grammar training, and another that received only 
vocabulary training. They showed that, in response to syntactic category violations, the grammar-
training group elicited ERP responses similar to those usually found in native speakers (early nega-
tivities followed by a P600), whereas the vocabulary-training group did not. Similarly, Morgan-Short 
et al. (2012) investigated the effects of implicit (immersion-like) vs. explicit (classroom-like) training 
and further tested each group at high and low proficiency levels (performance at the acceptability 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
253
judgment task). Interestingly, more proficient participants elicited a P600 regardless of the type of 
training (implicit or explicit), whereas only the highly proficient group that learned the language 
through implicit training elicited a LAN in addition to a P600. This suggests that not only proficiency, 
but also the type of exposure, influences the convergence of L2 learners toward native-like patterns. 
The advantage of using artificial languages is that experimenters have more control over the learning 
conditions of the participants. The drawbacks are that (a) it is a less “organic” setting, and (b), there 
are no native speakers to compare the participants to.
Using natural languages is trickier, because experimenters must control for AoA and proficiency 
during the recruitment phase. This was elegantly done by Rossi et al. (2006), who tested early (before 
age 10) and late learners (after age 10)5 of L2 German (L1 Italian), and Italian (L1 German). They 
recruited participants at high and low levels of L2 proficiency in each group. The authors used com-
parable sets of stimuli both in German and Italian, containing syntactic category violations, agreement 
errors, or a combination of the two. In both languages, high proficiency L2 learners displayed an 
ELAN-P600 complex for syntactic category violations (and a smaller similar complex for the low 
proficiency group), and a LAN-P600 complex for agreement errors (vs. a small P600 for the low 
proficiency participants). Results were thus (a) consistent with L1 typical responses for the highly 
proficient participants, and (b) either quantitatively smaller or qualitatively different for the less pro-
ficient groups. To our knowledge, this was the first study showing that late learners could indeed 
show typical native-like electrophysiological responses to morpho-syntactic errors. Altogether, these 
studies suggest that the LAN component could be a marker of proficiency rather than AoA, as it is 
completely absent from the lower proficiency groups’ responses.
Later studies seem to confirm these interpretations. Bowden et al. (2013) recruited participants 
with adulthood experience in L2 Spanish (L1 English). They had a “low Spanish” group who had 
classroom experience for 2–4 semesters, and an “advanced Spanish” group that had more exten-
sive classroom experience and immersion experience. They used lexical semantic and word-order 
manipulations. In the former conditions, all participants exhibited N400 effects, which was also 
evidenced in a control group of L1 Spanish speakers). The word-order violation elicited a LAN-
P600 response in both L1 controls and advanced Spanish learners, again supporting the convergence 
hypothesis. Interestingly, the low Spanish participants elicited a frontal positivity that started early 
and lingered until 900–100ms. This suggests that lower proficiency L2 learners may rely on qualita-
tively different mechanisms to process syntactic aspects during comprehension.
Overall, the convergence hypothesis has received convincing empirical support from studies 
that controlled for AoA and showed that late learners could indeed elicit similar ERP responses 
compared to native speakers. Although methodologically sound, the convergence hypothesis, just 
like the studies supporting the CPH did before, tends to overlook two important aspects related to 
individuals: L1 controls are not a monolithic group, and in all participants, other factors may also be 
confounded with proficiency. In particular, the type and length of exposure to the target language is 
often used to select proficiency groups (e.g., in Bowden et al.’s (2003) study), and therefore also may 
act as possible confounds. Generally, the convergence hypothesis would benefit from a closer inspec-
tion of interindividual variability in order to establish the relative importance of factors such as AoA, 
proficiency, but also exposure and other cognitive abilities, in explaining successful L2 learning.
Moving Away from “Ultimate L1 Attainment”: Back to Individuals
Proficiency seems to play a role even in native monolinguals’ language processing. Pakulak and 
Neville (2011) recruited 72 native English speakers, and used an ERP paradigm containing syntactic 
category violations in both English and Jabberwocky sentences.6 The authors split participants into 
low and high proficiency groups based on their performance on a TOAL-3 offline evaluation. Their 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
254
findings suggest that L1-speakers’ proficiency correlates with the magnitude of both anterior nega-
tivities and late positivity in response to the syntactic category violations (see White et al., 2006, for 
similar findings).
A deeper investigation of interindividual differences in both native and L2 speakers came 
from Osterhout’s and Tanner’s research teams. In a number agreement processing study focusing 
on interindividual variability in German L2-learners, Tanner et al. (2013) observed that individ-
uals varied along a continuum from an N400 to a P600 profile, and that only the P600 increased 
as participants became better able to detect anomalies. Later, Tanner et al. (2014) observed that 
proficiency (with self-ratings and pencil-and-paper assessments) predicted the overall response 
magnitude (reflected by a larger N400 or a larger P600), rather than a specific ERP component, 
whereas early AoA and motivation to speak like a native speaker were associated with a P600-
dominant response. As individual differences along an N400–P600 continuum are also observed 
in L1-speakers (Osterhout, 1997; Osterhout et al., 2004; Tanner & Van Hell, 2014), variation in 
response dominance may be a characteristic of sentence processing in general, reflecting individual 
tendencies to rely on one processing stream over the other, e.g., memory-based heuristics (N400 
dominance) versus procedural or combinatorial information (P600 dominance). In sum, a biphasic 
LAN-P600 should not be considered as the gold standard for L1 attainment (see also Freunberger 
et al., 2022).
Overall, these findings suggest that neurolinguistic research should consider interindividual vari-
ability in L1 speakers instead of referring to “ultimate L1 attainment” (Hartshorne et al., 2018). As 
the convergence hypothesis predicts that at very high proficiency, L2 speakers’ responses to syntactic 
violations would be indistinguishable from those of native speakers, whatever this profile may be, it 
is important to consider interindividual variability in L2 as well as in L1 speakers.
Innovations, Current Trends, and Future Directions
In this section, we will focus on a few studies that went a step further in examining the contributions 
of age and proficiency in L2 neurocognition. Later, we provide some pointers for possible future 
research in the field.
On the Relative Importance of Age of Acquisition and Proficiency in L2 Processing
In a meta-analysis performed over group-level data, Caffarra et al. (2015) performed logistic regres-
sion analyses over L2 processing studies to determine the weight of various predictors (AoA, pro-
ficiency, L1–L2 similarity, and immersion) in accounting for the presence or absence of sentence 
processing-related components (N400, LAN, P600). They showed that proficiency was a reliable 
predictor for the presence of a P600 response to syntactic violations, while immersion predicted 
the presence of a LAN effect. In this context, AoA did not seem to have any effect over any of the 
components. However, Caffarra et al. (2015) could not solve the confound problem, as it was already 
present in the studies they included in their analysis.
Nichols and Joanisse (2019) examined the joint contribution of AoA and proficiency in French 
L2 speakers (L1 English), who learned French relatively early (at about seven years old on average). 
They used a syntactic violation condition (similar between French and English, allowing for transfer 
effects), and a gender agreement error condition (dissimilar between those languages, thus preventing 
transfer effects). They analyzed the results using linear mixed-effect models and added proficiency 
and AoA in a stepwise manner in order to obtain the optimal model. They observed that proficiency, 
not AoA, predicted the LAN amplitude in response to syntactic violations that are based on similar 
rules in French and English, whereas AoA was a better predictor of ERP responses to agreement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
255
errors. In order to perform this type of study with late learners, however, one might, once again, be 
facing the issue of correlated variables, as later AoAs are often associated with lower proficiency.
Fromont, Royle, & Steinhauer (2020) ran into precisely this issue in an ERP study addressing 
individual variability among native French speakers and late learners of L2 French (L1 English) 
when processing syntactic category violations, lexical-semantic anomalies, and combined anom-
alies in French sentences. First, they performed a group analysis between L1 and L2 speakers. As 
the CPH would have predicted, they observed that native speakers elicited a biphasic N400–P600 
in response to ungrammatical sentences, whereas L2 learners only elicited an N400. However, 
individual response patterns showed variation in both L1 and L2 speakers, as individuals in both 
groups displayed both patterns of responses. Because the predicting variables, such as AoA, profi-
ciency (score at the online acceptability task), and daily exposure were all correlated, they adapted a 
machine learning algorithm (random forests) that, contrary to other common statistical analyses tools, 
handles multicollinearity, in order to assess the relative importance of these predictors. This approach 
revealed that language exposure and proficiency were the most reliable predictors in explaining ERP 
responses, with biphasic responses to ungrammatical sentences becoming larger as daily exposure to 
French and proficiency increased, as predicted by the convergence hypothesis. The AoA effect that 
was seemingly apparent in the group analyses completely disappeared, as this predictor was the least 
explanatory of all. Overall, then the results of this study, which uniquely addressed the confound 
between AoA and proficiency, provided evidence consistent with the convergence hypothesis rather 
than the CPH.
Future Directions: Grouping Must Be Meaningful
In the most recent years, neurocognitive research on L2 processing has gradually been moving 
away from group comparisons in order to explore interindividual variability. This approach is 
proving useful to refine or complement existing theories of L2 learning. However, as the use 
of (especially statistical) tools to explore individual variability are relatively new to the field 
of neurolinguistics, we may observe (ironically) a certain variability in the results yielded, 
depending on the approach used and the measures employed to express individual factors such as 
proficiency, motivation, or even exposure. For example, while Fromont, Royle, and Steinhauer 
(2020) did observe language experience and working memory effects even in native speakers, 
Tanner (2019), using a different approach, did not report any such effect. One challenge for the 
future of neurolinguistics research, in particular to examining age and proficiency effects in L2 
neurocognition, would be to gather more hypothesis-driven (rather than exploratory) evidence 
using consistent tools and parameters to assess individual variation, leading to a “grouping” of 
those individuals into profiles based on this empirical evidence.
Notes
1	 One striking example is that of “attriters,” individuals that “lose” certain aspects of their L1 due to a lack of 
use and exposure (see Kasparian et al, 2017, for an example in the morphosyntactic domain).
2	 This also explains why we contrast the terms “L2 learning” to “L1 acquisition.”
3	 In these studies, individual variability with regards to when puberty occurs and its domain-general cognitive 
effects are usually disregarded [Author Note].
4	 Note that the studies eliciting ELANs have since been shown to present very problematic experimental 
designs (Steinhauer & Drury, 2012), which has been backed by empirical evidence suggesting that it is an 
artefact (Fromont, Steinhauer, & Royle, 2020).
5	 For the purpose of the argument, we appreciate the intent of balancing the different groups; but we also warn 
the reader against the seemingly arbitrary choice of 10 year old as a cut-off for early vs. late AoA.
6	 A Jabberwocky sentence is a sentence which uses English syntax but contains nonsense words, rendering it 
semantically meaningless. Its name derives from the famous Lewis Caroll poem (1871).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
256
Further Readings
This article presents a compelling evaluation of statistical methods to deal with multicollinearity in linguistic data.
Tomaschek, F., Hendrix, P., Baayen, R.H. (2018). Strategies for addressing collinearity in multivariate linguistic 
data, Journal of Phonetics, 71, 249–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2018.09.004
This article provides a detailed introduction to get started with random forests.
Strobl, C., Malley, J., & Tutz, G. (2009). An introduction to recursive partitioning: Rationale, application, and 
characteristics of classification and regression trees, bagging, and random forests. Psychological Methods, 
14(4), 323–348. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016973
Acknowledgments
Many of the ideas presented in this chapter were discussed with the research teams led by Phaedra Royle, PhD 
(Université de Montréal) and Karsten Steinhauer, PhD (McGill University).
References
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language 
syntactic system. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Biondo, N., Molinaro, N., & Mancini, S. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language grammatical 
system: The role of grammar-related and speaker-related factors. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), 
The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Birdsong, D. (2006). Age and second language acquisition and processing: A selective overview. Language 
Learning, 56(s1), 9–49. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2006.00353.x
Bowden, H. W., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M. T. (2013). Native-like brain processing of syntax can 
be attained by university foreign language learners. Neuropsychologia, 51(13), 2492–2511. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2013.09.004
Burstall, C., Jamieson, M., Cohen, S. & Hargreaves, M. (1974). Primary French in the Balance, Slough: NFER.
Bylund, E., Hyltenstam, K., & Abrahamsson, N. (2021). Age of acquisition—not bilingualism—is the pri-
mary determinant of less than nativelike L2 ultimate attainment. Bilingualism, 24(1), 18–30. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728920000188
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: an empirical review. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
Chen, T., & Hartshorne, J.K. (2021). More evidence from over 1.1 million subjects that the critical period 
for syntax closes in late adolescence. Cognition, 214, Article 104706. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2021.104706
Chomsky, N. (1968). Language and Mind. Harcourt, Brace & World.
Clahsen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied Psycholinguistcs, 27, 
3–42. https://doi.org/10.1017.S0142716406060024
DeKeyser, R. (2010). The robustness of critical period effects in second language acquisition. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, 22(4), 499–533. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100004022
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Federmeier, K.D. (2021). Connecting and considering: Electrophysiology provides insights into comprehension. 
Psychophysiology, 59(1), Article e13940. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13940
Flege, J.E. (2019). A non-critical period for second-language learning, In A. M. Nyvad, M. Hejná, A. Højen, A. 
B. Jespersen & M. H. Sørensen (Eds.), A sound approach to language matters—in honor of Ocke-Schwen 
Bohn (pp. 501–541). Open access e-book at Aurhus University Library.
Freunberger, D., Bylund, E., & Abrahamsson, N. (2022). Is it time to reconsider the “gold standard” for 
nativelikeness in erp studies on grammatical processing in a second language? A critical assessment based 
on qualitative individual differences. Applied Linguistics, 43(3), 433–452. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/
amab058
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
257
Friederici, A.D. (2002). Towards a neural basis of auditory sentence processing. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 
6(2), 78–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(00)01839-8
Fromont, L.A., Steinhauer, K., Royle, P. (2020a). Verbing nouns and nouning verbs: ERP evidence against 
“syntax-first” approaches to sentence processing. PLoS ONE, 15(3): e0229169. https://doi.org/10.1371/jour
nal.pone.0229169
Fromont, L.A., Royle, P., & Steinhauer, K. (2020). Growing Random Forests reveals that exposure and profi-
ciency best account for individual variability in L2 (and L1) brain potentials for syntax and semantics. Brain 
& Language, 204, Article 104770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104770
Hahne, A., & Friederici, A.D. (2001). Processing a second language: Late learners’ comprehension mechanisms 
as revealed by event-related brain potentials. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 4(02). https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728901000232
Hartshorne, J.K., Tenenbaum, J.B., & Pinker, S. (2018). A critical period for second language acquisi-
tion: Evidence from 2/3 million English speakers. Cognition, 177, 263–277. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cognition.2018.04.007
Hernandez, A., Li, P., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). The emergence of competing modules in bilingualism. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 9(5), 220–225. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.03.003
Hyltenstam, K., & Abrahamsson, N. (2003). Maturational constraints in SLA. In C.J. Doughty & M.H. Long 
(Eds.), The handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 539–588). Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Johnson, J.S., & Newport, E.L. (1989). Critical period effects in second language learning: the influence of mat-
urational state on the acquisition of English as a second language. Cognitive Psychology, 21, 60–99. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0010-0285(89)90003-0
Kasparian, K., Vespignani, F., & Steinhauer, K. (2017). First language attrition induces changes in online mor-
phosyntactic processing and re-analysis: An ERP study of number agreement in complex Italian sentences. 
Cognitive Science, 41, 1760–1803. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12450
Klein-Braley, C., & Ulrich R. (1984). A survey of research on the C-Test1. Language Testing, 1(2),134–146. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/026553228400100202
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component 
of the event related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1), 621–647. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.131123
Laube, C., Van den Bos, W., & Fandakova,Y. (2020). The relationship between pubertal hormones and brain plas-
ticity: Implications for cognitive training in adolescence. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 42, Article 
100753. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2020.100753
Leclercq, P., Edmonds, A., & Hilton, H. (2014). Measuring L2 Proficiency: Perspectives from SLA. 
Clevedon: Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Lenneberg, E. (1967). Biological foundations of language. Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1080/21548
331.1967.11707799
Lu, J., Jones, A., & Morgan, G. (2016). The impact of input quality on early sign development in native and 
non-native language learners. Journal of Child Language, 43(3), 537–552. https://doi.org/10.1017/S03050
00915000835
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Meulman, N., Wieling, M., Sprenger, S. A., Stowe, L.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Age effects in L2 grammar 
processing as revealed by ERPs and how (not) to study them. PloS ONE, 10(12), Article e0143328. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0143328
Meyer, D.E., & Schvaneveldt, R.W. (1971). Facilitation in recognizing pairs of words: Evidence of a dependence 
between retrieval operations. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 90(2), 227–234. https://doi.org/10.1037/
h0031564
Molinaro N., Barber H.A., Caffarra S., & Carreiras M. (2015). On the left anterior negativity (LAN): The case 
of morphosyntactic agreement: A reply to Tanner et al. Cortex, 66, 156–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2014.06.009
Mueller, J.L. (2005). Electrophysiological correlates of second language processing. Second Language Research, 
21(2), 152–174. https://doi.org/10.1191/0267658305sr256oa
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). Explicit and implicit second language 
training differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 24(4), 933–947. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00119
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Lauren A. Fromont
258
Myers, E., & Fuhrmeister, P. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language phonological system. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Newport, E.L., Bavelier, D., & Neville, H.J. (2001). Perspectives on a critical period for language acquisition. 
In E. Dupoux (Ed.), Language, brain, and cognitive development (pp. 481–502). MIT Press. https://doi.org/
10.1067/mhn.2001.115372
Ojima, S., Nakata, H., & Kakigi, R. (2005). An ERP study of second language learning after childhood: Effects 
of proficiency. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(8), 1212–1228. https://doi.org/10.1162/089892905
5002436
Osterhout, L. (1997). On the brain response to syntactic anomalies: Manipulations of word position and word class 
reveal individual differences. Brain and Language, 59(3), 494–522. https://doi.org/10.1006/brln.1997.1793
Nichols, E.S., & Joanisse, M.F. (2019). Individual differences predict ERP signatures of second language 
learning of novel grammatical rules. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(1), 78–92. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728917000566
Pakulak, E., & Neville, H.J. (2011). Maturational constraints on the recruitment of early processes for syntactic 
processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(10), 2752–2765. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21586.
Maturational
Pallier, C., Dehaene, S., Poline, J.B., LeBihan, D., Argenti, A.M., Dupoux, E., & Mehler, J. (2003) Brain imaging 
of language plasticity in adopted adults: Can a second language replace the first? Cerebral Cortex, 13(2), 
155–61. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/13.2.155
Park, H.I., Solon, M., Dehghan-Chaleshtori, M., & Ghanbar, H. (2022), Proficiency reporting practices in 
research on second language acquisition: Have we made any progress? Language Learning, 72, 198–236. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12475
Penfield, W., & Roberts, L. (1959). Speech and Brain Mechanisms. Princeton University Press.
Rossi, S., Gugler, M.F., Friederici, A.D., & Hahne, A. (2006). The impact of proficiency on syntactic second-
language processing of German and Italian: evidence from event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 18(12), 2030–2048. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.12.2030
Row, M.L., & Snow, E.C. (2020). Analyzing input quality along three dimensions: Interactive, linguistic, and 
conceptual. Journal of Child Language, 47(1), 5–21. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000919000655
Singleton, D., & Lesniewska, J. (2021). The critical period hypothesis for L2 acquisition: An unfalsifiable embar-
rassment? Languages, 6(3), Article 149. https://doi.org/10.3390/languages6030149
Sprouse, J., & Almeida, D. (2017). Design sensitivity and statistical power in acceptability judgment experiments. 
Glossa: A journal of general linguistics, 2(1), Article 14. https://doi.org/10.5334/gjgl.236
Steinhauer, K. (2014). Event-related potentials (ERPs) in second language research: a brief introduction to the 
technique, a selected review, and an invitation to reconsider critical periods in L2. Applied Linguistics, 35(4), 
393–417. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amu028
Steinhauer, K., White, E.J., & Drury, J.E. (2009). Temporal dynamics of late second language acquisi-
tion: Evidence from event-related brain potentials. Second Language Research, 25(1), 13–41. https://doi.org/
10.1177/0267658308098995
Strobl, C., Malley, J., & Tutz, G. (2009). An introduction to recursive partitioning: Rationale, application, and 
characteristics of classification and regression trees, bagging, and random forests. Psychological Methods, 
14(4), 323–348. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016973
Swaab, T., Ledoux, K., Camblin, C.C., & Boudewyn, M. (2012). Language-related ERP components. In S.J. 
Luck & E.S. Kappenman (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of event-related potential components (pp. 397–440). 
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195374148.013.0197
Tanner, D. (2015). On the left anterior negativity (LAN) in electrophysiological studies of morphosyntactic 
agreement: A commentary on “grammatical agreement processing in reading: ERP findings and future 
directions” by Molinaro et al., 2014, Cortex, 66, 149–55. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.04.007
Tanner, D. (2019). Robust neurocognitive individual differences in grammatical agreement processing: a latent 
variable approach. Cortex, 111, 210–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.10.011
Tanner, D., Inoue, K., & Osterhout, L. (2014). Brain-based individual differences in online L2 grammatical com-
prehension. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17(2), 277–293. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
3000370
Tanner, D., McLaughlin, J., Herschensohn, J., & Osterhout, L. (2013). Individual differences reveal stages of L2 
grammatical acquisition: ERP evidence. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(2), 367–382. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728912000302
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J.G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 56(1), 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Age and Proficiency in Second Language Neurocognition
259
Tokowicz, N., & Tkacikova, V. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language lexico-semantic 
system. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Tomaschek, F., Hendrix, P., & Baayen, R.H. (2018). Strategies for addressing collinearity in multivariate lin-
guistic data, Journal of Phonetics, 71, 249–267. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2018.09.004
Ullman, M.T. (2001). A neurocognitive perspective on language: The declarative/procedural model. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 2(10), 717–726. https://doi.org/10.1038/35094573
Ullman, M.T. (2004). Contributions of memory circuits to language: The declarative/procedural model. 
Cognition, 92(1–2), 231–270. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2003.10.008
Ullman, M.T. (2005). A cognitive neuroscience perspective on second language acquisition: The declarative/
procedural model. In C. Sanz (Ed.), Mind and context in adult second language acquisition: Methods, theory 
and practice (141–178). Georgetown University Press.
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically-motivated theory of first and 
second language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition 
(3rd ed., pp. 128–161). Routledge.
Van der Slik, F., Schepens, J., Bongaerts, T., & Van Hout, R. (2022). Critical period claim revisited: Reanalysis 
of Hartshorne, Tenenbaum, and Pinker (2018) suggests steady decline and learner-type differences. Language 
Learning, 72, 87–112. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12470
Vanhove, J. (2013). The critical period hypothesis in second language acquisition: A statistical critique and a 
reanalysis. PLoS ONE, 8(7), Article e102922. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0069172
Weber-Fox, C.M., & Neville, H.J. (1996). Maturational constraints on functional specializations for language 
processing: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 8(3), 
231–256. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1996.8.3.231
White, E., Genesee, F., White, L., King, E., & Steinhauer, K. (2006). Factors contributing to native-like pro-
cessing of a late-acquired second language: Evidence from event-related brain potentials [Poster presenta-
tion]. Boston University Conference on Language Development, Boston, MA.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

260
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-24
19
DE-GENERACY AS  
AN ORGANIZING PRINCIPLE 
OF BILINGUAL LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING
Evidence from Brain and Behavior
Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
Introduction
Traditionally, research on bilingual language processing characterizes the ways that bilingual speakers 
process language differently from monolinguals, particularly in the second language (L2). In the adult 
L2 processing literature, for example, behavioral and brain indices are typically evaluated against 
native-like benchmarks with deviations from some target response (e.g., the presence/absence of the 
LAN-P600 effect for grammatical gender violations) interpreted as reflecting constraints associated 
with incomplete acquisition or suboptimal performance (Batterink & Neville, 2013). The dominant 
assumption in this research is that of an ideal and uniform speaker, where people’s idiosyncrasies 
are discarded as noise. However, new evidence points to substantial variability in language use, pro-
cessing, and experience even among monolingual speakers (Beatty-Martínez, Bruni et al., 2020; Bice 
& Kroll, 2019; Pakulak & Neville, 2010). Language experience is complex, and is a compelling, 
socially relevant example of how people adapt to the communicative demands of their environment. 
This calls for more ecologically nuanced characterizations of variation in natural language use and 
in participant samples, which considers individual differences in language and cognitive abilities, as 
well as environmental influences on how people actively learn and use their language(s) (for recent 
proposals, see Navarro-Torres et al., 2021; Titone & Tiv, 2022).
Here, we add to this conversation by illustrating how variability in language use, processing, 
and experience reveals fundamental insights into the evolutionary and ecological forces that shape 
dynamic and adaptive changes in both language and control networks. To do so, we highlight the 
contributions of three distinct sources of variability and describe how the distributed property of de-
generacy applied in systems biology (Edelman & Gally, 2001; Whitacre, 2010) can help organize the 
array of adaptations to linguistic and cognitive demands that can occur under different communicative 
constraints. Here, we use de-generacy with a hyphen as suggested by Mason (2015) and others to dis-
tinguish the scientific term from the historical baggage associated with degeneration.1 De-generacy in 
complex systems refers to the way that different elements (e.g., linguistic forms, cognitive processes, 
or brain regions) are functionally interchangeable under certain conditions yet can perform different 
functions under other conditions. Having variable pathways is an advantageous evolutionary strategy 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
261
not only for assuring a system’s robustness to perturbation, but also for increasing its adaptability to 
changing environments (Whitacre & Bender, 2010).
While we focus on language and bilingualism, the concept of de-generacy has been applied to a 
wide range of biological and cognitive phenomena, including the genetic code (e.g., the coding of an 
amino acid may be specified by more than one codon; González et al., 2019) and the immune system 
(e.g., different antibodies may bind to the same antigen; Eisen, 2001). In regard to the human brain, 
de-generacy contributes to the robustness of neural networks through distributed actions whereby 
complex cognitive processes can be supported by distinct components (Friston & Price, 2003; Price 
& Friston, 2002). One implication is that idiosyncratic patterns of neural activation (e.g., hemispheric 
lateralization for language comprehension; Gurunandan et al., 2020) might not reflect random noise, 
but de-generacy across people (Green et al., 2006; Noppeney et al., 2004).
In terms of language use, de-generacy means a particular discourse function can be fulfilled by 
different constructions (Mason et al., 2015; Winter, 2014). For example, quick and fast can both be 
used to express motion with great speed. These two linguistic forms are functionally de-generate 
because they show how alternative forms can have similar communicative functions. However, 
similarity does not imply equivalence in that there are contexts where they might convey different 
meanings (Goldberg, 2019). Accordingly, “a quick shower” and “a fast car” are preferred over “a 
fast shower” and “a quick car” because quick and fast respectively convey speed with an endpoint 
and without one. Thus, de-generacy implies variation without compromised function. However, in 
some cases (see Figure 19.1), it can also lead to diversity that gives rise to novelty through offering 
different legitimate outputs that align with different constraints (Mason et al., 2015). In this way, 
de-generacy does not entail redundancy in that the different variants are context-dependent and thus 
conditionally interchangeable.
In multilingual people and contexts, de-generacy can occur in many ways. However, it is ideally  
exemplified through codeswitching, whereby bilinguals use their languages opportunistically, which  
can enhance communicative precision (Feldman et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2021). For example, in a  
study on opportunistic speech planning by Beatty-Martínez, Navarro-Torres, and Dussias (2020), 
codeswitching bilinguals showed higher rates of codeswitching from Spanish into English when dis-
ambiguating between two referents. To illustrate, when referring to duplicate objects such as the two  
cars in Figure 19.2, bilinguals were more likely to use English or codeswitched forms (e.g., “the  
black car” and/or “el black car” respectively), over Spanish alternatives (e.g., “el carro negro”).  
The interpretation is that people’s choices between functionally equivalent, yet structurally distinct,  
alternatives depend on what is most optimal for a given situation (i.e., prenominal modification to  
disambiguate between competing referents more efficiently). In this way, variation in language use  
is a hallmark of de-generacy, exhibiting adaptability to novel or changing demands and in so doing,  
contributing to the robustness of the language system.
Figure 19.1  Schematic Representation of Redundant (One-to-one) and De-generate (Many-to-one) Form-
function Relationships.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
262
In what follows, we illustrate de-generacy using three different sources of variation. Specifically,  
section “De-generacy in language use” addresses de-generacy in the context of form-function asym-
metries in language use (Sankoff, 1988). Indeed, people’s choices among different forms (e.g., a  
Spanish–English bilingual producing “el black car” over “el carro negro” to identify a target referent) 
are not random but functionally de-generate, as evidenced by conditional and probabilistic  
constraints. Thus, de-generacy can help us understand the (extra)linguistic conditioning of parallel  
but differently variable forms and how they relate to differential processing patterns.
Section “De-generacy in language processing” capitalizes on the notion that people differ in how 
they deploy cognitive and linguistic resources during language processing. An important implica-
tion that follows is that complex processes can be accomplished in different ways (i.e., by engaging 
different neurophysiological components or brain regions, or by using different processing strategies) 
while achieving similar outcomes (Green et al., 2006; Kroll et al., 2021). For example, figurative 
interpretations of idioms can be accessed through a direct-retrieval and/or compositional processing 
route (Senaldi et al., 2022). By the same token, cognitive outcomes can be achieved through differ-
ential coordination of control processes (Morales et al., 2013). Thus, de-generacy can provide an 
insightful view of individual differences in language processing.
Section “De-generacy in language experience” addresses de-generacy in phenotypic variation in 
language experience (i.e., the behavioral ecology of language use). Interactional contexts differ in 
how they constrain which and how language(s) can be used (Gullifer & Titone, 2020; Kroll et al., 
2018). This variation in language experience relates to distinct behavioral phenotypes (i.e., identi-
fiable characteristics that differentiate between populations of speakers; Beatty-Martínez & Titone, 
2021). Accordingly, de-generacy at a contextual level is exemplified by recent findings that transcend 
a binary approach (e.g., monolinguals vs. bilinguals), which showcase the wide variety of bilingual 
phenotypes that lead to complex yet systematic patterns of performance across distinct contexts of 
language use. Altogether, the examples of de-generacy provided here call into question traditional 
benchmarks of native-like performance and offer new insights that unravel variability in bilingual 
language use, processing, and experience.
De-generacy in Language Use
Language use is inherently variable. Increasingly sophisticated tools for data collection and statistical 
modeling have uncovered richer patterns of variability in natural language use than previously under-
stood. Increasing evidence shows that people are sensitive to, and can adapt to, the statistical regu-
larities in their language experience with important implications for representation and processing 
(Beatty-Martínez & Dussias, 2018; Dell & Chang, 2014; MacDonald, 2013).
Figure 19.2  De-generacy Exemplified through Variation in Language Use.
Note: Beatty-Martínez, Navarro-Torres, and Dussias (2020) show how codeswitching bilinguals choose between unilingual 
and codeswitched forms to capitalize on what is most optimal in a given context (e.g., in terms of greater discriminatory 
efficiency).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
263
One impetus for shifting to the psycholinguistic analysis of natural language variation is the dis-
covery of learning and processing biases (Beatty-Martínez et al., 2018; MacDonald, 2013). Consider 
the comprehension of passive and active constructions in English. Whereas previous research 
suggested that passives are inherently more difficult than actives (Ferreira, 2003), recent work has 
shown that this difficulty is modulated by information structure constraints as observed in natural-
istic usage (Kaiser & Trueswell, 2004). Corpus data suggests asymmetrical information structure 
constraints on actives and passives, such that passive constructions are felicitous only when they 
express given-before-new information structure (Birner & Ward, 1998). Consequently, one relevant 
factor in understanding the relationship between word order and processing difficulty is whether the 
experimental stimuli reflect naturalistic usage of information structure constraints.
López-Beltrán et al. (2021) compared the processing of active and passive sentences in monolin-
gual and L2 speakers using eye-tracking. Specifically, active and passive sentences were embedded 
in a preceding context that varied by information structure (given–new or new–given). A simple 
main effects analysis found that, for both monolingual and L2 speakers, actives were read faster than 
passives, and sentences with a given–new information structure were read faster than those with 
new–given patterns. Initially, it would be tempting to interpret these findings as typical frequency 
effects, where more frequent constructions (i.e., actives and given–new ordering of information) led 
to faster reading times. However, hypothesized interactions between word order and information 
structure patterns revealed a more nuanced picture. In line with previous corpus studies, an inter-
action between word order and information structure emerged whereby the cost for passives was rela-
tively attenuated in given–new contexts (1) compared to new–given contexts (2). Further, whereas 
past research argued that bilingual speakers often fail to acquire information structural constraints 
during L2 processing (Bel et al., 2016), the study found that monolingual and L2 speakers were 
equally sensitive to information structure in the comprehension of actives and passives. Critically, 
these findings would have been missed had the authors not accounted for how functionally equiva-
lent alternatives may produce different processing outcomes under different information structure 
constraints (i.e., de-generacy).
(1)    The mayor’s present term of office expires Jan. 1.
       HeGIVEN will be succeeded by Ivan Allen Jr.NEW
(2)    Ivan Allen Jr. will take office Jan. 1.
       The mayorNEW will be succeeded by himGIVEN
The second illustration of de-generacy in language use involves grammatical gender, a nominal clas-
sification system typically specified through agreement with other elements of speech. Eye-tracking 
studies have shown that monolingual children and adults make use of gender cues to facilitate lan-
guage processing (Lew Williams & Fernald, 2007). Similarly, event-related potential (ERP) studies 
have reported that native speakers are sensitive to grammatical gender violations, as evidenced by a 
biphasic LAN-P600 pattern (Caffarra & Barber, 2015). Overall, the LAN has been argued to reflect 
detection of a morphosyntactic expectancy violation, while the P600 has been interpreted as an index 
of reanalysis and structural integration (Molinaro et al., 2011). Although previous work established 
the LAN-P600 response as an index of native-like processing, this biphasic pattern is not consistent 
across studies, even those of monolinguals (Caffarra et al., 2019; Molinaro et al., 2015). One explan-
ation proposed is that biphasic responses may be, in part, a spurious artifact of averaging across 
individuals who show predominantly negative (LAN/N400) or positive (P600/LPC) ERP responses 
(Tanner & Van Hell, 2014; cf., Caffarra et al., 2019). We return to the role of individual differences 
in language processing in section “De-generacy in language processing,” but first we consider 
how grammatical gender categories may differ in terms of cue validity and schematicity and the 
implications thereof for processing and representation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
264
Gendered languages differ in the number of categories they recognize and in the factors that 
influence gender assignment criteria. In Spanish, for example, nouns are classified into masculine or 
feminine categories based on their phonological shape (Eddington, 2002; Trawick & Bero, 2021). 
This relationship in turn creates a distributional asymmetry in schematicity between the two genders 
categories (see Beatty-Martínez & Dussias, 2019, for discussion on the differential behavior of mas-
culine and feminine gender in Spanish). In short, the feminine gender category is schematically 
constrained, allowing only a small number of phonological forms. Conversely, the masculine gender 
category is schematically more open, allowing all other forms, including those of most loanwords 
and neologisms. This difference in category schematicity additionally leads to a difference in the 
weighting of gender cues, where feminine cues ostensibly exclude masculine referents but not vice 
versa (Eddington & Hualde, 2008).
In an ERP study, Beatty-Martínez, Bruni et al. (2020) investigated the implications of the differ-
ential behavior between masculine and feminine gender for the processing of grammatical gender 
violations in L1 Spanish speakers. When collapsed across gender categories, congruency effects 
showed the classical LAN-P600 biphasic pattern. Notwithstanding, splitting the data by noun gender 
showed that individuals’ ERP response dominance (LAN or P600) systematically differed across 
the two genders: individuals who showed a LAN-dominant response to masculine-noun violations 
were more likely to show a P600 effect in response to feminine-noun violations. One interpretation 
is that the LAN indexes morpheme-based expectations, where feminine gender cues (i.e., encoded 
in determiners, e.g., la, “theF”) incur greater prediction costs compared to masculine cues (e.g., el 
“theM”). In contrast, the P600 indexes category exemplar strength, with categories of higher coher-
ence (here, the feminine gender category), yielding more robust responses to gender mismatches (see 
Bambini et al., 2021 for converging evidence).
These examples illustrate how functionally de-generate alternatives contribute to people’s choices 
among forms serving generally similar discourse functions and elicit different patterns of neurophysio-
logical activity. In this way, applying the concept of de-generacy in language use opens new avenues 
for discovery into how parallel yet differently variable forms—within and across languages—can 
induce differential processing outcomes.
De-generacy in Language Processing
The previous section applied the concept of de-generacy (i.e., many-to-one mappings of form to 
function) within individuals to account for distributional asymmetries in language use, showing how 
people’s choices among different forms have consequences for representation and processing more 
generally. In this section, we focus on individual differences in language processing and show how 
de-generacy is found across people, allowing for different processing strategies to achieve similar 
outcomes.
Contrary to a native speaker model, increasing research shows that language learning and pro-
cessing is modulated by individual differences such as linguistic proficiency, age of acquisition, and 
cognitive control ability (Birdsong, 2018; see Fromont, this volume; Luque & Covey, this volume). 
Accumulating evidence suggests that grand mean analyses may not reflect a normative response 
across people but rather an aggregate of distinct phenotypes with different profiles and processing 
strategies (Tanner & Van Hell, 2014). Thus, one pitfall of main-effect practices such as those that 
uphold the monolingual vs. bilingual group comparisons is that they potentially mask de-generate 
behavior during language processing (i.e., alternative pathways engaged by different components or 
by using different strategies).
In the first illustration, we examine de-generacy in predictive processing. The typical approach 
to studying L2 predictive processing has been to focus on whether bilingual speakers generate and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
265
recover from predictions like monolingual speakers (e.g., Foucart et al., 2014; see Kaan, this volume). 
However, rather than framing this question as a binary issue that is contingent on the presence/
absence of prediction costs, one could instead focus on which cognitive processes support predic-
tion in comprehension and explore how their coordination is differentially modulated as a function 
of language experience. To this end, an ERP study by Zirnstein et al. (2018) examined the role of 
cognitive control and verbal fluency as mediators of readers’ susceptibility to prediction error costs 
during sentence processing. English monolinguals and L2-immersed Mandarin–English bilinguals 
read highly semantically constraining sentences with embedded target words that were either pre-
dictable or plausible but unexpected (e.g., “After their meal, they forgot to leave a tip/ten for the 
waitress”). For monolinguals and bilinguals alike, prediction errors (i.e., when unexpected words 
were encountered) resulted in a frontally distributed positivity modulated by individual differences 
in cognitive control, with better control relating to a reduced prediction error effect. However, for 
bilinguals, the relationship between prediction error costs and cognitive control skill was addition-
ally moderated by L1 fluency, though in the opposite direction. Bilinguals with better L1 regulation 
skill (i.e., higher L1 fluency performance in an L2-immersion context) produced greater prediction 
error costs in the L2, an effect that was attenuated by increasing control ability. This suggests that 
becoming adept at regulating the L1 in an L2-immersion context can influence the processes involved 
in generating predictions during L2 reading. Notably, there was no independent effect of L1 fluency 
ability, showing that the interaction between these processes was vital for effective signal extraction 
(see Navarro-Torres et al., 2021, for discussion). These findings illustrate how different groups of 
speakers can achieve the same outcome (i.e., a frontally distributed positivity) by engaging different 
cognitive resources. In this way, de-generacy provides an interpretive framework for understanding 
how language experience influences alternative strategies during language processing.
Our second example focuses on individual variability in reading speed. In studies examining nat-
ural reading, faster reading times may indicate in-depth and more efficient processing (Kaan et al., 
2015), but also “good-enough” processing that is shallow and/or disengaged (Karimi & Ferreira, 
2016). These alternative interpretations highlight the complexities of individual differences in reading 
speed, which may account for and predict variability in L2 processing more generally. In a recent 
study, Pulido (2021a) examined L1 English–L2 Spanish learners’ eye-movements as they read L2 
verb–noun collocations in which the verb is cross-linguistically incongruent (e.g., blanquear dinero 
“launder money” literally translates to “whiten money”). To account for variability in reading per-
formance, the study capitalized on measures of L2 collocational knowledge and chunking ability as 
an index of processing efficiency. The findings revealed an inverse U-shaped pattern of results (see 
Figure 19.3), where readers at both extremes of chunking ability exhibited faster reading times, albeit 
for underlyingly different reasons. While faster reading suggests shallower processing for bilinguals 
with the lowest chunking ability scores, it suggests faster integration and more efficient processing for 
those on the opposite end of the spectrum. These results thus exemplify de-generacy across people. 
The implication is that people may exploit language processing in different ways while still achieving 
similar outcomes.
As a third illustration, consider individual differences in the processing of codeswitched speech. 
Traditional psycholinguistic approaches to codeswitching have been primarily concerned with 
whether the processing of codeswitched speech is inherently effortful. However, switch costs are 
not consistently observed in the literature (Beatty-Martínez & Dussias, 2017; Blanco-Elorrieta & 
Pylkkänen, 2017), suggesting that, under particular circumstances, bilinguals may adopt different 
modes of language control in face of changing cognitive demands.
Beatty-Martínez et al. (2021) examined changes in pupil size during the comprehension of unilin-
gual and codeswitched speech. An individual difference analysis linking variability in pupil  
responses to attentional skill and bilinguals’ habits of language use unveiled a complex pattern  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
266
of results. Only bilinguals who reported a greater tendency to use each of their languages in separate 
communicative contexts (i.e., Spanish at home, English at school) and who had high attention  
ability, showed larger increases in pupil size during the comprehension of codeswitched speech.  
Additionally, the results exemplify de-generacy across two phenotypic subgroups for whom pupil  
size was unaffected by codeswitching. For bilinguals who reported using their languages in separate 
communicative contexts but had low attention ability, the absence of a codeswitching effect is  
indicative of a good-enough processing strategy with low levels of engagement. At the same time,  
bilinguals for whom codeswitching is common practice also processed unilingual and codeswitched  
speech similarly, regardless of attentional skill. In this case, the absence of a codeswitching effect  
on pupil size can be interpreted as evidence for the differential modulation of attentional resources,  
where bilinguals with increasing codeswitching experience were able to allocate their attentional  
resources more broadly during bilingual language processing. The implication through the lens of  
de-generacy is that codeswitching is not inherently costly, and that, overall, variability in bilingual  
language processing may reflect complex and dynamic interactions between individual abilities and  
the behavioral ecology of language use.
De-generacy in Language Experience
In the previous sections, we discussed how the concept of de-generacy accounts for how alternative 
routes (i.e., within people as exemplified through people’s choices among variant forms of language 
use or across people as exemplified by alternate neurocognitive strategies of processing) may reach 
similar ends. In this section, we discuss how de-generacy allows for people with different language 
experiences to adopt different modes of control in different contexts.
Recent work suggests that processing demands on language control vary based on concurrent task 
demands in the learning environment (Bogulski et al., 2019; Misra et al., 2012; Wu & Thierry, 2013). 
Perhaps one of the most dramatic examples of how contextual demands mediate processing trajec-
tories and outcomes relates to the consequences of regulating the L1. For instance, Pulido (2021b) 
Figure 19.3  De-generacy Exemplified Through Individual Differences in Language Processing.
Notes: Pulido (2021a) shows how both high- and low-efficient readers (i.e., people at the extremes of the chunking ability 
continuum) have faster reading times, but modulated through different processing strategies (i.e., fast integration in the 
former and lack of integration in the latter).
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
267
compared processing strategies of English learners of Spanish under different training conditions. 
Following familiarization, participants were presented with L2 target and distractor verbs (e.g., 
gastar-ordenar; “spend-order”) followed by a noun (e.g., bromas; “jokes”) and were instructed to 
select the most conventional collocate (e.g., gastar bromas). In the practice phase of a multiword 
selection paradigm, critical conditions differed depending on the need to suppress L1 information. 
For one group, non-target verbs were unrelated distractors (e.g., gastar–ordenar–bromas; “spend–
order–jokes”; target: gastar “spend”). In a second group, learners had to avoid choosing a distractor 
verb that was inadequate in the L2 but congruent in the L1 (e.g., gastar–jugar–bromas; “spend–
play–jokes”; target: gastar “spend”). Group comparisons showed similar behavioral outcomes during 
practice, but individual differences in ERPs revealed different processing strategies based on the need 
to suppress information from L1-congruent choices. Whereas learners in the unrelated group showed 
increased monitoring during target selection, learners in the L1-interference group showed an inhibi-
tory effect to L1-congruent distractors as indexed by differences in N400. Furthermore, individual 
responses indexing the degree of L1 inhibition predicted overall learning rates, demonstrating how 
engagement of cross-language regulation affects L2 learning outcomes. Overall, these results reveal 
how alternate neurocognitive pathways engaged during learning exhibit de-generacy by achieving 
dissimilar outcomes in divergent contexts.
Increasing evidence suggests that adaptive changes in language control processes stem beyond the 
immediate context of the experiment itself, and that individuals may adopt different control strategies 
as a function of bilinguals’ conversational practices within a community (Beatty-Martínez et al., 2021; 
Beatty-Martínez, Navarro-Torres, Dussias et al., 2020; Gullifer & Titone, 2020; Hartanto & Yang, 
2016). Elsewhere, we discussed the ways that distinct interactional contexts vary in the demands 
they impose on language control, leading to different paths of adaptive change (Beatty-Martínez & 
Titone, 2021; Green & Abutalebi, 2013; Kroll et al., 2021). Here we focus on L2-immersion contexts 
in which bilinguals experience a global change in the communicative demands of their language 
environment, revealing a decline in L1 accessibility with increasing L2 exposure (Baus et al., 2013; 
Botezatu et al., 2020; Linck et al., 2009). The claim in recent studies is that L2-immersion contexts 
introduce a stronger pressure for regulating the L1 to accommodate to changes in the relative support 
for each language. In this way, L2 immersion creates a natural context that increases reliance on 
proactive control so as to monitor the appropriateness of using each language (Beatty-Martínez, 
Navarro-Torres, Dussias et al., 2020; Navarro-Torres et al., 2019; Xie & Antolovic, 2021).
In a series of language training studies, Zhang and colleagues examined how language immersion  
context mediated the relation between language regulation ability and proactive control reliance.  
Mandarin-English bilinguals underwent short-term intensive language switching training in either  
the native language environment (Zhang et al., 2015) or while studying abroad in an L2-immersion  
context (Zhang et al., 2021). To explore effects of language switching training on proactive control 
reliance, participants performed a domain-general measure of cognitive control while their EEG  
was recorded before and after training. For L1-immersed bilinguals, language switching training  
led to an increase in proactive control as measured by larger N2 amplitudes at post-test, suggesting  
that language training may differentially affect the recruitment of cognitive control. Notably, L2- 
immersed bilinguals did not show any effects of training. Instead, the analysis of naming latencies  
in the language switching task showed that L2-immersed bilinguals inhibited the L1 to a greater  
extent than those immersed in the native language, a result that is consistent with prior studies on the  
consequences of L2 immersion. L2-immersed bilinguals also showed a stronger relationship between  
language switching and cognitive control measures such that greater reliance on proactive control  
predicted faster naming latencies in both languages. Critically, these proactive effects were observed  
at pre-test, suggesting that they are the consequence of L2 immersion itself (see Beatty-Martínez,  
Navarro-Torres, Dussias et al., 2020 for converging evidence). Thus, these findings exemplify  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
268
de-generacy in language experience by demonstrating how different paths (i.e., short-term language  
switching training and L2 immersion) are associated with greater reliance on proactive components  
of control (see Figure 19.4).
Similar associations have been observed in language environments characterized by greater 
diversity in language use across communicative contexts. As in L2-immersion contexts, contexts 
that involve greater contextual diversity in language use, and hence higher language-related uncer-
tainty (i.e., entropy; Gullifer & Titone, 2020), require bilinguals to closely monitor and regulate 
their languages to best suit the communicative demands of a given situation. There is increasing evi-
dence that high-entropy contexts may lead to greater reliance on proactive control processes (Chan 
et al., 2020; Gullifer & Titone, 2021; Singh, 2021). Moreover, recent studies examining individual 
differences in resting-state fMRI have demonstrated that contextual diversity of language use is 
related to adaptive changes in functional brain organization. For example, Li et al. (2021) found that 
bilinguals reporting greater diversity in language usage across social contexts in Singapore displayed 
brain patterns that were more strongly associated with better monitoring, task switching, and goal 
maintenance, albeit poorer response inhibition. This is consistent with earlier results reported in 
Gullifer et al. (2018), where bilinguals with high language diversity in Montréal exhibited greater 
reliance on proactive control and higher connectivity between regions implicated in monitoring and 
goal maintenance, such as the anterior cingulate cortex and the putamen.
There is still much we do not know about how different behavioral ecologies of language use 
mediate adaptive change in bilinguals. Current evidence suggests that different forms of language 
experience may elicit different strategies for monitoring and maintaining access to relevant informa-
tion. A consideration of interpersonal language dynamics using network analysis offers a promising 
approach. For example, Tiv et al. (2022) examined interpersonal language diversity through social 
network structure in bilinguals from two distinct language environments: Montréal, Canada, a multi-
lingual context with high language diversity, and Gainesville, Florida, a relatively more homoge-
neous context where English is the predominant language. They specifically considered bilinguals’ 
position in their social network, how often they brokered connections between different language 
Figure 19.4  De-generacy Exemplified Through Variation in Language Experience.
Note: Zhang et al. (2021) observed how language switching training and L2 immersion confer similar increases in proactive 
control reliance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
269
subgroups, and how these related to individual differences in the ability to represent and attend 
to the intentions and actions of others (i.e., mentalizing). The results showed that bilinguals who 
brokered between different language subgroups in their network had greater mentalizing abilities. 
Critically, this was observed only among bilinguals embedded in Montréal, where there is relatively 
greater language-related uncertainty and need for people to keep track of the language profiles of 
their interlocutors. This illustrates how processing outcomes reflect individuals’ adaptive responding 
to the challenges and demands of their interpersonal as well broader societal dynamics of language 
use (see Navarro-Torres et al., 2021; Titone & Tiv, 2022 for discussion). Overall, these studies show 
remarkable convergence of findings regarding the role of the interactional context of language use in 
shaping bilinguals’ adaptive response to distinct communicative demands. Together, they exemplify 
de-generacy across multiple levels of language experience.
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
We used the concept of de-generacy (i.e., an organizing principle characterizing form-function 
relationships) to showcase how variability in language use, processing, and experience, tradition-
ally regarded as noise, reflects a distributed property of complex adaptive systems. Collectively, the 
studies reviewed here challenge traditional reductionist assumptions of monolingual normativity and 
processing uniformity. They instead suggest a framework for characterizing the behavioral, cogni-
tive, and neural markers that give rise to variability within and across different contexts. An important 
insight is that de-generacy provides a lens into how variant forms can come across as functionally 
redundant in some contexts yet diverse in others. The emerging evidence suggests that bilinguals 
drawn from the same underlying population can exhibit differential performance, and even those 
who appear to behave similarly can achieve the same outcome via different pathways or trajectories 
by engaging different cognitive processes or neural measures. Characterizing variability in com-
plex systems presents fundamental challenges. However, it also opens new avenues of discovery to 
pursue a more nuanced and socially informed scientific understanding of bilingualism, along with its 
consequences for language learning and processing.
Note
1	 The term de-generacy has been historically confounded with medical terminology relating to pathological 
degeneration, commonly implying deviance or deterioration. We note however that the contemporary scien-
tific usage of de-generacy has no negative connotations and is constructively applied as an explanatory tool 
for understanding complex systems within and beyond the biological sciences (Mason, 2010, 2015; Mason 
et al., 2015).
Further Readings
A review commentary on the historical and theoretical scope of the concept of de-generacy including illustrative 
examples from immunology, neuroscience, and linguistics:
Mason, P.H., Domínguez D., J.F., Winter, B., & Grignolio, A. (2015). Hidden in plain view: Degeneracy in com-
plex systems. BioSystems, 128, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2014.12.003
A perspective piece advocating against normative prescriptive approaches to research on bilingualism, 
highlighting instead the value of science as a discovery process that acts on variety:
Navarro-Torres, C.A., Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Kroll, J.F., & Green, D.W. (2021). Research on bilingualism as 
discovery science. Brain and Language, 222, 105014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105014
An illustrative overview conceptualizing de-generacy as a point of synthesis between biology and linguistics:
Winter, B. (2014). Spoken language achieves robustness and evolvability by exploiting degeneracy and neu-
trality. BioEssays, 36, 960–967. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201400028
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
270
Acknowledgments
The writing of this paper was supported in part by NIH Fellowship F32-AG064810 to A.L. Beatty-Martínez, 
and by NSERC RGPIN-2022-03375, SSHRC 430-2019-000935, Canada Research Chair (Tier 1) awarded 
to D.A. Titone.
References
Bambini, V., Canal, P., Breimaier, F., Meo, D., Pescarini, D., & Loporcaro, M. (2021). Capturing language 
change through EEG: Weaker P600 for a fading gender value in a southern Italo-Romance dialect. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 59, 101004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2021.101004
Batterink, L., & Neville, H. (2013). Implicit and explicit second language training recruit common neural 
mechanisms for syntactic processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 25, 936–951. https://doi.org/
10.1162/jocn_a_00354
Baus, C., Costa, A., & Carreiras, M. (2013). On the effects of second language immersion on first language pro-
duction. Acta Psychologica, 142, 402–409. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.01.010
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Bruni, M.R., Bajo, M.T., & Dussias, P.E. (2020). Brain potentials reveal differential pro-
cessing of masculine and feminine grammatical gender in native Spanish speakers. Psychophysiology, 58, 
e13737. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13737
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Dussias, P.E. (2017). Bilingual experience shapes language processing: Evidence from 
codeswitching. Journal of Memory and Language, 95, 173–189. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.04.002
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Dussias, P.E. (2018). Tuning to languages: Experience-based approaches to the lan-
guage science of bilingualism. Linguistics Vanguard, 4, 20170034. https://doi.org/10.1515/lingvan-2017-0034
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Dussias, P.E. (2019). Revisiting masculine and feminine grammatical gender in 
Spanish: Linguistic, psycholinguistic, and neurolinguistic evidence. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 751. https://
doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00751
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Guzzardo Tamargo, R.E., & Dussias, P.E. (2021). Phasic pupillary responses reveal dif-
ferential engagement of attentional control in bilingual spoken language processing. Scientific Reports, 11, 
23474. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-03008-1
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Navarro-Torres, C.A., & Dussias, P.E. (2020). Codeswitching: A bilingual toolkit for 
opportunistic speech planning. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 1699. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.01699
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Navarro-Torres, C.A., Dussias, P.E., Bajo, M.T., Guzzardo Tamargo, R. E., & Kroll, J.F. 
(2020). Interactional context mediates the consequences of bilingualism for language and cognition. Journal 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 46, 1022–1047. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm
0000770
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Titone, D.A. (2021). The quest for signals in noise: Leveraging experiential variation to 
identify bilingual phenotypes. Languages, 6, 168. https://doi.org/10.3390/languages6040168
Bel, A., Sagarra, N., Domínguez, J.P., & García-Alcaraz E. (2016). Transfer and proficiency effects in L2 pro-
cessing of subject anaphora. Lingua, 184, 134–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2016.07.001
Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2019). English only? Monolinguals in linguistically diverse contexts have an edge in lan-
guage learning. Brain and Language, 196, 104644. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2019.104644
Birdsong, D. (2018). Plasticity, variability, and age in second language acquisition and bilingualism. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 9, 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00081
Birner, B.J. & Ward, G.L. (1998). Information status and non-canonical word order in English. John Benjamins. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/slcs.40
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., & Pylkkänen, L. (2017). Bilingual language switching in the laboratory versus in the 
wild: The spatiotemporal dynamics of adaptive language control. Journal of Neuroscience, 37, 9022–9036. 
https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0553-17.2017
Bogulski, C.A., Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2019). Bilingualism as a desirable difficulty: Advantages in word learning 
depend on regulation of the dominant language. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22, 1052–1067. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728918000858
Botezatu, M.R., Kroll, J.F., Trachsel, M.I., & Guo, T. (2020). Second language immersion impacts native lan-
guage lexical production and comprehension. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 12, 347–376. https://
doi.org/10.1075/lab.19059.bot
Caffarra, S., & Barber, H.A. (2015). Does the ending matter? The role of gender-to-ending consistency in sen-
tence reading. Brain Research, 1605, 83–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2015.02.018
Caffarra, S., Mendoza, M., & Davidson, D. (2019). Is the LAN effect in morphosyntactic processing an ERP 
artifact? Brain and Language, 191, 9–16. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2019.01.003
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
271
Chan, C.G.H., Yow, W.Q., & Oei, A. (2020). Active bilingualism in aging: Balanced bilingualism usage and 
less frequent language switching relate to better conflict monitoring and goal maintenance ability. Journal of 
Gerontology: Series B, 75, E231–E241. https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbaa058
Dell, G.S., & Chang, F. (2014). The P-chain: relating sentence production and its disorders to comprehension 
and acquisition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 369, 20120394. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rstb.2012.0394
Edelman, G.M., & Gally, J.A. (2001). Degeneracy and complexity in biological systems. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 98, 13763–13768. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.231499798
Eddington, D. (2002). Spanish gender assignment in an analogical framework. Journal of Quantitative 
Linguistics, 9, 49–75. https://doi.org/10.1076/jqul.9.1.49.8482
Eddington, D., & Hualde, J.I. (2008). El abundante agua fría: Hermaphroditic Spanish nouns. Studies in Hispanic 
and Lusophone Linguistics, 1, 5–32. https://doi.org/10.1515/shll-2008-1004
Eisen, H.N. (2001). Specificity and degeneracy in antigen recognition: Yin and yang in the immune system. 
Annual Review of Immunology, 19, 1–21. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.immunol.19.1.1
Feldman, L.B., Srinivasan, V., Fernandes, R.B., & Shaikh, S. (2021). Insights into codeswitching from 
online communication: Effects of language preference and conditions arising from vocabulary richness. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24, 791–797. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921000122
Ferreira, F. (2003). The misinterpretation of noncanonical sentences. Cognitive Psychology, 47, 164–203. https://
doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0285(03)00005-7
Foucart, A., Martin, C.D., Moreno, E.M., & Costa, A. (2014). Can bilinguals see it coming? Word anticipation 
in L2 sentence reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory and Cognition, 40, 1461–
1469. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036756
Friston, K.J., & Price, C.J. (2003). Degeneracy and redundancy in cognitive anatomy. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 7, 151–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6613(03)00034-2
Fromont, L. A. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Goldberg, A.E. (2019). Explain me this: Creativity, competition, and the partial productivity of constructions. 
Princeton University Press.
González, D.L., Giannerini, S., & Rosa, R. (2019). On the origin of degeneracy in the genetic code. Interface 
Focus, 9, 20190038. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsfs.2019.0038
Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology, 25, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.796377
Green, D.W., Crinion, J., & Price, C.J. (2006). Convergence, degeneracy, and control. Language Learning, 56, 
99–125. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2006.00357.x
Gullifer, J.W., Chai, X.J., Whitford, V., Pivneva, I., Baum, S., Klein, D., & Titone, D.A. (2018). Bilingual 
experience and resting-state brain connectivity: Impacts of L2 age of acquisition and social diversity of lan-
guage use on control networks. Neuropsychologia, 117, 123–134. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsycholo
gia.2018.04.037
Gullifer, J.W., & Titone, D.A. (2020). Characterizing the social diversity of bilingualism using language 
entropy. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23, 283–294. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
9000026
Gullifer, J.W., & Titone, D.A. (2021). Engaging proactive control: Influences of diverse language experiences 
using insights from machine learning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 150, 414–430. https://
doi.org/10.1037/xge0000933
Gurunandan, K., Arnaez-Telleria, J., Carreiras, M., & Paz-Alonso, P.M. (2020). Converging evidence for differ-
ential specialisation and plasticity of language systems. Journal of Neuroscience, 40, 9715–9724. https://doi.
org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0851-20.2020
Hartanto, A., & Yang, H. (2016). Disparate bilingual experiences modulate task-switching advantages: A 
diffusion-model analysis of the effects of interactional context on switch costs. Cognition, 150, 10–19. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2016.01.016
Kaan, E. (this volume). The neurocognition of prediction in second language processing and learning. In K. 
Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kaan, E., Ballantyne, J.C., & Wijnen, F. (2015). Effects of reading speed on second-language sentence pro-
cessing. Applied Psycholinguistics, 36, 799–830. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716413000519
Kaiser, E. & Trueswell, J.C. (2004). The role of discourse context in the processing of a flexible word-order lan-
guage. Cognition, 94, 113–147. https://doi.org/:10.1016/j.cognition.2004.01.002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Anne L. Beatty-Martínez and Debra A. Titone
272
Karimi, H., & Ferreira, F. (2016). Good-enough linguistic representations and online cognitive equilibrium in 
language processing. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 69, 1013–1040. https://doi.org/10.1080/
17470218.2015.1053951
Kroll, J.F., Dussias, P.E., & Bajo, M.T. (2018). Language use across international contexts: Shaping the minds of 
L2 speakers. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 38, 60–79. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190518000119
Kroll, J.F., Takahesu Tabori, A., & Navarro-Torres, C.A. (2021). Capturing the variation in language experience 
to understand language processing and learning. Language, Interaction and Acquisition, 12, 82–109. https://
doi.org/10.1075/lia.20018.kro
Li, X., Kei, K., Ju, J., Wong, Y., Wen, J., Helen, J., & Yow, W.Q. (2021). Bilingual language entropy influences 
executive functions through functional connectivity and signal variability. Brain and Language, 222, 105026. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105026
Linck, J.A., Kroll, J.F., & Sunderman, G. (2009). Losing access to the native language while immersed in a 
second language evidence for the role of inhibition in second-language learning. Psychological Science, 20, 
1507–1515. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2009.02480.x
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2007). Young children learning Spanish make rapid use of grammat-
ical gender in spoken word recognition. Psychological Science, 18, 193–198. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-9280.2007.01871.x
López-Beltrán, P., Johns, M.A., Dussias, P.E., Lozano, C., & Palma, A. (2021). The effects of information struc-
ture in the processing of word order variation in the second language. Second Language Research, 38, 639–
670. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658321992461
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
MacDonald, M.C. (2013). How language production shapes language form and comprehension. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 4, 226. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00226
Mason, P.H. (2010). Degeneracy at multiple levels of complexity. Biological Theory, 5, 277–288. https://doi.org/
10.1162/BIOT_a_00041
Mason, P.H. (2015). Degeneracy: Demystifying and destigmatizing a core concept in systems biology. 
Complexity, 20, 12–21. https://doi.org/10.1002/cplx.21534
Mason, P.H., Domínguez D., J.F., Winter, B., & Grignolio, A. (2015). Hidden in plain view: Degeneracy in com-
plex systems. BioSystems, 128, 1–8. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biosystems.2014.12.003
Misra, M., Guo, T., Bobb, S.C., & Kroll, J.F. (2012). When bilinguals choose a single word to 
speak: Electrophysiological evidence for inhibition of the native language. Journal of Memory and Language, 
67, 224–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2012.05.001
Molinaro, N., Barber, H.A., & Carreiras, M. (2011). Grammatical agreement processing in reading: ERP findings 
and future directions. Cortex, 47, 908–930. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.02.019
Molinaro, N., Barber, H.A., Caffarra, S., & Carreiras, M. (2015). On the left anterior negativity (LAN): The case 
of morphosyntactic agreement. Cortex, 66, 156–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2014.06.009
Morales, J., Gómez-Ariza, C.J., & Bajo, M.T. (2013). Dual mechanisms of cognitive control in bilinguals and 
monolinguals. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25, 531–546. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.807812
Navarro-Torres, C.A., Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Kroll, J.F., & Green, D.W. (2021). Research on bilingualism as 
discovery science. Brain and Language, 222, 105014. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105014
Navarro-Torres, C.A., Garcia, D.L., Chidambaram, V., & Kroll, J.F. (2019). Cognitive control facilitates atten-
tional disengagement during second language comprehension. Brain Sciences, 9, 95. https://doi.org/ 10.3390/
brainsci9050095
Noppeney, U., Friston, K.J., & Price, C.J. (2004). Degenerate neuronal systems sustaining cognitive functions. 
Journal of Anatomy, 205, 433–442. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0021-8782.2004.00343.x
Pakulak, E., & Neville, H.J. (2010). Proficiency differences in syntactic processing of monolingual native 
speakers indexed by event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 12, 2728–2744. https://doi.
org/ 10.1162/jocn.2009.21393
Price, C.J., & Friston, K.J. (2002). Degeneracy and cognitive anatomy. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 6, 416–421. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/s1364-6613(02)01976-9
Pulido, M.F. (2021a). Individual chunking ability predicts efficient or shallow L2 processing: Eye-tracking evi-
dence from multiword units in relative clauses. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 607621. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2020.607621
Pulido, M.F. (2021b). Native language inhibition predicts more successful second language learning: Evidence 
of two ERP pathways during learning. Neuropsychologia, 152, 107732. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2020.107732
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

De-generacy as an Organizing Principle
273
Sankoff, D. (1988). Sociolinguistics and syntactic variation. In F.J. Newmeyer (Ed.), Linguistics: The Cambridge 
survey (pp. 140–161). Cambridge University Press.
Senaldi, M.S.G., Wei, J., Gullifer, J.W. & Titone, D.A. (2022). Scratching your tête over language-switched 
idioms: Evidence from eye-movement measures of reading. Memory & Cognition, 50, 1230–1256. https://
doi.org/10.3758/s13421-022-01334-x
Singh, L. (2021). Evidence for an early novelty orientation in bilingual learners. Child Development Perspectives, 
15, 110–116. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdep.12407
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J.G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 56, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.002
Titone, D.A., & Tiv, M. (2022). Rethinking multilingual experience through a Systems Framework of 
Bilingualism. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921001127
Tiv, M., Kutlu, E., O’Regan, E., & Titone, D. (2022). Bridging people and perspectives: General and language-
specific social network structure predict mentalizing across diverse sociolinguistic contexts. Canadian 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 76, 235–250. https://doi.org/10.1037/cep0000273
Trawick, S., & Bero, T. (2021). Gender assignment: Monolingual constraints contribute to a bilingual outcome. 
International Journal of Bilingualism, 26, 181–197. https://doi.org/10.1177/13670069211053466
Whitacre, J.M. (2010). Degeneracy: A link between evolvability, robustness and complexity in biological 
systems. Theoretical Biology and Medical Modelling, 7, 6. https://doi.org/10.1186/1742-4682-7-6
Whitacre, J.M. & Bender A. (2010). Degeneracy: A design principle for achieving robustness and evolvability. 
Journal of Theoretical Biology, 263, 143–153. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtbi.2009.11.008
Winter, B. (2014). Spoken language achieves robustness and evolvability by exploiting degeneracy and neu-
trality. BioEssays, 36, 960–967. https://doi.org/10.1002/bies.201400028
Wu, Y., & Thierry, G. (2013). Fast modulation of executive function by language context in bilinguals. Journal 
of Neuroscience, 33, 13533–13537. https://doi.org/ 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4760-12.2013
Xie, Z., & Antolovic, K. (2021). Differential impacts of natural L2 immersion and intensive classroom L2 
training on cognitive control. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 75, 550–562. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1747021821104081
Xu, Q., Markowska, M., Chodorow, M., & Li, P. (2021). Modeling bilingual lexical processing through code-
switching speech: A network science approach. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 662409. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2021.662409
Zhang, H., Diaz, M.T., Guo, T., & Kroll, J.F. (2021). Language immersion and language training: Two paths 
to enhanced language regulation and cognitive control. Brain and Language, 223, 105043. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105043
Zhang, H., Kang, C., Wu, Y., Ma, F., & Guo, T. (2015). Improving proactive control with training on language 
switching in bilinguals. Neuroreport, 26, 354–359. https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000000353
Zirnstein, M., Van Hell, J.G., & Kroll, J.F. (2018). Cognitive control ability mediates prediction costs in 
monolinguals and bilinguals. Cognition, 176, 87–106. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

274
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-25
20
FACTORS ACCOUNTING FOR  
INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
Introduction
Acquiring a second language (L2) as an adult has been defined as one of the most complex tasks the 
adult mind can undertake. In contrast to child language learning, adult language learners often have 
limited exposure to L2 input, in terms of both quality and quantity, and significantly less access to 
opportunities to meaningfully engage with the L2, often resulting in a high degree of variability in 
learning trajectories and outcomes (see Li et al., 2022). The present chapter aims to provide a com-
prehensive synthesis of empirical research findings that have shed light on the relative contribution 
that different factors play in adult L2 acquisition, to better understand the neurocognitive mechanisms 
underlying L2 processing and the individual-level variation amongst learners. One important dis-
tinction when examining factors accounting for individual differences in L2 neurocognition regards 
establishing to what extent and under what conditions variability is driven by learner-internal factors, 
such as the different individual abilities and experiences each learner brings, or by external factors, 
such as the language learning environment or specific characteristics about the L2 itself, among 
others. In the present chapter, we aim to provide a review of a subset of widely studied individual 
difference factors that have been posited to be important for L2 acquisition. Specifically, empirical 
studies which utilize neurocognitive methods, such as EEG, ERPs, and fMRI are outlined. Hence, 
the goal of this chapter is to better understand the underlying factors which account for individual 
differences in L2 neurocognition, including background characteristics, linguistic and cognitive abil-
ities, and contextual and instructional factors.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
In the past 30 years, a significant body of research within the field of Second Language Acquisition 
(SLA) has attempted to disentangle what underlies successful adult L2 learning, using behavioral 
methods to examine the relative contribution that a variety of different individual difference factors 
play in explaining or predicting group-level variability in L2 trajectories and outcomes (Roberts & 
Meyer, 2012). This work improved our understanding of the individual factors that are particularly 
relevant for successful L2 acquisition (Dörnyei & Ryan, 2015). In recent years, mainly due to signifi-
cant technological advances that have made the use of neurocognitive methods more accessible to 
researchers in the language sciences, a new area of research in SLA has emerged. This work aims to 
better understand L2 neurocognition as well as its underlying mechanisms by utilizing a wide range 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
275
of neurocognitive methods, which make it possible to investigate L2 acquisition and processing in a 
more fine-grained and multidimensional manner. This chapter reviews research in this domain spe-
cifically for studies taking an individual-difference approach, and the following sections synthesize 
some of the most critical research outcomes.
The Role of Personal and Linguistic Factors
Many factors relating to learners’ personal and linguistic background have been investigated as a 
method of explaining variability in L2 performance. The most well-studied of these is age of acqui-
sition (AoA), the age at which the learner began acquiring or became immersed in the L2. Early cog-
nitive neuroscience studies examining the role of AoA investigated whether there are differences in 
how learners with an early as opposed to a late AoA process linguistic information in their L2 (e.g., 
Rossi et al., 2006; Weber-Fox & Neville, 1996), with some studies reporting native-like processing 
for early learners but not for late learners. Some recent studies have investigated AoA by including 
it as a continuous measure, exploring whether AoA differences can account for some of the vari-
ability often found in L2 outcomes, revealing the role of AoA in L2 acquisition and processing at 
different stages of learning and across different types of learners (e.g., Nichols & Joanisse, 2019). 
Much of this work has utilized electroencephalography (EEG), a neuroimaging technique with a 
high temporal resolution which measures electrical activity to specific cognitive events, such as lan-
guage processing. For example, Meulman et al. (2015) measured event-related potentials (ERPs) 
during sentence reading with Russian and Polish advanced learners of L2 German, reporting that 
individuals’ average ERP response to a grammatical gender violation varied based on AoA, with early 
learners showing the native-like brain response expected for grammatical violations, the P600, and 
older learners eliciting a posterior negativity or an N400, the native-like brain response expected for 
semantic violations.1 To date, many studies argue for a neurocognitive benefit in L2 processing for 
learners with an earlier AoA; for further discussion, see Fromont, this volume.
Perhaps the most well-studied linguistic factor is proficiency, the ability of an individual to func-
tionally produce and comprehend language. Proficiency can be determined in a variety of ways, 
including via self-rating, language learning history, and/or performance on standardized proficiency 
tests. Note, however, that proficiency assessments are not able to provide a holistic account of 
L2 competence, but rather provide information regarding how well a learner performed on a spe-
cific language-related task. For researchers interested in exploring the underlying neurocognitive 
mechanisms involved in L2 processing, proficiency measurements can be used as a proxy to tap into 
different L2 abilities.
Many studies have analyzed proficiency as a dichotomous variable, categorizing participants into 
high vs. low-proficiency groups (e.g., Díaz et al., 2016; Di Liberto et al., 2021; Tanner et al., 2013). In 
general, these studies report increasingly native-like processing for learners with higher proficiency 
(cf. Coughlin et al., 2019).
Fromont et al. (2020) presented a new approach for understanding individual variability as it relates 
to proficiency. They found that ERPs at the group level revealed an N400 for L2 French learners, 
whereas native French speakers yielded a biphasic N400–P600 signature in response to ungrammat-
ical sentences containing both syntactic and semantic anomalies. Crucially, using a Random Forests 
approach to model the individual brain data, Fromont et al. found that language exposure and profi-
ciency reliably predicted ERP responses in both L1 and L2 groups. For the learners, proficiency was 
among the most important measures that predicted N400 size in a semantic anomaly condition. For 
the P600 effect, different individual difference measures were shown to be important in predicting 
neural signatures: for natives, vocabulary size as assessed via the LexTALE was the most important 
predictor, whereas for learners, it was daily L2 usage.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
276
Apart from AoA and proficiency, the amount of language exposure, experience and/or usage can 
vary greatly amongst L2 learners, and studies like Fromont et al. (2020) have revealed its importance 
in modulating neurolinguistic processing. This has also been shown in a study by Perani et al. (2003) 
using functional magnetic resonance (fMRI), a brain-imaging method with a high spatial resolution. 
Their work argued for the critical role of language exposure in L2 acquisition, with results showing 
less activation in prefrontal regions in bilinguals with increased L2 exposure, as compared to a group 
of bilinguals with less L2 exposure. Perani et al. claim that with increasing L2 usage, bilinguals’ 
neural activations are increasingly automatic and, as such, fewer neural resources may be recruited. 
Recent work by Pereira Soares et al. (2021) also investigated how individual differences in language 
experience modulate neural signatures in a large-scale study of L2 learners and proficient bilinguals 
using resting-state EEG, which provides insight into the dynamics of brain activity during rest. Their 
research suggested that exposure and experience are related to both power and coherence factors in 
specific EEG frequency bands, with higher levels of alpha power for participants related to higher 
rates of L2 usage overall, and increased coherence in the theta band of activity being related to indi-
viduals who report using the non-societal (L1) language at home. In sum, this work reveals that bilin-
gual language experience impacts neural activity and connectivity among different brain regions. In 
the ERP domain, Mickan and Lemhöfer (2020) tested three groups of German-speaking learners of 
L2 Dutch with different degrees of L2 exposure: a mean of less than 3 months (beginner), 10 months 
(intermediate), or more than a year (advanced). Their study measured ERPs in response to violations 
that were either similar or different to the L1 German. Learners with the least experience showed 
N400-like responses to both types of violations rather than the native-like P600. The two groups of 
more experienced learners showed native-like P600 responses for the condition which was similar 
for the L1 German group. However, for the violation which contained a structure that had a different 
word order in Dutch, the groups’ P600s were delayed, which was interesting given that their offline 
performance on these structures was native-like.
A different approach to individual differences has been to examine the relationship between 
behavioral and neural sensitivity during language tests. An influential study by Tanner et al. (2013) 
operationalized grammatical sensitivity as an individual difference measure, calculated via d-prime 
scores from grammaticality judgments on experimental sentences. In their ERP study, intermediate 
L2 learners of German judged sentences with subject–verb agreement anomalies, which yielded 
a P600 effect for native speakers. Analyses for the L2 learners revealed that while some learners 
showed a P600 effect, others elicited an N400 effect. Interestingly, learners’ behavioral accuracy was 
significantly related to their ERP responses, such that learners who were more accurate in identifying 
agreement anomalies showed more positive ERP effects, i.e., P600 (see also White et al., 2012).
A factor that has been a central focus in L2 research is language aptitude, described as an innate 
ability to learn a language, although there are several sub-components to aptitude that can be broken 
down by linguistic domain (e.g., grammatical vs. phonological) or the type of knowledge (e.g., 
explicit vs. implicit). A recent review paper by Turker et al. (2021) makes a more specific claim 
about the neurocognitive role of aptitude in language learning as it relates to individual brain plas-
ticity. One of the first widely adopted aptitude measurements was the Modern Language Aptitude 
Test (MLAT), which consists of five subtests measuring specific skills related to (mostly explicit) 
language learning (e.g., grammatical structure, spelling, vocabulary, phonetic awareness). Bond et al. 
(2011) utilized several MLAT subtests in an ERP experiment examining the processing of agreement 
dependencies in L2 Spanish. Both native speakers and L2 learners demonstrated the canonical P600 
in response to a morphosyntactic violation, and interestingly, learners’ P600 effect size was correlated 
with aptitude scores in the noun–adjective number condition. That is, learners with higher aptitude 
showed increased sensitivity to the violation in their ERP response. More recent aptitude tests, like 
the LLAMA, measure a participant’s ability to pick up some facet of an artificial language. A recent 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
277
study that used both of these measures was Gabriele et al. (2021); in contrast to Bond et al. (2011), 
they found that neither MLAT nor LLAMA scores significantly predicted ERP effects for novice 
English-speaking learners of L2 Spanish. However, related work using fMRI by Kepinska and 
colleagues (Kepinska et al., 2017a, 2017b) found that LLAMA scores significantly predicted novel 
grammar learning in an artificial language, Brocanto. In their study, participants were classified into 
high- and low-aptitude groups based on their LLAMA scores. In an fMRI learning task, participants 
with high aptitude scores showed more activity overall, resulting from greater engagement of the 
right hemisphere. Thus, while some studies suggest an important role for aptitude in L2 neurolin-
guistic processing, further work is needed to shed light on its specific contribution.
Related to aptitude, a learner’s phonological abilities have been measured as an individual diffe-
rence factor. For example, Reiterer et al. (2011) examined how speech imitation ability impacted L2 
outcomes on an fMRI task. L1 German participants’ ability to “mimic” an accent was assessed in the 
L2 English as well as a language they had never been exposed to, Hindi. Reiterer et al. found that poor 
Hindi imitators showed increased BOLD activation in the left hemisphere network associated with 
speech motor activities during two imitation tasks. This is particularly interesting given that learners 
had no experience with Hindi and suggests that an aptitude for articulation may underlie L2 produc-
tion abilities (for related work with bilinguals, see Díaz et al., 2008).
Apart from abilities related to the learners themselves, other ways to explore individual variability 
stem from the language itself. Some studies examine the role of language background as it relates 
to linguistic similarity between the L1 and L2 (e.g., Alemán Bañon et al., 2014; Carrasco-Ortíz 
et al., 2017; Díaz et al., 2016). The expectation for this type of research is that features which are 
different between the two languages are more difficult to acquire or process, resulting in different 
patterns of neural processing. White et al. (2012) examined the acquisition of regular past tense -ed 
in L2 English by two different groups: L1 Chinese, which does not inflect for tense, and L1 Korean, 
which instantiates past tense albeit differently than English. In a longitudinal ERP study, White et al. 
found an expected P600 effect for morphosyntactic violations emerged after intensive exposure to L2 
English in both groups. However, the onset of the ERP effect was roughly 250 ms later in Chinese 
learners as compared to Korean learners. Because the groups were proficiency matched, the authors 
argue that the onset latency difference emerged due to factors related to L1 background, such as the 
instantiation of grammatical features or reading strategies related to the L1 writing system.
Besides linguistic similarity at the level of grammar or phonology, there is also a line of research 
that explores language modality (i.e., visual vs. auditory domain). A new line of longitudinal MRI 
studies has examined functional brain changes occurring in hearing speakers learning a signed lan-
guage as an adult (Banaszkiewicz et al., 2021; Williams et al., 2016, 2018; see also Meade, this 
volume). These studies followed novice learners in their first eight to ten months of learning and 
revealed a complex pattern of neural changes in acquiring a visuospatial signed language. Specifically, 
this work showed increased activation in the left inferior frontal gyrus, a brain region that serves lan-
guage processing independent of modality (see Emmorey et al., 2014), as well as in regions linked 
specifically to sign language processing (e.g., superior parietal lobule).
Finally, a new strand of research has investigated resting-state EEG, or individuals’ brain oscil-
latory patterns during wakeful rest as a factor predicting L2 learning outcomes (see Mottarella & 
Prat, this volume). This research explores whether an individual’s resting neural rhythms may cap-
ture underlying differences in one’s general neural functioning or “readiness,” leading to potential 
differences in linguistic processing and L1 abilities. For example, Prat et al. (2016; 2019) measured 
quantitative EEG (qEEG) during an eyes-closed resting state to extract data from different frequency 
bands (theta, alpha, beta, gamma), which have been linked to different underlying mechanisms 
associated with cognitive systems like working memory and language processing, among others. 
For English learners in a virtual eight-week immersive French program, Prat et al. found that qEEG 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
278
indices significantly predicted the rate of L2 acquisition as measured by learners’ progression through 
a training paradigm, indicating a promising new line of individual differences research (see also 
Ogunniyi et al., 2021; Pereira Soares et al., 2021; Qi et al., 2017).
The Role of Cognitive Factors
It is increasingly common for neurolinguistic L2 studies to include a range of cognitive measures to 
explore the underlying cognitive mechanisms related to L2 processing and learning as well as the 
relative contribution of each factor, which may account for inter-individual variability. This section 
reviews the most well-studied cognitive factors in the L2 literature.
Cognitive control has gained significant attention in the realm of bilingualism and language 
learning in the past years, mostly due to groundbreaking findings which suggests that bilinguals have 
both languages active during language processing/production. This co-activation requires bilinguals 
to correctly select the language(s) they want to use each time, necessitating an ability to suppress 
and manage interference from the language(s) they are not using (for review, see Kroll et al., 2012). 
Cognitive control is linked to attentional resources and broadly defined as “an individual’s ability to 
regulate their own thoughts and actions in accordance with internally represented behavioral goals” 
(Braver, 2012, p. 106). It is one of the key mechanisms for facilitating efficient language selection 
as well as promoting proficient bilingual language processing and use (e.g., Green & Abutalebi, 
2013; Zirnstein et al., 2018). Indeed, there is increasing evidence suggesting that the experience of 
acquiring and managing multiple languages can change the volume and shape of cortical and subcor-
tical brain regions underlying language acquisition and control, as well as the integrity of the white 
matter tracts that connect them (Pliatsikas, 2019; see also Korenar and Pliatsikas, this volume).
Considering the relevance of these findings, an increasing number of neurolinguistic studies have 
investigated the role that cognitive control plays in the (time)course of L2 acquisition. For example, 
Grant et al. (2015) conducted a longitudinal fMRI study with English-speaking Spanish L2 learners, 
whose proficiency ranged from intermediate to advanced, exploring the neural correlates of L2 lex-
ical processing over the course of an academic year. For less proficient learners, there was increased 
activation in the brain areas traditionally associated with cognitive control, such as the anterior cingu-
late cortex and caudate nucleus. Interestingly, the opposite pattern of results was found for the more 
proficient learners, who showed decreased activation in the prefrontal cortex and increased activation 
in brain areas traditionally associated with L1 semantic processing (middle temporal gyrus). These 
results reveal a relationship between cognitive control abilities and L2 outcomes, specifically during 
the early stages of L2 learning, suggesting that learners’ ability to use cognitive control to access 
and engage with their L2 especially at beginning stages might be particularly critical to achieving 
proficient L2 performance, at least at the lexical level. Relatedly, Covey et al. (2022), building on 
L2 psycholinguistic research (e.g., Johnson et al., 2016), conducted an ERP study with Mandarin 
Chinese L2 learners of English. The ERP experiment targeted the processing of wh-dependencies 
using a filled-gap design to examine whether learners engaged in syntactic prediction during long-
distance dependency resolution. A number Stroop task was used to assess cognitive control. At a 
filled-gap site, native English speakers showed an N400 effect, which was argued to be related to 
gap prediction, and better Stroop scores were associated with larger N400s for natives. In contrast, 
learners showed a P600 effect, suggesting that learners did not predict a gap but rather experienced 
syntactic integration difficulty. Interestingly, increased cognitive control scores were associated with 
larger P600s for L2 learners. The results of this study suggest that attentional resources may be 
related to prediction for native speakers and to integration efforts for L2 learners.
Additionally, Pulido (2021) conducted an ERP study with adult English speakers learning L2 
Spanish where learners acquired new L2 sentence collocations. Participants first completed practice 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
279
blocks in which difficulty was manipulated across groups, such that the practice block contained 
either all “easy” distractors or “difficult” distractors that were incongruent collocations in the L1. In 
the main experiment, Pulido found ERP evidence of L1 inhibition as indexed by an N400 effect that 
was elicited for phrases that were congruent with the L1, only for participants in the difficult prac-
tice group. These results were argued to be linked to the cognitive control resources learners used to 
monitor and regulate the influence of their L1 to avoid interference during L2 word selection which 
is hypothesized to be a crucial step for acquiring the more difficult L2 collocations. Interestingly, 
the results also revealed a relationship between individuals’ degree of L1 regulation and learning 
outcomes during testing, highlighting once again that one’s ability to engage cognitive control 
mechanisms to manage the influence of the L1 during L2 processing has the potential to influence L2 
acquisition (see also Guo & Ma, this volume).
Another cognitive factor that has received significant attention in L2 neurocognition is working 
memory, defined as an individual’s ability to temporarily store, organize, and manipulate informa-
tion in the mind (Engle et al., 1999). Working memory is thought to be involved in many of the 
underlying cognitive processes hypothesized to support L2 learning, such as attentional control, 
information retrieval, explicit deduction, and decision making (e.g., Linck et al., 2014; Tagarelli 
et al., 2015). Additionally, working memory capacity has been shown to facilitate the retention of 
metalinguistic information for both L2 comprehension and use (Roehr, 2008), as well as to modu-
late the neural responses elicited during language processing (Dallas et al., 2013; Prat, 2011; Vos 
et al., 2001). Studies examining working memory in the context of L2 acquisition using neurolin-
guistic methods have often found a positive relationship between learners’ working memory cap-
acity and adult L2 outcomes across different linguistic domains. For example, Reichle et al. (2016) 
conducted an ERP study that required English-speaking intermediate L2 learners of French to process 
L2 sentences containing subject–verb agreement errors in both short- and long-distance dependen-
cies. Results evidenced a positive relationship between L2 learners’ working memory capacity, as 
assessed by a reading-span task, and the size of the N400 effect elicited in response to the morpho-
syntactic violations. Their findings suggest that working memory capacity modulates L2 morphosyn-
tactic processing and that individual differences in working memory abilities may explain variability 
in outcomes related to the acquisition of L2 morphosyntax.
A recent ERP study by Gabriele et al. (2021) explored how individual differences in working 
memory modulated the processing of morphosyntactic agreement in novice learners. In a longitu-
dinal design, L2 Spanish learners (L1 English) were tested throughout the academic year on number 
and gender agreement violations, which yield a canonical P600 response in native speakers. Their 
study showed that working memory, assessed via a letter-number sequencing task, was a predictor 
of P600 effect size, such that L2 learners with better working memory capacity showed greater sen-
sitivity to both number and gender violations in the L2, with the more advanced learners showing 
larger effects for number and marginal sensitivity to gender violations. These results are taken to 
suggest that working memory, which underlies the encoding and maintenance of the relevant lin-
guistic features during processing, is involved in sensitivity to grammatical anomalies of features 
which are shared (number) and unique (gender) to the L1 and L2. Related ERP findings were found 
in a study by Schwab et al. (2020) testing adult French speakers learning either English or German. 
In an auditory training task, a positive relationship between working memory and L2 learners’ ability 
to discriminate lexical stress contrasts emerged. Working memory abilities were indexed via the 
P3b amplitude: Larger P3b amplitudes index an increased ability to track and maintain information 
related to stress during acoustic processing. Crucially, their results showed that participants with 
increased working memory performed better at discriminating L2 prosodic information, suggesting 
that working memory supports the acquisition and development of L2 phonetic and phonological 
features. Together, results from these three studies contribute to previous claims that situate individual 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
280
differences in working memory as a key cognitive factor to better understand variability in L2 acqui-
sition. Additionally, they provide evidence suggesting that individual differences in working memory 
abilities might help explain variability in L2 outcomes.
Declarative and procedural memory are two additional cognitive factors often studied in par-
allel given their intricate relationship as long-term memory systems as well as their attested role in the 
language domain (e.g., Paradis, 2009; Ullman, 2020; see also Ullman & Morgan-Short, this volume). 
Declarative memory is generally known as “knowing what” and is broadly defined as one’s ability 
to remember facts about the world as well as information related to episodes or experienced events 
(Tulving, 1993). Cognitive psychology has generally linked declarative memory with earlier stages 
of learning, making it possible to learn explicit information relatively quickly after a short period 
of exposure. Crucially, declarative knowledge is thought to be the learning and memory system 
that underlies explicit knowledge (i.e., knowledge that is available to conscious awareness), even 
though the declarative memory system also underlies implicit or unconscious knowledge (Ullman, 
2020). Procedural memory is generally known as “knowing how,” broadly defined as one’s ability 
to gradually acquire the necessary skills to learn new habits or perform different actions that eventu-
ally become automatic, including those that might involve motor skills (Ohlsson, 2008). Procedural 
knowledge is thought to be less available to conscious awareness, and, as such, has been characterized 
as implicit (Eichenbaum & Cohen, 2001).
Neurolinguistic studies with adult L2 learners have, in large part, found a relevant but distinctive 
role for both declarative and procedural knowledge, generally suggesting a stronger role for declara-
tive memory/knowledge at earlier stages of L2 learning and a more relevant role for procedural 
memory/knowledge at later stages of L2 learning (e.g., Morgan-Short et al., 2012; Ullman, 2020). For 
example, Morgan-Short et al. (2015) conducted an fMRI study that evidenced a relationship between 
individual differences in declarative and procedural memory and L2 outcomes during implicit-based 
L2 learning, revealing that L2 learners with stronger declarative memory abilities were better able 
to learn an L2 naturalistically. Additionally, a similar pattern of results was found in an ERP study 
with adult L2 learners of Spanish with different types of L2 learning experience (Faretta-Stutenberg 
& Morgan-Short, 2018). Individual differences in procedural memory, assessed by the Alternating 
Serial Response Time Task and Weather Prediction Task, significantly predicted both L2 processing 
and outcomes for their most experienced L2 learners: those who had studied abroad and therefore 
had more opportunities to engage with naturalistic (i.e., more implicit) input. Their results contribute 
to previous claims that situate individual differences in both declarative and procedural memory 
abilities as a key cognitive factor to better understand variability in L2 neurocognition as well as L2 
outcomes. Additionally, they provide evidence suggesting that the extent to which learners might 
rely on one memory system over the other might differ but also be mediated by other factors, such as 
learning stage, proficiency, or learning context, among others.
The Role of Instructional and Contextual Factors
Contextual and instructional factors have also been investigated as a source of variability in L2 studies, 
with empirical work exploring the relative role that different types of L2 instruction, explicit versus 
implicit-based, and contexts of learning play in adult L2 learning (Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, 
this volume; see Bultena, this volume). Studies in this area typically examine learners at the group 
level rather than taking an individual difference approach. For example, artificial language learning 
paradigms have been used to compare explicit and implicit L2 learning as a way to control for pre-
vious exposure with the language (e.g., Batterink et al., 2015; Morgan-Short et al., 2012, 2015). 
Tagarelli et al. (2019) conducted a neuroanatomical meta-analysis and reported that explicit training 
of grammar was associated with hippocampal involvement, a region linked to declarative memory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
281
resources, whereas implicit training resulted in the recruitment of anterior caudate/putamen, areas 
associated with procedural memory (see also Morgan-Short et al., 2015). A related line of research has 
investigated the instructional context by comparing learners who participate in traditional classroom 
learning to those who complete a study abroad program (e.g., Grey et al., 2015; Faretta-Stutenberg 
& Morgan-Short, 2018), suggesting that instructional and contextual factors play a crucial role in 
understanding variability in L2 outcomes.
Current Trends and Future Directions
We briefly review trends and future directions for L2 neurolinguistic research with a focus on indi-
vidual difference factors. It is important to first point out that a majority of the studies reviewed in 
this chapter utilize the ERP method, which has strengths in its ability to tease apart different types 
of language processing (e.g., semantic/syntactic) as they are argued to be linked to specific ERP 
responses. However, an emerging trend is to analyze EEG data via frequency bands or resting-state 
EEG to capture individual variability in brain oscillations amongst learners, as these measurements 
have been shown to predict L2 learning rates and outcomes (Prat et al., 2016, 2019). We expect to 
see additional L2 studies in this domain, which would allow researchers to take advantage of a rich 
source of inter-individual brain variability.
Regarding future directions of the field, we recommend two approaches, the first of which considers 
a line of well-cited L2 studies using behavioral measures to investigate the relative contribution of 
a set of individual differences in socio-cognitive/affective abilities and L2 outcomes. For example, 
there is a large body of work examining motivation (Dörnyei, 2009). In a meta-analysis, Al-Hoorie 
(2018) reported that motivation was a significant predictor of L2 intended effort, although crucially, a 
weak predictor of objective measures of L2 achievement. Al-Hoorie points to the need for methodo-
logical improvements in motivation research and calls for further experimental research, which may 
inform future studies in the neurocognitive domain. A related socio-affective factor is grit, defined as 
both passion and perseverance for long-term goals (Duckworth et al., 2007). Language scientists have 
recently investigated its relevance for L2 acquisition. For example, Teimouri et al. (2022) argued for 
the relevance of language-specific grit as a critical individual difference factor modulating ultimate 
success in L2 learning (see also Khajavy et al., 2021; Sudina et al., 2020).
A second direction future research could take follows current trends in identifying individual 
differences in L1 processing along the native speaker continuum. Tanner (2019) used a latent factor 
analysis to investigate individual differences in a large sample of native English speakers’ ERP 
responses to sentences with subject-verb agreement anomalies. Even in a relatively homogenous 
sample of highly literate adults, the results showed great individual variability during L1 processing: at 
the group-level, a P600 effect emerged, but at the individual level, some participants showed N400 
responses whereas others demonstrated P600 ones for grammatical processing. Tanner argues that 
there might be a trait-like effect regarding how individuals process grammar violations specifically 
in the domain of agreement, which has important implications for how future ERP studies inter-
pret grand mean effects that may mask individual neural response dominance as well as for moving 
away from considering language processing and learning as a monolithic construct (Freunberger 
et al., 2022).
In sum, there is an increased emphasis in both the native and L2 literature on investigating internal 
and external factors that explain the variability in language processing, and we anticipate that the field 
of cognitive neuroscience of SLA will continue to explore the role of the individual difference factors 
reviewed in this chapter. The research highlighted here also points to a need for studies that include 
multiple individual difference measures, to better understand the relative contribution of each factor 
in a more holistic manner (e.g., Gabriele et al., 2021; López et al., 2023; Pereira Soares et al., 2021), 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
282
as well as research which directly examines the relative weight that each one of those individual diffe-
rence measures plays along the continuum of L2 acquisition and processing.
Note
1	 Early accounts of the N400 and P600 made strong claims about their generation being linked to semantic and 
syntactic processing respectively. However, more recent investigations have revealed that this distinction is 
not so clearly delineated (e.g., Delogu et al., 2019) with individual-level ERP differences emerging even for 
native speakers (e.g., Tanner, 2019) as well as L2 learners (e.g., Grey, 2022); see also Beatty-Martínez and 
Titone (this volume).
Further Readings
Review paper examining the underlying sources of L2 variability, with a focus on neural plasticity and individual 
differences:
Birdsong, D. (2018). Plasticity, variability, and age in second language acquisition and bilingualism. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 9, 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00081
Comprehensive volume highlighting the role of multiple individual difference factors and L2 acquisition:
Li, S., Hiver, P., & Papi, M. (Eds.). (2022). The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and indi-
vidual differences. Taylor & Francis.
Review article highlighting the neural changes in functional brain networks during L2 acquisition, shedding light 
on neural bases of individual differences:
Li, P., & Grant, A. (2016). Second language learning success revealed by brain networks. Bilingualism: Language 
and Cognition, 19(4), 657–664. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728915000280
References
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2014). Morphosyntactic processing in advanced second lan-
guage (L2) learners: An event-related potential investigation of the effects of L1–L2 similarity and structural 
distance. Second Language Research, 30(3), 275–306. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658313515671
Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2018). The L2 motivational self-system: A meta-analysis. Studies in Second Language Learning 
and Teaching, 8(4), 721–754. http://dx.doi.org/10.14746/ssllt.2018.8.4.2
Banaszkiewicz, A., Matuszewski, J., Szczepanik, M., Kossowski, B., Mostowski, P., Rutkowski, Śliwińska, P., 
Jednoróg, K. Emmorey, K., & Marchewka, A. (2021). The role of the superior parietal lobule in lexical pro-
cessing of sign language: Insights from fMRI and TMS. Cortex, 135, 240–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2020.10.025
Batterink, L.J., Reber, P.J., Neville, H.J., & Paller, K.A. (2015). Implicit and explicit contributions to statistical 
learning. Journal of Memory and Language, 83, 62–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2015.04.004
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Titone, D.A. (this volume). De-generacy as an organizing principle of bilingual lan-
guage processing: Evidence from brain and behavior. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The 
Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Birdsong, D. (2018). Plasticity, variability and age in second language acquisition and bilingualism. Frontiers in 
psychology, 9, 81. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00081
Bond, K., Gabriele, A., Fiorentino, R., & Aleman Banon, J. (2011). Individual differences and the role of the 
L1 in L2 processing: An ERP investigation. In Proceedings of the 11th generative approaches to second lan-
guage acquisition conference (GASLA 2011) (pp. 17–29).
Braver, T.S. (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control: a dual mechanisms framework. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 16(2), 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.010
Bowden, H.W. & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning and second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Bultena, S. (this volume). Feedback in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
283
Carrasco-Ortíz, H., Herrera, A.V., Jackson-Maldonado, D., Ramírez, G.N.A., Pereyra, J.S., & Wicha, N.Y. 
(2017). The role of language similarity in processing second language morphosyntax: Evidence from ERPs. 
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 117, 91–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2017.04.008
Coughlin, C.E., Fiorentino, R., Royle, P., & Steinhauer, K. (2019). Sensitivity to inflectional morphology in 
a non-native language: evidence from ERPs. Frontiers in Communication, 4, 21. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fcomm.2019.00021
Covey, L., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2022). Island sensitivity in L2 learners: Evidence from acceptability 
judgments and event-related potentials. Second Language Research. Advance online publication. https://doi.
org/10.1177/02676583221116039
Dallas, A., DeDe, G., & Nicol, J. (2013). An event-related potential (ERP) investigation of filler-gap processing 
in native and second language speakers. Language Learning, 63(4), 766–799. https://doi.org/10.1111/
lang.12026
Delogu, F., Brouwer, H., & Croker, M.W. (2019). Event-related potentials index lexical retrieval (N400) and inte-
gration (P600) during language comprehension. Brain and Cognition, 135, 103569. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2019.05.007
Díaz, B., Baus, C., Escera, C., Costa, A., & Sebastián-Gallés, N. (2008). Brain potentials to native phoneme 
discrimination reveal the origin of individual differences in learning the sounds of a second language. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(42), 16083–16088. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.080
5022105
Díaz, B., Erdocia, K., De Menezes, R.F., Mueller, J.L., Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Laka, I. (2016). 
Electrophysiological correlates of second-language syntactic processes are related to native and second 
language distance regardless of age of acquisition. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 133. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00133
Di Liberto, G.M., Nie, J., Yeaton, J., Khalighinejad, B., Shamma, S.A., & Mesgarani, N. (2021). Neural represen-
tation of linguistic feature hierarchy reflects second-language proficiency. NeuroImage, 227, 117586. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.117586
Dörnyei, Z. (2009). Motivation, Language Identities and the L2 Self: Future Research Directions. In Z. Dörnyei 
& E. Ushioda (Eds.), Motivation, language identity and the L2 self (pp. 350–356). Multilingual Matters.
Dörnyei, Z., & Ryan, S. (2015). The Psychology of the Language Learner Revisited. Routledge.
Duckworth, A.L., Peterson, C., Matthews, M.D., & Kelly, D.R. (2007). Grit: perseverance and passion for long-
term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(6), 1087. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/
0022-3514.92.6.1087
Eichenbaum, H., & Cohen, N.J. (2001). From conditioning to conscious recollection: Memory systems of the 
brain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Emmorey, K., McCullough, S., Mehta, S., & Grabowski, T.J. (2014). How sensory-motor systems impact 
the neural organization for language: Direct contrasts between spoken and signed language. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 5, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2014.00484
Engle, R.W., Tuholski, S.W., Laughlin, J.E., & Conway, A.R. (1999). Working memory, short-term memory, and 
general fluid intelligence: a latent-variable approach. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 128(3), 
309–331. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/0096-3445.128.3.309
Faretta-Stutenberg, M., & Morgan-Short, K. (2018). The interplay of individual differences and context of 
learning in behavioral and neurocognitive second language development. Second Language Research, 34(1), 
67–101. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316684903
Freunberger, D., Bylund, E., & Abrahamsson, N. (2022). Is it time to reconsider the “gold standard” for 
nativelikeness in ERP studies on grammatical processing in a second language? A critical assessment based 
on qualitative individual differences. Applied Linguistics, 43(3), 433–452. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/
amab058
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Fromont, L.A., Royle, P., & Steinhauer, K. (2020). Growing Random Forests reveals that exposure and profi-
ciency best account for individual variability in L2 (and L1) brain potentials for syntax and semantics. Brain 
and Language, 204, 104770. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104770
Gabriele, A., Alemán Bañón, J., Hoffman, L., Covey, L., Rossomondo, A., & Fiorentino, R. (2021). Examining 
variability in the processing of agreement in novice learners: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1037/xlm
0000983
Grant, A.M., Fang, S.Y., & Li, P. (2015). Second language lexical development and cognitive control: A longitu-
dinal fMRI study. Brain and Language, 144, 35–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2015.03.010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
284
Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515–530. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.796377
Grey, S. (2022). Variability in native and nonnative language: An ERP study of semantic and grammar pro-
cessing. Studies in Second Language Acquisition. Advance online publication. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0272263122000055
Grey, S., Cox, J.G., Serafini, E.J., & Sanz, C. (2015). The role of individual differences in the study abroad 
context: Cognitive capacity and language development during short-term intensive language exposure. The 
Modern Language Journal, 99(1), 137–157. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12190
Guo, T., & Ma, F. (this volume). Cognitive control in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short 
and J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Johnson, A., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2016). Syntactic constraints and individual differences in native 
and non-native processing of wh-movement. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 549. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.00549
Kepinska, O., De Rover, M., Caspers, J., & Schiller, N.O. (2017a). On neural correlates of individual differences 
in novel grammar learning: an fMRI study. Neuropsychologia, 98, 156–168. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro
psychologia.2016.06.014
Kepinska, O., De Rover, M., Caspers, J., & Schiller, N.O. (2017b). Whole-brain functional connectivity 
during acquisition of novel grammar: Distinct functional networks depend on language learning abilities. 
Behavioural Brain Research, 320, 333–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2016.12.015
Khajavy, G.H., MacIntyre, P.D., & Hariri, J. (2021). A closer look at grit and language mindset as predictors 
of foreign language achievement. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 43(2), 379–402. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0272263120000480
Korenar, M. & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). The dynamic restructuring model and second language. In K. Morgan-
Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., Dussias, P.E., Bogulski, C.A., & Kroff, J.R.V. (2012). Juggling two languages in one mind: What 
bilinguals tell us about language processing and its consequences for cognition. Psychology of Learning and 
Motivation, 56, 229–262.
Li, P., & Grant, A. (2016). Second language learning success revealed by brain networks. Bilingualism: Language 
and cognition, 19(4), 657–664. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728915000280
Li, S., Hiver, P., & Papi, M. (Eds.). (2022). The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and indi-
vidual differences. Taylor & Francis.
Linck, J.A., Osthus, P., Koeth, J.T., & Bunting, M.F. (2014). Working memory and second language compre-
hension and production: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(4), 861–883. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13423-013-0565-2
López, B. G., Luque, A., & Piña-Watson, B. (2023). Context, intersectionality, and resilience: Moving toward a 
more holistic study of bilingualism in cognitive science. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 
29(1), 24. https://doi.org/10.1037/cdp0000472
Meade, G. (this volume). The neurocognition of learning a second language in the visual-auditory modality. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Meulman, N., Wieling, M., Sprenger, S.A., Stowe, L.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Age effects in L2 grammar 
processing as revealed by ERPs and how (not) to study them. PloS One, 10(12), e0143328. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0143328
Mickan, A., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). Tracking syntactic conflict between languages over the course of L2 acqui-
sition: A cross-sectional event-related potential study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(5), 822–846. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01528
Morgan-Short, K., Deng, Z., Brill-Schuetz, K.A., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., Wong, P.C., & Wong, F.C. (2015). 
A view of the neural representation of second language syntax through artificial language learning under 
implicit contexts of exposure. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 37(2), 383–419. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S0272263115000030
Morgan-Short, K., Finger, I., Grey, S., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). Second language processing shows increased 
native-like neural responses after months of no exposure. PLoS One, 7(3), e32974. https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0032974
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Factors Accounting for Individual Differences
285
Nichols, E.S., & Joanisse, M.F. (2019). Individual differences predict ERP signatures of second language 
learning of novel grammatical rules. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(1), 78–92. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728917000566
Ogunniyi, V., Abugaber, D., Finestrat, I., Luque, A., & Morgan-Short, K. (2021). Predicting second language 
proficiency with resting-state brain rhythms. Columbia Undergraduate Science Journal, 15, 39–54. https://
doi.org/10.52214/cusj.v15i1.7797
Ohlsson, S. (2008). Computational models of skill acquisition. In R. Sun (Ed.), The Cambridge handbook of 
computational psychology, pp. 359–395. Cambridge University Press.
Paradis, M. (2009). Declarative and procedural determinants of second languages (Vol. 40). John Benjamins 
Publishing.
Perani, D., Abutalebi, J., Paulesu, E., Brambati, S., Scifo, P., Cappa, S.F., & Fazio, F. (2003). The role of age 
of acquisition and language usage in early, high-proficient bilinguals: An fMRI study during verbal fluency. 
Human Brain Mapping, 19(3), 170–182. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.10110
Pereira Soares, S.M., Kubota, M., Rossi, E., & Rothman, J. (2021). Determinants of bilingualism predict 
dynamic changes in resting-state EEG oscillations. Brain and Language, 223, 105030. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105030
Pliatsikas, C. (2019). Multilingualism and brain plasticity. The handbook of the neuroscience of multilingualism, 
230–251.
Prat, C.S. (2011). The brain basis of individual differences in language comprehension abilities. Language and 
Linguistics Compass, 5(9), 635–649. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1749-818X.2011.00303.x
Prat, C.S., Yamasaki, B.L., Kluender, R.A., & Stocco, A. (2016). Resting-state qEEG predicts rate of second 
language learning in adults. Brain and Language, 157, 44–50. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.04.007
Prat, C.S., Yamasaki, B.L., & Peterson, E.R. (2019). Individual differences in resting-state brain rhythms 
uniquely predict second language learning rate and willingness to communicate in adults. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 31(1), 78–94. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01337
Pulido, M.F. (2021). Native language inhibition predicts more successful second language learning: Evidence 
of two ERP pathways during learning. Neuropsychologia, 152, 107732. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2020.107732
Qi, Z., Beach, S.D., Finn, A.S., Minas, J., Goetz, C., Chan, B., & Gabrieli, J.D.E. (2017). Native-language N400 
and P600 predict dissociable language-learning abilities in adults. Neuropsychologia, 98, 177–191. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.10.005
Reichle, R.V., Tremblay, A., & Coughlin, C. (2016). Working memory capacity in L2 processing. Probus, 28(1), 
29–55. https://doi.org/10.1515/probus-2016-0003
Reiterer, S.M., Hu, X., Erb, M., Rota, G., Nardo, D., Grodd, W., … & Ackermann, H. (2011). Individual 
differences in audio-vocal speech imitation aptitude in late bilinguals: functional neuro-imaging and brain 
morphology. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 271. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00271
Roberts, L. & Meyer, A. (2012) Individual differences in second language learning: Introduction. Language 
Learning, 62(S2), 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00703.x
Roehr, K. (2008). Metalinguistic knowledge and language ability in university-level L2 learners. Applied 
Linguistics, 29(2), 173–199. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/amm037
Rossi, S., Gugler, M. F., Friederici, A.D., & Hahne, A. (2006). The impact of proficiency on syntactic second-
language processing of German and Italian: Evidence from event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 18(12), 2030–2048. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.12.2030
Schwab, S., Giroud, N., Meyer, M., & Dellwo, V. (2020). Working memory and not acoustic sensitivity is related 
to stress processing ability in a foreign language: An ERP study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 55, 100897. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100897
Sudina, E., Brown, J., Datzman, B., Oki, Y., Song, K., Cavanaugh, R., … & Plonsky, L. (2020). Language-specific 
grit: exploring psychometric properties, predictive validity, and differences across contexts. Innovation in 
Language Learning and Teaching, 4, 334–351. https://doi.org/10.1080/17501229.2020.1802468
Tagarelli, K.M., Mota, M.B., & Rebuschat, P. (2015). 13. Working memory, learning conditions and the acquisi-
tion of L2 syntax. In Z. Wen, M.B. Mota, and A. McNeill (Eds.), Working memory in second language acqui-
sition and processing (pp. 224–247). Multilingual Matters.
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., & Ullman, M.T. (2019). Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
Tanner, D. (2019). Robust neurocognitive individual differences in grammatical agreement processing: A latent 
variable approach. Cortex, 111, 210–237. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.10.011
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alicia Luque and Lauren Covey
286
Tanner, D., McLaughlin, J., Herschensohn, J., & Osterhout, L. (2013). Individual differences reveal stages of L2 
grammatical acquisition: ERP evidence. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 16(2), 367–382. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728912000302
Teimouri, Y., Plonsky, L., & Tabandeh, F. (2022). L2 grit: Passion and perseverance for second-language learning. 
Language Teaching Research, 26(5), 893–918. https://doi.org/10.1177/1362168820921895
Tulving, E. (1993). What is episodic memory?. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 2(3), 67–70. https://
doi.org/10.1111/1467-8721.ep10770899
Turker, S., Seither-Preisler, A., & Reiterer, S.M. (2021). Examining individual differences in language 
learning: a neurocognitive model of language aptitude. Neurobiology of Language, 2(3), 389–415. https://
doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00042
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically-motivated theory of first and 
second language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition 
(3rd ed., pp. 128–161). Routledge.
Ullman, M.T., & Morgan-Short, K. (this volume). How the declarative and procedural memory brain circuits 
support second language: Electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological evidence. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Vos, S. H., Gunter, T.C., Schriefers, H., & Friederici, A.D. (2001). Syntactic parsing and working memory: The 
effects of syntactic complexity, reading span, and concurrent load. Language and Cognitive Processes, 16(1), 
65–103. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690960042000085
Weber-Fox, C.M., & Neville, H.J. (1996). Maturational constraints on functional specializations for language 
processing: ERP and behavioral evidence in bilingual speakers. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 8(3), 
231–256. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1996.8.3.231
White, E.J., Genesee, F., & Steinhauer, K. (2012). Brain responses before and after intensive second language 
learning: Proficiency-based changes and first language background effects in adult learners. PloS One, 7(12), 
e52318. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0052318
Williams, J.T., Darcy, I., & Newman, S.D. (2016). Modality-specific processing precedes amodal linguistic pro-
cessing during L2 sign language acquisition: A longitudinal study. Cortex, 75, 56–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cortex.2015.11.015
Williams, J.T., Darcy, I., & Newman, S.D. (2018). Neural substrates of sign language vocabulary pro-
cessing in less-skilled hearing M2L2 signers: Evidence for difficult phonological movement perception. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 21(3), 550–562. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728917000347
Zirnstein, M., Van Hell, J.G., & Kroll, J.F. (2018). Cognitive control ability mediates prediction costs in 
monolinguals and bilinguals. Cognition, 176, 87–106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.03.001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART V
Second Language in Relation to the 
Neurocognition of First Language and 
Additional Languages
 
 

 

289
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-27
21
CROSS-LINGUISTIC TRANSFER 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
Introduction
By definition, second language (L2) acquisition requires that speakers possess a first language (L1). 
This previously established L1 and its similarities and/or differences with the L2 has been shown 
to greatly impact the learning of the latter (e.g., Odlin, 2003; Serratrice, 2013), which is known as 
cross-linguistic transfer.1 Similarities in structure and concepts often result in positive transfer and 
ease of L2 acquisition and processing, whereas differences result in negative transfer and processing 
difficulty (Kotz, 2009).2 In addition to transfer from L1 to L2 and other known languages (Ln), cross-
linguistic effects can also be found from the L2 and Ln on to the L1 (this is sometimes referred to as 
L1 attrition; see Keijzer & Seton, this volume; also for more on cross-linguistic transfer to languages 
subsequent to L2, see Xu & Wong, this volume).
Cross-linguistic transfer is widely studied from a behavioral perspective, with a focus on effects 
found after processing has occurred and not on what effects are occurring as decisions are made. 
Although valuable information regarding the transfer of knowledge and how it relates to language 
acquisition has been gained from such research, measures of L2 neural processing can provide insight 
into the underlying neural mechanisms that regulate how and when our brains process cross-linguistic 
transfer. L2 speakers of a language similar to their L1 may benefit from positive cross-linguistic 
transfer effects to acquire and use the language to a highly proficient degree. Thus, speakers can 
appear to have reached native-like skills in areas such as production, comprehension, and grammar. 
However, the possibility exists that these positive transfer effects that result in native-like behavior 
by L2 learners may be regulated by different neurological underpinnings (Díaz et al., 2016; Mueller, 
2005; Wartenburger et al., 2003). For example, it might be possible to see native-like performance in 
L2 acceptability judgments, but for participants whose L1 is more like the L2, it may reflect transfer 
of linguistic mechanisms (suggesting cross-linguistic transfer of the structure of interest). On the 
other hand, participants who have a less similar L1 may be recruiting working memory mechanisms 
suggesting that cross-linguistic transfer is not at play (e.g., Sabourin & Stowe, 2008). These effects 
may occur at all levels of linguistic processing from phonetic level processing up to and including the 
processing of pragmatic information. We will, however, limit our present discussions to the phono-
logical, lexical, and syntactic linguistic levels.
The present chapter focuses on transfer from L1 to L2, with emphasis on the neurological 
underpinnings associated with these effects. Below, we provide a brief overview of historical 
perspectives that have helped guide current empirical investigations of cross-linguistic transfer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
290
Next, we introduce the critical issues and topics surrounding cross-linguistic transfer in relation to 
neurocognition and summarize the current empirical knowledge in the field. Finally, we provide 
current trends in transfer research and introduce avenues and considerations for future research.
Historical Perspectives
Cross-linguistic transfer has been studied extensively in the field of second language acquisition 
(SLA) research with a focus both on facilitation (positive transfer) and interference (negative transfer) 
effects on the learning and processing of an L2. This section outlines and evaluates a set of earlier 
views based on behavioral data sets that have had a great influence on the field of language transfer 
effects in SLA.
Many models and theories of SLA have directly or indirectly focused on the role of transfer from 
the L1. For instance, at the phonological level, models such as the perceptual assimilation model 
(Best et al., 2001) and the speech learning model (Flege, 1995; Flege & Bohn, 2021) assume that the 
ability to acquire L2 speech sounds is related to the degree of similarity between the speech sounds 
of the L1 and L2. At the syntax level, models such as those incorporating markedness (Eckman et al., 
1986) suggest that similarity between the L1 and L2 can predict the outcomes of L2 learning.
One of the earliest approaches to transfer, known as contrastive analysis (Lado, 1957), compared 
the degree of similarity between L1 and L2 surface forms to predict the outcome of language 
learning. Specifically, similarities between the L1 and L2 were predicted to facilitate the process of 
L2 learning, whereas differences were expected to make those aspects more difficult to learn. This 
approach treated language learning as consisting of a set of habits that needed to be learned, espe-
cially for aspects that were dissimilar (Flynn, 2019). Although this approach to language highlighted 
potential areas of learning difficulty, evidence from language learners did not always support these 
predictions: differences between the L1 and L2 did not always result in difficulty, and not all errors 
produced by L2 learners were due to L1 transfer effects (Whitman & Jackson, 1972). Alternatively, 
the error analysis approach viewed L2 grammatical errors as a window into the process of language 
learning (Corder, 1967). The source of these errors was thought to reflect language transfer from 
the L1. Over time, focus thus shifted from more behaviorist views of language as habit formation 
to an internal focus on the rules of grammar and linguistic structure representing competence; SLA 
researchers began to investigate the underlying processes of language learning.
Interest in grammatical competence can be linked to the seminal theories of Chomsky (1965). 
According to this view of L1 acquisition, children possess an innate language learning mechanism 
(a “Language Acquisition Device” or LAD) rooted in a Universal Grammar (UG). UG is a system of 
principles (i.e., universal statements that specify properties shared by all languages) and parameters 
(i.e., universal options available within the principles of UG that explain language variation) and is 
considered to be innate (Dabrowska, 2015; Towell & Hawkins, 1994). Dulay and Burt (1974) argued 
that SLA may be analogous in its usage of the LAD and UG. Within this perspective, there are various 
views on the degree of access to specific UG elements that L2 learners are privy to, beyond what is 
accessible from L1 grammar via transfer, resulting in different views of transfer: (a) The Full Access 
account argues that speakers have the ability to reset their UG parameters when learning a new lan-
guage (White, 1985a; Flynn, 1996), and that all UG mechanisms from the L1 are made available 
for transfer and access when utilizing the L2 (Schwartz & Sprouse, 1994); (b) The Partial Access 
account states that a subset of UG knowledge is available to L2 speakers during language acquisition 
(Hawkins & Chan, 1997; Tsimpli & Roussou, 1991); although the precise aspects of UG knowledge 
that is readily available is a matter of debate; and (c) The No Access account claims that speakers 
cannot access any UG-related mechanisms that are not present in the established L1 (Bley-Vroman, 
1989, 1990; Clahsen & Felser, 2006).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
291
Other models that may also provide explanations of transfer effects are usage-based models in 
which language learning is determined by the properties of input. One such model, MacWhinney’s 
Unified Competition Model (1987, 2012), states that children acquire their L1 based on the presence 
of cues in the target language. How frequently the cue is encountered by the learner as well as 
whether the cue reliably signals the form being learned are both determinants of acquisition (Janssen 
& Meir, 2019; MacWhinney, 1987, 2012). These L1 forms become entrenched and create competi-
tion with the L2 patterns being learned. This results in transfer effects that are stronger in adult than 
child L2 learners as the L1 patterns have had longer to consolidate in the adult learners (Bates & 
MacWhinney, 1981).
Moving forward from the historical perspectives to cross-linguistic transfer, current psycholinguistic 
outlooks on this topic and its processes fall under two distinct approaches to language acquisition. 
The first was largely influenced by the UG framework and assumes that L2 acquisition, including lan-
guage transfer effects, is constrained by an interlanguage (i.e., the current state between the L1 and the 
target L2) that follows UG. This approach led to many studies comparing different types of languages 
with contrasting parameter settings and how different parametric values are treated during the pro-
cess of L2 learning (e.g., White, 1985b) and investigating, more generally, the effect of syntactic 
differences between L1 and L2. In contrast, the second approach applies a functionalist perspective. 
Specifically, it looks at how the L2 learner can process and learn regularities (based on frequency) 
provided in the input (Agebjörn, 2021; MacWhinney, 2012; Shirai, 2019). These different approaches 
to transfer have led to several successful research avenues with largely behavioral research methods. 
With the use of methods that investigate neural processing, we can pinpoint the locus of transfer 
effects. In the section that follows we discuss these methodological issues.
Critical Issues and Topics
There are a number of issues related to the study of cross-linguistic transfer that has made it dif-
ficult to adequately describe the role of transfer in SLA. Current research attempts to document 
transfer in terms of positive vs. negative effects and explain whether these effects are modulated by 
various factors, such as the underlying grammar of the L1 system being applied during the process 
of L2 learning, more strategic processing (i.e., working memory or other cognitive effects), or the 
frequency of structures in the input. To distinguish between these explanations of cross-linguistic 
transfer, we need to ensure that an adequate methodology is implemented alongside appropriate 
research questions. The remainder of this section focuses on methodological considerations and 
research considerations in relation to linguistic and non-linguistic processing.
Methodological Considerations
Historically, issues in the field of SLA, and subsequently cross-linguistic transfer, have been studied 
using behavioral experimental techniques. These have allowed for the collection of information 
regarding accuracy and speed during the production or comprehension of an L2. Although such 
results are valuable, we argue that additional neurocognitive evidence is required to obtain a well-
rounded understanding of the impact of cross-linguistic transfer on L2 acquisition and use. Whereas 
behavioral techniques have contributed to our knowledge on the final state of processing and surface-
level effects, a neurocognitive approach allows for a deeper investigation into the neurological 
underpinnings associated with cross-linguistic transfer, including whether L2 acquisition makes use 
of the same or related processing routines and mechanisms as those employed by L1 speakers.3 
Although the neurocognitive techniques have yet to provide a definitive answer regarding the precise 
mechanisms of transfer effects in SLA, they show promising results (Rothman et al., 2015) and have 
started to contribute to a clearer and more complex understanding of cross-linguistic transfer. The 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
292
remainder of this section discusses two (neuro)cognitive experimental approaches, and how they can 
be used to investigate cross-linguistic transfer.
One useful method for investigating the neural underpinnings of language processing and cross-
linguistic transfer is the event-related brain potentials (ERPs) technique (see, for example, Sabourin 
et al., 2013; Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). By measuring the electrical currents produced in the 
brain, ERPs allow us to see how and when the brain reacts with high temporal resolution. Therefore, 
ERPs are useful for investigating the time-course of a reaction as well as automatic processing of 
language-related stimuli (Luck, 2014). Certain ERP components are strongly associated with lan-
guage processing including the mismatch negativity (MMN), N400, and P600. The MMN is a nega-
tive deflection peaking between 100 and 250 ms post-stimulus that indicates that a change in sound 
has been detected in a stream of otherwise similar sounds (Näätänen, 2001). The N400 is a nega-
tive deflection peaking at 400 ms post-stimulus onset reflective of semantic integration and access 
of words into context (Kutas & Hillard, 1980; Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). Finally, the P600 is a 
positive deflection peaking at 600 ms post-stimulus onset demonstrating syntactic integration and 
reanalysis (Osterhout & Holcomb, 1992). Several aspects of ERP components can be considered 
and compared, such as latency (when an effect starts), amplitude (how strong an effect is), polarity 
(whether the deflection is negative or positive) and scalp topography (where on the scalp the effect 
is seen). In studies of cross-linguistic transfer effects, we can identify which neural mechanisms 
are being recruited for each language by comparing how ERP components differ in L1 and L2 pro-
cessing. Thus, researchers can determine if there is simply a quantitative difference between the L1 
and L2, as reflected by modulations in the timing and strength of a particular component. This can 
be further differentiated from a qualitative difference showing the presence of a different component 
altogether, which may be reflective of the use of distinct mechanisms.
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is another brain-imaging technique. It allows 
researchers to determine where language processes occur at a neural level via changes in blood flow 
(Sabourin & Stowe, 2008a; see also Kousaie & Klein, this volume). Due to its excellent spatial reso-
lution, fMRI can help pinpoint when and if L2 speakers use typical L1 language-related areas in 
the brain for processing or whether they rely on alternative neural resources. Although there seems 
to be fewer studies utilizing fMRI (likely due to less access to the technique for cost and expertise 
reasons) to test cross-linguistic transfer, they provide essential information regarding underlying 
neurocognitive processes and add complementary data to ERP findings.
Linguistic vs. Non-linguistic Processing
By investigating transfer from a neurocognitive perspective, we can determine if L2 learners can learn 
different structures and whether they make use of the same neural mechanisms as native speakers or 
more general cognitive mechanisms. Ultimately, this refers to whether the L2 is learned linguistic-
ally (with primarily the use of linguistic knowledge and strategies) or whether the same processes 
and mechanisms that are used in other cognitive domains (e.g., attention, memory, learning) are used 
in the learning of the L2. In the case of positive transfer from the L1 to L2, we expect to see similar 
ERP components modulated in comparable ways. For example, if grammatical gender information is 
transferred from the L1 to the L2, and gender in the target language results in P600 effects by native 
speakers, then P600 effects would also be expected when gender must be processed in the L2. On the 
other hand, if native-like behavioral level use of the L2 (thought to be the result of positive linguistic 
transfer effects) is in fact reflecting the use of the L1 in a strategic, non-linguistic way, we could 
observe the absence of language-related ERP components or the presence of components relating 
to general cognitive processes (e.g., memory). As discussed below, this distinction in L2 gender 
processing can be seen in the comparison of German and Romance learners of Dutch (Sabourin & 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
293
Stowe, 2008). The German speakers can transfer an almost identical gender agreement system to 
show similar ERP patterns to gender violations as L1 Dutch speakers (a modulation of the P600 
component). On the other hand, Romance speakers show that they can process L2 gender violations, 
although their ERP patterns are suggestive of a more general cognitive strategy to perform like native 
speakers (a late frontal negativity).
Likewise, by using an oddball paradigm to modulate the MMN component it may be possible 
to distinguish between whether L2 speakers discriminate non-native speech sounds acoustically 
(suggestive of non-linguistic processing of the L2 stimuli) or at a phonological level (representing 
linguistic ability to discriminate L2 sounds). An acoustic change in the MMN is seen at bilateral 
scalp sites whereas a phonological MMN is larger in amplitude and left lateralized (Näätänen, 2001; 
Näätänen, Ilmoniemi & Alho, 1994). In short, tracking the presence versus absence of different lin-
guistic ERP components as well as the topography across the development of the L2 should allow for 
an exploration of when and how information from the L1 affects L2 processing.
Current Empirical Knowledge
Using ERPs and fMRI, researchers have begun to test when and how cross-linguistic transfer 
influences the neurocognitive process of language learning. As previously discussed, transfer from 
the L1 to the L2 can be deemed positive or negative (resulting in facilitation or interference) and has 
been studied primarily at the syntactic, lexical, and phonological levels of language acquisition and 
processing. We will now discuss the current neurocognitive literature in relation to varied linguistic 
cross-linguistic phenomena resulting in positive or negative transfer.
Cross-Linguistic Influence Resulting in Positive Transfer
Language similarity plays a considerable role in cross-linguistic transfer resulting in positive 
effects. In particular, related languages that are also typologically similar (e.g., French and Spanish) 
greatly overlap in regard to lexical items and grammatical rules. When an L2 is closely related to 
the established L1, it is argued to result in simpler L2 acquisition. An example of this stems from 
research on cognates, which are words with similar or overlapping phonological/orthographic form 
and meaning. Cognates have been shown to easily map from form to meaning in the L2, displayed 
through ERPs by the presence of a smaller N400 amplitude, suggesting less cognitive effort to recog-
nize or access the item in the L2 (Midgley et al., 2011). Likewise, L2 speech sounds with equivalents 
or near-equivalents in the L1 are easier to produce and perceive (e.g., Werker & Tees, 1984a; 1984b), 
indicating that the processing of non-native speech contrasts is heavily influenced by the phono-
logical system of the native language (Best, McRoberts & Goodell, 2001). In fact, it is possibly such 
an overlapping phonological system that is partly responsible for the cognate effects. There seems to 
be some evidence that both cross-language cognates and cross-language homophones make use of a 
shared L1–L2 language specific network (Ghazi-Saidi & Ansaldo, 2017). In contrast, words that are 
not phonologically similar across the L1 and L2 seem to activate neural structures associated with 
the L1 but also rely on neural regions that are more typically found to be active in working memory 
and attention tasks.
Linguistic overlap of syntactic systems has also been shown to result in positive transfer effects. 
Using fMRI, Jeong and colleagues (2007) found that Korean L1 speakers show similar neural acti-
vation patterns for Korean and Japanese (languages that share a flexible subject–verb–object word 
order), whereas different neural activation was exhibited for Korean and English (languages with 
different syntactic structures).4 The lack of substantial difference between Korean and Japanese is 
attributed to the languages’ shared syntactic structure, resulting in speakers using Japanese L2 effi-
ciently during processing due to positive transfer.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
294
Additional evidence for positive transfer effects at the syntactic level is seen when investigating 
syntactic violations. Kotz and colleagues (2008) studied a group of L1 Spanish–L2 English speakers 
and monolingual English speakers’ neural responses to English sentences containing phrasal 
violations or syntactic ambiguities that would require additional syntactic elements in either lan-
guage to be made unambiguous or syntactically sound. A P600 response was elicited in both groups 
of speakers, consistent with L1 Spanish speakers having positively transferred structural syntactic 
knowledge to their L2. Of particular interest is that similarities in processing were only seen at a 
neurological level during the online ERP task and were not reflected in an offline judgment task, 
reinforcing the importance of using neurocognitive techniques in studies of cross-linguistic transfer. 
Similar transfer effects were found in an earlier study looking at L1 Spanish–L2 English (Tokowicz 
& MacWhinney, 2005).
Further effects of positive word order transfer are seen in Swedish L2 acquisition, a verb-
second (V2) language. Andersson et al. (2019) studied L1 English (non-V2 language)–L2 Swedish, 
L1 German (V2 language)–L2 Swedish, and L1 Swedish speakers. The L1 German participants 
showed an overall pattern of processing like the L1 Swedish speakers. Indeed, the L1 German 
group exhibited fully native-like ERP responses to the stimuli, whereas the L1 English group only 
showed partially similar processing effects. This was attributed to the fact that the L1 German 
speakers were able to transfer their L1 knowledge of V2 word order along with the required pro-
cessing mechanisms.
More examples of positive transfer are found in studies of predictive processing. Alemán Bañón 
and Martin (2021) studied the processing of possessive pronouns in L2 English learners with either 
Spanish or Swedish as an L1. English and Swedish contain possessive pronouns providing refer-
ence to the natural gender of the antecedent (e.g., his/her), whereas in Spanish possessive pronouns 
refer to syntactic features (e.g., number, syntactic gender), of the possessed noun. Therefore, when 
accessing possessive pronouns, Spanish activates representations different from those of English 
and Swedish. Accordingly, native English and L1 Swedish-L2 English speakers showed an N400 
effect when presented with unexpected possessive pronouns (i.e., a mismatch between the possessor 
and possessive pronoun), reflective of integration and access difficulties. This was not observed for 
Spanish L1 learners, showing that only Swedish L1 learners benefit from potential positive cross-
linguistic transfer in processing the gender of English possessive pronouns.
Studies focusing on the grammatical property of gender are often used as a tool to investigate 
cross-linguistic transfer, especially as regards gender agreement and gender congruency (e.g., 
Sabourin et al., 2006; Sabourin & Stowe, 2008b). Gender congruency refers to a noun bearing the 
same gender in two languages (e.g., the table in French, la table, and Spanish, la mesa, both possess 
feminine gender). Using ERPs, it was found that positive transfer effects at the level of linguistic pro-
cessing only hold when the gender categories are similar across the L1 and L2 (Sabourin & Stowe, 
2008b), in contrast to behavioral findings via acceptability judgements (Sabourin et al., 2006).
The studies presented above showed effects of positive transfer at all levels of linguistic pro-
cessing. It seems to be the case that the ability to transfer information from the L1 and have that 
information be successfully used to guide L2 learning facilitates may result in the earlier appearance 
of native-like processing in the L2.
Cross-Linguistic Influence Resulting in Negative Transfer
In contrast to facilitation because of positive cross-linguistic transfer, negative effects are found when 
conflicting information is transferred at various linguistic levels. In studies aimed at determining 
whether L2 learners can acquire and discriminate new speech sounds (e.g., Dehaene-Lambertz, 1997; 
Rivera-Gaxiola et al., 2000), the focus has been on whether speech sounds that are present, or more 
to the point, those that are not present in the learner’s L1 will cause difficulty in the acquisition of a 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
295
new speech contrast. For example, using ERPs, Dehaene-Lambertz (1997) showed that non-native 
contrasts did not elicit a MMN (neither within-category nor between category) demonstrating that the 
MMN is not simply an index of acoustic similarity but that it is modulated by the phonemic status of 
the contrast. On the other hand, Rivera-Gaxiola et al. (2000) did find electrophysiological evidence 
(in the absence of behavioral evidence) that both native and non-native contrasts can elicit an MMN. 
Both studies, however, do not place a primary focus on transfer effects, but instead on the presence 
vs. absence of speech sounds in the L1 vs. L2.
Negative transfer effects are commonly observed at the syntactic level of cross-linguistic 
transfer, particularly in relation to variation in word order between the L1 and L2 (e.g., Foucart 
& Frenck-Mestre, 2012). For instance, Erdocia and Laka (2018) studied whether word order in 
the L1 (Spanish) influences the processing of word order in the L2 (Basque). Specifically, they 
investigated the processing of subject–verb–object (SVO) and object–verb–subject (OVS) word 
orders. The canonical word order in Spanish is SVO, whereas for Basque it is subject–object–verb 
(SOV); OVS word order is possible but non-canonical in both languages. Native speakers of 
Basque showed a P600 effect to non-canonical (but grammatical) SVO sentences reflecting the 
idea that non-canonical word orders are processed, at least initially, as ungrammatical. However, 
L2 speakers did not show a P600 effect to the non-canonical SVO word order, which is standard in 
their L1. Specifically, L2 speakers processed this word-order using the grammatical restrictions of 
their L1, consistent with the negative transfer causing them to fail to recognize the non-canonical 
nature of the SVO order in Basque. Likewise, another ERP study (Mickan & Lemhöfer, 2020) also 
showed that L2 word order processing remained difficult for learners when there were differences 
between the L1 and the L2 and that this was the case for even advanced L2 users. Importantly, they 
provided data suggesting that, even for the same participants, comparable L1 and L2 structures 
resulted in native-like L2 processing whereas structures that are conflicting do not result in native-
like processing.
A handful of studies have focused on the processing of negative cross-linguistic transfer in con-
junction with predictive processing (e.g., Van Bergen & Flecken, 2017). In the previously mentioned 
Alemán Bañón and Martin (2021) study, whereas positive transfer effects were seen for L1 Swedish–
L2 English speakers, L1 Spanish–L2 English speakers provided evidence for negative transfer effects 
by displaying a P600, suggesting that speakers relied on the structure of their L1 in relation to antici-
patory processing of the gender of possessive pronouns.
Further evidence for negative transfer has been found with agreement relations between languages 
with comparable or conflicting adjective placement. For example, both French and German allow pre-
posed adjectives, but only French permits post-posed adjectives. Foucart and Frenck-Mestre (2011) 
tested L1 French and L1 German–L2 French learners: participants were read French plural sentences 
containing pre-posed adjectives and plural sentences with post-posed adjectives where the gender of 
the adjective either agreed (matched) or disagreed (mismatched) with the corresponding noun. L1 
French speakers exhibited a P600 to gender agreement violations between pre-posed adjectives and 
the noun, as well as post-posed adjectives and the noun. In contrast, German–French learners did not 
show an effect of agreement errors in either adjective condition. Although the researchers acknow-
ledge that their study was not intended to directly probe transfer effects, and therefore cannot assert 
any strong conclusions, they do discuss the possibility that negative transfer effects from German 
may hinder gender agreement processing. As opposed to French, grammatical gender is not overtly 
marked when the plural is used in German and, consequently, L1 German speakers potentially relied 
on this construction, resulting in processing differences.
In all, research suggests that differences between languages that may cause negative transfer 
effects do seem to result in differences in the processing of the L2. This non-native like performance 
in the L2 is likely due to the interference of the L1 structures.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
296
Current Trends and Future Directions
As the field of SLA and cross-linguistic transfer continues to grow and evolve, new methodo-
logical and experimental considerations surface. For instance, various neuroimaging techniques are 
becoming increasingly implemented not only within the fields of psycholinguistics and L2 processing 
but in the more specific research interest of cross-linguistic transfer. This is allowing researchers 
to investigate more than just the effects of positive and/or negative linguistic processing strategies 
at a surface level. For example, Wang and colleagues (2022) investigated morphosyntactic cross-
linguistic influence from the L1 (Spanish or Mandarin) to L2 (English) using functional near infrared 
spectroscopy (fNIRS).
Additionally, researchers are adopting newer trends, such as artificial language learning paradigms. 
Artificial languages are useful tools to investigate how natural languages are learned, as they are 
made up of linguistic rules and constraints that can mimic those found in natural language while con-
trolling the number of variables learners are exposed to (e.g., Ferman, et al., 2009; Morgan-Short, 
2020). Artificial languages are taught in a controlled environment where researchers can ensure that 
all participants have received equal amounts of input (Braine et al., 1990), and that they have not had 
previous exposure to the language (Hulstijn, 1997). L2 learning provides a logical application for the 
artificial language learning approach, as all participants would necessarily already have a native lan-
guage and be L2 (or Ln) learners (e.g., Ettlinger, et al., 2016; Robinson, 2005). Thus, these studies are 
able to model what is likely to happen during natural SLA in a controlled manner. Studies combining 
artificial language learning techniques with investigations of cross-linguistic transfer are gaining in 
importance (e.g., Berthelsen et al., 2021; Havas et al., 2017). For instance, Berthelsen and colleagues 
(2020) found that speakers of Swedish, a language with word accents (an aspect of some types of 
tonal languages) show positive transfer of morphosyntactic tone when learning a novel artificial lan-
guage. Such approaches could be incorporated into neurocognitive studies of cross-linguistic transfer.
Common methods of testing for cross-linguistic transfer effects utilize stimuli items such as 
sentences, determiner phrases, and single words. Despite the valuable insight these constructions 
provide, it is rarely the case that they are thus spoken, heard, or read in isolation during natural-
istic communication. Therefore, these widely implemented methods are not necessarily ecologic-
ally valid (i.e., representative of natural language comprehension and use). Research has begun to 
incorporate more ecologically valid measures (Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkänen, 2018); for example, 
Alemán Bañón and Martin (2021) implemented a measure that is more reflective of conversational 
practices and interactions by providing participants with stories consisting of contextual information 
and potential responses.
Recent studies are also touching on the importance of investigating non-linguistic cognitive 
processes in conjunction with cross-linguistic transfer (e.g., Verbeek et al., 2022). Inhibitory con-
trol is of particular interest, as speakers are required to contend with interference from the L1 that 
may hinder processing in the L2. In addition, by investigating non-linguistic processing, we can 
detect what kind of strategies are being used during L2 acquisition and processing. For example, Von 
Grebmer Zu Wolfsthurn and colleagues (2021) suggest investigating ERP components such as the 
P300, which is thought to underlie more general inhibitory processes. It would also be worthwhile to 
determine the precise roles of other cognitive mechanisms like working memory and cognitive flexi-
bility (Diamond, 2013; Valian, 2015) on the process of cross-linguistic transfer from the L1 to the L2 
and in the ultimate attainment of the L2.
Lastly, there are several other psycholinguistic factors, such as metalinguistic awareness, pro-
cessing demands, age of acquisition, and proficiency, that often play important roles in the ultimate 
attainment of the L2. These factors are often reflected in L2 learning strategies (Bialystok, 1990; 
Kellerman, 1995, Lago et al., 2021) and have been shown to interact with cross-linguistic transfer. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
297
For example, increased proficiency in the L2 can counter negative transfer effects, such that highly 
proficient non-native speakers show native-like processing patterns (Hopp, 2007). Future studies 
determining the strength of these effects, how they interact with language similarity and their time-
line in affecting L2 processing are desirable in contributing to a full-fledged understanding of the 
mechanisms of cross-linguistic transfer.
Notes
1	 Various terms are used throughout the literature to refer to cross-linguistic transfer: transfer, cross-linguistic 
influence, language transfer, etc. For the purpose of this chapter, we will refer to this phenomenon as cross-
linguistic transfer, or transfer for short.
2	 It should be noted that language-specific structures may also exist: these are not expected to participate in 
transfer effects, neither positive nor negative.
3	 Falling between behavioral and neurocognitive methods is eye-tracking, which can reveal information 
regarding cognitive load and the time-course of processes.
4	 It should be noted that participants in this study were L1 Korean, L2 English, L3 Japanese speakers; the 
researchers refer to both English and Japanese as L2s.
Further Readings
This article examines behavioral and ERP effects of proficiency and syntactic structure similarity (positive 
transfer) and conflict (negative transfer).
Mickan, A., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). Tracking syntactic conflict between languages over the course of L2 acqui-
sition: A cross-sectional event-related study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(5), 822–846. https://doi.
org/10.1162/jocn_a_01528
This article uses an artificial language learning paradigm to investigate cross-linguistic transfer effects with bilin-
gual heritage speakers.
Perreira Soares, S.M., Kupisch, T., & Rothman, J. (2022). Testing potential transfer effects in heritage and adult 
L2 bilinguals acquiring a mini grammar as an additional language: An ERP approach. Brain Sciences, 12(5), 
669. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci12050669
This article utilizes a more recent neuroimaging technique to provide valuable neurological information regarding 
cross-linguistic transfer.
Wang, D., Wang, S., Zinszer, B., Sheng, L., & Jasińska, K. (2022). Cross-linguistic influences of L1 on L2 mor-
phosyntactic processing: An fNIRS study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 63, 101063. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneuroling.2022.101063
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Ariane Senécal for her thoughtful edits and suggestions, and the editors of this edition for their 
comments.
References
Agebjörn, A. (2021). Swedish noun-phrase structure in Russian-speaking learners: An explorative study of L1 
influence and input-frequency effects. Journal of the European Second Language Association, 5(1), 16–29. 
http://doi.org/10.22599/jesla.70
Alemán Bañón, J., & Martin, C. (2021). The role of crosslinguistic differences in second language anticipa-
tory processing: An event-related potentials study. Neuropsychologia, 155, 107797. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2021.107797
Andersson, A., Sayehli, S., & Gullberg, M. (2019). Language background affects online word order processing 
in second language but not offline. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(4), 802–825. http://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728918000573
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
298
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1981). Second language acquisition from a functional perspective. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 379(1), 190–210.
Berthelsen, S.G., Horne, M., Shtyrov, Y., & Roll, M. (2020). Different neural mechanisms for rapid acquisition 
of words with grammatical tone in learners from tonal and non-tonal backgrounds: ERP evidence. Brain 
Research, 1729, 146614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2019.146614
Berthelsen, S.G., Horne, M., Shtyrov, Y., & Roll, M. (2021). Phonological transfer effects in novice learners: A 
learner’s brain detects grammar errors only if the language sounds familiar. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 24(4), 656–669. http://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921000134
Best, C., McRoberts, G., & Goodell, E. (2001). Discrimination of non-native consonant contrasts varying in 
perceptual assimilation to the listener’s native phonological system. Journal of the Acoustical Society of 
America, 109(2), 775–794. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1332378
Bialystok, E. (1990). Communication strategies: A psychological analysis of second language use. Basil 
Blackwell.
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., & Pylkkänen, L. (2018). Ecological validity in bilingualism research and the bilingual 
advantage. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 22(12), 1117–1126. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2018.10.001
Bley-Vroman, R. (1989). What is the logical problem of foreign language learning? In S. Gass & J. Schacter 
(Eds.), Linguistic perspectives on second language acquisition (pp. 41–68. Cambridge University Press.
Bley-Vroman, R. (1990). The logical problem of foreign language learning. Linguistic Analysis, 20, 3–49. http://
doi.org/ 10.1017/CBO9781139524544.005
Braine, M.D.S., Brody, R.E., & Brooks, P.J. (1990). Exploring language acquisition in children with miniature 
artificial language: Effects of item and pattern frequency, arbitrary subclasses, and correction. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 29, 591–610. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(90)90054-4
Chomsky, N. (1995). Bare phrase structure. In G. Webelhuth (Ed.), Government and binding theory and the min-
imalist program (pp. 71–132). Blackwell.
Clashen, H., & Felser, C. (2006). Grammatical processing in language learners. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(1), 
3–42. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716406060024
Corder, S.P. (1967). The significance of learners’ errors. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language 
Teaching, 5, 161–170.
Dabrowska, E. (2015). What exactly is Universal Grammar, and has anyone seen it? Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 
852. http://doi.org/ 10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00852
Dehaene-Lambertz, G. (1997). Electrophysiological correlates of categorical phoneme perception in adults. 
NeuroReport, 8, 919–924.
Diamond, A. (2013). Executive functions. Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 135–168. http://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-psych-113011-143750
Díaz, B., Erdocia, K., de Menezes, R.F., Mueller, J.L., Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Laka, I. (2016). Electrophysiological 
correlates of second-language syntactic processes are related to native and second language distance regard-
less of age of acquisition. Frontiers in Psychology, 12(7), 133. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00133
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electro encephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dulay, H.C., & Burt, M.K. (1974). Natural sequences in child language acquisition. Language Learning, 24, 
37–53. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1974.tb00234.x
Eckman, F., Moravcsik, E., & Writh, J. (1986). Markedness. Plenum Press.
Erdocia, K., & Laka, I. (2018). Negative transfer effects on L2 word order processing. Frontiers in Psychology, 
9, 337. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00337
Ettlinger, M., Morgan-Short, K., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., & Wong, P.C.M. (2016). The relationship between arti-
ficial and second language learning. Cognitive Science, 40(4), 822–847. https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12257
Ferman, S., Olshtain, E., Schechtman, E., & Karni, A. (2009). The acquisition of a linguistic skill by 
adults: Procedural and declarative memory interact in the learning of an artificial morphological rule. Journal 
of Neurolinguistics, 22, 384–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2008.12.002
Flege, J.E. (1995). Second-language speech learning: Theory, findings, and problems. In W. Strange (Ed.), 
Speech perception and linguistic experience: Issues in cross-linguistic research (pp. 229–273). York Press.
Flege, J.E., & Bohn, O.-S. (2021). The revised speech learning model (SLM-r). In R. Waylands (Ed.), Second 
language speech learning: Theoretical and empirical progress (pp. 3–83). Cambridge University Press.
Flynn, S. (1996). A parameter setting approach to second language acquisition. In W. Ritchie & T. Bhatia (Eds.), 
Handbook of second language acquisition (pp. 121–158). Academic Press.
Flynn, S. (2019). Foreword. In J.M. Gutierrez-Mangado, M. Martinez-Adrián & F. Gallardo-del-Puerto. (Eds.), 
Cross-linguistic influence: From empirical evidence to classroom practice (pp. vii–vix). Springer Cham. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-22066-2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
299
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2011). Grammatical gender processing in L2: Electrophysiological evidence 
of the effect of L1–L2 syntactic similarity. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 14(3), 379–399. http://
doi.org/10.1017/S136672891000012X
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2012). Can late L2 learners acquire new grammatical features? Evidence 
from ERPs and eye-tracking. Journal of Memory and Language, 66(1), 226–248. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2011.07.007
Ghazi-Saidi, L., & Ansaldo, A.I. (2017). The neural correlates of semantic and phonological transfer 
effects: Language distance matters. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 20(5), 1080–1094. http://doi.org/
10.1017/S136672891600064X
Havas, V., Laine, M., & Fornells, A.R. (2017). Brain signatures of early lexical and morphological learning of a 
new language. Neuropsychologia, 101, 47–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2017.04.005
Hawkins, R., & Chan, C.Y.-H. (1997). The partial availability of Universal Grammar in second language acqui-
sition: The “failed functional features hypothesis.” Second Language Research, 13, 187–226. https://doi.org/
10.1191/026765897671476153
Hopp, H. (2007). Ultimate attainment at the interfaces in second language acquisition: Grammar and pro-
cessing. (Publication No. 9789088910234). [Doctoral dissertation, University of Groningen]. University of 
Groningen.
Hulstijn, J.H. (1997). Second language acquisition research in the research lab: Possibilities and limitations. 
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 19, 131–144. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263197002015
Janssen, B., & Meir, N. (2019). Production, comprehension and repetition of accusative case by monolingual 
Russian and bilingual Russian-Dutch and Russian-Hebrew-speaking children. Linguistic Approaches to 
Bilingualism, 9(4–5), 736–765. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.17021.jan
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Haji, T., Usui, N., Taria, M., Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2007). 
Effect of syntactic similarity on cortical activation during second language processing: A comparison of 
English and Japanese among native Korean trilinguals. Human Brain Mapping, 28, 194–204. https://doi.org/
10.1002/hbm.20269
Keijzer, M., & Seton, B. (this volume). Second language neurocognition and first language attrition. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Kellerman, E. (1995). Crosslinguistic influence: Transfer to nowhere? Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 15, 
125–150. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190500002658
Kotz, S.A. (2009). A critical review of ERP and fMRI evidence on L2 syntactic processing. Brain & Language, 
109, 68–74. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2008.06.002
Kotz, S.A., Holcomb, P.J., & Osterhout, L. (2008). ERPs reveal comparable syntactic sentence processing in 
native and non-native readers of English. Acta Psychologia, 128(3), 514–527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.act
psy.2007.10.003
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge Handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: finding meaning in the N400 component of 
the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual review of psychology, 62, 621–647. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.psych.093008.131123
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Event-related brain potentials to semantically inappropriate and surprisingly 
large words. Biological Psychology, 11(2), 99–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/0301-0511(80)90046-0
Lado, R. (1957). Linguistics across Cultures. Ann Arbor, MI. University of Michigan Press.
Lago, S., Mosca, M., & Stutter Garcia, A. (2021). The role of crosslinguistic influence in multilingual pro-
cessing: Lexicon versus syntax. Language Learning, 71(S1), 163–192. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12412
Luck, S.J. (2014). An introduction to the event-related potential technique. MIT Press.
MacWhinney, B. (1987). Applying the competition model to bilingualism. Applied Psycholinguistics, 8(4), 315–
327. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716400000357
MacWhinney, B. (2012). The logic of the Unified Model. In S. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), Handbook of second 
language acquisition (pp. 211–227). Routledge.
Mickan, A., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). Tracking syntactic conflict between languages over the course of L2 acqui-
sition: A cross-sectional event-related study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(5), 822–846. https://doi.
org/10.1162/jocn_a_01528
Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Grainger, J. (2011). Effects of cognate status on word comprehension in second 
language learners: An ERP investigation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 23(7), 1634–1647. https://doi.
org/10.1162/jocn.2010.21463
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Laura Sabourin and Gabrielle Manning
300
Morgan-Short, K. (2020). Insights into the neural mechanisms of becoming bilingual: A brief synthesis of second 
language research with artificial linguistic systems. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(1), 87–91. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728919000701
Mueller, J.L. (2005). Electrophysiological correlates of second language processing. Second Language Research, 
21(2), 152–172. https://doi.org/10.1191/0267658305sr256oa
Näätänen, R. (2001). The perception of speech sounds by the human brain as reflected by the mismatch nega-
tivity (MMN) and its magnetic equivalent (MMNm). Psychophysiology, 38, 1–21. http://doi.org/10.1111/
1469-8986.3810001
Näätänen, R., Ilmoniemi, R.J., & Alho, K. (1994). Magnetoencephalography in studies of human cognitive brain 
function. Trends in Neuroscience, 17, 389–395. https://doi.org/10.1016/0166-2236(94)90048-5
Odlin, T. (2003). Cross-linguistic influence. The Handbook of Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Blackwell.
Osterhout, L., & Holcomb, P.J. (1992). Event-related brain potentials elicited by syntactic anomaly. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 31(6), 785–806. https://doi.org/10.1016/0749-596X(92)90039-Z
Perreira Soares, S.M., Kupisch, T., & Rothman, J. (2022). Testing potential transfer effects in heritage and adult 
L2 bilinguals acquiring a mini grammar as an additional language: An ERP approach. Brain Sciences, 12(5), 
669. https://doi.org/10.3390/brainsci12050669
Rivera-Gaxiola, M., Csibra, G., Johnson, M.H., & Karmiolff-Smith, A. (2000). Electrophysiological correlates 
of crosslinguistic speech perception in native English speakers. Behavioral Brain Research, 111, 13–23. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S0166-4328(00)00139-X
Robinson, P. (2005). Cognitive abilities, chunk-strength and frequency effects in implicit artificial grammar and 
incidental second language learning: Replications of Reber, Walkenfeld, and Hernstadt (1991) and Knowlton 
and Squire (1996) and their relevance for SLA. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 235–268. http://
doi.org/10.1017/S0272263105050126
Rothman, J., Alemán Bañón, J., & González Alonso, J. (2015). Neurolinguistic measures of typological effects 
in multilingual transfer: Introducing an ERP methodology. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1087. https://doi.org/
10.3389/fpsyg.2015.01087
Sabourin, L., Brien, C., & Tremblay, M.-C. (2013). Electrophysiology of second language processing: The 
past, present and future. In M.P. García Mayo, M. Junkal Gutierrez-Mangado, & M. Martínez Adrián (Eds.) 
Contemporary approaches to second language acquisition (pp. 221–242). John Benjamins.
Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L.A. (2008a). Neurobiology of language learning. In B. Spolsky & F.M. Hult (Eds.), 
The handbook of educational linguistics (pp. 25–37). Blackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470694138.ch3
Sabourin, L., & Stowe, L.A. (2008b). Second language processing: When are first and second languages processed 
similarly. Second Language Research, 24(3), 397–430. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658308090186
Sabourin, L., Stowe, L.A., & de Haan, G.J. (2006). Transfer effects in learning a second language grammatical 
gender system. Second Language Research, 22(1), 1–29. https://doi.org/10.1191/0267658306sr259oa
Schwartz, B.D., & Sprouse, R. (1994). Word order and nominative case in nonnative language acquisition. In T. 
Hoekstra & B. Schwartz (Eds.), Language acquisition studies in generative grammar (pp. 317–368). John 
Benjamins.
Serratrice, L. (2013). Cross-linguistic influence in bilingual development: Determinants and mechanisms. 
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 3, 3–25. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.3.1.01ser
Shirai, Y. (2019). Connectionism and second language acquisition. Routledge.
Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit measures of sensitivity to violations in second 
language grammar: An event-related potential investigation. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27(2), 
173–204. http://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263105050102
Towell, R., & Hawkins, R. (1994). Approaches to second language acquisition. Multilingual Matters Ltd.
Tsimpli, I.M., & Roussou, A. (1991). Parameter resetting in L2? UCL Working Paper in Linguistics, 3, 149–169.
Valian, V. (2015). Bilingualism and cognition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(1). 3–24. http://doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728914000522
Van Bergen, G., & Flecken, M. (2017). Putting things in new places: Linguistic experience modulates the pre-
dictive power of placement verb semantics. Journal of Memory and Language, 92, 26–42. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jml.2016.05.003
Verbeek, L., Vissers, C., Blumenthal, M., & Verhoeven, L. (2022). Cross-language transfer and attentional con-
trol in early bilingual speech. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 6(2), 450–468. 1–19. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/2021_JSLHR-21-00104
Von Grebmer Zu Wolfsthurn, S.V.G., Robles, L.P., & Schiller, N.O. (2021). Cross-linguistic interference 
in late language learners: An ERP study. Brain and Language, 221, 104993. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2021.104993
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross-Linguistic Transfer in Second Language Neurocognition
301
Wang, D., Wang, S., Zinszer, B., Sheng, L., & Jasińska, K. (2022). Cross-linguistic influences of L1 on L2 mor-
phosyntactic processing: An fNIRS study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 63, 101063. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jneuroling.2022.101063
Wartenburger, I., Heekeren, H.R., Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S.F., Villringer, A., & Perani, D. (2003). Early 
setting of grammatical processing in the bilingual brain. Neuron, 37, 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(02)01150-9
Werker, J.F., & Tees, R.C. (1984a). Cross-language speech perception: Evidence for perceptual reorganiza-
tion during the first year of life. Infant Behavior and Development, 7(1), 49–63. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0163-6383(84)80022-3
Werker, J.F., & Tees, R.C. (1984b). Phonemic and phonetic factors in adult cross-language speech perception. 
Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 75, 1866–1878. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.390988
White, L. (1985a). The acquisition of parameterized grammar: subjacency in second language acquisition. 
Second Language Research, 1, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676583850010010
White, L. (1985b). The “pro-drop” parameter in adult second language acquisition. Language Learning, 35, 
47–62. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1985.tb01014.x
Whitman, R., & Jackson, K. (1972). The unpredictability of contrastive analysis. Language Learning, 22, 29–41. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1972.tb00071
Xu, E.S., & Wong, P.C.M. (this volume). First language/second language cross-linguistic influence on third 
language acquisition via neurocognitive memory systems. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The 
Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

302
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-28
22
SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION AND FIRST 
LANGUAGE ATTRITION
Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
Introduction and Critical Definitions
The research field of language attrition is unique in that the initiation of few other research realms can 
be marked so distinctly. In 1980, the Loss of Language Skills conference organized at the University 
of Pennsylvania and the ensuing edited volume by Richard Lambert and Barbara Freed (1982) marked 
the start of empirical work in a research field that, until that time, had mainly generated interest based 
on self-perceived changes in mastery and accessibility of the first language or additional languages 
as new languages were being learned. The 1982 volume, which targeted second language loss after 
periods of non-use, did not yet clearly distinguish between irretrievable language loss and the tem-
porary inaccessibility of earlier learned languages.
In subsequent years, this very distinction formed the main tenet in the development of the research 
field. The term language attrition was introduced, setting temporarily inaccessible language firmly 
apart from the language loss that may characterize pathological settings and processes following 
neurological or psychological cases associated with stroke, brain trauma, or normal aging (cf. Köpke, 
2004 for a more detailed account). First language (L1) attrition also came to be distinctly studied 
from second (L2) or foreign language attrition, based on the premise that the two “share termin-
ology, [but] there are also a number of differences that have to be clarified” (Mehotcheva & Köpke, 
2019, p. 332). L1 attrition came to be more widely studied compared to L2 attrition, but defining L1 
attrition proved difficult, resulting in a “terminological jungle” (Köpke, 2004) and the phenomenon 
was mostly defined based on what it did not entail. The most commonly used definition to this day 
describes L1 attrition as the non-pathological decline in a language that had previously been mastered 
and used as the dominant language by an individual (Köpke & Schmid, 2004). It is important to note 
that the field of L1 attrition is highly interdisciplinary (cf. Raffaldini, 1983), and moves “at the cross-
roads of brain, mind, and society” (Köpke, 2007). It is counterintuitive, then, that a neurocognitive 
perspective on attrition has only relatively recently been introduced. Indeed, Gallo et al. (2021), in a 
recent overview of the neurological correlates of L1 attrition, note specifically the “salient lacuna in 
this field, namely the neurocognitive mechanisms underlying linguistic attrition” (p. 2).
In this chapter, we explore L1 attrition specifically from a neurocognitive perspective. We depart 
from the intricate definition of the field and explore—through historical perspectives and current state 
of the art—whether this difficulty may not partly be due to the fact that language attrition cannot be 
seen in isolation from more broadly construed multilingual perspectives.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
303
Historical Perspectives of Neurocognitive Approaches to L1 Attrition
Despite the earliest (1982) endeavor to adopt an interdisciplinary perspective, including calls to 
incorporate neurocognitive approaches and research methods (cf. Raffaldini, 1983), language attrition 
has mostly been studied using linguistic, applied linguistic and sociolinguistic approaches. Linguistic 
accounts of attrition have traditionally been concerned with the question how linguistic proper-
ties change as a function of specific attrition settings, typically pointing to typological distinctions 
between the L1 and L2 and using language contact models to interpret research findings (Schmid & 
De Leeuw, 2019). Indeed, attrition was first viewed as “a special case of variability” (Anderson, 1982, 
p. 86). More applied research questions have centered on the consequences of (L2) language attrition 
for language teaching practices, asking how language teaching practices could be geared towards 
long-term language retention and maintenance (cf. Kupske, 2019). With sociolinguistic-oriented 
attrition studies, finally, came the realization that attrition is manifested radically differently in indi-
viduals, warranting a closer inspection into the combined “extralinguistic, personal, and individual 
predictors” that drive the attrition process (Schmid & Cherciov, 2019, p. 268).
Köpke and Keijzer (2019) describe that it took 20 years since the inauguration of the field for the 
first collection of papers specifically detailing neurolinguistic attrition dimensions to be published. 
The premise that underlies psycho- and neurolinguistic investigations of language attrition is that 
attrition cannot be seen in isolation from processes and mechanisms fundamental to human cogni-
tion. After all, attrition occurs in the mind and brain. Köpke and Keijzer (2019) detail that one of the 
first psycholinguistically inspired attrition questions was related to the language competence versus 
performance dichotomy (cf. Bialystok & Sharwood Smith, 1985, for a more detailed account); to 
what extent do changes in language use and mastery that are witnessed in attriters reflect underlying 
changes in language representation and/or to what extent are underlying representations intact but are 
the fluctuations in language use due to competition (two languages competing for limited cognitive 
resources)?
Once psycho- and neurolinguistic approaches became more commonplace in attrition work, one 
of the challenges was to interweave what we know about language processing and access with psy-
chosocial accounts (see also Bylund, 2019, for an elaboration on psychosocial effects underlying lan-
guage attrition): how do life events and extralinguistic, highly individual factors modulate language 
accessibility at a neurocognitive level? Integrating psycho- and neurolinguistic models and theoret-
ical frameworks with sociolinguistic ones has proven challenging in the broader realm of multilin-
gualism studies as well (De Bot, 2019).
In relation to this question, one of the most robust findings in language attrition research is that 
there are profound qualitative and quantitative differences in the attested attrition and online L1 pro-
cessing between those speakers who, due to sudden and impactful life events beyond their control, 
find themselves in situations where they are abruptly cut off from their L1 environment versus those 
who continue to reside in their home language environment until adulthood and have more agency in 
language dominance shift patterns. Within the former category, the case of international adoptees has 
come to be widely investigated (cf. Pierce et al., 2019, for an overview), but extends to the well-cited 
case of German Jews who fled the Nazi regime at different times before, during, and after World War 
II and were found to show different degrees of attrition based on how traumatic their experiences had 
been, reported in Schmid (2002).
In more recent years, inspired by an integrated account where the neurocognitive bases for attrition 
are studied in conjunction with psychosocial factors, a tenet to place attrition on the more general 
multilingualism research spectrum can be seen. Indeed, multilingual language processing studies 
have vastly advanced in recent years (reflected in the contributions in the current volume). Integrating 
and embedding language attrition within this framework may at first glance seem as undoing the 
work of carving a research niche for language attrition but instead creates a bidirectional research 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
304
opportunity: rather than Anderson (1982) describing attrition as “a special case of variability,” it is 
a special case of multilingual language processing and use, shedding light on more general multilin-
gual models. Moreover, insights into the neurofunctional and cognitive bases of language can greatly 
inform the mechanisms underlying language attrition.
Theoretical Perspectives: The Potential of Neuroscience  
Insights to Shape Attrition Research
From a neurocognitive perspective, attrition is viewed as a language processing, memory, or brain 
mechanism phenomenon. With that, attrition work has greatly profited from recent advances in both 
neuroscience methods and models, but much unexplored potential remains. Indeed, notions based on 
neurocognitive foundations, such as language activation and inhibition, have been foundational in 
psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic attrition research, but other neuroscientific insights have hardly 
been taken into account. Köpke and Keijzer (2019) point, for instance, to research with monolinguals 
that have resulted in models of the neural substrate and, crucially, the time course of language pro-
cessing (e.g. Friederici, 2012; Hickok, 2014; Price, 2012). Although these models are hard to trans-
late directly to multilingual speakers, an attempt may well prove worthwhile as the time course of 
language processing changes in attrition is crucial.
But perhaps the greatest potential in transferring neuroscience insights to attrition settings lies 
in the construct of neural plasticity. In the realm of language development, critical periods have 
received abundant attention; a later onset of language acquisition has traditionally been associated 
with compromised native-like attainment (cf. Abrahamsson & Hyltenstam, 2009). But, reversely, it 
has been claimed that adults, having reached full language maturation, are less susceptible to attrition 
than children, who may only have partly developed their first language when attrition set in. This 
has led Bylund (2019) to postulate principles that relate age effects to attrition, but he adds that “an 
important question that is open to further research concerns the mechanisms underlying age effects in 
attrition” (p. 287). Illustrative in this context is neuroscience work demonstrating that brain pathways 
are malleable and adaptive when new skills (including language skills) are learned and that rapid func-
tional and structural changes can be attested in children as well as adults. This has been shown both 
at a micro-level involving the learning of new speech sounds (see Myers & Furhmeister, this volume) 
but also more broadly in learning novel languages (see Ekerdt et al., this volume). While most brain 
flexibility has been reported at the macroscopic level, meaning in changed brain volume and/or func-
tional connectivity, recent explorations have also found the neurobiological bases of these adaptations 
to be observable at the cellular level (Pliatsikas et al., 2021). These authors found metabolite con-
centration differences between mono and multilingual speakers specifically in the basal ganglia, a 
structure known to be susceptible to restructuring following multilingual experiences. Important for 
the context of attrition is that Pliatsikas, in his Dynamic Restructuring Model, postulates that such 
changes are not irreversible: structural brain adaptations may be undone depending on different lan-
guage input and exposure patterns (Pliatsikas, 2020; see also Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume).
The potential of applying neuroscientific evidence to attrition also lies in the use of innovative 
tools and methods of data collection, extending attrition work that has so far mainly relied on behav-
ioral evidence to both structural and connectivity-related brain imaging data (see Kousaie & Klein, 
this volume; see Rossi et al., this volume) Findings from Osterhout et al. (2006, 2008) add to this 
by suggesting that event-related potentials (ERPs; see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume) allow us to see 
changes arising as a function of classroom L2 instruction in the brain’s electrical activity. The poten-
tial of the ERP metric has, more recently, been pointed out for second and foreign language attrition 
(Osterhout et al., 2019), showing that the ERP neural indicator of grammatical processing (the P600) 
“decreased in magnitude during the attrition period, whereas lexical sensitivity (reflected by the N400 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
305
effect) increased over time” (p. 415; see also the section “Critical research outcomes and current 
empirical knowledge” below).
Critical Issues and Topics
Neuroimaging methods, as opposed to behavioral measures, are sensitive enough to pick up changes 
in language processing ahead of overt changes in behavior (McLaughlin et al., 2004). For a long time, 
attrition was regarded a long-term and gradual process; in guidelines, researchers were recommended 
to observe a minimum of 10 years of subjects being away from the home language environment and 
immersed in a new language environment (Schmid, 2011). But with the advent of neuroimaging 
techniques, bidirectional (L1 to L2 and vice versa) influences are detectable at much shorter time 
intervals. Novel skill learning studies other than language show that functional neural effects may be 
most profound in initial stages of familiarization with the new skills, whereas structural changes most 
likely follow after prolonged periods of exposure and input, but can also set in quicker than has previ-
ously been assumed (see e.g. Li et al., 2014 for an overview). This has provided an important impetus 
for researchers to emphasize the need for an integrative account of attrition, showing that what is 
labeled attrition may have its origin in general memory retrieval processes; Linck and Kroll (2019) 
go as far as to postulate that good language learners may also be good forgetters; they allow the L2 to 
impact on the accessibility and use of the L1 at early stages of L2 mastery. Based on psycholinguistic 
laboratory studies and relying on so-called retrieval induced forgetting paradigms, they show that 
more local effects of having difficulty accessing the L1 after having been asked to name items in an 
L2 for a set number of times may not be fundamentally different from global effects that ensue from 
prolonged immersion periods. By consequence, attrition effects may even be detected in the absence 
of a clearly marked shift from an L1 to L2 environment and can also characterize language learning in 
subjects who still reside in their dominant language environment (see also Bice & Kroll, 2015). The 
fact that attrition can happen in the absence of a radical shift in language use patterns or immersion 
experiences is not new; already in 2002, Van Hell and Dijkstra posited that foreign language know-
ledge can influence native language performance, even in exclusively native contexts. This finding 
is extended by Chang (2015, 2019), who looked at L1 phonetic drift following a brief but intense 
foreign language course, where he ascribed some of these effects to L2 exposure and some to L2 use 
(see Keijzer, 2020, for a more detailed summary of these studies).
Based on these insights, a refinement of the original definition of language attrition seems to be in 
order. Rather than the non-pathological decline in a language that had previously been mastered and 
used as the dominant language by an individual (Köpke & Schmid, 2004; see Introduction), attrition 
from a neurocognitive and integrative multilingual perspective is perhaps better conceptualized as a 
phenomenon that cannot be seen in isolation from L2 development. This renewed approach in turn 
bears relevance to two of the most commonly invoked questions in the context of attrition: 1) Is L1 
attrition primarily caused by reduced L1 use or increased L2 use?; and 2) Is the phenomenon of L1 
attrition temporary or permanent? In relation to the first question, Keijzer (2020) shows that studies 
have pointed to both options in the past but that psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic attrition studies 
have emphasized that “competition in processing multiple languages in one mind more so than 
changes to the L1 alone” (p. 223) should be the main object of study in attrition work. In response 
to the second question, too, a strong position of L1 attrition leading to irreversible changes is most 
likely untenable based on insights from neurocognitive investigations of attrition. There is additional 
evidence of the L1, after years of non-use and apparent attrition, resurfacing in older adulthood. 
This phenomenon, labeled “language reversion,” has been empirically investigated in Schmid and 
Keijzer (2009). But converging evidence is also found in other work, ranging from once suppressed 
L1s becoming accessible again following hypnosis (Footnick, 2007), to retraining studies of once 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
306
lost languages in international adoptees (Zhou, 2015). Collectively, these findings invoke the so-
called savings paradigm, which stipulates that languages learned at an earlier life stage leave a trace 
of some sort and are quicker and less effortful to relearn than mastering an entirely new language 
(see Keijzer & de Bot, 2018, for more details). But to fully answer the (ir)reversibility question, both 
functional and structural brain data obtained through methods such as (f)MRI are needed, as will be 
discussed next.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
While neurocognitive approaches have helped shape and redefine both the research field and con-
ceptualization of language attrition, empirical work investigating attrition using neurocognitive 
(including neuroimaging) techniques has only very sparsely augmented behavioral set-ups. As a 
result, mechanisms of attrition as a language processing, memory or brain mechanism “still remain 
speculative” (Köpke & Keijzer, 2019, p. 64). This section details all the work (that we are aware of) 
investigating the neural underpinnings of attrition.
In the realm of language processing, a construct that has formed the foundation of many attrition 
investigations is that of competition. Gallo et al. (2021) claim that, as a consequence of “the tendency, 
intrinsic to our brain, to favor cost-efficient processes: to relieve the cognitive burden on the linguistic 
system, an attriter would unconsciously shift to a less costly simpler construction common to both 
languages” (p. 4). Under the umbrella of competition, the mirror notions of activation and inhibition 
(see Sharwood Smith, 2019, for details) set the stage for many attrition investigations that specific-
ally tested the tenability of Paradis’ (2007) Activation Threshold Hypothesis (ATH). The underlying 
tenets of the ATH are recency and frequency of use. With language use patterns shifting in attrition 
situations, less frequently and recently used language items (which can be words, but also gram-
matical features or even sounds) are claimed to become harder to activate and are inhibited instead, 
allegedly leading to greater response time latencies and increased error rates on behavioral tasks. 
Using the ATH as a framework, Köpke (2002) found that grammar was not as affected by frequency 
or recency effects compared to the lexical domain. This was partially corroborated by Gürel (2004), 
who added that frequency effects only seem to emerge on the basis of competition if there are in fact 
competing grammatical structures in a speaker’s two (or more) languages. As a more general finding, 
then, cumulative efforts of past studies have not found a uniform frequency or recency of use effect 
(detailed in Schmid, 2019) and instead indicate that the more general construct of competition has 
greater explanatory value in attrition settings. That competition underlies multilingual processing 
in a broader sense is underscored by Dussias et al. (2019), who detail the interactive nature of the 
multilingual system through their review of eye-tracking methods. They posit that the eye-tracking 
technique can help shed more light on attrition as a language processing phenomenon.
Moving from attrition as a processing phenomenon to cognitive and brain mechanisms underlying 
attrition, a relevant cognitive psychological framework to invoke in addition to retrieval induced for-
getting and the savings paradigm (see section “Critical issues and topics”) is catastrophic interference, 
whereby the sudden introduction of new information deeply impacts earlier stored representations 
(McClosky & Cohen, 1989). These frameworks were construed outside of the confines of linguis-
tics and later applied to attrition settings, because attrition too pertains to memory structures and 
to retrieving linguistic memories in the face of competing (L2) information. But only a handful of 
studies so far have investigated the neural correlates of such cognitive memory systems, for instance 
by means of ERP methods.
The main aim in using ERP methods in attrition studies is to explore if online L1 comprehen-
sion can ever become non-native like. ERP methods can advance our understanding of attrition 
phenomena as they can detect subtle processing changes at early attrition stages without requiring 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
307
an overt behavioral response (Steinhauer & Kasparian, 2019). Studying grammatical gender, 
Bergmann et al. (2015) found that L1 German attriters overall still processed gender violations 
in a native-like manner, eliciting expected P600 effects upon encountering an ungrammatical 
German article choice, although in attiters this was followed by a biphasic pattern (an N400 that 
preceded the significant P600). This study was part of a larger study focusing on grammatical 
gender violations in a cross-sectional design comparing monolingual speakers, L2 learners and L1 
attriters of various European languages (cf. Schmid et al., 2016, for a full outline). A robust and 
expected P600 effect was thus elicited in L1 speakers and L1 attriters; the same pattern was attested 
for some advanced L2 learners but they showed substantial variability as a function of how old they 
were when they first started acquiring the language (Meulman et al., 2015). Focusing on L1 Italian 
attriters immersed in an Anglophone environment, Kasparian et al. (2014, 2017) investigated 
the processing of morpho-syntactic agreement violations. They found distinctive patterns for the 
attriters versus their monolingual L1 Italian controls but, crucially, the degree of continued L1 
Italian exposure in the attriters positively correlated with convergence in ERP patterns to the non-
attrited baseline performance. Steinhauer and Kasparian (2019) interpret these findings and their 
non-uniformity as pointing to methodological complexities as well as discrepancies in subject 
selection across studies. In a later conceptual review paper by Steinhauer and Kasparian (2020), 
the implications of these (diverging) ERP attrition data for our understanding of the plasticity of 
the bilingual brain are discussed.
Focusing on the lexical domain, Kasparian and Steinhauer (2016) found a two-way distinction 
between what they termed high-proficient (i.e. showing little attrition) and low-proficient (showing 
considerable attrition) L1 speakers of Italian who were immersed in an L2 English environment: the 
low-proficient attriters did not uniformly show an expected N400 effect when encountering a lexical 
violation in their L1. This finding is corroborated by Datta (2010), who tested L1 Bengali speakers 
immersed in the US. Their ERP signatures showed a more negative deflation to English but also to 
Bengali words compared to native speakers of both languages. In short, the scant ERP evidence to 
date shows that L1 attriters can come to process their mother tongue in a non-native like manner, and 
that there is a difference among participants at various time points of their attrition trajectories.
Although ERP techniques can aptly tap into language processing differences between attriting 
and non-attriting individuals, and detail how these deviances are manifested at different time axes of 
the attrition process, they cannot say anything about the brain localization of such effects. To fully 
answer the question whether attrition is permanent or temporary (see section “Critical issues and 
topics”), brain data are needed for a holistic picture of attrition, both functional brain data that are 
obtained while participants carry out a given task, and structural data that yield anatomic pictures 
and measures of white matter integrity. (Functional) Magnetic Resonance Imaging ((f)MRI) is a non-
invasive brain imaging technique that provides information about brain structures, on task and at rest, 
on the basis of blood demands in given brain regions following required energy consumption (for 
an introduction to this technique, see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). Seminal and much-cited fMRI 
attrition work comes from Christophe Pallier’s lab. Pallier and colleagues examined neural traces of 
an abandoned L1 in Korean international adoptees being adopted into Francophone families between 
the ages of 4;0 and 9;0 (Pallier, 2007; Ventureyra et al., 2004). The findings corroborated earlier 
obtained behavioral results that reflected no recollection or heightened sensitivity to Korean sounds 
in the adoptees as compared to their non-adopted Francophone peers. A somewhat different picture 
emerged from a study by Pierce et al. (2014, 2019) targeting neural traces of Mandarin in Chinese 
international adoptees who were adopted at the mean age of 1;2. As opposed to a group of controls, 
the Chinese adoptees did show some activation in specifically the left planum temporale (PT) when 
listening to Mandarin three-syllable phrases. The extent of this activation, moreover, depended on 
how much exposure to Chinese they had had prior to adoption. These results were taken to denote that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
308
“early experiences unconsciously influence neural processing for years, if not indefinitely” (Pierce 
et al, 2014, p. 17314). The discrepancy in findings between these studies set aside, it needs to be 
pointed out that these are extreme L1 attrition cases, where language suppression may also have been 
at force due to potentially traumatic childhood experiences (see Footnick, 2007).
Rossi et al. (2019) plea for (f)MRI to be employed at early stages of L1 attrition, capturing attrition 
as “a flexible, continuous adaptation of the language system that is characterized by modulations 
in the linguistic, cognitive, and neural functioning of the L1” (p. 171). They formulate attrition 
predictions based on (f)MRI work such as that by Guo et al. (2011) that rendered higher levels of 
brain activation when L1 naming followed L2 naming in blocked naming trials rather than the other 
way around. This robust psycholinguistic finding is reflective of greater cognitive effort that is needed 
to switch back into the dominant L1 following L2 use. Rossi et al. (2019) formulate the need for 
future attrition work to build on these results. But with both the technique and the analysis of (f)MRI 
data being quite complex, it is necessary to ask the right questions and this has proven particularly 
difficult to do in attrition research (cf. Köpke, 2021; see Gallo et al. (2021) for a research agenda on 
attrition that includes functional and structural brain changes).
Pedagogical Implications
Against the backdrop of what we now know about attrition as a processing, memory, and brain phe-
nomenon, perhaps the most substantial implications to follow from neurocognitive attrition insights 
are pedagogical in nature and specifically relate to the foreign language classroom. What stands out 
here is the bold claim that good language learners may also be good forgetters (see section “Critical 
issues and topics”). This would speak to a meta approach in the foreign language classroom: making 
learners aware how their brain adapts to learning multiple languages and explicate how this dynam-
ically changes as a function of increased or decreased foreign language exposure, learning, and pro-
ficiency. Such an approach of “learning about language learning” while simultaneously developing 
proficiency is advocated in recent curriculum reforms highlighting what has been labeled “a human 
ecological language pedagogy” (Levine, 2020). Indeed, the current modern foreign language class-
room is still predominantly skills based. Depending on the context of language classrooms around the 
world, the focus is either on the receptive (reading and listening) or productive (speaking and writing) 
skills dimension (see Magyar et al., 2022 for an overview). Learning about language and how lan-
guage development shapes and restructures both the L2 but also the L1 as several languages compete 
in one mind may help boost skills training.
This need is underscored by the fact that bilingual education or foreign-language medium edu-
cation through content and language integrated learning (CLIL; see Coyle, 2018 for more informa-
tion) have grown in popularity. In CLIL curricula, a portion of content courses is taught through the 
medium of a second or foreign language. Concerns have been raised as to whether such high-intensity 
input settings have an impact on the native language (see explorations in Tedick & Lyster, 2019); 
insights from especially neurocognitive and psychological studies looking into first language attrition 
can elucidate whether these concerns are justified and can provide a scientific perspective on the 
bidirectional influences between the first and additional languages and the time course during which 
these fluctuations tend to settle back into more stable patterns.
Current Trends and Future Directions
This chapter has highlighted the trend to approach attrition from a holistic perspective, viewing attrition 
as a dynamic interplay between the first and second or additional languages that can characterize both 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
309
radical shifts in language use patterns (following, for instance, an international move), but also more 
subtle processes of learning new languages while still residing in the dominant L1 environment. 
The neurocognitive turn in attrition, which has taken some time to become established, is set to fur-
ther develop in years to come; researchers have specifically emphasized the need to understand in 
more detail the neural correlates of attrition, through techniques such as (f)MRI, but also EEG and 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) (Gallo et al., 2021; Rossi et al., 2019). More specifically, a future 
research avenue for the field that has been proposed is a combined approach of (f)MRI and more 
task-independent neural oscillations recorded using MEG or high-density EEG (for more details on 
this technique, see Mottarella & Prat, this volume). But tools are merely instruments and in order to 
use neuroscientific advances to the fullest, the right questions have to be asked in relation to attrition 
to dictate which method or combination of techniques are best employed.
Related to this, attrition researchers, in applying neurocognitive and neuroimaging methods, 
have been prompted to remain mindful of what has been called psychosocial underpinnings of 
attrition (Köpke, 2021, see also section “Critical issues and topics”) and the individual differences 
that characterize attrition narratives. This aligns with other work in multilingualism showing that 
individual multilingual histories and (current) use patterns better predict any cognitive advantage 
that comes from juggling several languages in one mind than merely the number of languages a 
person has ever acquired in life (cf. Gullifer & Titone, 2020). In short, two trends likely dictate the 
future of attrition research: 1) an integrative approach that embeds attrition within the spectrum 
of multilingualism research; and 2) the use of neurocognitive approaches and tools that allow for 
a more detailed look at how the native language fluctuates as another language or other languages 
compete for selection in one mind. Neural correlates of attrition as they emerge as a function of an 
individual’s psychosocial multilingual reality can then move from the speculative domain towards 
empirical substantiation. Under these premises, the field of attrition can benefit and benefit from 
multilingual theorizing.
To do justice to an integrative account of attrition, where behavioral tests are augmented by 
neuroimaging tools, a shift in data analysis methods is also in order. Past attrition studies have noted 
the difficulties in finding a good native, non-attrited reference point (cf. Schmid, 2011), but this need 
is less stringent when a perspective shift comes to focus on fluctuations in multilingual processing, 
the multilingual mind and brain. Moving away from group comparisons, the dynamic and non-linear 
fluctuations in multilingual systems can be captured in data analysis tools that encapsulate such com-
plexities. Generalized Additive Mixed Models (GAMMs) are one such way to do that and are prom-
ising for attrition findings as well (cf. Miwa & Baayen, 2021, for an introduction to this technique 
based on bilingual visual word recognition data).
Further Readings
A state-of-the-art handbook edited by leading researchers in the field of attrition:
Schmid, M. & Köpke, B. (2019). The Oxford Handbook of Language Attrition. Oxford University Press.
One of the best introductions towards an integrative neurocognitive and psychosocial account of attrition:
Köpke, B. (2007). Language attrition at the crossroads of brain, mind, and society. In B. Köpke, M.S. 
Schmid, M. Keijzer, & S. Dostert (Eds.), Language attrition: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 9–37). John  
Benjamins.
An epistemological issue of the journal Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, comprising a keynote paper by 
Schmid and Köpke on the relevance of first language attrition to theories of bilingual development, followed by 
a number of commentaries by attrition researchers:
Schmid, M.S., & Köpke, B. (2017). The relevance of first language attrition to theories of bilingual development. 
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 7(6), 637–667. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.17058.sch
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
310
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the editors and anonymous reviewer for their very helpful comments on the first draft of 
this chapter.
References
Abrahamsson, N., & Hyltenstam, K. (2009). Age of onset and nativelikeness in a second language: Listener 
perception versus linguistic scrutiny. Language Learning, 59(2), 249–306. https://doi.org/10.1111/
J.1467-9922.2009.00507.X
Anderson, R.W. (1982). Determining the linguistic attributes of language attrition. In R.D. Lambert & B.F. Freed 
(Eds.), The loss of language skills (pp. 83–118). Newbury House.
Bergmann, C., Meulman, N., Stowe, L.A., Sprenger, S.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Prolonged L2 immersion 
engenders little change in morphosyntactic processing of bilingual natives. NeuroReport, 26(17), 1065–1070. 
https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000000469
Bialystok, E., & Sharwood Smith, M. (1985). Interlanguage is not a state of mind: An evaluation of the con-
struct for second-language acquisition. Applied Linguistics, 6(2), 101–117. https://doi.org/10.1093/APPLIN/
6.2.101
Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2015). Native language change during early stages of second language learning. 
NeuroReport, 26(16), 966–971. https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000000453
Bylund, E. (2019). Age effects in language attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook 
of language attrition (pp. 276–287). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/978019
8793595.013.23
Chang, C.B. (2015). Accounting for multicompetence and restructuring in the study of speech. The Journal of the 
Acoustical Society of America, 137(4), 2383. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.4920671
Chang, C.B. (2019). Language change and linguistic inquiry in a world of multicompetence: Sustained phonetic 
drift and its implications for behavioral linguistic research. Journal of Phonetics, 74, 96–113. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.WOCN.2019.03.001
Coyle, D. (2018). The place of CLIL in (bilingual) education. Theory into Practice, 57(3), 166–176. https://doi.
org/10.1080/00405841.2018.1459096
Datta, H. (2010). Brain bases for first language lexical attrition in Bengali-English speakers [PhD thesis]. City 
University of New York.
De Bot, K. (2019). Defining and assessing multilingualism. In J.W. Schwieter, & M. Paradis (Eds.), The hand-
book of the neuroscience of multilingualism (pp. 1–18). Wiley. https://doi.org/10.1002/9781119387725.CH1
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short. & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dussias, P.E., Valdés Kroff, J.R., Johns, M., & Villegas, Á. (2019). How bilingualism affects syntactic processing 
in the native language. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition 
(pp. 97–107). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.9
Ekerdt, C., Takashima, A., & McQueen, J.M. (this volume). Memory consolidation in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short, & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Footnick, R. (2007). A hidden language: Recovery of a “lost” language is triggered by hypnosis. In B. Köpke, 
M.S. Schmid, M. Keijzer, & S. Dostert (Eds.), Language attrition: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 169–187). 
John Benjamins.
Friederici, A.D. (2012). The cortical language circuit: from auditory perception to sentence comprehension. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(5), 262–268. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.TICS.2012.04.001
Gallo, F., Bermudez-Margaretto, B., Shtyrov, Y., Abutalebi, J., Kreiner, H., Chitaya, T., Petrova, A., & 
Myachykov, A. (2021). First language attrition: What it is, what it isn’t, and what it can be. Frontiers in 
Human Neuroscience, 15, 1–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/FNHUM.2021.686388
Gullifer, J.W., & Titone, D. (2020). Characterizing the social diversity of bilingualism using language entropy. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23, 283–294. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728919000026
Guo, T., Liu, H., Misra, M., & Kroll, J.F. (2011). Local and global inhibition in bilingual word production: fMRI 
evidence from Chinese–English bilinguals. NeuroImage, 56(4), 2300–2309. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEU
ROIMAGE.2011.03.049
Gürel, A. (2004). Selectivity in L2-induced L1 attrition: a psycholinguistic account. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
17(1), 53–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0911-6044(03)00054-X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
311
Hickok, G. (2014). Towards an integrated psycholinguistic, neurolinguistic, sensorimotor framework for 
speech production. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 29(1), 52–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690
965.2013.852907
Kasparian, K., & Steinhauer, K. (2016). Confusing similar words: ERP correlates of lexical-semantic processing 
in first language attrition and late second language acquisition. Neuropsychologia, 93, 200–217. https://doi.
org/10.1016/J.NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA.2016.10.007
Kasparian, K., Vespignani, F., & Steinhauer, K. (2014). The case of a non-native-like first language: ERP evi-
dence of first language (L1) attrition in lexical and morphosyntactic processing. International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, 94(2), 159–160. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.IJPSYCHO.2014.08.700
Kasparian, K., Vespignani, F., & Steinhauer, K. (2017). First language attrition induces changes in online mor-
phosyntactic processing and re-analysis: An ERP study of number agreement in complex Italian sentences. 
Cognitive Science, 41(7), 1760–1803. https://doi.org/10.1111/COGS.12450
Keijzer, M. (2020). First language attrition in the twenty-first century: How continued L1 contact in the digital 
age fuels language attrition theorizing. In E. Adamou, & Y. Matras (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of lan-
guage contact (pp. 221–233). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781351109154-15
Keijzer, M., & de Bot, K. (2018). Unlearning and relearning of languages from childhood to later adulthood. 
In A. de Houwer, & L. Ortega (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook of bilingualism (pp. 67–286). Cambridge 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781316831922.015
Köpke, B. (2002). Activation thresholds and non-pathological first language attrition. In F. Fabbro (Ed.), 
Advances in the neurolinguistics of bilingualism (pp. 119–142). Forum.
Köpke, B. (2004). Neurolinguistic aspects of attrition. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17(1), 3–30. https://doi.org/
10.1016/S0911-6044(03)00051-4
Köpke, B. (2007). Language attrition at the crossroads of brain, mind, and society. In B. Köpke, M.S. Schmid, 
M. Keijzer, & S. Dostert (Eds.), Language attrition: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 9–37). John Benjamins.
Köpke, B. (2021). Language attrition: A matter of brain plasticity? Language, Interaction and Acquisition, 12(1), 
110–132. https://doi.org/10.1075/LIA.20015.KOP
Köpke, B., & Keijzer, M. (2019). Introduction to psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic approaches to language 
attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 61–72). Oxford 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.6
Köpke, B., & Schmid, M.S. (2004). Language attrition: the next phase. In M.S. Schmid, B. Köpke, M. Keijzer, & 
L. Weilemar (Eds.), Language attrition: Interdisciplinary perspectives on methodological issues (pp. 1–43). 
John Benjamins.
Korenar, M. & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). The dynamic restructuring model and second language. In K. Morgan-
Short, & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short, & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kupske, F.F. (2019). The impact of language attrition on language teaching: the dynamics of linguistic know-
ledge retention and maintenance in multilingualism. Ilha Do Desterro, 72(3), 311–329. https://doi.org/https://
doi.org/10.5007/2175-8026.2019v72n3p3n
Lambert, R.D., & Freed, B. (1982). The Loss of Language Skills. Newbury House.
Levine, G.S. (2020). Supplementary issue; Monograph issue; A human ecological language pedagogy. The 
Modern Language Journal, 104(S1), 1–130.
Li, P., Legault, J., & Litcofsky, K.A. (2014). Neuroplasticity as a function of second language learning: Anatomical 
changes in the human brain. Cortex, 58, 301–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.CORTEX.2014.05.001
Linck, J.A., & Kroll, J.F. (2019). Memory retrieval and language attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), 
The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 87–97). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.8
Magyar, A., Habók, A., & Molnár, G. (2022). Exploring the role of English as a foreign language receptive skills 
and learning strategy usage in the ability to acquire and apply knowledge at the beginning of higher educa-
tion. Frontiers in Psychology, 13. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg2022.808546
McClosky, M., & Cohen, N.J. (1989). Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential 
learning problem. Psychology of Learning and Motivation, 24, 109–165.
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of second-language word learning: minimal 
instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience, 7(7), 703–704. https://doi.org/10.1038/NN1264
Mehotcheva, T.H., & Köpke, B. (2019). Introduction to L2 attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The 
Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 329–348). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/
OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.27
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Merel Keijzer and Bregtje Seton
312
Meyers, E., & Fuhrmeister, P. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of second language phonemic contrast learning. 
In K. Morgan-Short, & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Meulman, N., Wieling, M., Sprenger, S.A., Stowe, L.A., & Schmid, M.S. (2015). Age effects in L2 grammar 
processing as revealed by ERPs and how (not) to study them. PLoS ONE, 10(12). https://doi.org/10.1371/
JOURNAL.PONE.0143328
Miwa, K., & Baayen, H. (2021). Nonlinearities in bilingual visual word recognition: An introduction to 
generalized additive modeling. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(5), 825–832. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728921000079
Mottarella, M., & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electro encephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short, & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Pitkänen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & Molinaro, N. (2006). Novice learners, longi-
tudinal designs, and event-related potentials: A means for exploring the neurocognition of second language 
processing. Language Learning, 56, 199–230. https://doi.org/10.1111/J.1467-9922.2006.00361.X
Osterhout, L., Pitkänen, I., McLaughin, J., & Zeitlin, M. (2019). Event-related potentials as metrics of foreign 
language learning and loss. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition 
(pp. 402–416). Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.32
Osterhout, L., Poliakov, A., Inoue, K., McLaughlin, J., Valentine, G., Pitkanen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & 
Hirschensohn, J. (2008). Second-language learning and changes in the brain. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
21(6), 509–521. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JNEUROLING.2008.01.001
Pallier, C. (2007). Critical periods in language acquisition and language attrition. In B. Köpke (Ed.), Language 
attrition: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 155–168). John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/sibil.33.11pal
Paradis, Michel. (2007). L1 attrition features predicted by a neurolinguistic theory of bilingualism. In B. Köpke, 
M.S. Schmid, M. Keijzer, & S. Dostert (Eds.), Language attrition: Theoretical perspectives (pp. 121–134). 
John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/sibil.33.09par
Pierce, L.J., Genesee, F., & Klein, D. (2019). Language Loss and Language Learning in Internationally Adopted 
Children. In M.S. Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 469–480). 
Oxford University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.37
Pierce, L.J., Klein, D., Chen, J.-K., Delcenserie, A., & Genesee, F. (2014). Mapping the unconscious main-
tenance of a lost first language. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 111, 17314–17319. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1409411111
Pliatsikas, C. (2020). Understanding structural plasticity in the bilingual brain: The Dynamic Restructuring 
Model. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(2), 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
9000130
Pliatsikas, C., Pereira Soares, S.M., Voits, T., Deluca, V., & Rothman, J. (2021). Bilingualism is a long-term 
cognitively challenging experience that modulates metabolite concentrations in the healthy brain. Scientific 
Reports, 11(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/S41598-021-86443-4
Price, C.J. (2012). A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken 
language and reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), 816–847. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2012.04.062
Raffaldini, T. (1983). The loss of language skills. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 6(1), 94–100. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0272263100000334
Rossi, E., Prystauka, Y., & Diaz, M.T. (2019). Neuroimaging perspectives on L1 attrition and language change. 
In M.S. Schmid & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 165–177). Oxford 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.14
Schmid, M.S. (2002). First Language Attrition, Use and Maintenance: The Case of German Jews in Anglophone 
Countries. John Benjamins.
Schmid, M.S. (2011). Language attrition. Cambridge University Press.
Schmid, M.S. (2019). The impact of frequency of use and length of residence on L1 attrition. In M.S. Schmid & 
B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 287–303). Oxford University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.24
Schmid, M.S., Berends, S.M., Bergmann, C., Brouwer, S.M., Meulman, N., Seton, B.J., Sprenger, S.A., & Stowe, 
L.A. (2016). Designing research on bilingual development. Springer International. https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-319-11529-0
Schmid, M.S., & Cherciov, M. (2019). Introduction to extralinguistic factors in language attrition. In M.S. 
Schmid, & B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 265–276). Oxford University 
Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.22
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Second Language Neurocognition and First Language Attrition
313
Schmid, M.S., & de Leeuw, E. (2019). Introduction to linguistic factors in language attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & 
B. Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 179–190). Oxford University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.15
Schmid, M.S., & Keijzer, M. (2009). First language attrition and reversion among older migrants. International 
Journal of the Sociology of Language, 200, 83–101. https://doi.org/10.1515/IJSL.2009.046
Schmid, M.S., & Köpke, B. (2017). The relevance of first language attrition to theories of bilingual development. 
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 7(6), 637–667. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.17058.sch
Sharwood Smith, M. (2019). Language attrition as a special case of processing change. In M.S. Schmid & B. 
Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 72–87). Oxford University Press. https://doi.
org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.7
Steinhauer, K., & Kasparian, K. (2019). Electrophysiological approaches to L1 attrition. In M.S. Schmid, & B. 
Köpke (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of language attrition (pp. 145–165). Oxford University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1093/OXFORDHB/9780198793595.013.13
Steinhauer, K., & Kasparian, K. (2020). Brain plasticity in adulthood–ERP evidence for L1 attrition in lexicon 
and morphosyntax after predominant L2 use. Language Learning, 70(S2), 171–193. https://doi.org/10.1111/
lang.12391
Tedick, D.J., & Lyster, R. (2019). Scaffolding Language Development in Immersion and Dual Language 
Classrooms. Taylor and Francis. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429428319
Van Hell, J.G., & Dijkstra, T. (2002). Foreign language knowledge can influence native language performance 
in exclusively native contexts. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 9(4), 780–789. https://doi.org/10.3758/BF0
3196335
Ventureyra, V.A.G., Pallier, C., & Yoo, H.-Y. (2004). The loss of first language phonetic perception in adopted 
Koreans. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 17(1), 79–91. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0911-6044(03)00053-8
Zhou, W. (2015). Assessing birth language memory in young adoptees [PhD thesis]. Radboud University.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

314
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-29
23
FIRST LANGUAGE/SECOND 
LANGUAGE CROSSLINGUISTIC 
INFLUENCE ON THIRD 
LANGUAGE ACQUISITION VIA 
NEUROCOGNITIVE MEMORY 
SYSTEMS
Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
Introduction to Crosslinguistic Influence and Critical Definitions
Neurolinguistic studies in recent decades have sought to investigate the neurocognitive mechanisms 
that underlie the crosslinguistic influence observed in second or third language acquisition. 
Crosslinguistic influence, in the broad context of language use, refers to the phenomenon where 
knowledge of one language affects the production or perception of another, regardless of the acquisi-
tion sequence of the source and recipient languages. Different terms have been used to describe such 
interaction between languages, including but not limited to crosslinguistic influence, crosslinguistic 
interference and language transfer. Crosslinguistic influence and crosslinguistic interference are used 
more often in second language acquisition literature, and language transfer was used historically in 
second language research and has recently reemerged as the common term in the younger field of 
third language acquisition. Crosslinguistic interference, as indicated by the name, suggests a nega-
tive effect of the interactions between language systems and is thus imprecise when knowledge of 
one language facilitates the development of another. To maintain clarity throughout the chapter, we 
will use crosslinguistic influence and language transfer interchangeably to denote the neural-effect 
interactions between languages. The term crosslinguistic interference is used specifically to refer to 
an inhibition effect.
There are various types of crosslinguistic influence (CLI) across various dimensions. For instance, 
if categorized by directionality, there are forward (from first language (L1) to second language 
(L2)) and backward (from L2 to L1) CLI; if categorized by linguistic knowledge across language 
components, there are phonological, lexical, (morpho)syntactic, semantic, and pragmatic CLI (Jarvis 
& Pavlenko, 2008). In this chapter, we will focus on CLI that happens in a forward direction in 
the (morpho)syntactic system, and we aim to address how previously acquired language knowledge 
influences the processing of rule-governed regularities (i.e., morphology and syntax) in a newly learnt 
language. In other words, this chapter explores the neurocognitive mechanisms of CLI of known 
languages (e.g., L1/L2) on the acquisition of a to-be-known language (e.g., L3/Ln), or target lan-
guage, with a focus on the (morpho)syntactic system.
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
315
After nearly two decades of rigorous research, L2 acquisition studies now consist of a siz-
able collection of findings on the neurocognitive basis of (morpho)syntactic transfer from L1 to 
L2 (Alemán Bañón et al., 2018; Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011; Tokowicz & MacWhinney, 2005; 
Tolentino & Tokowicz, 2011; see also Sabourin & Manning, this volume). As research on third lan-
guage acquisition matures, we see the rise of a new line of literature that examines how transfer from 
L1 and L2 affects the acquisition of a third/later language (L3/Ln). This body of research has largely 
focused on two major outcomes that result from crosslinguistic interactions, namely facilitation and 
inhibition, and has sought to understand why and how existing language knowledge expedites or 
slows down a learner’s acquisition of new linguistic knowledge. To answer this “why and how” 
question, we need to closely examine the available findings to identify the condition(s) where facili-
tation or inhibition happens and to establish the neurocognitive embodiment of the facilitative or 
inhibitory effect of CLI. We believe it is timely to collect and synthesize available empirical evidence 
concerning the neurocognition of CLI to reach a comprehensive and thorough interpretation of CLI 
and its effects on language learning and, more imperatively, to identify research gaps in the literature 
and discuss pedagogical implications for future language education.
Historical Review of Crosslinguistic Influence
The earliest observations of CLI can be traced back to the 1900s when intercontinental migrations 
became frequent and motivated language learning or borrowing for the purpose of communication 
among speakers of different mother tongues. Evidence of CLI, such as texts that used a mixture of 
lexical properties from different languages, speech production with the phonological system of one 
language and lexical/syntactic system of another, and the wrong application of L1 word order onto 
L2 production, were uncovered by anthropologists, philosophers, and linguists (Jarvis & Pavlenko, 
2008). Put simply, CLI started off as unappreciated language transfer errors that indicated poor cog-
nitive ability and should be consciously subdued with careful language use. It was not until the mid-
twentieth century when linguists and language teachers started to recognize CLI as an inevitability 
in language learning. From 1960s to 1980s, CLI research revealed that 1) the consequences of CLI 
can be both facilitative or inhibitory to language learning, depending on the similarity or difference 
between the source form and the target form; 2) CLI not only influences the trajectory of language 
development but also modulates the ultimate language attainment; 3) any previously learned lan-
guage can influence the acquisition of subsequent languages, e.g., from L1 to L2 or from L1/L2 to 
L3; and 4) the effect of CLI extends beyond linguistic forms to the language-related ideology or view 
of the world (for a comprehensive review, see Jarvis & Pavlenko, 2008). Together, these findings 
helped to form a holistic understanding of CLI and contributed to later examinations of CLI as a legit-
imate (psycho)linguistic phenomenon. Since then, CLI studies have been subdivided by the linguistic 
components (e.g., phonology, vocabulary, sentential structure, morphological inflection) they focused 
on and have further expanded the scope of research to include the crosslinguistic interactions between 
three or more languages. The recent two decades have seen a remarkable endeavor in developing the-
oretical accounts for (morpho)syntactic CLI (Puig-Mayenco et al., 2020), as will be discussed next.
Crosslinguistic Influence Models and Neurocognitive Approaches
To date, studies of crosslinguistic influence (CLI) in L2 and L3 acquisition (SLA and TLA) have 
formulated different theoretical accounts to predict the source of (morpho)syntactic transfer and its 
effect on modulating L2/Ln acquisition (for a review, see Lago et al., 2021).
Regarding the source of CLI, particularly in TLA studies, there are single-source CLI models, 
such as the L1-dominant hypothesis (Hermas, 2010; Lozano, 2003), the L2 Status Factor (Bardel & 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
316
Sánchez, 2017) and the Typological Primacy Model (TPM: Rothman, 2011), and models that predict 
accumulated CLI from all known languages (De Angelis, 2007), such as the Cumulative Enhancement 
Model (CEM: Flynn et al., 2004). As for the effect of CLI on the learning of new (morpho)syntactic 
features, there are generally two possible outcomes: facilitation and inhibition. When the acquired 
and target linguistic forms align well, CLI from acquired language(s) results in facilitated learning, 
whereas mismatched or conflicting forms induce inhibitory CLI that hinders language acquisition.
The L1-dominant hypothesis, also referred to as the L1 status factor, considers L1 as the privileged 
source of CLI on L3 grammatical preference in the early acquisition stage. Empirical support was 
provided by Hermas’ (2010) examination of how L1-Arabic and L2-French affect learners’ acquisition 
of adverbial and negation word orders in L3-English, a feature that differs among all three languages. 
The findings revealed L1-Arabic’s interference with the learning of English and no significant influence 
of L2-French. Lozano (2003) also provided supporting evidence by testing L1-Greek, L2-English, L3-
Spanish learners’ performance in the Spanish contrastive focus structure, in comparison to L1-English 
learners of L2-Spanish and L1-Spanish controls. The study showed that the L1-English group’s perform-
ance in Spanish differed from that of the L1-Greek, L2-English group. L1-English learners failed to reject 
ungrammatical items, presumably caused by the syntactic difference between English and Spanish, while 
L1-Greek learners performed similarly well to Spanish natives, presumably due to the syntactic similarity 
between Greek and Spanish, without observable interference from their L2 English.
The L2 Status Factor, on the other hand, originally argued for the L2 to be the major source of 
CLI. Falk and Bardel (2011) tested L1-English, L2-French, L3-German learners with the placement 
of object pronouns and compared them to a mirror group (i.e., L1-French, L2-English & L3-German). 
Results showed that both groups showed L2-like processing of L3-German with good performance 
when German and the L2 conformed, but compromised performance when L2-L3 structures differed. 
The updated L2 status model (Bardel & Sánchez, 2017) postulated that the privileged status of L2 
being the transfer source comes from the learner’s distinct cognitive access to L1 and L2 grammars 
that results from the segregation of declarative and procedural memory systems, as predicted by the 
Declarative/Procedural Model (DP model: Paradis, 2009; Ullman, 2020; see Ullman & Morgan-Short, 
this volume). Specifically, L2 is the more accessible transfer source during L3/Ln acquisition as both 
L2 and L3/Ln are presumably stored as explicit metalinguistic knowledge in the declarative memory 
system, while L1 grammar is stored separately in the procedural memory system as implicit know-
ledge. Ergo, L2 serves as the dominant source of crosslinguistic transfer and can potentially cause 
inhibition on L3 development when L2–L3 structurally differ.
According to the TPM (Rothman, 2011), the source of CLI is the overall similarity or relatedness 
perceived by the learners based on the degree of structural crossover between the source (L1/L2) and 
recipient (L3) languages (i.e., psychotypology; Kellerman, 1983), instead of the acquisition sequen-
tial status. L1-English-L2-Spanish and L1-Spanish-L2-English learners of L3-Brazilian Portuguese 
(BP) were tested with the subject-verb word order and relative clause attachment in BP. Both groups 
presented Spanish-like processing of BP structures, with evidence for both facilitative and inhibiting 
CLI hinged on whether BP structurally coincided or conflicted with Spanish. As Spanish shares a 
higher degree of structural similarity with BP than English, the author concluded that the perceived 
overall similarity between the L1 or L2 and the L3 determines the transfer source. Converging 
findings were reported by Cawalho and Silva (2006).
The CEM (Flynn et al., 2004), on the other hand, hypothesized combined or accumulated (morpho)
syntactic CLI on L3 acquisition that comes from both the L1 and L2, i.e., a multi-source facilitative-
only CLI. Findings in Fernández-Berkes and Flynn (2021) on the L2/L3-English acquisition revealed 
that crosslinguistic transfer from L1 modulates the learning outcome of L2, but such outcome can 
be changed by learning an extra language in between. In their study, L2 learners of the head-initial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
317
English with a head-final L1 presented a unique acquisition pattern that was altered by learning 
another head-initial language before English (e.g., comparing L1-Japanese learners of L2-English 
to L1-Japanese, L2-Russian learners of L3 English). The CEM thus concluded that any prior lan-
guage experience is potentially influential to the development of a new language, and such influence 
is incremental or cumulative. For a review of transfer models in L3 acquisition, see Puig-Mayenco 
et al. (2020).
Although L3 models were predominantly built upon behavioral measurements that do not have 
an explicit neurocognitive component, one touched upon the underlying neurocognition of CLI. 
For instance, the L2 Status Factor’s affirmation of L2 being the transfer source was built upon the 
segregated storage of the L1 and L2/L3 in the memory systems (i.e., the DP model: Ullman, 2020). To 
date, most of the research that tested the effect of grammatical CLI from a neural perspective has been 
conducted in an L2 acquisition context using neurocognitive measures such as functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI), electroencephalography (EEG) and memory tasks.
fMRI measures brain activities by detecting the changes in the blood-oxygen-level-dependent 
(BOLD) signal to reflect the activated brain regions and the activation magnitude (for more details, 
see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). EEG, on the other hand, records real-time brainwaves during 
stimulus processing (for more details, see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). Two critical language-
related ERP components are the P600 and N400 (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011; Tanner et al., 2014). 
Memory tests are commonly conducted to investigate how procedural and declarative memory 
systems are recruited during Ln learning and to demonstrate the role of working memory capacity 
(WMC) in modulating Ln learning. For instance, by testing a learner’s implicit or explicit knowledge 
of a Ln structure that is potentially influenced by prior language knowledge, studies can delineate if 
both procedural and declarative memory systems are accessible during Ln acquisition. By correlating 
learners’ Ln performance to their WMC, we can extrapolate how an individual’s inhibition control 
affects language learning under the influence of crosslinguistic interference.
While behavioral methods largely reveal which learner-internal (e.g., proficiency) or learner-
external (typological distances between L1/L2 and L3) factors manipulate the effect of CLI, they 
rarely provide direct evidence of the distinct processing mechanisms that lead to contrastive behav-
ioral outcomes or the underlying difference between similar behavioral performance. Neurocognitive 
methods, on the other hand, provide mechanistic evidence for the behavioral findings by revealing 
the cognitive factors that effectuated learner’s observed behaviors. In other words, as behavioral 
outcome externalizes learner’s linguistic knowledge, neurocognitive outcome instantiates the online 
processing or cognitive resource recruitment, and hence allow us to understand how CLI functions 
on the cognitive level (Jarvis & Pavlenko, 2008).
Empirical Evidence for Crosslinguistic Influence Effects
Various research methods have been adopted to investigate the effects of CLI from both behavioral 
and neurocognitive perspectives. Common behavioral tasks include timed/untimed grammaticality 
judgment, self-paced reading, structural priming, and elicited imitation, sometimes coupled with eye-
tracking. Neurocognitive approaches often combine aforementioned behavioral tasks with a brain-
imaging component such as EEG recording or fMRI scan, and/or include a cognitive task that tests 
working memory, implicit versus explicit learning ability or declarative versus procedural memory. 
In this section, we report key findings from studies that applied the neurocognitive approach to under-
stand CLI and its effects on Ln learning. Our discussion covers CLI from different source languages 
that results in facilitation and/or inhibition.
 
 
 

Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
318
Neurocognitive Evidence for Facilitative Crosslinguistic Influence
Similarity between the learnt language(s) and the target language is the primary impetus for facili-
tative CLI that consolidates and accelerates correct production or processing of the target language. 
In SLA literatures, empirical evidence of a shared neuronal mechanism that serves the processing of 
L1–L2 congruent structures mostly comes from brain imaging studies that captured learner’s brain 
activities when carrying out language tasks. The commonly adopted brain imaging techniques are 
fMRI and EEG.
fMRI studies of crosslinguistic similarity have reported supporting findings for shared neural 
circuits in processing L1–L2 shared representations. In an fMRI study that tested Korean native 
speakers’ processing of L2-English and L2-Japanese sentences, Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Haji, et al. 
(2007) studied how interlanguage syntactic similarity affects brain activation during L2 sentence 
comprehension. Korean and Japanese share a sentential structure of Subject (S)-Object (O)-Verb 
(V) while English has a canonical SVO structure. Korean natives with two L2s (i.e., English and 
Japanese) were auditorily presented with SOV Japanese sentences and SVO English sentences. 
Results showed that L1-Korean elicited a similar brain activation pattern as L2-Japanese did, but 
different from L2-English. Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Yokoyama, et al. (2007) replicated this finding 
with a group of SVO-Chinese natives who spoke both SVO-English and SOV-Japanese as their 
L2s. Converging with earlier findings, L2-English induced a comparable brain activation as did L1-
Chinese while L2-Japanese elicited a unique, different neural response. The overlapping activation 
pattern for the structurally similar L1 and L2 indicated an efficient processing of L2 without recruit-
ment of extra neural resource and hence proved how L1–L2 crosslinguistic similarity motivates a 
unified processing mechanism that promotes efficient L2 grammaticalization.
EEG studies of morphological or syntactic acquisition (for reviews, see Alemán Bañón et al., 
this volume; Biondo et al., this volume) examined L2 learners’ brainwaves during (morpho)syn-
tactic processing and found that (morpho)syntactic violations typically evoked a meaning-sensitive 
N400 in low proficient learners. As proficiency increases, learner’s response eventually shifts to 
a form-sensitive P600 that is typically seen in native speaker’s structural processing, sometimes 
preceded by a left anterior negativity (LAN). In sum, typical L2 development experiences a transi-
tion from meaning-dependent integration to structure-oriented analysis during L2 (morpho)syntactic 
processing. Nonetheless, upon examination of low proficient learners’ processing of L2 grammars, 
researchers found a native-like P600 effect for structures that are formed similarly in L1 and L2, 
corroborating an earlier, automatic grammaticalization of the L1–L2 shared features (for number 
agreement, see Alemán Bañón et al, 2018; for gender agreement, see Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011; 
for tense marking, see Tokowicz & MacWhinney, 2005; for reviews, see Tolentino & Tokowicz, 
2011 and Sabourin & Manning, this volume). A unique L2 feature, on the other hand, either evokes 
no robust brain reaction, indicating insensitivity towards that feature, or evokes an N400 that indexes 
lexical-semantic processing.
In TLA, there is a scarcity of empirical studies that applied a neural methodology to evaluate the 
effects of L1–and L2-sourced CLI, and consequently we have limited reference to make sense of the 
observed comparable or contrastive behavioral outcomes caused by CLI from difference sources. 
One available EEG study that examined morphological transfer from L1/L2 to L3 was conducted 
by González Alonso et al. (2020). This study adopted an artificial language (AL) learning paradigm 
and trained L1-Spanish, L2-English speakers with either mini-English or mini-Spanish (i.e., artificial 
languages with, respectively, English or Spanish lexical items). The target grammar was determiner-
noun gender agreement that exists in L1-Spanish but is absent in L2-English, and both ALs have the 
gender agreement feature. Although ERP results did not reveal a typical N400/P600 pattern in either 
AL, gender violation elicited a positive deflection in the P600 window in mini-Spanish learners, 
indicating a facilitative transfer from L1-Spanish to L3-mini-Spanish, and a negative deflection in 
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
319
the N400 window in mini-English learners that was considered as the typical non-native response 
towards morphosyntactic processing, hinting an absent or limited transfer effect. These findings 
provided empirical corroboration that L1-sourced and L2-sourced morphosyntactic transfer have 
different effects on L3 processing, and that L1-L3 similarity may induce a native-like L3 morphosyn-
tactic processing. To sum up these electrophysiological findings, similarity between L1 and L2/L3/
Ln invokes a facilitative CLI from L1 to the recipient language that contributes to the accelerated and 
efficient grammaticalization of L1-shared structural features, as indicated by the early-on P600. The 
neurocognitive effect of L2-sourced CLI on the acquisition of a L3 is hitherto uncertain and needs 
to be examined systematically in L3/Ln learners. It is worth noting that, although (morpho)syntactic 
processing normally elicits a LAN/P600 continuum response in native speakers on a group level, 
inspection of individual waveforms revealed that some speakers rely more heavily on word-level or 
meaning-dependent information and hence show a N400 response instead (Tanner & Van Hell, 2014). 
When these speakers become L2/L3 learners, their structural processing will maintain the depend-
ence on non-structural information (Qi et al., 2017). In addition, other than grammaticality manipu-
lation, the phonological cues’ distribution (Beatty-Martínez et al., 2021) or deterioration (Bambini 
et al., 2021) of a specific morphosyntactic feature could also lead to atypical processing responses.
In Ullman’s (2020) discussion of the declarative/procedural memory systems and their functions 
in L2 learning, he suggested that the meaning-oriented N400 possibly denotes the recruitment 
of the declarative memory system where explicit language knowledge (e.g., meaningful units) is 
stored. Although the discussion did not connect the P600 component and the procedural memory 
system, the P600 is assumed to reflect the processing of rule-governed information that is typically 
accessed implicitly. The relationship between the P600 and recruitment of procedural memory is fur-
ther supported by empirical findings on implicit Ln grammatical knowledge. CLI studies that tested 
learners’ implicit grammatical knowledge of L2 (Marsden et al., 2018; Roberts & Liszka, 2013) 
showed that only L1-shared L2 forms benefited from facilitative CLI on implicit knowledge consoli-
dation, which encouraged the educated conjecture that P600 indexes the recruitment of the procedural 
memory system in language processing. That being said, Morgan-Short et al. (2022) found a correl-
ation between the P600 component and explicit language knowledge that is supposedly subserved 
by the declarative memory system, indicating that despite the possible correlation between the P600 
and the procedural memory engagement, the mapping is likely not exclusive. Future research should 
further explore this topic and provide more evidence for the association between the recruitment of 
memory systems and online language processing.
In sum, empirical findings suggest that structural similarity leads to facilitative CLI that results in 
common neural processing of L1 and L2, instantiated as comparable brain activation and response. 
In addition, the shared brain activation pattern induced by L1-Chinese and L2-English processing 
indicates that psychotypological distance may not restrain facilitative crosslinguistic interaction. 
Chinese and English are quite far away from each other on the typological map, yet the enhan-
cing effect of L1-Chinese on L2-English processing was observed, which reminds us to reconsider 
or discuss with caution the determining power of (psycho)typological proximity promoted by the 
Typological Primacy Model (TPM). That being said, the TPM was built upon initial-stage learners’ 
language processing while the fMRI studies (Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Haji, et al., 2007; Jeong, Sugiura, 
Sassa, Yokoyama, et al., 2007) tested learners with high proficiency, and this might explain the 
different effects of psychotypological closeness. The L3 EEG study’s (González Alonso et al., 2020) 
result implied that both L1 and L2 have an influence, though potentially different, on L3/Ln grammar 
acquisition and thus compromise CLI models that postulate single transfer source. Nevertheless, the 
scarcity of neurocognitive studies in TLA has restricted our understanding of how L1 and L2 CLI 
modulates the acquisition of L3/Ln structures and hence cautiousness is appreciated when interpreting 
the effect of CLI observed in TLA.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
320
Neurocognitive Evidence for Inhibitory Crosslinguistic Influence
The number of studies that investigated crosslinguistic difference is notably smaller than that of 
crosslinguistic similarity studies, yet a comprehensive understanding of crosslinguistic influence 
(CLI) cannot be achieved without knowing how confliction is dealt with during language acqui-
sition. Moreover, studies that aimed at settling whether native-like processing is attainable by Ln 
learners revealed that, as crosslinguistic similarity promotes native-like proficiency, crosslinguistic 
confliction makes native-like processing unfeasible even for advanced learners (Caffarra et al., 2015; 
Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011), and such confliction-induced fossilization in Ln grammar develop-
ment obstructs pedagogical improvement and complicates the theorization of ultimate Ln attainment.
Regarding the limited neurocognitive evidence of confliction-induced CLI, fMRI results from 
the studies where similarity-induced CLI was tested also attested to the laborious, non-native pro-
cessing of the L1-conflict word-order (Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Haji, et al., 2007; Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, 
Yokoyama, et al., 2007). In contrast to the overlapping brain response for L1-shared structures, more 
extensive activation with stronger magnitude was observed for L1-conflict L2 grammars. Some of the 
brain areas that showed increased activation by L1–L2 incongruence were known to regulate inhibi-
tory control, which is a critical executive function served by working memory. This indicates that 
learning a L1-dissimilar/conflict structure requires more cognitive effort and thus recruits a broader 
cortical area or induces stronger activation. On the other hand, the comparable cortical activation 
during the processing of L1–L2 congruent forms serves as evidence for reduced cognitive demands 
with less involvement of inhibitory control. In other words, the facilitative effect of CLI may essen-
tially be a more economic deployment of neurocognitive resources when the to-be-learnt linguistic 
form coincides with a known form, whereas the inhibitory effect of CLI indicates a laborious cognitive 
maneuver in coping with L1–L2 incongruency. Notwithstanding, caution is needed when inspecting 
activation differences caused by crosslinguistic similarity versus dissimilarity, as activation of one 
brain region can be attributed to the mere status of a language being non-native while activation of 
another may indicate deployment of memory-dependent executive function.
Evidence from ERP components in response to non-facilitative CLI effect revealed a postponed 
transition from N400 to P600 during learners’ processing of L2-unique syntactic structures, with a 
smaller P600 amplitude or a delayed latency at high proficiency (Osterhout et al., 2006), yet a direct 
study of L1-conflict condition is rare. Moreover, a delayed emergence or reduced P600 magnitude is 
not definite evidence for non-facilitative CLI, as the uniqueness of a structure alone can lead to the 
same observation (without the presence of a CLI effect). One attempt to provide direct evidence for 
the effect of crosslinguistic confliction was provided by Mickan and Lemhöfer (2020). They tested 
L1-German L2-Dutch learners from three proficiency levels (i.e., low, intermediate, and high) with 
L1-congruent subordinate clause word order and L1-conflict modal auxiliary word order. Despite 
comparable behavioral performance of the intermediate and advanced learners for L1-conflict and 
L1-congruent conditions, congruent sentences induced a native-like P600, whereas conflict sentences 
elicited an attenuated P600 with a smaller amplitude and a delayed latency. The result indicate 
that conflict-induced neural response is instantiated as a delayed and unconsolidated grammatical-
ization of the incongruent structure and, hence, corroborates the interfering effect of crosslinguistic 
confliction in syntactic acquisition. The delayed P600 indicates either a higher demand of cognitive 
effort in processing the L1-conflict L2 feature or unsteady automatization of it, and supports the 
argument that learners adopt different neuronal mechanisms to process the structure that is absent 
from or conflicts with their prior linguistic knowledge, even when behavioral outcomes show no 
robust difference. This study is among the first to address the neurocognition of the inhibitory effect 
of crosslinguistic interference and thus provides an insightful foundation for future research. So far, 
the EEG literature is short of a concurrent inspection of the three most crucial CLI cases, namely the 
facilitative CLI in a L1-Ln congruent condition, the inhibitory CLI in a L1-Ln incongruent condition, 
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
321
and a Ln-unique condition where CLI is not expected. A simultaneous test of these three cases is crit-
ical to better understand how facilitative and inhibitory CLI modulate (morpho)syntactic learning.
As important as acknowledging the inhibitory effect of CLI is the need to identify possible 
modulators of its impact. One factor that has been found to modulate CLS inhibition is working 
memory capacity (WMC). As discussed earlier, L1-conflict structures activates wider brain regions 
than L1-congruent structures (Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Haji, et al., 2007; Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, 
Yokoyama, et al., 2007), and some of these activated regions were found to be recruited in inhibitory 
control served by working memory. This indicates that learners exert less inhibitory control when 
processing and producing grammars that are similar to their prior linguistic knowledge. Furthermore, 
behavioral findings illustrated that learners with higher levels of executive control (i.e., better WMC) 
are more successful in inhibiting negative transfer from the L1 (Jarvis et al., 2013). The effect of 
working memory on modulating CLI inhibition is further consolidated in a meta-analysis (Linck 
et al., 2014) that reported strong predictive power of WMC on learners’ performance when conflict 
resolution is required. However, the predictive power of WMC on Ln attainment is more robust under 
an explicit than an implicit learning condition (Tagarelli et al., 2015), calling for a careful consider-
ation of learning conditions in designing future studies.
Taken together, the findings on the inhibition effect of crosslinguistic interference revealed a heavy 
involvement of working memory’s inhibitory control in the learning of a L1-incongruent structure, 
which is instantiated by the recruitment of inhibition-related cortical regions seen in fMRI images 
(Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Haji, et al., 2007; Jeong, Sugiura, Sassa, Yokoyama, et al., 2007) and by 
WMC’s influence on a learner’s Ln learning outcome in the case of L1-Ln incongruency (Linck et al., 
2014). Consequently, the grammaticalization of L1-Ln incongruent structures requires extensive cog-
nitive effort and appears to be more time consuming, as indicated by a delayed and/or reduced P600 
effect in coping with structural violation (Mickan & Lemhöfer, 2020) and compromised performance 
in metalinguistic tasks (Tagarelli et al., 2015). There is to date a lack of study on inhibitory CLI with 
TLA learners to show how L1 or L2 interacts with L3 learning when L1–L3 or L2–L3 incongruency 
is expected, and, to make the situation more complicated, what will happen if L1 and L2 conflict with 
each other while one (L1 or L2) agrees with L3 for certain morphosyntactic parameters.
Crosslinguistic Influence in L3/Ln Acquisition
The scarcity of neurocognitive examination of CLI in TLA leaves numerous questions unanswered 
regarding how L1 and L2 facilitate or inhibit the learning of a sequential L3/Ln. Nevertheless, 
educated hypotheses can be made based on the available L2 neural studies and the transfer models of 
L3 (morpho)syntactic acquisition.
L3 models that assume a single source of CLI expect L3 acquisition to be influenced only by 
one prior language. If the sole CLI source is L1, it is reasonable to assume the same effect of L1’s 
CLI on L3 as on L2, i.e., L1-L3 congruency leads to facilitative CLI that promotes native-like L3 
processing while incongruency causes inhibitory CLI, which is modulated by WMC, that prevents 
native-like grammaticalization of L3. If the sole CLI source is L2, then L2 proficiency needs to be 
taken into consideration as higher proficiency is expected to result in a stronger CLI effect, with L2-
L3 similarity motivating learning and difference inhibiting learning. Regarding working memory’s 
role in modulating L2–L3 interaction, Trude and Tokowicz (2011), studying phonological CLI in 
TLA, revealed that individuals with higher WMC were worse at inhibiting L2 interference with L3 
learning, externalized as more L2-like error for the higher WMC group than the lower WMC group. 
Findings on the effect of WMC on L2–L3 interaction in the (morpho)syntactic domain are not yet 
available to make predictions about how working memory affects L3 development, and if higher 
WMC leads to better L1 suppression but compromised L2 inhibition during L3 grammar learning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
322
That being said, considering the domain-general characteristic of the WMC, we would expect a 
similar effect of WMC on the learning of L3 morphosyntax.
For TLA models that assume cumulative CLI, it is yet too early to provide an explicit prediction 
on the interaction pattern between L1, L2, and L3, especially when L2 is in itself a subject of L1’s 
influence which may leave residual effects that can be further passed down to the acquisition of L3/
Ln. The factors that need to be taken into consideration when piecing up the puzzle include, but are 
not limited to, the similarity and difference between the L1 and L2, the similarity and difference 
between L1/L2 and L3, L2 proficiency, and the distribution of cognitive control (if possible) over L1 
and L2 inhibition.
Future Research Directions and Pedagogical Implications
In this chapter, we discussed (morpho)syntactic CLI models and the mechanism and effect of CLI 
in Ln learning from a neurocognitive perspective. A comprehensive understanding of the facilita-
tive and inhibitory effects of CLI is the key not only to account for the observed inconsistency in 
learners’ development and ultimate attainment of L3/Ln grammar, but also to develop pedagogical 
solutions that maximize CLI facilitation and suppress its interference. Neurocognitive findings 
discussed in this chapter shed light on how native and non-native languages are stored in the brain, 
how languages interact with each other neurologically and how cognitive mechanisms modulate 
language interactions, which are otherwise obscure from behavioral findings. By understanding the 
details of neurocognitive mechanisms beyond language interactions, we can fit the contributing cog-
nitive factors into the acquisition equation to better theorize language acquisition and make accurate 
predictions about language development in learners with distinctive linguistic background and under 
different learning conditions.
Despite groundbreaking developments in CLI research, there remain research gaps that require 
immediate attendance. First, the available number of neural studies of inhibitory CLI is too small to 
generate a theory that accounts for its cause and mechanism. Second, neurocognitive evidence for CLI 
in L3/Ln acquisition is still lacking to settle the disputes over L1 and L2 effect on L3/Ln learning as 
argued in current TLA models. Moreover, current TLA models mostly make predictions about initial 
stage learner’s L3 knowledge, leaving L3 development at later stages unaccounted for. As language 
acquisition is a dynamic process with constant progress, theories that take language development 
into consideration are therefore fundamental and necessary. Additionally, research is lacking that 
investigates how WMC affects L3/Ln learning. For instance, does domain-general working memory 
capacity predict L3/Ln learning outcome? If not, which component of working memory is the critical 
factor in modulating L3/Ln learning? To reach a comprehensive understanding of CLI that allows for 
better theorization of Ln acquisition, we need studies that address the aforementioned issues.
As crosslinguistic similarity and difference cause distinctive outcomes in Ln development, we 
encourage to take advantage of CLI’s facilitative function during language education while minim-
izing its inhibition power. Specifically, when learning a grammatical system or feature that is different 
from the learner’s existing linguistic knowledge, language educators can spend more effort in empha-
sizing the differences to draw constant attention to avoiding making conflict-induced overgeneraliza-
tion errors. In addition, different methods of language instruction or training often have significant 
influence on the outcome of language learning (Antoniou et al., 2016; Antoniou & Wong, 2015, 2016; 
Ettlinger et al., 2014; Ingvalson, Barr & Wong, 2013; Ingvalson & Dhar et al., 2015; Ingvalson, 
Young & Wong, 2014;) and on the neurological mechanisms of speech processing (Deng et al., 2018). 
Furthermore, as WMC plays an important role in learning a new language, especially under the inter-
ference of CLI, pedagogical plans may add in a few memory-training tasks that help boost a learner’s 
WMC or integrate language learning with memory enhancement techniques (Ullman & Lovelett, 
2018). Last but not least, considering the stronger influence of WMC on language learning in an 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
323
explicit rule-based context, teachers may include more implicit learning tasks in the syllabus, espe-
cially in situations where crosslinguistic confliction is expected.
Further Readings
State-of-the-art review of theoretical models and empirical studies, with specific focus on language transfer at 
the syntactic level:
Angelovska, T., & Hahn, A. (2017). L3 syntactic transfer: Models, new developments and implications (Vol. 5). 
John Benjamins Publishing Company. https://doi.org/10.1075/bpa.5
Volume that provides theoretical background and empirical review of working memory and SLA:
Wen, Z., Mota, M. & McNeill, A. (2015). Working Memory in Second Language Acquisition and Processing. 
Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781783093595
Latest empirical investigations of other factors that influence L3 acquisition:
Kang, X., Mathews, S., Yip, V.C.Y., & Wong, P.C.M. (2021). Language and non-language factors in foreign lan-
guage learning: Evidence for the learning condition hypothesis. NPJ Science of Learning, 6(1), 28. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41539-021-00104-9
Wong, P.C.M., Kang, X., So, H.C., and Choy, K.W. (2022). Contributions of common genetic variants to spe-
cific languages and to when a language is learned. Scientific Reports, 12, 580. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41
598-021-04163-1
Kang, X., Yip, V., Matthews, S., Wong, P.C.M. (2023). A large-scale repository of spoken narratives in French, 
German and Spanish from Cantonese-speaking learners. Scientific Data. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41
597-023-02090-6
References
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (2018). Using event-related potentials to track morphosyntactic 
development in second language learners: The processing of number and gender agreement in Spanish. PloS 
One, 13(7), e0200791. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0200791
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language 
syntactic system. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge. 
Antoniou, M., Ettlinger, M., & Wong, P.C.M. (2016). Complexity, training paradigm design, and the contribution 
of memory subsystems to grammar learning. PloS ONE, 11(7), e0158812. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/journal.
pone.0158812
Antoniou, M. & Wong, P.C.M. (2015). Poor phonetic perceivers are affected by cognitive load when resolving 
talker variability. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 138(2), 571–74. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/
1.4923362
Antoniou, M., & Wong, P.C.M. (2016). Varying irrelevant phonetic features hinders learning of the feature being 
trained. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 139(1), 271–278. http://dx.doi.org/10.1121/1.4939736
Bambini, V., Canal, P., Breimaier, F., Meo, D., Pescarini, D., & Loporcaro, M. (2021). Capturing language 
change through EEG: Weaker P600 for a fading gender value in a southern Italo-Romance dialect. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 59, 101004. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2021.101004
Bardel, C., & Sánchez, L. (2017). The L2 Status Factor hypothesis revisited: The role of metalinguistic know-
ledge, working memory, attention and noticing in third language learning. In T. Angelovska & A. Hahn 
(Eds.), L3 syntactic transfer: Models, new developments and implications (pp. 85–102). John Benjamins. 
https://doi.org/10.1075/bpa.5.05bar
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., Bruni, M.R., Bajo, M.T., & Dussias, P.E. (2021). Brain potentials reveal differential pro-
cessing of masculine and feminine grammatical gender in native Spanish speakers. Psychophysiology, 58(3). 
e13737. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13737
Biondo, N., Molinaro, N., & Mancini, S. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language morpho-
logical system: the role of grammar-related and speaker-related factors. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Caffarra, S., Molinaro, N., Davidson, D., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Second language syntactic processing revealed 
through event-related potentials: An empirical review. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 51, 31–47. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2015.01.010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Emily Shimeng Xu and Patrick Chun Man Wong
324
Cawalho, A.M., & Silva, A.J.B. (2006). Cross-linguistic influence in third language acquisition: The case of 
Spanish-English bilinguals’ acquisition of Portuguese. Foreign Language Annals, 39(2), 185–202. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.1944-9720.2006.tb02261.x
De Angelis, G. (2007). Third or additional language acquisition. Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/
9781847690050
Deng, Z., Chandrasekaran, B., Wang, S., & Wong, P.C.M. (2018). Training-induced brain activation and func-
tional connectivity differentiate multi-talker and single-talker speech training. Neurobiology of Learning and 
Memory, 151, 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nlm.2018.03.009
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Ettlinger, M., Bradlow, A., & Wong, P.C.M. (2014). Variability in the learning of complex morphophonology. 
Applied Psycholinguistics, 35(4), 807–831. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0142716412000586
Falk, Y., & Bardel, C. (2011). Object pronouns in German third language syntax: Evidence for the second lan-
guage status factor. Second Language Research, 27(1), 59–82. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658310386647
Fernández-Berkes, É., & Flynn, S. (2021). Vindicating the need for a principled theory of language acquisition. 
Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 11(1), 30–36. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.20095.fer
Flynn, S., Foley, C., & Vinnitskaya, I. (2004). The cumulative-enhancement model for language acquisi-
tion: Comparing adults’ and children’s patterns of development in first, second and third language acquisition 
of relative clauses. International Journal of Multilingualism, 1(1), 3–16. https://doi.org/10.1080/1479071040
8668175
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2011). Grammatical gender processing in L2: Electrophysiological evidence 
of the effect of L1–L2 syntactic similarity. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 14(3), 379–399. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S1366728911000137
González Alonso, J., Alemán Bañón, J., DeLuca, V., Miller, D., Soares, S. M. P., Puig-Mayenco, E., Slaats, S., 
& Rothman, J. (2020). Event related potentials at initial exposure in third language acquisition: Implications 
from an artificial mini-grammar study. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 56, 100939. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jne
uroling.2020.100939
Hermas, A. (2010). Language acquisition as computational resetting: Verb movement in L3 initial state. 
International Journal of Multilingualism, 7(4), 343–362. https://doi.org/10.1080/14790718.2010.487941
Ingvalson, E.M., Barr, A.M., & Wong, P.C.M. (2013). Poorer phonetic perceivers show greater benefit in 
phonetic-phonological speech learning. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56, 1045–50. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2012/12-0024)
Ingvalson, E., Dhar, S., Wong, P.C.M., Liu, H. (2015). Working memory training to improve speech perception 
in noise across languages. Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 137(6), 3477–3486. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1121/1.4921601
Ingvalson, E.M., Young, N., Wong, P.C.M. (2014). Auditory-cognitive training improves language performance 
in prelingually deafened cochlear implant recipients. International Journal of Pediatric Otorhinolaryngology, 
78(10), 1624–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ijporl.2014.07.009
Jarvis, S., & Pavlenko, A. (2008). Crosslinguistic influence in language and cognition. Routledge. https://doi.
org/10.4324/9780203935927
Jarvis, S., O’Malley, M., Jing, L., Zhang, J., Hill, J., Chan, C., & Sevostyanova, N. (2013). Cognitive foundations 
of crosslinguistic influence. In J.W. Schwieter (Ed.), Innovative research and practices in second language 
acquisition and bilingualism (pp. 287–308). John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/lllt.38.17jar
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Haji, T., Usui, N., Taira, M., Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2007). 
Effect of syntactic similarity on cortical activation during second language processing: A comparison of 
English and Japanese among native Korean trilinguals. Human Brain Mapping, 28(3), 194–204. https://doi.
org/10.1002/hbm.20269
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Yokoyama, S., Horie, K., Sato, S., Taira, M., & Kawashima, R. (2007). 
Cross-linguistic influence on brain activation during second language processing: An fMRI study. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 10(2), 175–187. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728907002921
Kellerman, E. (1983). Now you see it, now you don’t. In S. Gass, & L. Selinker (Eds.), Language transfer in 
language learning (pp. 112–134). Newbury House.
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: finding meaning in the N400 component of 
the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 621–647. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.psych.093008.131123
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Crosslinguistic Influence on Third Language Acquisition
325
Lago, S., Mosca, M., & Stutter Garcia, A. (2021). The role of crosslinguistic influence in multilingual pro-
cessing: Lexicon versus syntax. Language Learning, 71(S1), 163–192. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12412
Linck, J.A., Osthus, P., Koeth, J.T., & Bunting, M.F. (2014). Working memory and second language compre-
hension and production: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21(4), 861–883. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13423-013-0565-2
Lozano, C. (2003). Focus, pronouns and word order in the acquisition of L2 and L3 Spanish [Unpublished doc-
toral dissertation]. University of Essex.
Marsden, E., Thompson, S., & Plonsky, L. (2018). A methodological synthesis of self-paced reading in second 
language research. Applied Psycholinguistics, 39(5), 861–904. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716418000036
Mickan, A., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). Tracking syntactic conflict between languages over the course of L2 acqui-
sition: A cross-sectional event-related potential study. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(5), 822–846. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01528
Morgan-Short, K., Finestrat, I., Luque, A. and Abugaber, D. (2022). Exploring new insights into explicit and 
implicit second language processing: Event-related potentials analyzed by source attribution. Language 
Learning, 72, 365–411. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12492
Osterhout, L., McLaughlin, J., Pitkänen, I., Frenck-Mestre, C., & Molinaro, N. (2006). Novice learners, longi-
tudinal designs, and event-related potentials: A means for exploring the neurocognition of second language 
processing. Language Learning, 56(s1), 199–230. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2006.00361.x
Paradis, M. (2009). Declarative and procedural determinants of second languages. John Benjamins. https://doi.
org/10.1075/sibil.40
Puig-Mayenco, E., González Alonso, J., & Rothman, J. (2020). A systematic review of transfer studies in third 
language acquisition. Second Language Research, 36(1), 31–64. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658318809147
Qi, Z., Beach, S.D., Finn, A.S., Minas, J., Goetz, C., Chan, B., & Gabrieli, J.D. (2017). Native-language N400 
and P600 predict dissociable language-learning abilities in adults. Neuropsychologia, 98, 177–191. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.10.005
Roberts, L., & Liszka, S.A. (2013). Processing tense/aspect-agreement violations on-line in the second lan-
guage: A self-paced reading study with French and German L2 learners of English. Second Language 
Research, 29(4), 413–439. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658313503171
Rothman, J. (2011). L3 syntactic transfer selectivity and typological determinacy: The typological primacy 
model. Second Language Research, 27(1), 107–127. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658310386439
Sabourin, L., & Manning, G. (this volume). Cross-linguistic transfer in second language neurocognition. In 
K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Tagarelli, K., Mota, M. & Rebuschat, P. (2015). Working memory, learning conditions and the acquisition of L2 
syntax. In Z. Wen, M. Borges Mota & A. McNeill (Eds.), Working memory in second language acquisition 
and processing (pp. 224–247). Multilingual Matters. https://doi.org/10.21832/9781783093595-017
Tanner, D., Inoue, K., & Osterhout, L. (2014). Brain-based individual differences in online L2 grammatical com-
prehension. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 17 (02), 277–293. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
3000370
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J.G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 56, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.002
Tokowicz, N., & MacWhinney, B. (2005). Implicit and explicit measures of sensitivity to violations in second 
language grammar. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 27, 173–204. https://doi.org/10.1017/S02722
63105050102
Tolentino, L.C., & Tokowicz, N. (2011). Across languages, space, and time: A review of the role of cross-
language similarity in L2 (morpho) syntactic processing as revealed by fMRI and ERP methods. Studies in 
Second Language Acquisition, 33(1), 91–125. https://psycnet.apa.org/doi/10.1017/S0272263110000549
Trude, A.M., & Tokowicz, N. (2011). Negative transfer from Spanish and English to Portuguese pronunci-
ation: The roles of inhibition and working memory. Language Learning, 61(1), 259–280. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-9922.2010.00611.x
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically-motivated theory of first and 
second language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition 
(pp. 128–161). Routledge.
Ullman, M.T., & Lovelett, J.T. (2018). Implications of the declarative/procedural model for improving second 
language learning: The role of memory enhancement techniques. Second Language Research, 34(1), 39–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316675195
Ullman, M.T., & Morgan-Short, K. (this volume). How the declarative and procedural memory brain circuits 
support second language: Electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological evidence. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

PART VI
The Neurocognition of Second 
Language Learning
Mechanisms and Contexts
 
 

 

329
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-31
24
THE NEUROCOGNITION 
OF PREDICTION IN SECOND 
LANGUAGE PROCESSING AND 
LEARNING
Edith Kaan
Introduction and Critical Definitions
It is intuitively clear that language processing can be predictive. For instance, one can often guess 
correctly how somebody will complete a sentence (e.g., one expects the word sugar after hearing 
I take my coffee with cream and…). Some consider predictive processing an important part of lan-
guage processing, since it can make processing more efficient and robust in noisy circumstances by 
pre-activation of expected information. In addition, the difference between what is predicted and the 
actual input (“prediction error”) is highly informative and can be used to adjust the system to reduce 
future prediction errors. This adjustment can be considered a form of learning. However, when and 
how we predict during language processing is still unclear, as is the role of prediction in (second-) 
language learning.
In this chapter I will discuss what is known about predictive processing in first and second lan-
guage with a focus on what is known from research using event-related brain potentials (ERPs, see 
Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). Unless noted otherwise, I will use the term “first language” (L1) to 
refer to the language that somebody learned first as a child and which is still their dominant language; 
the term “second language” (L2) refers to a language which is learned at a later age, and which is not 
the speaker’s dominant language. I acknowledge that data available thus far are limited and do not do 
justice to the wealth of variation in language use and experience among humans.
Part of the reason why the role of prediction in language processing is unclear is because the 
term “predictive processing” has been interpreted in different ways (for discussion, see Kuperberg & 
Jaeger, 2016). In the minimal sense, prediction implies “that context changes the state of the language 
processing system before new input becomes available” (Kuperberg & Jaeger, 2016, p. 34). Under 
this definition, modulations of reading times or brain responses at a particular word can be interpreted 
in terms of prediction if such responses are affected by the properties of the preceding context (e.g., 
strongly or weakly constraining towards that word). A more narrow definition is that of pre-activation 
of certain features of the upcoming input, or pre-activation of specific lexical items. Assuming this 
definition, the only strong evidence in favor of prediction are effects observed before the critical 
(predicted) word appears in the input. This is because effects seen at the critical word itself can also 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
330
reflect (bottom-up) integration of the word into the context and are not necessarily evidence of (top-
down) prediction (but see, e.g., Ferreira & Chantavarin, 2018).
Regardless of which definition one assumes, it has become clear that predictive language pro-
cessing is variable, even in L1, and is modulated by participant-specific factors such as literacy (e.g., 
Favier et al., 2021) or processing speed (Huettig & Janse, 2016); external factors such as working 
memory load (Ito, Corley, et al., 2018) or the participant’s task (Brothers et al., 2017); or stimulus 
properties such as accent (Romero-Rivas et al., 2016). The issue is therefore not whether language 
users predict, but under which conditions they predict what to what extent, thus explaining differences 
within and between people. Many modulating factors are shared between L1 and L2 processing, 
however L2 speakers tend to be more variable, due to differences in proficiency, resources needed 
for L2 processing, and cross-language influence. L2 speakers therefore provide further insight into 
the mechanisms and factors underlying prediction and their boundary conditions. A second reason 
why investigating L2 speakers is important is the putative relation between language processing 
and learning. If we can show that predictive processing is important in L2 learning, this may have 
implications for pedagogical practices.
Prediction in L1 and L2 Language Processing: A Historical Perspective
Until the turn of the century, most approaches to language processing stressed bottom-up pro-
cessing: incoming words are first processed in terms of orthography, sounds, and meaning, and only 
later integrated with the preceding context. The role and timing of higher level (discourse, world 
knowledge) information was heavily debated. Predictive processing was dismissed especially with 
respect to sentence processing. Since sentences can continue in an infinite number of ways, predictive 
processing would lead to many errors and would be very inefficient (see for an historical overview 
e.g., Ferreira & Chantavarin, 2018).
This changed in the early 2000s, mainly due to developments in cognitive neuroscience, and to 
new techniques that convincingly showed that readers and listeners predict information that they 
have not yet heard or read. One influential study was by Altmann and Kamide (1999). In this study 
participants looked at scenes and listened to sentences while their eye movements were recorded 
(visual world eye-tracking). For instance, a scene contained a cake, a ball and a toy train, and the sen-
tence could be either The boy will move the cake or The boy will eat the cake. Upon hearing eat (as 
compared to move) participants already started looking at the edible object in the scene even before 
the word cake was mentioned, suggesting they anticipated the mention of cake. A drawback of using 
such visual world paradigms is that the set of potential referents is given and is restricted to a few 
objects, which could artificially elicit predictive behavior. However, results from studies using elec-
trophysiology without visual displays also supported the view that aspects of upcoming words are 
anticipated (e.g., DeLong et al., 2005; Wicha et al., 2004).
Following mainstream psycholinguistics, prediction also became a topic of L2 processing research. 
Initially, studies failed to find evidence for predictive processing in L2 when this involved morpho-
syntactic or phonological information (Grüter et al., 2012; Lew-Williams & Fernald, 2010; Martin 
et al., 2013). This led to the hypothesis that L2 speakers have a reduced ability to predict during lan-
guage processing (Grüter et al., 2014; Kaan et al., 2010). However, it soon became clear that some L2 
speakers can use morpho-syntactic information predictively (Dussias et al., 2013; Hopp, 2013), and 
that L2 and L1 processing may therefore not be qualitatively different in this respect (Kaan, 2014). 
What is still being debated are what mechanisms underlie prediction, what information is used under 
what circumstances to predict, and what the relation is between predictive processing and language 
learning (Kaan & Grüter, 2021).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing
331
Theoretical Perspectives and Approaches
Several models and theoretical perspectives have been proposed in relation to prediction in language 
processing and learning. I will discuss a few below; for a summary of more approaches see e.g., 
Huettig (2015).
Computational Models
Computational models of language processing provide insight in language processing and learning 
by training a computer model on language data and testing how closely this mimics human lan-
guage processing and learning (e.g., Rabovsky & McRae, 2014). Many of these models incorporate 
aspects of predictive processing. For instance, the Dual-Path model (Chang et al., 2006) includes a 
simple recurrent network that predicts the upcoming word in the sentence on the basis of words pre-
viously encountered. When the word that actually occurs is different from the predicted word, the 
model’s connection weights are changed to minimize future errors. The Dual-Path model can account 
for patterns observed in adult sentence processing, language development, and language disorders. 
A bilingual version of the model has successfully simulated pro-drop errors in Spanish L2 learners of 
English (Tsoukala et al., 2017).
Bayesian Approaches
Bayesian approaches include computational models but also more conceptual models, such as 
the hierarchical generative framework proposed by Kuperberg (e.g., Kuperberg et al., 2020). The 
assumption of this framework is that language comprehenders generate probabilistic hypotheses as to 
the message being communicated (beliefs), which are continuously updated on the basis of incoming 
information. Several layers of representation can be distinguished, including a level of semantics, 
a higher, more abstract level of events, and an even higher level of the situation model. At each 
level, predictions are generated based on prior experience and fed down to the lower layer. Top-
down predictive pre-activation occurs when information is activated at a lower level before incoming 
(bottom-up) information arrives at that level. Deviations between the prediction and the bottom-up 
input at each layer (the “prediction error,” which is not explained away by predictions) is fed forward 
to the higher levels, and is used to adjust the system and make future predictions (belief updating). 
The extent of the update is modulated by the size of the error and how certain the comprehender is 
about the other interlocutor’s or agent’s goals. For an application of a Bayesian framework to cross-
language influence and L2/n language learning, see Pajak et al. (2016).
Cognitive Approaches
Cognitive approaches aim to specify the cognitive systems underlying prediction and how predictions 
are generated. One example is the Prediction-by-Production model (Pickering & Garrod, 2013). 
According to this model, predictions are made in two ways. The first is through automatic asso-
ciations, e.g., the word sugar is associated with the word cream and hence is activated in contexts 
where cream is mentioned. The second way is through the production system.
Ito and Pickering (2021) apply the Prediction-by-Production model to L2 processing. Prediction-
by-production requires more resources than prediction-by-association. Since L2 processing in gen-
eral is more resource-demanding than L1 processing, it follows that L2 speakers may experience 
difficulty especially in prediction-by-production. This approach can account for the observation that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
332
L2 speakers pre-activate syntactic and phonological information to a lesser extent than semantic 
information (Ito et al., 2017b; Ito, Pickering, et al., 2018). Note that prediction-by-association is 
not completely effortless either, and that differences in the spread of activation through the lexical-
semantic network may lead to differences in prediction-by-association between L2 and L1 speakers 
(Dijkgraaf et al., 2019).
All approaches above would need to account for the observation that prediction is variable within 
and across individuals. Following Kuperberg and Jaeger (2016), Kaan and Grüter (2021) stress the role 
of utility. Making predictions (in the sense of top-down pre-activation) can be assumed to be metabol-
ically costly (Kuperberg & Jaeger, 2016) and time-consuming, or can be costly if the prediction is not 
borne out. However, not making predictions can be costly too, since processing the incoming word 
will be less efficient. The comprehender therefore makes a tradeoff to minimize cost and maximize 
efficiency. What is predicted and when can therefore be modulated by factors such as goals and task 
demands, but also by the properties of the language and subjective reliability and certainty of informa-
tion. For instance, L2 speakers may rely more on information that is a reliable cue in their L1 (e.g., word 
order rather than case for L1 English speakers, Bates & MacWhinney, 1981). L2 speakers may there-
fore make different predictions than L1 speakers or predict to a lesser extent (e.g., Grüter et al., 2020).
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
Most research on prediction in language processing, in L2 in particular, has used visual world eye-
tracking paradigms (for an overview, see Dussias, 2010). Below, I will focus on evidence from ERPs. 
Predictive processing has also been studied using EEG oscillations (see for an overview, Prystauka & 
Lewis, 2019) and fMRI (e.g., Shain et al., 2020), but to my knowledge, not with L2 speakers. I will 
also restrict myself to studies concerning meaning-based predictions (for syntax, see Alemán Bañón 
et al., this volume, and Ferreira & Qiu, 2021). In these studies, the predictability of a target word is 
manipulated, typically by presenting the word in a sentence context that is constraining towards the 
target word to a varying degree. For instance the target word sugar can be presented in a high con-
straint context such as I like coffee with cream and… or a low constraint context such as I mentioned 
I do not like… . The degree of constraint can be measured by cloze probability, that is, the propor-
tion of people that produce the same word when asked to complete that sentence fragment. I will 
first discuss L1 and L2 studies looking at ERP responses to the target word (N400 and post-N400 
positivities). Next, I will discuss L1 and L2 studies looking at brain responses to prediction violations 
before the target word is presented.
N400 at the Target Word
The N400 component is a negative going brain potential peaking around 300–500 ms after word 
onset (see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). Its amplitude is modulated by lexical properties such as 
frequency, but also by properties of the preceding context. Words that are more expected given the 
context (that have a higher cloze probability) elicit a smaller N400 amplitude (e.g., DeLong et al., 
2005; Kutas & Hillyard, 1984). In a predictive processing framework, the N400 amplitude can then 
be seen as an index of prediction error, in particular, as reflecting the access of (semantic) features 
not already activated by context (e.g., Kuperberg et al., 2020; but see Federmeier, 2021, for a more 
nuanced view). Typically, L2 speakers show a larger N400 for words that are implausible compared 
with plausible continuations of the sentence, like L1 speakers do, but this N400 plausibility effect 
may be smaller and occur later in L2 speakers than L1 speakers, especially for low-proficiency or 
late L2 learners (for overviews, see e.g., Frenck-Mestre et al., 2014; Newman et al., 2012; see also 
Fromont, this volume). In addition, the N400 for semantically congruent continuations is often larger 
in L2 compared to L1 speakers (e.g., Martin et al., 2013; Rossi et al., 2006). Newman et al. (2012) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing
333
relate the latter effect to proficiency rather than processing an L2, as also less-proficient L1 speakers 
show a larger N400 in their L1. Assuming that the N400 reflects activation of information that is not 
pre-activated, these data suggest that low-proficient speakers pre-activate semantic and other word-
related information to a lesser extent or more slowly. In addition, less proficient speakers may have a 
lower baseline activation for lexical items, since they may have had less exposure to words compared 
to proficient speakers.
The N400 can also be used to study what features are pre-activated. This can be done by con-
tinuing the sentence with a word that overlaps with the expected word in certain (semantic, ortho-
graphic) features (Federmeier & Kutas, 1999; Laszlo & Federmeier, 2009). For instance, Ito, Corley, 
et al. (2016) had L1 English speakers read texts such as The student went to the library to borrow a 
…. The fragment could continue either with the expected word (book), an unexpected word that over-
lapped with the expected word in meaning (page) or form (hook), or with a word that was unrelated 
to the expected word (sofa). The N400 was smallest for the expected ending, largest for the unrelated 
word, and in between for the semantically related word and the form-related word (the latter only 
in high-cloze sentences). These findings suggest that semantic and form features were pre-activated 
by the context. Furthermore, the N400 to both types of related words was modulated by the cloze 
probability of the expected word. This suggests that the more likely it is that a specific word will 
occur, the stronger the activation of its features. Ito et al. (2017b) tested L2 English speakers in the 
same paradigm. As in L1 speakers, the N400 was smallest for the expected words, intermediate for 
semantically related words and largest for unrelated words. However, there was no N400 difference 
between the unrelated and form-related words. Furthermore, the N400 amplitude of the semantically 
related words was not modulated by the (L2) cloze probability of the expected word. Results of this 
study and the other studies above suggest that L2 speakers can pre-activate semantic information on 
the basis of the context to some extent (as they show N400 anomaly effects), but that even relatively 
proficient L2 speakers may not pre-activate form features, or fine-grained semantic features in the 
way L1 speakers do.
Post-N400 Positivities
The N400 can be followed by positive components (600–1000 ms), which have been related to 
processes in response to prediction violations. In highly constraining contexts such as The lifeguards 
received a report of sharks right near the beach. Their immediate concern was to prevent any 
incidents in the sea. Hence, they cautioned the… (from Kuperberg et al., 2020), unexpected but 
plausible continuations (such as trainees) may elicit a frontal positivity compared with expected 
words (swimmers). Assuming a hierarchical predictive framework, Kuperberg et al. (2020) interpret 
this frontal positivity as reflecting an update (shift) at the level of the situation model (higher level 
discourse representation) in response to the prediction error. This may also imply that the predicted 
representations or situation model entertained up to that point need to be inhibited (see Zirnstein et al., 
2018 for evidence supporting this). On the other hand, anomalous continuations (such as drawer as 
a continuation of the example above), elicit a positivity that is more posteriorly distributed. This 
posterior positivity occurs when the input cannot be incorporated into the situation model. It may be 
associated with reanalysis and repair processes and has been equated to the P600 component found 
for syntactic difficulties (see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume; Kuperberg et al., 2020).
L2 studies differ as to whether post-N400 positivities are observed. Some report frontal positivities 
for unexpected words, suggesting that L2 speakers experienced a prediction violation (Foucart et al., 
2014), but some studies do not (Frenck-Mestre et al., 2010; Martin et al., 2013). Zirnstein et al. (2018) 
report a frontal positivity in L2 speakers with good L1 verbal fluency (interpreted as better language 
regulation), which was smaller in those with better cognitive control. Some studies do not find a 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
334
posterior positivity for anomalous continuations in L2 (Frenck-Mestre et al., 2014; Ito et al., 2017a; 
Zheng & Lemhöfer, 2019), or only with a slow presentation rate, which makes it hard to interpret this 
effect in terms of predictive processing (Ito et al., 2017b). In contrast, Newman et al. (2012) report a 
posterior positivity for semantic anomalies in L2 but not L1 speakers when participants were asked 
to make acceptability judgements.
The variation among L2 studies is not surprising given that post-N400 positivities show substan-
tial variation among L1 speakers as well. The determinants of this variation are still being explored 
(e.g., Zirnstein et al., 2018). One factor that may play a role is the comprehender’s task and goals. 
Post-N400 positivities typically occur when the words are presented in a globally coherent and 
informative discourse with a large communicative value to the reader (Brothers et al., 2020). One 
account of the differences in post-N400 positivities between L1 and L2 speakers may therefore be in 
terms of differences in goals and utility. For instance, in a reading task, L2 speakers may not much 
engage in updating and revision (resulting in smaller or no positivities), even if they notice that a 
word or feature is unexpected; this so as to save resources and be most efficient given the task, espe-
cially since revision may be difficult for L2 speakers (Pozzan & Trueswell, 2016). On the other hand, 
in a judgment task, L2 speakers may be less confident in determining whether an unexpected word 
is indeed anomalous in the L2, leading to more revision attempts (larger posterior positivity) than L1 
speakers (Newman et al., 2012).
Pre-target Violations of Predictions
Another way to study predictive processing is to look at electrophysiological responses before the 
target word appears in the input. Some languages mark properties of upcoming nouns (e.g., gender) on 
function words or inflections preceding the noun. When the sentence context heavily biases towards 
a certain upcoming noun, one can test what information about this word is pre-activated by using the 
incorrect pre-nominal function word or affixation. For example, Wicha et al. (2004) presented Spanish 
speakers with contexts such as La historia de Excalibur dice que el joven rey Arturo sacó de una gran 
roca una / un… . (“The story of Excalibur says that the young King Arthur removed from a large stone 
a [fem]/a [masc]…”). This context biases towards the word sword. In Spanish, this word has fem-
inine gender (espada). Hence, the masculine determiner (un) rather than the feminine (una) violates 
the gender features of the predicted noun. Wicha et al. (2004) showed a difference in the ERPs in L1 
Spanish speakers to unexpected vs. expected gender marked determiners, that is, before the predicted 
noun was presented. This is evidence that readers/listeners already activated some features (gender 
in this case) of the upcoming information (see also, e.g., Foucart et al., 2015; Van Berkum et al., 
2005). Studies using such pre-target violation paradigms suggest that also phonological features of 
upcoming words can be pre-activated, among other things. As an example of the latter, DeLong et al. 
(2005) used the English indefinite determiner a/an whose form signals that the next word starts with 
a consonant or a vowel. They presented contexts that were constraining towards a particular word 
and manipulated whether the determiner matched or mismatched the onset of the expected word. An 
example is The day was breezy so the boy went outside to fly a/an… . Here the word kite is expected, 
hence an is incongruent with that expectation. DeLong et al. reported an N400 at the mismatching 
determiner, which varied with the cloze probability of the upcoming noun. Outcomes of studies using 
pre-target violations have been much debated, however, with some researchers finding small effects 
if any, even in large-scale studies (Nieuwland et al., 2020; Nieuwland et al., 2018), and some finding 
support for the original interpretation (Nicenboim et al., 2020).
In spite of the controversy regarding the L1 data, pre-target violation paradigms have been used 
to study predictive processing in L2. Martin et al. (2013) used an a/an-paradigm similar to that in 
DeLong et al. (2005). Intermediate-proficiency Spanish L2 English learners in the study did not show 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing
335
any effects at the pre-target determiner, even though they were familiar with the rules regarding 
a(n) and had similar cloze probabilities to the items as L1 English speakers. Foucart and colleagues 
(Foucart et al., 2014; Foucart et al., 2016), on the other hand, did find evidence for pre-target pre-
diction of gender by French L2 leaners of Spanish in a paradigm like the one used by Wicha et al. 
(2004). The contrast with the findings from Martin et al. (2013) suggests that featural overlap between 
languages (grammatical gender in this case) may make it easier for L2 speakers to pre-activate that 
information during reading and listening. Alemán Bañón and Martin (2021) provide more direct 
evidence that cross-linguistic influence plays a role. Alemán Bañón and Martin (2021) cite a prior 
study using English cleft constructions in which specific nouns could be predicted on the basis of the 
preceding context. These expected nouns started either with a vowel or a consonant, as in DeLong 
et al. (2005). L1 English speakers showed an N400 at the determiner a(n) when its form mismatched 
the expected noun. However, Swedish L2 English speakers showed a later negativity, and Spanish 
L2 English speakers showed a late anterior positivity. The difference between the L2 groups may be 
due to the differences in word order between Spanish on the one hand, and Swedish and English on 
the other. Alemán Bañón and Martin (2021) tested participants from the same three populations in 
a study on possessive pronouns. Swedish and English are similar in that the gender of a possessive 
pronoun is that of the possessor (e.g., Tom’s mother is referred to as his mother), whereas in Spanish, 
the pronoun has the gender of the possessee (e.g., two boys refer to their mother as nuestra madre 
“our-FEM mother”). When the gender of the pronoun did not match that of the predicted noun (e.g., 
a reference to Tom’s (his) mother was expected, but the possessive pronoun was her), L1 English 
speakers and Swedish L2 English speakers showed an N400 effect, whereas the Spanish L2 English 
speakers showed a P600. Since these effects occurred before the target noun, this is evidence that 
both groups of L2 speakers predicted the upcoming word, but recruited different processes when the 
possessive pronoun violated the expectations.
Taken together, these results suggest that L2 speakers can use the semantic context to predict 
formal (phonological, gender) features of upcoming nouns, but that this is a function of overlap 
between the languages. This matches findings from studies using the visual world paradigm, showing 
that L2 speakers can use formal features (e.g., gender) to predict upcoming information, especially 
when the L2 and L1 overlap in terms of the use and realization of these features (Hopp & Lemmerth, 
2018; Schlenter & Felser, 2021).
Prediction and Learning: Pedagogical Implications
Predictive processing has been proposed as a mechanism underlying learning. The difference between 
what is predicted and the actual input can be used to adjust the system and reduce future prediction 
errors. While this mechanism has proven to be very successful in computational models of language 
learning (e.g., Chang et al., 2006), it is still debated to what extent prediction and prediction errors are 
used in human language leaning, and whether such a mechanism can lead to long-term, generalizable 
knowledge (e.g., Kaan & Chun, 2018; Phillips & Ehrenhofer, 2015). First, prediction is not the only 
mechanism through which learning may occur. There are phenomena that are hard to learn through 
forward prediction, and L2 speakers may know certain aspects of L2 that they cannot use predict-
ively (Huettig & Mani, 2016; Kaan, 2015). Furthermore, given the evidence discussed above that L2 
speakers may not make predictions or make the same predictions to the same extent as L1 speakers, it 
is not straightforward how prediction could lead to L2 learning (Hopp, 2021). Third, even among L1 
speakers, adaptation of processing in response to errors has not been systematically observed (Kaan 
& Chun, 2018).
However, there is evidence suggesting that prediction errors can help word learning and memor-
ization, at least in adults (Federmeier et al., 2007; Gambi et al., 2021). Furthermore, several studies 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
336
have shown better learning when learners actively predict (guess) and check their predictions (e.g., 
Potts et al., 2019). Learning may therefore be facilitated by attentional and reward systems, rather 
than by predictive processing itself (Gambi, 2021).
Especially the latter findings have obvious pedagogical applications. Guessing exercises could 
be easily implemented in language learning apps or classroom practices. As motivation and reward 
appears to play a great role, gamification of such apps may encourage learning as well (Schremm 
et al., 2017).
Current Trends and Future Directions
Cognitive neuroscience research on predictive language processing in L2 learners and other bilinguals 
is still scarce. What is clear is that predictive language processing is highly variable across and within 
individuals. Current research is aimed at identifying the modulating factors, such as individual 
differences in cognitive control (Zirnstein et al., 2018). Another trend is to investigate how cognitive 
control and other processes are dynamically adjusted depending on the current context and demands 
within individuals (Salig et al., 2021). Along these lines, studies on prediction could manipulate the 
relative reliability or task-relevance of particular cues across the experiment (e.g., Henry et al., 2017; 
Henry et al., 2020), so as to determine how L2-speakers trade off such cues to predict or learn from 
prediction errors. Alternatively, neuromodulation (see Pandža, this volume) could be used to deter-
mine what aspects of prediction or learning from prediction errors would be affected by modulating, 
e.g., the inhibition or attention system. Future research would also need to include people with many 
different language backgrounds and language experiences. This will help us further identify what 
factors affect prediction during processing and learning from prediction errors.
Further Readings
For an overview of the different interpretations of prediction and an explanation of a Bayesian approach, see:
Kuperberg, G.R., & Jaeger, T.F. (2016). What do we mean by prediction in language comprehension? Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(1), 32–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1102299
For an alternative take on prediction and its role in language processing and learning, see:
Huettig, F., & Mani, N. (2016). Is prediction necessary to understand language? Probably not. Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(1), 19–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1072223
For an overview of the role of prediction in L2 processing and learning, see e.g.:
Kaan, E. (2014). Predictive sentence processing in L2 and L1: What is different? Linguistic Approaches to 
Bilingualism, 4(2), 257–282. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.4.2.05kaa
Kaan, E., & Grüter, T. (2021b). Prediction in second language processing and learning: Advances and directions. 
In E. Kaan & T. Grüter (Eds.), Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 1–24). John 
Benjamins.
Acknowledgments
The author likes to thank Kristin Lemhöfer, an anonymous reviewer, and the editors of this volume for comments 
and suggestions. EK is supported by NSF BCS-2017251.
References
Alemán Bañón, J., Fiorentino, R., & Gabriele, A. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language 
syntactic system. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing
337
Alemán Bañón, J., & Martin, C. (2021). The role of crosslinguistic differences in second language anticipa-
tory processing: An event-related potentials study. Neuropsychologia, 155, 107797. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2021.107797
Altmann, G.T.M., & Kamide, Y. (1999). Incremental interpretation at verbs: Restricting the domain of subse-
quent reference. Cognition, 73(3), 247–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(99)00059-1
Bates, E., & MacWhinney, B. (1981). Second language acquisition from a functionalist perspective: Pragmatic, 
semantic and perceptual strategies. In H. Winitz (Ed.), Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences confer-
ence on native and foreign language acquisition (pp. 190–214). New York Academy of Sciences.
Brothers, T., Swaab, T.Y., & Traxler, M.J. (2017). Goals and strategies influence lexical prediction during sentence 
comprehension. Journal of Memory and Language, 93, 203–216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.10.002
Brothers, T., Wlotko, E.W., Warnke, L., & Kuperberg, G.R. (2020). Going the extra mile: Effects of discourse 
context on two late positivities during language comprehension. Neurobiology of Language, 1(1), 135–160. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00006
Chang, F., Dell, G.S., & Bock, K. (2006). Becoming syntactic. Psychological Review, 113(2), 234–272. https://
doi.org/10.1037/0033-295x.113.2.234
DeLong, K.A., Urbach, T.P., & Kutas, M. (2005). Probabilistic word pre-activation during language comprehen-
sion inferred from electrical brain activity. Nature Neuroscience, 8(8), 1117–1121. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn1504
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dijkgraaf, A., Hartsuiker, R.J., & Duyck, W. (2019). Prediction and integration of semantics during L2 and 
L1 listening. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 34(7), 881–900. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273
798.2019.1591469
Dussias, P.E. (2010). Uses of eye-tracking data in second language sentence processing research. Annual Review 
of Applied Linguistics, 30, 149–166. https://doi.org/10.1017/S026719051000005X
Dussias, P.E., Valdés Kroff, J.R., Guzzardo Tamargo, R.E., & Gerfen, C. (2013). When gender and looking go 
hand in hand. Grammatical gender processing in L2 Spanish. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 35, 
353–387. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263112000915
Favier, S., Meyer, A.S., & Huettig, F. (2021). Literacy can enhance syntactic prediction in spoken language 
processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 150, 2167–2174. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge
0001042
Federmeier, K.D. (2021). Connecting and considering: Electrophysiology provides insights into comprehension. 
Psychophysiology, 59, e13940. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13940
Federmeier, K.D., & Kutas, M. (1999). A rose by any other name: Long-term memory structure and sentence 
processing. Journal of Memory and Language, 41(4), 469–495. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/
jmla.1999.2660
Federmeier, K.D., Wlotko, E.W., De Ochoa-Dewald, E., & Kutas, M. (2007). Multiple effects of sentential 
constraint on word processing. Brain Research, 1146, 75–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2006.06.101
Ferreira, F., & Chantavarin, S. (2018). Integration and prediction in language processing: A synthesis of old 
and new. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 27(6), 443–448. https://doi.org/10.1177/096372141
8794491
Ferreira, F., & Qiu, Z. (2021). Predicting syntactic structure. Brain Research, 1770, 147632. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2021.147632
Foucart, A., Martin, C.D., Moreno, E.M., & Costa, A. (2014). Can bilinguals see it coming? Word anticipation in 
L2 sentence reading. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 40(5), 4161–
1469. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0036756
Foucart, A., Ruiz-Tada, E., & Costa, A. (2015). How do you know I was about to say “book”? Anticipation 
processes affect speech processing and lexical recognition. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience. https://
doi.org///dx.doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1016047
Foucart, A., Ruiz-Tada, E., & Costa, A. (2016). Anticipation processes in L2 speech comprehension: Evidence 
from ERPs and lexical recognition task. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(1), 213–219. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S1366728915000486
Frenck-Mestre, C., Carrasco-Ortiz, H., McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Foucart, A. (2010). Linguistic input 
factors in native and L2 processing of inflectional morphology: Evidence from ERPs and behavioral studies. 
Language, Interaction and Acquisition, 1(2), 206–228. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1075/lia.1.2.04fre
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
338
Frenck-Mestre, C., German, E.S., & Foucart, A. (2014). Qualitative differences in native and nonnative semantic 
processing as revealed by ERPs. In R.R. Heredia & J. Altarriba (Eds.), Foundations of bilingual memory (pp. 
237–255). Springer New York. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4614-9218-4_12
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Gambi, C. (2021). The role of prediction in second language vocabulary learning. In E. Kaan & T. Grüter (Eds.), 
Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 187–206). John Benjamins.
Gambi, C., Pickering, M.J., & Rabagliati, H. (2021). Prediction error boosts retention of novel words in adults 
but not in children. Cognition, 211, 104650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104650
Grüter, T., Lau, E., & Ling, W. (2020). How classifiers facilitate predictive processing in L1 and L2 Chinese: the 
role of semantic and grammatical cues. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(2), 221–234. https://doi.
org/10.1080/23273798.2019.1648840
Grüter, T., Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2012). Grammatical gender in L2: A production or a real-time pro-
cessing problem? Second Language Research, 28(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312437990
Grüter, T., Rohde, H., & Shafer, A.J. (2014). The role of discourse-level expectations in non-native speakers’ 
referential choices. In W. Orman & M.J. Valleau (Eds.), Proceedings of the 38th Annual Boston University 
Conference on Language Development (pp. 179–191). Cascadilla Press.
Henry, N., Hopp, H., & Jackson, C.N. (2017). Cue additivity and adaptivity in predictive processing. Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 32(10), 1229–1249. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2017.1327080
Henry, N., Jackson, C.N., & Hopp, H. (2020). Cue coalitions and additivity in predictive processing: The inter-
action between case and prosody in L2 German. Second Language Research, 0267658320963151. https://doi.
org/10.1177/0267658320963151
Hopp, H. (2013). Grammatical gender in adult L2 acquisition: Relations between lexical and syntactic vari-
ability. Second Language Research, 29(1), 33–56. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658312461803
Hopp, H. (2021). Prediction and grammatical learning in second language sentence processing. In E. Kaan & T. 
Grüter (Eds.), Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 167–185). John Benjamins.
Hopp, H., & Lemmerth, N. (2018). Lexical and syntactic congruency in L2 predictive gender processing. Studies 
in Second Language Acquisition, 40(1), 171–199. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263116000437
Huettig, F. (2015). Four central questions about prediction in language processing. Brain Research, 1626, 118–
135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2015.02.014
Huettig, F., & Janse, E. (2016). Individual differences in working memory and processing speed predict antici-
patory spoken language processing in the visual world. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 31, 80–93. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1047459
Huettig, F., & Mani, N. (2016). Is prediction necessary to understand language? Probably not. Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 31(1), 19–31. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1072223
Ito, A., Corley, M., & Pickering, M.J. (2018). A cognitive load delays predictive eye movements similarly during 
L1 and L2 comprehension. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 21(2), 251–264. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S1366728917000050
Ito, A., Corley, M., Pickering, M.J., Martin, A.E., & Nieuwland, M.S. (2016). Predicting form and 
meaning: Evidence from brain potentials. Journal of Memory and Language, 86, 157–171. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jml.2015.10.007
Ito, A., Martin, A.E., & Nieuwland, M.S. (2017a). How robust are prediction effects in language comprehen-
sion? Failure to replicate article-elicited N400 effects. Language, Cognition & Neuroscience, 32, 954–965. 
doi:10.1080/23273798.2016.1242761
Ito, A., Martin, A.E., & Nieuwland, M.S. (2017b). On predicting form and meaning in a second language. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 43(4), 635–652. https://doi.org/
10.1037/xlm0000315
Ito, A., & Pickering, M.J. (2021). Automaticity and prediction in non-native language comprehension. In E. Kaan 
& T. Grüter (Eds.), Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 25–46). John Benjamins.
Ito, A., Pickering, M. J., & Corley, M. (2018). Investigating the time-course of phonological prediction in native 
and non-native speakers of English: A visual world eye-tracking study. Journal of Memory and Language, 98, 
1–11. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.09.002
Kaan, E. (2014). Predictive sentence processing in L2 and L1: What is different? Linguistic Approaches to 
Bilingualism, 4(2), 257–282. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.4.2.05kaa
Kaan, E. (2015). Knowing without predicting, predicting without learning. Linguistic Approaches to Bilingualism, 
5(4), 482–486. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.5.4.07kaa
Kaan, E., & Chun, E. (2018). Syntactic Adaptation. In K.D. Federmeier & D.G. Watson (Eds.), Psychology of 
Learning and Motivation (Vol. 68, pp. 85–116). Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.plm.2018.08.003
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Neurocognition of Prediction in Second Language Processing
339
Kaan, E., Dallas, A.C., & Wijnen, F. (2010). Syntactic predictions in second-language sentence processing. In 
J.-W. Zwart & M. de Vries (Eds.), Structure preserved. Festschrift in the honor of Jan Koster (pp. 207–213). 
John Benjamins.
Kaan, E., & Grüter, T. (2021). Prediction in second language processing and learning: Advances and directions. 
In E. Kaan & T. Grüter (Eds.), Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 1–24). John 
Benjamins.
Kuperberg, G.R., Brothers, T., & Wlotko, E.W. (2020). A tale of two positivities and the N400: Distinct neural 
signatures are evoked by confirmed and violated predictions at different levels of representation. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 32(1), 12–35. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01465
Kuperberg, G.R., & Jaeger, T.F. (2016). What do we mean by prediction in language comprehension? Language, 
Cognition & Neuroscience, 31(1), 32–59. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2015.1102299
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1984). Brain potentials during reading reflect word expectancy and semantic asso-
ciation. Nature, 307(5947), 161–163. https://doi.org/10.1038/307161a0
Laszlo, S., & Federmeier, K.D. (2009). A beautiful day in the neighborhood: An event-related potential study of 
lexical relationships and prediction in context. Journal of Memory and Language, 61(3), 326–338. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2009.06.004
Lew-Williams, C., & Fernald, A. (2010). Real-time processing of gender-marked articles by native and non-
native Spanish speakers. Journal of Memory and Language, 63(4), 447–464. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2010.07.003
Martin, C., Thierry, G., Kuipers, J.-R., Boutonnet, B., Foucart, A., & Costa, A. (2013). Bilinguals reading in their 
second language do not predict upcoming words as native readers do. Journal of Memory and Language, 
69(4), 574–588. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2013.08.001
Newman, A.J., Tremblay, A., Nichols, E.S., Neville, H.J., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). The influence of language 
proficiency on lexical semantic processing in native and late learners of English. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 24(5), 1205–1223. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00143
Nicenboim, B., Vasishth, S., & Rösler, F. (2020). Are words pre-activated probabilistically during sentence com-
prehension? Evidence from new data and a Bayesian random-effects meta-analysis using publicly available 
data. Neuropsychologia, 142, 107427. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.107427
Nieuwland, M.S., Arkhipova, Y., & Rodríguez-Gómez, P. (2020). Anticipating words during spoken discourse 
comprehension: A large-scale, pre-registered replication study using brain potentials. Cortex, 133, 1–36. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2020.09.007
Nieuwland, M.S., Politzer-Ahles, S., Heyselaar, E., Segaert, K., Darley, E., Kazanina, N., Von Grebmer Zu 
Wolfsthurn, S., Bartolozzi, F., Kogan, V., Ito, A., Mézière, D., Barr, D.J., Rousselet, G.A., Ferguson, H.J., 
Busch-Moreno, S., Fu, X., Tuomainen, J., Kulakova, E., Husband, E.M., Donaldson, D.I., Kohút, Z., 
Rueschemeyer, S.A., & Huettig, F. (2018). Large-scale replication study reveals a limit on probabilistic pre-
diction in language comprehension. Elife, 7. https://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.33468
Pajak, B., Fine, A.B., Kleinschmidt, D.F., & Jaeger, T.F. (2016). Learning additional languages as hierarchical 
probabilistic inference: insights from L1 processing. Language Learning, 66(4), 900–944. https://doi.org/
10.1111/lang.12168
Pandža, N. (this volume). Using non-invasive brain stimulation to investigate second language. In K. Morgan-
Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics.
Phillips, C., & Ehrenhofer, L. (2015). The role of language processing in language acquisition. Linguistic 
Approaches to Bilingualism, 5(4), 409–453. https://doi.org/10.1075/lab.5.4.01phi
Pickering, M.J., & Garrod, S. (2013). An integrated theory of language production and comprehension. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 36(4), 329–347. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X12001495
Potts, R., Davies, G., & Shanks, D.R. (2019). The benefit of generating errors during learning: What is the locus 
of the effect? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 45(6), 1023–1041. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000637
Pozzan, L., & Trueswell, J.C. (2016). Second language processing and revision of garden-path sentences: a 
visual word study. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(3), 636–643. https://doi.org/10.1017/S13667
28915000838
Prystauka, Y., & Lewis, A.G. (2019). The power of neural oscillations to inform sentence comprehension: A 
linguistic perspective. Language and Linguistics Compass, 13, e12347. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12347
Rabovsky, M., & McRae, K. (2014). Simulating the N400 ERP component as semantic network error: Insights 
from a feature-based connectionist attractor model of word meaning. Cognition, 132(1), 68–89. https://doi.
org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.03.010
Romero-Rivas, C., Martin, C.D., & Costa, A. (2016). Foreign-accented speech modulates linguistic anticipatory 
processes. Neuropsychologia, 85, 245–255. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.03.022
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Edith Kaan
340
Rossi, S., Gugler, M.F., Friederici, A.D., & Hahne, A. (2006). The impact of proficiency on syntactic second-
language processing of German and Italian: evidence from event-related potentials. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 18, 2030–2048. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.12.2030
Salig, L.K., Valdés Kroff, J.R., Slevc, L.R., & Novick, J.M. (2021). Moving from bilingual traits to 
states: Understanding cognition and language processing through moment-to-moment variation. Neurobiology 
of Language, 2, 487–512. https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00046
Schlenter, J., & Felser, C. (2021). Second language prediction ability across different linguistic domains: Evidence 
from German. In E. Kaan & T. Grüter (Eds.), Prediction in second language processing and learning (pp. 
47–68). John Benjamins.
Schremm, A., Hed, A., Horne, M., & Roll, M. (2017). Training predictive L2 processing with a digital 
game: Prototype promotes acquisition of anticipatory use of tone-suffix associations. Computers & Education, 
114, 206–221. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2017.07.006
Shain, C., Blank, I.A., van Schijndel, M., Schuler, W., & Fedorenko, E. (2020). fMRI reveals language-specific 
predictive coding during naturalistic sentence comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 138, 107307. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.107307
Tsoukala, C., Frank, S.L., & Broersma, M. (2017). “He’s pregnant”: simulating the confusing case of gender 
pronoun errors in L2 English. Proceedings of the 39th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society 
(CogSci 2017) (pp. 3392–3397). Cognitive Science Society, Austin, TX.
Van Berkum, J.J.A., Brown, C.M., Zwitserlood, P., Kooijman, V., & Hagoort, P. (2005). Anticipating upcoming 
words in discourse: Evidence from ERPs and reading times. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 31, 443–467. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.31.3.443
Wicha, N.Y.Y., Moreno, E.M., & Kutas, M. (2004). Anticipating words and their gender: An event-related 
brain potential study of semantic integration, gender expectancy, and gender agreement in Spanish sentence 
reading. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 16(7), 1272–1288. https://doi.org/10.1162/0898929041920487
Zheng, X., & Lemhöfer, K. (2019). The “semantic P600” in second language processing: When syntax conflicts 
with semantics. Neuropsychologia, 127, 131–147. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2019.02.010
Zirnstein, M., Van Hell, J.G., & Kroll, J.F. (2018). Cognitive control ability mediates prediction costs in 
monolinguals and bilinguals. Cognition, 176, 87–106. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2018.03.001
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

341
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-32
25
FEEDBACK IN SECOND 
LANGUAGE NEUROCOGNITION
Sybrine Bultena
Introduction
Feedback is indispensable in the process of learning a second language (L2). Although the effect-
iveness of feedback has often been discussed (e.g., Karim & Nassaji, 2019; Li, 2010; Plonsky & 
Brown, 2015; Truscott, 1996), all L2 learners rely on input and corrections from teachers, peers, 
native speakers, computer programs, or apps to improve their level of proficiency. Feedback can 
expose gaps in the learner’s knowledge, promote noticing of errors, provide correct forms, and, as 
such, provide opportunities for L2 learning (Loewen, 2012).
The topic of feedback itself has received much attention from different perspectives and research 
fields, including applied linguistics, the educational field more generally, and cognitive neurosci-
ence, all of which come with their own specific interests and terminology. Linguistic and educational 
approaches to feedback have often focused on questions regarding the effectiveness of different 
types of feedback, which have been studied both in the classroom and in the lab, predominantly 
using behavioral techniques (e.g., Nassaji & Kartchava, 2021). Neurocognitive approaches, mostly 
interested in subdomains other than language learning, investigate how feedback is processed in the 
brain and which neural mechanisms underlie participants’ behavioral adaptations (i.e., changes in 
performance) after receiving feedback (e.g., Ullsperger et al., 2014). Primarily relying on electro-
encephalography (EEG), which provides a measure of the brain’s electrical activity, studies in this 
domain have identified several domain-general response-locked and feedback-locked event-related 
potential (ERP) components (for more information about the ERP method, see Dickson & Pelzl, this 
volume). These brain responses to specific events could also benefit investigations of L2 feedback, 
because they can give more insight in feedback processing and feedback effectiveness. To date, 
however, only few neurocognitive studies have approached feedback processing in the context of 
L2 learning.
The current neurocognitive L2 literature has a strong focus on learning outcomes, with a pri-
mary interest in the extent to which L2 learners show native-like processing, typically examined 
by means of language-related ERP components (Morgan-Short & Tanner, 2014; see also Dickson 
& Pelzl, this volume). What makes the domain-general ERP components associated with feedback 
interesting is that they allow for an online examination of processing right at the moment that 
new knowledge is acquired. These components can reveal how the brain responds to feedback, 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
342
which may involve error evaluation, updating of representations, and prevention of future errors. 
In other words, feedback-related EEG activity can give us insights into processing during learning. 
This chapter aims to give an overview of neurocognitive findings available from the L2 learning 
domain on feedback, and connect behavioral findings to insights and methods from cognitive 
neuroscience. In doing so, it additionally aims to pave the way for future studies on L2 feedback 
processing.
Critical Definitions and Overview of Feedback-Related ERPs
Feedback promotes learning, which can be defined as correct performance immediately on a subse-
quent experimental trial, on delayed post-tests, or in terms of long-term retention (see Soderstrom & 
Bjork, 2015). This can result in declarative knowledge (such as memorized information) and proced-
ural knowledge (such as rule discovery; Rebuschat & Williams, 2012).
There are many different forms of feedback that can lead to learning. Traditionally, linguistics 
has broadly distinguished between positive and negative evidence (White, 1991), both of which 
can be thought of as feedback. Negative evidence is the information provided to a learner that a 
produced utterance is not correct, which is typically an explicit form of feedback. The L2 feed-
back literature generally uses the term corrective feedback to refer to negative evidence. Such 
corrective feedback may involve different types of information, which can be broadly categorized 
on the basis of three characteristics: (a) the accuracy of the response or utterance (was it correct 
or incorrect?); (b) the correct form proper; and (c) metalinguistic information elucidating why 
something is wrong or how a rule should be applied correctly (Loewen, 2012). The term corrective 
feedback is used to refer to all of these forms or a combination of any of the three. Positive evi-
dence, or exposure to correct input, can similarly provide feedback to L2 learners, albeit in a more 
implicit form. Recasts, more or less subtle reformulations of a preceding erroneous production, 
and input provided by natives are examples of positive evidence; such feedback allows learners 
to detect errors in their own formulations, provided that these are noticed (see Loewen, 2012). 
More recently, feedback has been categorized as either input-providing (e.g., recasts and metalin-
guistic information) or output-promoting (e.g., elicitations and prompts) (Loewen, 2012). These 
categorizations indicate that linguistic approaches to feedback have been primarily concerned 
with the errors that learners make (see Leeman, 2007), rather than with correct performance in a 
learning situation.
As opposed to linguistic investigations, neurocognitive approaches typically distinguish 
between effects of positive and negative feedback, i.e., indications that a preceding response was 
correct or incorrect. Feedback is investigated as part of performance monitoring, a field that studies 
how the brain detects and learns from mistakes by means of self-monitoring of one’s own errors, 
observation of others’ errors, or feedback received from others (Ullsperger et al., 2014). This lit-
erature spans a variety of topics related to learning and memory, involving tasks based on execu-
tion of motor commands in response to a particular stimulus, such as eye movements or grasping 
behavior (see Gehring et al., 2011), the memorization of names for novel objects (e.g., Arbel et al., 
2013), or visual perception, an example of which is the Flanker task where participants are asked 
to make a decision on the direction of an arrow flanked by other arrows (e.g., Heldmann et al., 
2008). In such tasks, feedback is usually provided in response to binary choice decisions, and the 
same stimuli are repeatedly presented to facilitate trial-and-error learning. This allows for the 
examination of feedback processing, which can be defined as “the cognitive process [that] allows 
[an] individual to monitor, detect, and pay attention to errors in order to learn from them and thus 
improve performance, adapt behavior and regulate emotions, and update knowledge” (Dion & 
Restrepo, 2016, p. 247).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition
343
How feedback provided by others is processed by the receiver can be inferred from feedback-
related ERP components that are visible in the EEG waveform time-locked to the onset of the feed-
back presentation. This typically elicits two components that vary according to whether the feedback 
is positive or negative. The first of these components is known as the feedback-related negativity 
(FRN), an early fronto-central negative-going waveform, usually quantified at electrode Fz or FCz, 
that peaks roughly between 200 and 300 ms after feedback presentation (Miltner et al., 1997). 
It is elicited for feedback in both the auditory (usually immediate) and visual (more likely to be 
delayed) modality (San Martín, 2012), and is attested in adult, child (Arbel & Fox, 2021), and toddler 
populations (Meyer et al., 2014). The FRN effect is typically measured as a difference between the 
more negative waveform following negative feedback in comparison to positive feedback. In tasks 
involving reliable (i.e., valid) feedback that is informative for behavioral adaptation,1 the FRN is 
commonly thought to be an index of expectancy violations, irrespective of whether the feedback is 
positive or negative (Ferdinand & Opitz, 2014; Oliveira et al., 2007). In other words, an FRN effect 
can indicate that a learner is surprised both by feedback indicating that their response was incorrect 
as well as by feedback that their response was correct. The FRN is thought to originate in the medial 
prefrontal cortex (Alexander & Brown, 2011). More specifically, it is assumed to reflect the response 
of the dorsal part of anterior cingulate cortex to expectancy violations (Miltner et al., 1997; Van Schie 
et al., 2004).
The second ERP component associated with feedback processing, which co-occurs with typic-
ally the FRN, is the feedback-locked P300, a broad-ranging centro-parietal positive-going waveform 
linked to the temporal parietal junction (TPJ) or locus coeruleus (a part of the brain stem associated 
with responses to stress) that tends to peak roughly between 300 and 600 ms after feedback onset 
(San Martín, 2012). In terms of its functional significance for feedback processing, the P300 has been 
related to updating processes (Donchin & Coles, 1988), and encoding of new information (Donchin, 
1981). Larger P300 amplitudes are found as the feedback stimulus is more infrequent or less expected. 
The amplitude of the P300 has also been related to the probability of behavioral adaptation following 
feedback (San Martín, 2012). In addition to the FRN and P300, several studies investigating declara-
tive learning (e.g., of name-object associations) also report an early frontal positivity (FCP or P3a) 
in relation to corrective feedback, which is thought to reflect attentional orienting towards relevant 
information (Butterfield & Mangels, 2003; Ernst & Steinhauser, 2012).
Apart from feedback-locked components elicited by external feedback provided by a computer 
program, teacher, or interlocutor, studies on performance monitoring have also examined the internal 
detection of errors, or self-monitoring, a process thought to result in what is more commonly known 
as an “oops response” (Hajcak & Simons, 2008). The internal detection of errors can be visualized by 
examining response-locked components. Committed errors yield an error-related negativity or ERN 
once detected (Falkenstein et al., 1990; Gehring et al., 1993), a fronto-central sharp negative deflec-
tion, generally measured at Fz or FCz, that peaks within 100 ms after an error has been made. It is 
usually followed by an error positivity (Pe) that peaks between 100–200 ms after error commission, 
which has been linked to error awareness (see Wessel, 2012). Early accounts have shown that the 
FRN and ERN components are related and share neural generators (Miltner et al., 1997). The internal 
detection of errors is particularly interesting as an outcome measure of learning; once a new rule or 
knowledge set has been acquired, learners should be able to monitor their own errors. As such, the 
ERN can be used as a marker of learning.
So far, we have distinguished between positive vs. negative, and internal vs. external types of 
feedback. In what follows, this chapter will give an overview of findings on feedback in L2 learning 
from both behavioral and neurocognitive approaches. In doing so, it will address feedback effective-
ness, the neural correlates of feedback processing, and studies on L2 learning that have used these 
measures.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
344
Theoretical Perspectives and Approaches
Key Issues About L2 Feedback Effectiveness
A key question in the L2 literature concerns the long-term effectiveness of different types of feed-
back (e.g., Nassaji & Kartchava, 2021). Several research overviews point to an advantage of explicit 
over implicit forms of feedback (Russell & Spada, 2006; but see Li, 2010), in line with the idea that 
attention and noticing are crucial for L2 learning (Gass & Mackey, 2020; Schmidt, 2010). Other 
aspects that affect feedback effectiveness relate to contextual factors, including the timing of the 
feedback (immediate or delayed), characteristics of the interlocutor (their L1, gender, and age), who 
the recipient is (the learner themselves or someone else), and how informative the feedback is (is the 
correct form provided or not), as well as individual differences, including L2 proficiency, develop-
mental readiness, working memory and inhibitory control (see Loewen, 2012).
Despite a large number of behavioral studies on feedback effectiveness, several questions remain, 
such as how we can tell that feedback is noticed, how the incidence of learning can be established (see 
Lyster & Ranta, 1997 on uptake vs. intake), and whether it is possible to predict if feedback will be 
effective. Although behavioral performance provides useful insights to establish the effectiveness of 
different types of feedback, it cannot reveal how such feedback is processed, and how this can con-
tribute to changes in subsequent performance.
How Can Effectiveness Be Measured Using ERPs?
As a prediction error marker (Alexander & Brown, 2011), the occurrence of feedback-locked 
components could serve as an indication of noticing when measured at the moment that feedback is 
provided. These components can also show learning-related fluctuations and changes. As L2 learning 
progresses and proficiency increases, instances of negative feedback decline, whereas positive feed-
back is likely to become more and more expected. So, as performance improves, the occurrence of 
the FRN, and thereby also its amplitude in the averaged signal, decreases in the course of learning 
(Van Der Helden et al., 2010). Importantly, such a relationship between the FRN effect and learning 
is typically only observed for tasks that rely on rule-learning (Butterfield & Mangels, 2003; Ernst & 
Steinhauser, 2012); when a rule is memorized, feedback becomes less informative, reducing the pre-
diction error (i.e., the difference between predicted and actual outcomes). For item-based learning, 
however, feedback remains informative until all individual items have been learnt, meaning that the 
FRN may not decrease in amplitude even though performance improves (e.g., Bultena et al., 2017). 
By the same token, informativity of feedback depends on the number of response options; when 
participants are asked to make a binary choice, negative feedback is as informative as positive feed-
back. In a multiple-choice design, however, negative feedback without being complemented by a 
correct form leaves several options to choose from, which implies that ERP amplitudes in response to 
positive feedback are a better indication of subsequent learning (Arbel et al., 2013).
The amplitude of feedback-locked components has also been used to predict behavioral 
adjustments. Larger amplitudes for the FRN, FCP and P300 during learning have been associated 
with correct performance on a subsequent occurrence of particular items or on a post-test (Arbel, 
2013; Arbel &Wu, 2016; Ernst & Steinhauser, 2012). Whether or not feedback leads to behavioral 
adjustment depends on a number of modulating factors. These include contextual effects, such as 
the perceived relevance of feedback and how well it is understood (see Dion & Restrepo, 2016), and 
how confident participants are about response accuracy (Frömer et al., 2021). Individual differences 
regarding age have similarly been shown to affect the size of the FRN, because neural generators of 
the FRN, such as the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex and other parts of the cognitive control network 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition
345
have not yet fully developed in young children (Arbel et al., 2013; Arbel & Fox, 2021). Performance 
monitoring thus improves as the brain matures, which implies that feedback may not be processed 
optimally as long as inhibitory mechanisms have not fully developed.
A reduction of the FRN has furthermore been shown to be accompanied by an increase in the 
response-locked ERN (Bellebaum & Daum, 2008; Heldmann et al., 2008), as learners can increas-
ingly monitor their own performance internally and rely less on explicit feedback. Note that such an 
effect can only be reliably observed once learners are able to detect slips in their own performance. 
As such, this effect is more likely to be observed for rule-learning. Finally, response-locked and 
feedback-locked components can be used to monitor learning from observation. The observational 
ERN (oERN) or FRN (oFRN) and subsequent positivities can be elicited in participants who observe 
another participant making a mistake or receive feedback (Bellebaum et al., 2010; van Schie et al., 
2004; but see Burnside et al., 2019).
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
To date, only a handful of studies on L2 learning have used error-related and feedback-related 
components to investigate learning. One of the first L2 studies to focus on processing during learning, 
while simultaneously taking teaching methods into account, was conducted by Davidson and Indefrey 
(2009). In a morpho-syntactic learning task, they examined the performance of Dutch learners of 
German and compared their performance to that of native speakers of German. The L2 learners, all of 
whom had some previous knowledge of German, were taught a declension rule relating to adjectives. 
In German, the marking of case, gender, and number on individual lexical items that form part of the 
noun phrase depends on the presence or absence of determiners. If a determiner is part of the noun 
phrase, the adjective only takes a weak suffix, but in the absence of a determiner, the adjective has a 
strong suffix. The Dutch learners in this study, who had intermediate levels of proficiency, were typ-
ically not aware of this subtle variation.
All participants were subjected to different rounds of testing as part of a learning study. On the 
first day of testing, they took part in a pre-test in which they were asked to judge whether prepos-
itional phrases, part of which included declension and gender violations, were grammatically correct 
or incorrect. While the morpho-syntactic feature was relatively complex, the nouns and adjectives 
used in the study were all familiar to the Dutch learners, so that erroneous responses could not be 
lexically driven. On the same day, the participants also received explicit instruction on the declension 
rule involving pen-and-paper tasks that focused on gender and case marking. This was followed by 
a training phase, in which participants were once again asked to judge the accuracy of a set of prep-
ositional phrases. This training phase included simple feedback on response accuracy; by means of a 
color cue and an accompanying sound, learners were informed whether their judgement was correct 
or not, but they were not told the correct response or the exact location of the error in violated phrases. 
One week later, participants came back for a post-test that did not provide any feedback.
Participants’ EEG was measured during the pre-test, training phase, and post-test, both during 
stimulus presentation and while they assessed the accuracy of the phrases. The training was shown to 
be effective: the number of judgment errors for the declension manipulation decreased in the course 
of learning. During processing, a stimulus-locked P600 effect was observed for the L2 learners in 
both the training phase and the post-test, which was similar to the effect native speakers showed when 
presented with the same morpho-syntactic violations. Although behavioral performance on gender 
violations similarly increased between pre-test and post-test, this manipulation did not show P600 
effects at any stage of learning.
Having demonstrated that grammatical learning occurred, the authors subsequently examined 
ERP components as learners decided on the accuracy of the phrases presented during the pre-test, 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
346
training, and post-test. In line with the observed P600 effects, their data indicated a response-locked 
ERN and error positivity (Pe) for declension violations in the training phase and post-test, which was 
absent during the pre-test. A follow-up analysis furthermore demonstrated that a larger ERN ampli-
tude correlated with greater behavioral improvement from pre-test to post-test. No such effects were 
evidenced for the gender violation. The results for the declension manipulation thus showed that the 
explicit instruction had helped the learners to figure out the declension rule, which resulted in error 
monitoring. On the basis of these findings, the learning of gender agreement, however, seems to 
require item-based learning rather than rule-based learning. Assuming that item-based learning takes 
longer to memorize, this may explain why P600 and error-related effects were absent for the gender 
violation. Together these results indicate that domain-general learning mechanisms, as indexed by the 
ERN, are relevant for language processing. Despite using a feedback-guided design, Davidson and 
Indefrey (2009) did not examine feedback-related components (FRN and P300) separately. The study 
gives no specifics on the timing of the feedback following the response, other than that feedback was 
presented at very short intervals. This suggests that the ERN effect that was observed early on during 
the training phase, which included feedback presentation, may have included feedback processing 
rather than or in addition to internal monitoring of errors.
A subsequent study by Davidson and Indefrey (2011) did look into response-locked and feedback-
locked components separately. They repeated the same task employed in their earlier design, again 
targeting a similar group of Dutch learners of German, but left out the explicit instructions. Similar 
to the 2009 study, on the first day, participants took part in a pre-test and received a feedback-guided 
training task that asked them to judge the accuracy of prepositional phrases. A week later, participants 
came back for another two training sessions; in all cases, accuracy feedback was given in the form 
of color cues. The feedback was presented 1000 ms after a response was given, and remained on the 
screen for 250 ms followed by a 1000 ms blank screen, to allow for distinct analyses of ERN/Pe and 
FRN/P300 effects. The behavioral data showed that performance on declension violations was close 
to chance level in the pre-test, but improved in every round of training. A similar pattern was pre-
sent for gender violations, although the learning curve for this condition was less steep. Congruent 
with behavioral performance, the stimulus-locked EEG data showed a P600 effect for declension 
violations in every training round after the pre-test; such an effect was present for the gender vio-
lation only in the third training round. Feedback-locked components, irrespective of violation type, 
showed an FRN effect that was larger in amplitude in the first two training rounds compared to the 
third round of training. In all three rounds, the FRN was followed by a P300, which increased over 
rounds. An analysis of response-locked components failed to produce clear evidence of internal error 
monitoring; a small ERN effect emerged when the data of the last two training rounds were combined 
to improve power, but a Pe effect was absent. This supported the authors’ suspicion that the response-
locked effects in the 2009 study, in fact, reflected feedback processing. This 2011 follow-up study 
furthermore showed that simple color cues, which did not specify the type or location of an error, may 
suffice as informative feedback. The combination of feedback-locked effects and P600 effects after 
only a few rounds of simple feedback-guided learning highlights the fact that L2 learning can occur 
rapidly and that its effects may be observed in the relatively short course of an experiment.
Similar findings have been obtained by Bultena et al. (2017) for L2 learning of grammatical gender. 
Participants in this study were German learners of Dutch, who are known to struggle deciding on the 
correct article for Dutch-German cognates (such as ‘auto’/‘Auto’) as a result of L1 interference, 
especially when the grammatical gender of the two versions of the cognate differs (Lemhöfer et al., 
2010). In a feedback-driven gender decision task, learners were asked to make a binary gender deci-
sion for lexical items that were presented. The items, which included the incongruent gender cognates 
(de[COMMON] auto/ das[NEUTER] Auto), were repeated in three consecutive rounds to foster learning. For 
every gender decision, participants were additionally asked to rate their response certainty on a 
 
 
 
 

Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition
347
four-point scale ranging from ‘uncertain’ to ‘certain’. The EEG data showed robust FRN and P300 
effects, which did not diminish in size as behavioral performance improved. This is in line with the 
observation that learning-related changes in the FRN depend on the informativity of the feedback. 
In contrast to rule-learning, negative feedback for individual trials continues to be relevant in the 
case of vocabulary or other word-specific features. The data furthermore showed an emergent ERN 
effect after two rounds of feedback, suggesting that the L2 learners were beginning to make accurate 
predictions of response outcomes. Both ERN and FRN measures in the third round were shown to be 
correlated with certainty ratings obtained in an immediate post-test: higher amplitudes for both error-
related components resulted in higher levels of response certainty (see also Bultena et al., 2020).
The use of response-locked and feedback-locked components is not limited to L2 learning of 
morpho-syntactic features. In a recent study (Bujok et al., 2021), participants were presented with 
an auditory lexical decision task comprising of L1 words that had undergone a vowel shift. Based 
on corrective feedback after each trial, participants had to learn that monosyllabic words containing 
one vowel had been replaced by another vowel. For example, /ɪ/ would consistently be pronounced 
as /ʌ/, which could result in either a non-word (“strip” becoming “strup”) or another existing word 
(“list” becoming “lust”). Erroneous responses to items presented in this novel accent showed almost 
instant internal error monitoring, indexed by ERN effects, indicating quick phonological adaptation 
in speech comprehension (see also Sebastian-Gallés et al., 2006). Other studies using response-locked 
ERNs have examined internal monitoring of bilingual speech production, demonstrating that the ERP 
effect can be isolated from motor artifacts—EEG signals reflecting the muscle movements involved 
in speaking that can obscure ERP signals (Acheson & Hagoort, 2014). Vocabulary learning has simi-
larly been studied from the perspective of feedback processing, in tasks where participants are asked 
to learn L1–L2 word pairings. A recent study focusing on the effect of lexical specificity for vocabu-
lary learning shows that the amplitude of feedback-locked components varies according to whether 
L2 learners were presented with multiple-choice options that included target words combined with 
form-similar distractors (demanding a high level of attention to form) compared to form-unrelated 
distractors (demanding less attention; Weindorf et al., in prep.). These examples demonstrate that 
domain-general components can similarly be employed in L2 learning studies for various linguistic 
domains.
Some Remarks on Feedback-Locked and Response-Locked ERP Components
A few words of caution are in order for the use of feedback-locked and response-locked components. 
At present, there does not seem to be a clear consensus on how to quantify the FRN. In some studies, 
it is quantified as the difference between the most negative and the preceding most positive peak in 
the 150–350 ms time window, known as a through-to-peak amplitude (e.g., Bultena et al., 2017). 
Although this approach is sometimes argued to be a means to quantify the FRN independently from 
the P300 (e.g., Ernst & Steinhauser, 2012), it is also commonly known to be highly susceptible to 
noise, or signals not generated by the brain (San Martín, 2012). Alternatively, the FRN component 
can be measured as a mean amplitude in the time window of 200–300 ms following feedback presen-
tation. Furthermore, the FRN can be hard to discern among other components, because it is embedded 
between the first visual component, the N1, and the P300, both of which are much more pronounced 
than the FRN. The quantification issue similarly applies to the ERN (e.g., Gehring et al., 2011).
Perhaps a more crucial issue is the fact that any error-related effect depends on response accuracy, 
which implies that a critical mass of error observations is needed. Previous studies have shown that 
the minimum number of trials needed for an ERN individual average to be attested is 6 or 7 (Olvet & 
Hajcak, 2009; Pontifex et al., 2010). It is therefore important that the task at hand is difficult enough, 
for example, comprising a complex rule to learn, involving a high memory load, or challenging task 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
348
demands, such as a short response deadline (see Özkan et al, 2021). As the occurrence of errors is 
likely to diminish in the course of learning, the number of trials associated with the two conditions is 
likely to be imbalanced throughout an experimental paradigm. A small number of negative feedback 
trials is likely to cause problems particularly at the end of a learning task; some studies have therefore 
combined different experimental rounds in their analysis to compensate for the low number of nega-
tive trials (e.g., Bultena et al., 2017; Davidson & Indefrey, 2011).
More recent EEG techniques offer one way to counter some of these issues, because they can 
better capture the complexities of neural processing and therefore provide more solid answers to 
questions regarding cognitive mechanisms (Cohen, 2014). As holds for any ERP component, the 
FRN represents a combination of different frequency bands that originate from multiple generators 
in a large-scale brain network. Brain regions involved in feedback processing, along the anterior 
cingulate cortex, include the dorsolateral pre-frontal cortex as well as the dopamine system more 
generally (San Martín, 2012). Time frequency analyses, which can reveal neural oscillations such 
as alpha, beta, theta or gamma frequencies (Cohen, 2014; see also Mottarella & Prat, this volume), 
can therefore complement current insights based on ERPs, because these are likely to offer a better 
window on the different neural generators involved in feedback processing (see Watts et al., 2018) 
and how they interact to facilitate learning (Luft, 2014). Time frequency analyses could also be 
helpful in visualizing changes in connectivity that are assumed to be involved in learning (see San 
Martín, 2012).
Current Trends and Future Directions
Current neurocognitive studies on feedback-driven learning in L2 have often focused on explicit 
forms of learning, in which participants are asked to make explicit, often binary, decisions. Although 
such a decision is necessary to examine response-locked components associated with internal 
monitoring, feedback-locked components could also be studied in the absence of explicit decision 
making. It has been shown repeatedly that individuals are susceptible to the linguistic behavior of 
their interlocutor. They align, for example, in terms of pronunciation (Norris et al., 2003) and syn-
tactic structures (Branigan, 2007; Hartsuiker et al., 2004), and, importantly, this phenomenon has 
also been observed in conversations between L2 learners and native speakers (Garrod & Pickering, 
2009). The interlocutors’ input can therefore also be considered as a form of (implicit) feedback, or 
positive evidence. Recently, several new techniques have been developed to study implicit learning 
in interaction, which have the potential to be combined with neurocognitive measures. One such tech-
nique concerns the use of a “confederate” in a so-called ventriloquist paradigm (Felker et al., 2018), 
in which L2 learners are exposed to pre-recorded speech, which provides native input regarding pro-
nunciation. Interaction with a confederate has furthermore been shown to facilitate L2 learning of 
vocabulary (De Vos et al., 2019) and morphosyntactic features (Brandt et al., 2021). These designs 
allow for measurement of feedback-locked components at the point in time the confederate utters 
a correct form. If such implicit feedback is noticed by participants, they are likely to show atten-
tional or updating processes, which could help to predict whether or not participants make behavioral 
adaptations in subsequent utterances.
Another path to be explored concerns the connection between neurocognitive insights and the 
practical implications for L2 instruction, as currently discussed in the field of educational neuro-
science (see Dion & Restrepo, 2016). Despite the enormous interest in the topic of feedback from 
an educational perspective, there are a few hurdles that prevent a one-to-one connection between 
these two fields. Feedback that is provided in the classroom usually goes beyond that given in an 
experimental setting, both in terms of the amount, as well as the detail provided. Nevertheless, the 
studies reviewed above indicate that the effectiveness of different kinds of feedback can be examined 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition
349
when manipulated carefully (Davidson & Indefrey, 2009, 2011). Besides feedback, there are also 
studies pointing to the effectiveness of errors. Several studies on vocabulary learning suggest that 
making errors in and of itself increases the chances of long-term retention (Huelser & Metcalfe, 2012; 
Metcalfe, 2017), with several studies suggesting that the effect of error-prone conditions may only be 
visible on delayed post-tests (Baxter et al., 2021; Weindorf et al., in prep.). Such error-based learning 
could be investigated in more detail using response-locked components.
In conclusion, this chapter has aimed to highlight the relevance of studying feedback from a 
neurocognitive perspective to allow for a better understanding of feedback effectiveness. L2 
learning can occur quite rapidly, which is why the use of a method with a high temporal resolution 
is well-suited. The FRN/P300 and ERN/Pe components in particular, allow for online examination 
of feedback processing and emergent internal monitoring in many forms of error-based learning. 
Furthermore, feedback-locked components provide an interesting tool to examine whether feedback 
processing, and predictive processing more generally, differ between L1 and L2 processing, or how 
feedback processing changes in the course of L2 development. Neurocognitive methods seem well-
suited to study the use of feedback and find answers to these questions.
Note
1	 It must be noted that the FRN as an early processing component is also elicited in tasks that involve unreli-
able (sometimes valid, sometimes invalid) feedback, also known as probabilistic feedback. In these studies, 
this early component is typically associated with feedback valence, the positive or negative effect that infor-
mation regarding response accuracy has on a learner (see Luft, 2014; San Martín, 2012). This is typically 
the case in studies on gambling and reward processing, where positive feedback is associated with gains, 
and negative feedback with losses. Within this research, which is traditionally referred to as Reinforcement 
learning (Ullsperger et al., 2014), the FRN effect is generally relabelled Reward Positivity, where rewards 
(positive outcomes) yield more positive amplitudes than losses. Because feedback provided in gambling 
paradigms is at best probabilistic and usually not informative, it does not lead to actual learning and therefore 
falls beyond the scope of this chapter.
Further Readings
A comprehensive account on the neurophysiology of performance monitoring and adaptive behavior can be 
found in Ullsperger, Danielmeier and Jocham (2014)
Ullsperger, M., Danielmeier, C., & Jocham, G. (2014). Neurophysiology of performance monitoring and adaptive 
behavior. Physiological Reviews, 94(1), 35–79. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00041.2012
A useful overview of response-locked components is provided by Gehring et al. (2011).
Gehring, W.J., Liu, Y., Orr, J.M., & Carp, J. (2011). The error-related negativity (ERN/Ne). In S.J. Luck & 
E.S. Kappenman (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of event-related potential components (pp. 231–291). 
University Press.
A good overview on feedback-locked components is given by San Martín (2012)
San Martín, R. (2012). Event-related potential studies of outcome processing and feedback-guided learning. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00304
For more details on oscillations associated with feedback processing, see Luft (2014).
Luft, C.D.B. (2014). Learning from feedback: The neural mechanisms of feedback processing facilitating better 
performance. Behavioral Brain Research, 261, 356–368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.043
References
Acheson, D.J., & Hagoort, P. (2014). Twisting tongues to test for conflict-monitoring in speech production. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00206
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
350
Alexander, W.H., & Brown, J.W. (2011). Medial prefrontal cortex as an action-outcome predictor. Nature 
Neuroscience, 14(10), 1338–1344. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn.2921
Arbel, Y., & Fox, A.B. (2021). Electrophysiological examination of feedback-based learning in 8–11-year-old 
children. Frontiers in Psychology, 12. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.640270
Arbel, Y., Goforth, K., & Donchin, E. (2013). The good, the bad, or the useful? The examination of the relation-
ship between the feedback-related negativity (FRN) and long-term learning outcomes. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 1249–1260. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn
Arbel, Y., & Wu, H. (2016). A neurophysiological examination of quality of learning in a feedback-based learning 
task. Neuropsychologia, 93, 13–20. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2016.10.001
Baxter, P., Droop, M., Van den Hurk, M., Bekkering, H., Dijkstra, T., & Leoné, F. (2021). Contrasting similar 
words facilitates second language vocabulary learning in children by sharpening lexical representations. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 12(July), 1–14. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.688160
Bellebaum, C., & Daum, I. (2008). Learning-related changes in reward expectancy are reflected in the 
feedback-related negativity. European Journal of Neuroscience, 27, 1823–1835. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1460-9568.2008.06138.x
Bellebaum, C., Kobza, S., Thiele, S., & Daum, I. (2010). It was not my fault: Event-related brain potentials in 
active and observational learning from feedback. Cerebral Cortex, 20(2006), 2874–2883. https://doi.org/
10.1093/cercor/bhq038
Brandt, A.C., Schriefers, H., & Lemhöfer, K. (2021). A laboratory study of naturalistic second language 
learning: Acquiring grammatical gender from simple dialogue. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, 
Memory, and Cognition, 48 (5), 658–679. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0001068
Branigan, H. (2007). Syntactic priming. Language and Linguistics Compass, 1(1–2), 1–16. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1749-818x.2006.00001.x
Bujok, R., Bultena, S., McQueen, J., & Broersma, M. (2021). Accent adaptation through error-based learning. 
In J.S. Nixon, E. Shafaei-Bajestan, & H. Baayen (Eds.), The International Conference on Error-Driven 
Learning in Language. https://quantling.org/EDLL2021/docs/EDLL2021_timetable_book_of_abstra
cts.pdf
Bultena, S., Danielmeier, C., Bekkering, H., & Lemhöfer, K. (2017). Electrophysiological correlates of error 
monitoring and feedback processing in second language learning. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 
11(January), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2017.00029
Bultena, S., Danielmeier, C., Bekkering, H., & Lemhöfer, K. (2020). The role of conflicting representations and 
uncertainty in internal error detection during L2 learning. Language Learning, 70(June), 75–103. https://doi.
org/10.1111/lang.12401
Burnside, R., Fischer, A.G., & Ullsperger, M. (2019). The feedback-related negativity indexes prediction error 
in active but not observational learning. Psychophysiology, 56(9), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.13389
Butterfield, B., & Mangels, J.A. (2003). Neural correlates of error detection and correction in a semantic retrieval 
task. Cognitive Brain Research, 17(3), 793–817. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0926-6410(03)00203-9
Cohen, M.X. (2014). Analyzing neural time series data. MIT Press.
Davidson, D.J., & Indefrey, P. (2009). An event-related potential study on changes of violation and error 
responses during morphosyntactic learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21, 433–446. https://doi.org/
10.1162/jocn.2008.21031
Davidson, D.J., & Indefrey, P. (2011). Error-related activity and correlates of grammatical plasticity. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00219
De Vos, J.F., Schriefers, H., ten Bosch, L., & Lemhöfer, K. (2019). Interactive L2 vocabulary acquisition in a lab-
based immersion setting. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 34(7), 916–935. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2019.1599127
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge
Dion, J.S., & Restrepo, G. (2016). A systematic review of the literature linking neural correlates of feedback 
processing to learning. Zeitschrift Fur Psychologie / Journal of Psychology, 224(4), 247–256. https://doi.org/
10.1027/2151-2604/a000260
Donchin, E. (1981). Surprise!…Surprise? In Psychophysiology (Vol. 18, pp. 493–513). https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1469-8986.1981.tb01815.x
Donchin, E., & Coles, M.G.H. (1988). Is the P300 component a manifestation of context updating? Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences, 11, 357–374. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X00058015
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Feedback in Second Language Neurocognition
351
Ernst, B., & Steinhauser, M. (2012). Feedback-related brain activity predicts learning from feedback in multiple-
choice testing. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 12(2), 323–336. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13
415-012-0087-9
Falkenstein, M., Hohnsbein, J., Hoormann, J., & Blanke, L. (1990). Effects of errors in choice reaction tasks on 
the ERP under focused and divided attention. Psychophysiological Brain Research, 1, 192–195.
Felker, E., Troncoso-Ruiz, A., Ernestus, M., & Broersma, M. (2018). The ventriloquist paradigm: Studying speech 
processing in conversation with experimental control over phonetic input. The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 144(4), EL304–EL309. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.5063809
Ferdinand, N.K., & Opitz, B. (2014). Different aspects of performance feedback engage different brain 
areas: Disentangling valence and expectancy in feedback processing. Scientific Reports, 4, 1–8. https://doi.
org/10.1038/srep05986
Frömer, R., Nassar, M.R., Bruckner, R., Stürmer, B., Sommer, W., & Yeung, N. (2021). Response-based out-
come predictions and confidence regulate feedback processing and learning. ELife, 10, 1–29. https://doi.org/
10.7554/ELIFE.62825
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M.J. (2009). Joint action, interactive alignment, and dialog. Topics in Cognitive Science, 
1(2), 292–304. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009.01020.x
Gass, S.M., & Mackey, A. (2020). Input, interaction, and output in L2 acquisition. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, 
& S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An introduction (pp. 192–222). Routledge.
Gehring, W.J., Goss, B., Coles, M.G.H., Meyer, D.E., & Donchin, E. (1993). A neural system for error detection 
and compensation. Psychological Science, 4, 385–390. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.1993.tb00586.x
Gehring, W.J., Liu, Y., Orr, J.M., & Carp, J. (2011). The error-related negativity (ERN/Ne). In S.J. Luck & 
E.S. Kappenman (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of event-related potential components (pp. 231–291). 
University Press.
Hajcak, G., & Simons, R.F. (2008). Oops!.I did it again: An ERP and behavioral study of double-errors. Brain 
and Cognition, 68(1), 15–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2008.02.118
Hartsuiker, R.J., Pickering, M.J., & Veltkamp, E. (2004). Is syntax separate or shared between languages? Cross-
linguistic syntactic priming in Spanish-English bilinguals. Psychological Science, 15(6), 409–414. https://
doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00693.x
Heldmann, M., Rüsseler, J., & Münte, T.F. (2008). Internal and external information in error processing. BMC 
Neuroscience, 9. https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2202-9-33
Huelser, B.J., & Metcalfe, J. (2012). Making related errors facilitates learning, but learners do not know it. 
Memory and Cognition, 40(4), 514–527. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-011-0167-z
Karim, K., & Nassaji, H. (2019). The effects of written corrective feedback. Instructed Second Language 
Acquisition, 3(1), 28–52. https://doi.org/10.1558/isla.37949
Leeman, J. (2007). Feedback in L2 learning: Responding to errors during practice. In R. DeKeyser (Ed.) 
Practice in a second language: Perspectives from linguistics and psychology,  (pp. 111–137). Cambridge 
University Press.
Lemhöfer, K., Schriefers, H., & Hanique, I. (2010). Native language effects in learning second-language grammat-
ical gender: A training study. Acta Psychologica, 135, 150–158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2010.06.001
Li, S. (2010). The effectiveness of corrective feedback in SLA: A meta-analysis. Language Learning, 60(2), 
309–365. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2010.00561.x
Loewen, S. (2012). The role of feedback. In S.M. Gass & A. Mackey (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition (pp. 24–40). Routledge.
Luft, C.D.B. (2014). Learning from feedback: The neural mechanisms of feedback processing facilitating better 
performance. Behavioral Brain Research, 261, 356–368. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2013.12.043
Lyster, R., & Ranta, L. (1997). Corrective feedback and learning uptake: Negotiation of form in communicative 
classrooms. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 20, 37–66.
Metcalfe, J. (2017). Learning from Errors. Annual Review of Psychology, 68, 465–489. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-psych-010416-044022
Meyer, M., Bekkering, H., Janssen, D.C., de Bruijn, E.R.A., & Hunnius, S. (2014). Neural correlates of feedback 
processing in toddlers. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 26(7), 1519–1527. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn
Miltner, W.H.R., Braun, C.H., & Coles, M.G.H. (1997). Event-related brain potentials following incorrect 
feedback in a time-estimation task: Evidence for a “generic” neural system for error detection. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 9(6), 788–798. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.1997.9.6.788
Morgan-Short, K., & Tanner, D. (2014). Event-related potentials (ERPs). In J. Jegerski & B. VanPatten (Eds.), 
Research methods in second language psycholinguistics (pp. 127–152). Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sybrine Bultena
352
Mottarella, M. & Prat, C. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate second 
language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Nassaji, H., & Kartchava, E. (2021). The Cambridge handbook of corrective feedback in second language 
learning and teaching. Cambridge University Press.
Norris, D., McQueen, J.M., & Cutler, A. (2003). Perceptual learning in speech. Cognitive Psychology, 47(2), 
204–238. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0285(03)00006-9
Oliveira, F.T.P ., McDonald, J.J., & Goodman, D. (2007). Performance monitoring in the anterior cingulate is 
not all error related: Expectancy deviation and the representation of action-outcome associations. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience, 19(12), 1994–2004. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2007.19.12.1994
Olvet, D.M., & Hajcak, G. (2009). The stability of error-related brain activity with increasing trials. 
Psychophysiology, 46(5), 957–961. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2009.00848.x
Özkan, D.G., Broersma, M., Bekkering, H., & Bultena, S. (2021). Observed and performed error signals in audi-
tory lexical decisions. Neuroscience. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroscience.2021.02.001
Plonsky, L., & Brown, D. (2015). Domain definition and search techniques in meta-analyses of L2 research 
(Or why 18 meta-analyses of feedback have different results). Second Language Research, 31(2), 267–278. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658314536436
Pontifex, M.B., Scudder, M.R., Brown, M.L., O’Leary, K.C., Wu, C.T., Themanson, J.R., & Hillman, C.H. 
(2010). On the number of trials necessary for stabilization of error-related brain activity across the life span. 
Psychophysiology, 47(4), 767–773. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-8986.2010.00974.x
Rebuschat, P., & Williams, J.N. (2012). Implicit and explicit knowledge in second language acquisition. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 33(04), 829–856. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716411000580
Russell, J., & Spada, N. (2006). The effectiveness of corrective feedback for the acquisition of L2 grammar. In 
J. Norris & L. Ortega (Eds.), Synthesizing research on language learning and teaching (pp. 133–164). John 
Benjamins.
San Martín, R. (2012). Event-related potential studies of outcome processing and feedback-guided learning. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00304
Schmidt, R. (2010). Attention, awareness, and individual differences in language learning. Proceedings of 
CLaSIC 2010, 4, 721–737.
Sebastian-Gallés, N., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., de Diego-Balaguer, R., & Díaz, B. (2006). First- and second-
language phonological representations in the mental lexicon. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18, 1277–
1291. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.8.1277
Soderstrom, N.C., & Bjork, R.A. (2015). Learning versus performance: An integrative review. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 10(2), 176–199. https://doi.org/10.1177/1745691615569000
Truscott, J. (1996). The case against grammar correction in L2 writing classes. Language Learning, 46(2), 327–
369. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-1770.1996.tb01238.x
Ullsperger, M., Danielmeier, C., & Jocham, G. (2014). Neurophysiology of performance monitoring and adaptive 
behavior. Physiological Reviews, 94(1), 35–79. https://doi.org/10.1152/physrev.00041.2012
Van Der Helden, J., Boksem, M.A.S., & Blom, J.H.G. (2010). The importance of failure: Feedback-related nega-
tivity predicts motor learning efficiency. Cerebral Cortex, 20(7), 1596–1603. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/
bhp224
Van Schie, H.T., Mars, R.B., Coles, M.G.H., & Bekkering, H. (2004). Modulation of activity in medial frontal 
and motor cortices during error observation. Nature Neuroscience, 7(5), 549–554. https://doi.org/10.1038/
nn1239
Watts, A.T.M., Tootell, A.V., Fix, S.T., Aviyente, S., & Bernat, E.M. (2018). Utilizing time-frequency amplitude 
and phase synchrony measure to assess feedback processing in a gambling task. International Journal of 
Psychophysiology, 132(August), 203–212. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2018.04.013
Weindorf, L., Goertz, R., Baxter, P., Bultena, S., & Leoné, F. (in prep). The effect of contrasting response options 
on feedback processing.
Wessel, J.R. (2012). Error awareness and the error-related negativity: Evaluating the first decade of evidence. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 1–16. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00088
White, L. (1991). Adverb placement in second language acquisition: Some effects of positive and negative evi-
dence in the classroom. Second Language Research, 7(2), 133–161. https://doi.org/10.1177/02676583910
0700205
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

353
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-33
26
MEMORY CONSOLIDATION 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
Introduction and Critical Definitions
Imagine yourself talking with your colleagues over lunch and one of them says “I want a mushrim for 
my birthday!”. You ask what a mushrim is and your colleague answers that it is a massage device to 
relax your arm muscles after spending the whole day clicking with your mouse. Before the personal 
computer era, the word mouse was solely used to refer to a small rodent. Now it has an additional 
meaning. And if you happen to be learning Spanish then you will learn that the word for the animal 
mouse in Spanish is ratón. We learn and remember new words and meanings throughout our lifetime, 
but how do we do so?
Our memory consists of multiple sub-systems. It can be divided into declarative and 
non-declarative sub-systems (for glossary, see Box 26.1; Schacter, 1997; Squire & Knowlton, 
1995). In the example above, the experience of you hearing the novel word “mushrim” over lunch 
is initially encoded as an episodic memory. Over time, you might forget all the instances of experi-
encing that word in specific contexts but can still remember what it means and use it in different 
situations. The declarative memory representation of such experience-independent knowledge can be 
categorized as part of semantic memory (Tulving, 1972; Tulving et al., 2001).
Box 26.1  Glossary
Declarative memory: Memory that is explicit (i.e., is open to conscious recollection) and representa-
tional (i.e., it concerns knowledge about things and events). It includes episodic and semantic memory.
Non-declarative memory: Memory that is implicit (i.e., not open to conscious recollection) and 
which tends to be expressed through performance (e.g., being able to ride a bike is expressed through 
the act of riding). It includes procedural memory, priming, and conditioning.
Episodic memory: Memory for personal experiences. The memory is bound to a specific spatio-
temporal context in which the experience took place.
Semantic memory: Memory for facts and knowledge, such as the meaning of words, concepts, 
symbols, etc. It is not bound to a specific time or place.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
354
The hippocampus is the core structure for retaining episodic memories (Alvarez & Squire, 1994; 
Eichenbaum et al., 2012; Nadel & Moscovitch, 1997). Patients with a hippocampal lesion cannot 
remember contextual information (episodes), for instance, what they ate for breakfast 30 minutes ago 
(Scoville & Milner, 1957). They also have difficulty learning new words. However, they can com-
municate verbally and do so fluently (Schmolck et al., 2002). This led memory researchers to assume 
that memory representations are not static but dynamic and shift to different areas of the brain through 
a process of consolidation (Dudai, 2012; Frankland & Bontempi, 2005; Gilboa & Moscovitch, 2021; 
Winocur & Moscovitch, 2011). Several studies suggest that the left temporal cortex is where lexical 
representations are stored after consolidation (Indefrey & Levelt, 2004; Price, 2012).
The memory traces that are consolidated are resistant to forgetting. How a memory representation 
becomes stabilized over time, however, is still not fully understood. According to the complementary 
learning systems (CLS) model (McClelland et al., 1995), a novel memory trace captured by the hippo-
campus is kept separate from the existing bulk of knowledge stored in the neocortex to prevent cata-
strophic interference (McCloskey & Cohen, 1989), but over time and through interleaved learning, 
the quality of the memory representation can change (Davis & Gaskell, 2009; Gilboa & Moscovitch, 
2021). One such change is integration into the existing semantic memory network. From this perspec-
tive, novel word representations can be of multiple types. A novel word bound in the learning context 
Memory consolidation: A process in which a memory trace becomes resistant to forgetting. 
Consolidation can occur in the form of stabilization or strengthening of the original episodic memory 
trace. The episodic trace can also change into another form of representation such as a semantic memory.
Lexicalization: When a newly learned word begins to interact with existing words, the word 
representation is thought to have reached the state of lexicalization. This process is seen as a conse-
quence of consolidation of newly learned words, where the word representation shifts from an epi-
sodic memory trace to a semantic memory representation.
Procedural memory: Memory that supports skilled behavior and habits or that concerns implicit 
knowledge of rules and sequences.
Lexical decision task: Task where participants indicate whether a string of letters (visual) or a 
sound fragment (auditory) is an existing word or not.
Semantically primed lexical decision task: Lexical decision task where the target word is 
preceded by a prime (pseudo-)word. If the prime and the target are related, it speeds up the reaction 
time (this is known as the Priming effect) on the target word. In word learning experiments, novel 
words are used both as primes and targets, to see if the newly learned words will influence/will be 
influenced by the related existing words.
Pause detection task: Task where participants detect the (non-)existence of an artificially inserted 
pause within a spoken word. Reaction time is affected by lexical neighborhood density (number of 
words phonologically similar to the target word, with higher density words showing slower reaction 
times than low density words).
N400: An event-related potential (ERP) component that is often investigated in word processing 
and that can be taken as a marker of how related items are to preceding items. It is thought to reflect 
more automatic aspects of semantic retrieval compared to the Late positive component (LPC).
LPC: A late positive ERP component which is thought to reflect more controlled aspects of 
semantic retrieval compared to the N400.
Prime lexicality effect: When a masked prime and a target word are related orthographically, the 
reaction time on lexical decision to the target is facilitated when the prime is a nonword but not when 
it is a word. This has been found for L1, but not L2.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
355
is an episodic memory representation, supported by the hippocampal complex. Once a novel word 
is lexicalized, however, the word begins to interact with neighboring words that share phonological, 
orthographic, or semantic similarities or associations. This interaction only happens once the novel 
word is integrated into the mental lexicon following consolidation (Gaskell & Dumay, 2003) and has 
thus become a semantic memory representation.
Time, especially sleep, is known to promote memory consolidation (Rasch & Born, 2013; Sara, 
2017; Schimke et al., 2021). When we are asleep, important or salient content is stabilized and 
consolidated, whereas less strong memory traces reduce their synaptic strength (Tononi & Cirelli, 
2006). During sleep, recent memory traces are reactivated, and this reactivation promotes consolida-
tion (e.g. Deuker et al., 2013). Furthermore, external stimulation of learned material presented during 
subsequent sleep, such as presenting odor or sound related to the learned context as one is sleeping, 
so-called targeted memory reactivation (TMR), has been shown to boost this consolidation process 
(Oudiette & Paller, 2013; Rasch et al., 2007).
Another factor known to speed up the consolidation trajectory is the existence of prior know-
ledge (e.g., a schema). Schema-related learning was first studied in rodents, where the memory trace 
was shown to become independent of the hippocampus at a faster time scale when the rodents were 
presented with new information as an addition to a well-learned environment (Tse et al., 2007). 
Knowledge assimilation, or adding new information to or altering existing knowledge, seems to 
require less time to consolidate than when totally novel information is learned from scratch.
We focus in this chapter on the CLS model because it makes specific claims about the memory 
consolidation process. There are however other, related theoretical perspectives which we summarize 
in Box 26.2.
Box 26.2  Other theoretical perspectives
Building on knowledge about our memory system, Ullman has proposed the declarative/procedural model 
to explain how we acquire and store linguistic information (Ullman, 2020). According to the model, we 
begin to acquire our first language (L1) through uninstructed learning situations. Babies are exposed, 
for instance, to object–name associations multiple times and gradually learn the names of objects. They 
learn grammatical properties without being told the underlying rules. This type of learning is procedural 
in nature and dominant in babies and young children whose hippocampal system is still under develop-
ment. In contrast, second language (L2) learning, especially in older children and adults, is often acquired 
under instructed learning situations in classrooms and through textbooks. According to the model, this is 
declarative learning, where the hippocampal complex is utilized for rapid and efficient learning. However, 
once an L2 user is fluent, and hence their use of L2 words has become automated, L2 word processing can 
become procedural in nature. The two systems interact and interfere with each other. The model offers 
an important account of how declarative and procedural memory systems are involved across ages and 
languages but it does not offer a specific account of the shift between episodic and semantic memory 
systems within declarative memory that we argue underlies lexicalization.
Henke’s processing-based model (2010) considers memory from a processing perspective rather than 
from the perspective of the classic conscious/non-conscious distinction (see glossary on declarative/non-
declarative memory). The model suggests that the rapid and flexible encoding that allows for one-shot 
learning takes place in the hippocampal-neocortical network, whereas slow and rigid association learning 
through repetition takes place in basal ganglia–cerebellum–neocortical circuits. With respect to language 
acquisition, one could translate Ullman’s model to Henke’s model by assuming that declarative learning 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
356
Historical Perspective: First Language Lexicalization
Research on second language (L2) memory consolidation has its historical roots in work on con-
solidation in first language (L1). As already outlined above, newly learned L1 words undergo con-
solidation. A substantial amount of research has sought to understand this L1 lexicalization process, 
starting when Gaskell and colleagues (Davis & Gaskell, 2009; Gaskell & Dumay, 2003) applied the 
CLS account of consolidation to word learning. In this account, words are initially represented in the 
hippocampus, and these representations are gradually replaced by representations in the neocortex. 
This account has been investigated using both behavioral and neurocognitive techniques.
Behavior
Behaviorally, one result of consolidation that is of specific interest to the process of word learning 
is lexicalization. Lexicalization is thought to have occurred when the new word interacts with other 
words in the existing lexicon. There are several ways to test whether a word has been lexicalized. 
Commonly used tasks to assess L1 lexicalization are (semantically primed) lexical decision, pause 
detection, and priming tasks (Davis et al., 2009; Gaskell & Dumay, 2003; Takashima et al., 2014; 
Tamminen & Gaskell, 2013; Van der Ven et al., 2015). These tasks all measure whether a newly 
learned word interacts with an existing word. The CLS account of word learning predicts that consoli-
dation is necessary for newly learned words to show signs of being lexicalized. For pause detection 
tasks, evidence of lexicalization takes the form of slowed RTs to familiar words due to competition 
with the newly learned words that share phonology/orthography. For example, when English-speaking 
participants learned the new spoken word cathedruke, their response to the question of whether 
the familiar word cathedral contains an artificial pause within the word or not is slower following 
lexicalization (Gaskell & Dumay, 2003). Directly after learning and hence prior to lexicalization, 
however, this phenomenon is not yet observed (Gaskell & Dumay, 2003). For semantically primed 
lexical decision tasks, the RTs of the target words are faster when the prime and the target word pairs 
are related to each other, but this is also found only after lexicalization (Bakker-Marshall et al., 2021; 
Van der Ven et al., 2015).
Sleep
Sleep appears to support lexicalization (Dumay & Gaskell, 2007), but sleep is not an absolute pre-
condition to lexicalization as interleaved learning can lead to lexicalization without sleep (Lindsay & 
Gaskell, 2013). There are also instances where neither sleep nor repetition is required for the learner 
to acquire the memory for novel words (Kapnoula et al., 2015). One example of this phenomenon 
is fast-mapping (Kan et al., 2014). When participants are presented with a novel word together with 
utilizes the former processing areas, and that procedural learning utilizes the latter. Henke’s model is 
broadly in line with the CLS account of consolidation.
Another view on the status of lexical items has been suggested by Leach and Samuel (2007). They 
introduced the terms lexical configuration and lexical engagement. If a word evokes its definition, how it 
is spelled, or how it is pronounced, this is lexical configuration. Once the novel word starts to interact with 
other words in the lexicon, showing for instance priming effects, then the word is thought to be in a state 
of lexical engagement. The latter is thus equivalent to lexicalization in the CLS model.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
357
a known object and an unknown object, they are likely to label the unknown object with the novel 
word. People can thus learn the novel word with its associated meaning with one presentation, and 
some hippocampally lesioned patients can also do this (Sharon et al., 2011).
EEG/MEG
In addition to the behavioral signatures of lexicalization, the electroencephalogram (EEG) has been 
employed to detect lexicalization (for an overview of methodologies, see Dickson & Pelzl, this 
volume, and Mottarella & Prat, this volume). The N400, one event-related potential (ERP) compo-
nent that is often investigated in word processing, can be taken as a marker of how related items are 
to preceding items (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011). Several studies have investigated both the N400 
and the late positive component (LPC) in word learning, with the N400 thought to reflect more 
automatic and the LPC more controlled aspects of semantic retrieval (Bakker et al., 2015b; Liu & 
Van Hell, 2020). Just like existing words, if the novel words are lexicalized, one would expect the 
novel words to show similar ERP components to those shown by existing words, and therefore a 
smaller N400 effect when the target word appears after a related word. Dutch-speaking participants 
exhibited an N400 that did not differ between pseudowords learned 24 hours before the EEG task 
(i.e., words learned remotely) and existing words, whereas recently learned pseudowords (learned 
one hour before the EEG task) evoked a more negative N400 and LPC than the existing words 
(Bakker et al., 2015b). In the same study, semantic priming of the newly learned words revealed 
a difference between learned words and existing words, but there was no effect of consolidation. 
That is, both the remote and recently learned words exhibited a smaller LPC when primed by a 
semantically related word as compared to an unrelated word. In a conceptual replication study 
with monolingual English-speaking participants, the LPC but not the N400 effect was observed 
both one day and one week after learning (Liu & Van Hell, 2020). The authors discuss that the lack 
of N400 effects in their sample may be related to their participants’ limited experience with for-
eign languages, compared to the participants tested by Bakker et al. (2015b). In a follow-up study, 
monolingual English-speaking participants learned novel words paired not only with a definition, 
as in Liu and Van Hell (2020), but also a picture (Lei et al., 2022). As predicted, words learned with 
a picture and definition elicited an LPC one day and one week after learning. However, the expected 
N400 effect was not seen at either time point, replicating the findings of Liu and Van Hell (2020). 
No differences in consolidation were found between words learned with just a definition or a defin-
ition and a picture. The authors propose that one session of training may not be enough to evoke the 
N400 lexicalization signature. Conversely, although Kaczer et al. (2018) report an N400 effect that 
arises 48 hours after novel word learning, no difference arose in the LPC for remote and recently 
learned words. The discrepancy between the studies investigating the N400 and LPC as measures 
of lexicalization suggest that future studies are needed to clarify how these two ERP components 
respond to lexicalization. Finally, in line with the behavioral results, EEG data suggest that sleep is 
not a prerequisite for lexicalization to arise (Borovsky et al., 2012).
EEG oscillations also differ between lexicalized novel words and those that have not under-
gone lexicalization. Words that were learned 24 hours before EEG data was collected did not 
exhibit power differences in theta or beta bands when compared to existing words (Bakker et al., 
2015a). This was in contrast to words that had been learned directly before the EEG data acquisi-
tion, for which oscillatory activity was more similar to that in response to unfamiliar words. In a 
magnetoencephalography (MEG) study, this effect was localized to the left posterior middle tem-
poral gyrus (pMTG; Bakker-Marshall et al., 2018). Theta and beta oscillations may thus also pro-
vide evidence for lexicalization.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
358
fMRI
Lexicalization of newly learned words has also been investigated using functional magnetic resonance 
imaging (fMRI). As already discussed, the CLS account predicts that initially, newly learned words are 
represented in the hippocampus and medial temporal structures as episodic memories, and following 
consolidation, they are represented in a distributed neocortical network including the pMTG. The 
hippocampus decreases in activation with successive presentations of new words (Breitenstein et al., 
2005). When directly testing consolidation, Davis et al. (2009) found that untrained words elicited 
greater hippocampal responses than learned words, both recent and remote, but the CLS-predicted 
increase of cortical involvement after sleep-related consolidation was not shown.
Several additional studies have specifically investigated the involvement of neural structures indi-
cative of lexicalization (Landi et al., 2018; Takashima et al., 2014, 2017). In one study, participants 
learned words that were either accompanied by pictures or without any meaning attached (form 
only) and fMRI data was acquired directly following learning, and again one day later (Takashima 
et al., 2014). Both medial temporal regions and neocortical regions showed activity in response to 
the learned words, directly after learning as well as one day later. In the pMTG, form-only words 
evoked higher activity than picture-associated words directly after learning, whereas the picture-
associated words showed more activity in this region one day after learning. These findings suggest 
that the time course of consolidation may differ depending on whether a word is taught with an 
associated meaning. In another study, participants learned novel words accompanied by meaning in 
the form of pictures or definitions or form-only words (Takashima et al., 2017). The fMRI data was 
acquired directly after learning, and again after a delay of one week. Similarly to Takashima et al. 
(2014), hippocampal activity was evoked both directly after learning, as well as one week later. 
Furthermore, although cortical regions were recruited already directly after learning, this recruitment 
was larger in magnitude one week later. Both studies provide support for the CLS account of word 
learning only in part, as the recruitment of the neocortex directly after learning is not predicted by 
the CLS account. The third fMRI study also lends evidence in partial support of the CLS account 
(Landi et al., 2018). Here, participants learned novel words on two consecutive days, and fMRI data 
was acquired after word learning on day 2. The words learned on day 1 and day 2 did not differ in 
the hippocampal activity they evoked. However, words learned on day 1, for which sleep-dependent 
consolidation could take place, exhibited greater activation in cortical areas than those words learned 
directly before the scan. In sum, the fMRI studies that have been conducted to date all provide partial 
support for the CLS account. The results suggest that the hippocampus does not disengage entirely 
following a short period of consolidation, but rather may still be responsible in part for maintaining a 
new word’s representation. It might take more than a week for the memory representation to become 
independent of the hippocampus, but it is unclear to date at which point representation of the novel 
word no longer recruits the hippocampus. Furthermore, the neocortex appears to be engaged earlier 
than the CLS model predicts. Again, the conditions under which neocortical representation begins to 
emerge remain to be determined.
The State of the Art on L2 Lexicalization
A rich body of evidence thus supports the view that novel word learning in the L1 entails processes 
of memory consolidation. Although much still remains to be discovered about this L1 lexicalization 
process, researchers have started to ask about L2 lexicalization. Is there a process by which 
representations of newly learned L2 words change from episodic to semantic representations? If so, 
are these L2 lexicalization processes the same or different from those in L1? Furthermore, what is 
the role of sleep in the L2 process, and are the same hippocampal and neocortical networks engaged 
across L1 and L2?
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
359
Extending the CLS account of word learning from L1 to L2 word learning, Lindsay and Gaskell 
(2010) propose no difference in principle between L1 and L2 lexicalization. Learning new words in 
an L2 entails similar aspects to L1 word learning, although being distinct in several ways. Whereas 
learning a new word in L1 such as mushrim requires the learner to map a new word to a new object, as 
well as learn the definition of mushrim, when a monolingual English speaker learns the Spanish word 
ratón, they can integrate this into their lexical entry for mouse. In the case of L2 word learning, there-
fore, the learner often has prior knowledge about the object and its definition. However, the degree 
of familiarity with the phonology/orthography of the L2 could lead to variation in how quickly a new 
word is lexicalized (Lindsay & Gaskell, 2010).
Behavior
To date, only a handful of studies have investigated L2 lexicalization (see Table 26.1). Behaviorally, 
we predict that L2 words that have undergone lexicalization should show a similar signature of 
lexicalization to that found in L1 words. This prediction has been confirmed for newly learned L2 
words using a pause detection task to assess whether lexicalization of novel word forms can be seen 
through interference between novel and known words after a period of consolidation (Tartaro et al., 
2021). Sequential Italian–English bilinguals learned English pseudowords for objects of which they 
did not know the English word. After learning, participants exhibited slower RTs during a pause 
detection task in response to English words that were phonologically similar to pseudowords that had 
been learned two days before the pause detection task, but not to English words that were phonolo-
gically similar to pseudowords learned directly before the task. This provides evidence that the words 
that were learned two days before the test were lexicalized, whereas the words learned directly before 
the test were not, which is in line with the CLS model prediction.
However, the evidence from semantic priming tasks involving word meaning is more mixed. In 
one study employing a semantic priming task to assess lexicalization, two groups of participants were 
taught Swahili words: English monolinguals and simultaneous Spanish–English bilinguals (Bakker-
Marshall et al., 2021). Neither group had prior experience with Swahili. Participants had to decide 
whether a target word (the second word presented) was a real English word. Each target word was 
preceded or primed by a learned Swahili word that was either semantically related or unrelated. If 
the related Swahili word primed the English word, this would be evidence for lexicalization. The 
English monolinguals exhibited a semantic priming effect in response to Swahili words learned one 
day before, but not words learned directly before the test. The same pattern did not hold, however, 
for the Spanish–English bilinguals who did not show evidence of priming at either testing moment.
Results from two studies that also assessed lexicalization with semantic priming or semantically 
primed lexical decision tasks are also not straightforward (Havas et al., 2018; Tartaro et al., 2021). 
Whereas a study with sequential Italian–English bilinguals found that both recently and remotely 
learned words primed existing English words (Tartaro et al., 2021), Spanish monolinguals learning 
Hungarian (a new language for them) did not show a semantic priming effect arising from Hungarian 
prime words learned 12 hours earlier, neither those learned before sleep, one day before the test, nor 
those learned on the same day as the test and thus without intervening sleep (Havas et al., 2018). 
It is thus not yet clear whether lexicalization at the word-form level is fully parallel with (e.g., has 
the same time course as) lexicalization at the word-meaning level. This may depend on whether the 
newly learned words are in a new or an existing L2.
Findings from Qiao and Forster (2017) challenge the idea that there is no hard division between 
L1 and L2 word learning. In an L1 study with printed words, Qiao and Forster (2013) took advan-
tage of the prime lexicality effect (PLE): masked primes that are orthographically similar to 
target words have a different effect on responses to the targets as a function of their lexical status.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
360
Table 26.1  An Overview of the Studies Investigating Lexicalization in L2 Word Learning
Study
Language of 
participants
L2 words learned
Timing
Test
DV
Outcome
Tartaro et al.,  
2021
Italian–English 
(late) sequential 
bilinguals
Novel English-like words  
for known objects 
(participants did not  
know English label of 
object);  
L2 was known
2 days before (remote)  
OR same day (recent)  
as test
Pause detection
RT
Pause detection was slower 
for remote words, but 
not recent words
Primed lexical 
decision
RT
New words primed 
responses for both 
remote and recent 
conditions
Recognition task
BOLD
Remote and recent 
words evoke more 
hippocampus activity 
than untrained words. 
No difference between 
remote/recent words 
and untrained words in 
pMTG
Bakker-Marshall 
et al., 2021
1) English 
monolinguals
2) early, mostly 
sequential 
Spanish-English 
bilinguals
Swahili–English word  
pairs; L2 was unknown
1 day before (remote)  
OR same day (recent)  
as test
Primed lexical 
decision, 
targets: English 
words and pseudo-
English nonwords; 
primes: learned 
Swahili words
RT
Monolinguals showed 
priming effect for 
remote words
Recognition task
BOLD
No difference in activity 
between remote and 
recent words
Havas et al.,  
2018
Spanish  
monolinguals
Hungarian; L2 was  
unknown
12 hours before test: with 
overnight sleep (sleep + 
group; sleep-associated 
consolidation) or without 
intervening overnight sleep 
(sleep – group)
Semantic priming  
task
RT
No priming effect of L2 
words in sleep + or 
sleep – groups
 
 
newgenrtpdf

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
361
Nonword primes facilitate responses but word primes do not (and can sometimes have inhibitory 
effects). Qiao and Forster (2013) showed that in L1 participants, following consolidation, newly 
learned words behaved like existing English words (i.e., there was a PLE). When the experiment was 
rerun with Chinese–English bilinguals, however, no PLE was found (i.e., even after consolidation the 
newly learned words produced facilitatory priming, just like nonwords). Similarly, when Japanese–
English bilinguals learned new English words, they did not show a PLE (Nakayama & Lupker, 2018). 
The latter authors proposed that this was related to the dissimilarity of the two languages: Japanese 
being logographic (like Chinese) and English being alphabetic. These studies demonstrate that the 
L1 that serves as the base upon which an L2 is being learned may play a very important role in how 
words are learned and lexicalized.
Sleep
As we have already noted, sleep plays an important role in memory consolidation (Rasch & Born, 
2013). This also appears to be true for L2 lexicalization. Cueing recently learned L2 words during 
sleep led to significantly better memory for cued than uncued words (Schreiner & Rasch, 2015b). 
A group that did not sleep but was cued showed no such difference between cued and uncued words 
(see also Schreiner & Rasch, 2015a). The EEG data collected during sleep showed that if more nega-
tive amplitude and slow oscillations 800-1100 ms following presentation of the trained words were 
observed, these words were remembered more than the words that did not show this effect. These 
EEG signatures possibly reflect replay of the learned memory trace through effective TMR leading 
to strengthening of consolidation.
EEG
Evidence exists that ERPs investigated in word learning, such as the N400, also emerge in L2 learning 
(Havas et al., 2017; McLaughlin et al., 2004; Ojima et al., 2005; Soskey et al., 2016; Yum et al., 
2014). Following 14 hours of a French course, the N400 for pseudowords was larger than for French 
words that had been studied, thus showing a similar pattern to what is expected in L1, though in the 
word judgment task, participants’ accuracy was not yet above chance (McLaughlin et al., 2004). 
Additionally, the N400 has been shown to increase with proficiency in L2 word learning (Yum et al., 
2014). Therefore, this ERP component may also be useful in EEG studies investigating lexicalization 
in L2 word learning. However, to date, no study has directly investigated the effect of lexicalization 
on the N400 and LPC ERP components elicited by newly learned L2 words, that is, to observe a diffe-
rence before and after a period of consolidation time.
fMRI
Neurally, the CLS account predicts that L2 words that have undergone consolidation recruit neo-
cortical regions whereas non-lexicalized words rely more heavily on the hippocampus and medial 
temporal structures. A handful of studies have investigated lexicalization in L2 word learning using 
fMRI. Thus far, these fMRI studies have not found clear evidence for the activation patterns that 
would be expected according to the CLS model. One study reported increased activity in the hippo-
campus for both remote and recently learned words compared to untrained words, but no difference in 
activation between remote or recently learned words and untrained words in the pMTG (Tartaro et al., 
2021). Similarly, participants who learned Swahili on two days, 24 hours apart did not show any 
difference in the fMRI signal between recently and remotely learned words (Bakker-Marshall et al., 
2021). Finally, a developmental study that investigated L2 word learning in children and adolescents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
362
found a trend for decreasing activation in the right hippocampus from immediately after learning to 
one week after learning (Takashima et al., 2019).
Current Trends and Future Directions
We have argued that consolidation protects memories from being forgotten and that, following con-
solidation, a word is said to be lexicalized. Studies investigating L1 word learning have explored the 
conditions under which words become lexicalized and how this can be assessed. These studies have 
found broad support for the CLS account. This line of research has recently been extended to L2 
lexicalization. Although our review of this literature has shown that there is increasing behavioral evi-
dence suggesting that L2 lexicalization follows a similar pattern to that proposed by the CLS account, 
many aspects of lexicalization that have been probed in L1 remain to be tested in L2. Additionally, 
further evidence is required from L2 studies on the involvement of brain regions implicated in the 
CLS account of word learning.
Learning an L2 differs in several profound aspects from learning an L1. Some of these aspects 
may affect lexicalization, in particular first the similarity of the L2 to the L1 and second the learning 
setting. The orthographic similarity of an L2 to the existing L1 has been shown to play a role when 
assessing lexicalization by means of the PLE (Nakayama & Lupker, 2018). It remains unclear 
whether there are also effects of phonological similarity. The masked-priming paradigm, however, 
can be used only with written stimuli, whereas many other tasks (e.g., lexical decision) can also be 
administered using spoken stimuli. An interesting avenue for future studies to pursue would thus be 
to assess further the role that similarity (or dissimilarity) of the L2 plays in lexicalization not only 
in the orthographic domain but also in the phonological domain. The effect of modality is also an 
understudied topic within L2 word lexicalization. For example, it is still not known whether novel 
L2 words learned in one modality (e.g., as printed words) have influence on processing L2 words in 
the other input modality (e.g., as spoken words), as appears to be the case across modalities in L1 
(Bakker et al., 2014).
Learning settings are different for L1 and L2. L1 is typically learned implicitly, but L2 can be 
learned in many ways. Two broad learning settings can be distinguished. On the one hand, in explicit 
classroom-type settings, linguistic and metalinguistic information about the L2 is conveyed to the 
learner. On the other hand, in implicit immersion-type settings, L2 learning takes place through 
exposure (e.g., in daily activities carried out in that language). In a study comparing explicit and 
implicit L2 training directly, differences in ERPs were reported between the two types of instruction 
(Morgan-Short et al., 2012). Although the effect of learning setting has not directly been investigated 
in L2 lexicalization, learning method differences (i.e., presenting participants either with the trans-
lation equivalent of a to-be-learned L2 word or a video depicting the L2 word) lead to differences 
in lexicalization of L2 words (Boddaert et al., 2021). Because many people who learn an L2 in 
adulthood are likely to learn in an explicit way, it would be of great interest to understand whether 
the learning setting (see Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume) also gives rise to differences in 
lexicalization. The difference between instructed (explicit) and uninstructed (implicit) learning plays 
a critical role in the declarative-procedural model (Ullman, 2020). Another important question that 
needs to be asked, therefore, is how the evidence on consolidation and lexicalization (i.e., transfer 
from episodic to semantic memory) might be added to that model.
Finally, we would like to propose a complementary approach to the study of L2 lexicalization. 
Although group comparisons have been one approach to disentangle the effect of variables like L2 
proficiency in L2 learning, recently the potential benefit of exploring individual variability has gained 
more attention (e.g., see Luque & Covey, this volume). This is a promising avenue of future research 
in L2 lexicalization. As discussed above, factors such as type of exposure to L2 may play a role in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
363
lexicalization, and there is a large amount of variability in these factors that exists in the popula-
tion. L2 studies so far have had to try to control for such variability in order to create homogenous 
experimental groups. A switch to focusing on individual differences overcomes this difficulty. It 
comes, however, with the additional requirement of large sample sizes, without which studies of indi-
vidual differences in any domain are less meaningful. We expect, therefore, that future research on 
L2 lexicalization will include continued work using group comparisons and new work on individual 
differences.
In the last 20 years, the understanding of how newly learned words become integrated into the 
lexicon has increased greatly. In L1 word learning, both on the behavioral and neural level, there is 
convincing evidence that complementary learning systems interact in the process of lexicalization. 
With regard to L2, while there is evidence for this lexicalization process on the behavioral level, 
the evidence remains sparse on the neural level. A handful of studies have reported findings in 
support of individual components of the CLS account. However, additional studies are required 
to confirm the idea that lexicalization in L2 word learning undergoes similar neural processes as 
L1 lexicalization. Furthermore, as discussed above, there are many other open questions about L2 
lexicalization, about the effects of factors such as cross-linguistic similarity and learning setting, 
about cross-modality effects, and about individual differences. Yet other factors concern both L1 
and L2 lexicalization, including the precise role that sleep plays in consolidation, the effect(s) of 
prior knowledge (i.e., memory schemata), and whether the time course of lexicalization is the same 
at the level of word forms (orthographic and phonological) as at the level of word meanings. In 
short, much remains to be discovered about how a novel L2 word, such as the Spanish word ratón, 
is learned and remembered.
Further Readings
The first study to investigate behaviorally the lexicalization of newly learned words.
Gaskell, M.G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89(2), 
105–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00070-2
A paper following Gaskell and Dumay (2003) extending the view on the neural level.
Davis, M.H., & Gaskell, M.G. (2009). A complementary systems account of word learning: Neural and behav-
ioural evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1536), 3773–
3800. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0111
A recent review of consolidation with a focus on the neuroscience and memory-consolidation literature.
Takashima, A., & Bakker, I. (2016). Memory Consolidation. In H.-J. Schmid (Ed.), Entrenchment and the psych-
ology of language learning: How we reorganize and adapt linguistic knowledge (pp. 177–200). De Gruyter 
Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1037/15969-009
A recent review of the L1 lexicalization literature, with a focus on the effect of sleep.
Palma, P., & Titone, D. (2021). Something old, something new: A review of the literature on sleep-related 
lexicalization of novel words in adults. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28(1), 96–121. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13423-020-01809-5
References
Alvarez, P., & Squire, L.R. (1994). Memory consolidation and the medial temporal lobe: A simple network 
model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 91(15), 7041–7045. https://doi.org/10.1073/
pnas.91.15.7041
Bakker, I., Takashima, A., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2014). Competition from unseen or 
unheard novel words: Lexical consolidation across modalities. Journal of Memory and Language, 73, 116–
130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2014.03.002
Bakker, I., Takashima, A., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2015a). Changes in theta and beta 
oscillations as signatures of novel word consolidation. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(7), 1286–1297. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00801
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
364
Bakker, I., Takashima, A., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2015b). Tracking lexical consolida-
tion with ERPs: Lexical and semantic-priming effects on N400 and LPC responses to newly-learned words. 
Neuropsychologia, 79, 33–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2015.10.020
Bakker-Marshall, I., Takashima, A., Fernandez, C. B., Janzen, G., McQueen, J.M., & Van Hell, J.G. (2021). 
Overlapping and distinct neural networks supporting novel word learning in bilinguals and monolinguals. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(3), 524–536. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728920000589
Bakker-Marshall, I., Takashima, A., Schoffelen, J.-M., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2018). 
Theta-band oscillations in the middle temporal gyrus reflect novel word consolidation. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 30(5), 621–633. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01240
Boddaert, G., Cornut, C., & Casalis, S. (2021). Integration of newly learned L2 words into the mental lexicon 
is modulated by vocabulary learning method. Acta Psychologica, 212, 103220. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.act
psy.2020.103220
Borovsky, A., Elman, J.L., & Kutas, M. (2012). Once is enough: N400 indexes semantic integration of novel 
word meanings from a single exposure in context. Language Learning and Development, 8(3), 278–302. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/15475441.2011.614893
Bowden, H. & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Breitenstein, C., Jansen, A., Deppe, M., Foerster, A.-F., Sommer, J., Wolbers, T., & Knecht, S. (2005). 
Hippocampus activity differentiates good from poor learners of a novel lexicon. NeuroImage, 25(3), 958–
968. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.019
Davis, M.H., Di Betta, A.M., Macdonald, M.J.E., & Gaskell, M.G. (2009). Learning and consolidation of novel 
spoken words. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 21(4), 803–820. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2009.21059
Davis, M.H., & Gaskell, M.G. (2009). A complementary systems account of word learning: Neural and behav-
ioural evidence. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1536), 3773–
3800. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2009.0111
Deuker, L., Olligs, J., Fell, J., Kranz, T.A., Mormann, F., Montag, C., Reuter, M., Elger, C.E., & Axmacher, 
N. (2013). Memory consolidation by replay of stimulus-specific neural activity. Journal of Neuroscience, 
33(49), 19373–19383. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0414-13.2013
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electro encephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dudai, Y. (2012). The restless engram: Consolidations never end. Annual Review of Neuroscience, 35(1), 227–
247. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-neuro-062111-150500
Dumay, N., & Gaskell, M.G. (2007). Sleep-associated changes in the mental representation of spoken words. 
Psychological Science, 18(1), 35–39. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01845.x
Eichenbaum, H., Sauvage, M., Fortin, N., Komorowski, R., & Lipton, P. (2012). Towards a functional organiza-
tion of episodic memory in the medial temporal lobe. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 36(7), 1597–
1608. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2011.07.006
Frankland, P.W., & Bontempi, B. (2005). The organization of recent and remote memories. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 6(2), 119–130. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn1607
Gaskell, M.G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89(2), 
105–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00070-2
Gilboa, A., & Moscovitch, M. (2021). No consolidation without representation: Correspondence between neural 
and psychological representations in recent and remote memory. Neuron, 109(14), 2239–2255. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuron.2021.04.025
Havas, V., Laine, M., & Rodríguez Fornells, A. (2017). Brain signatures of early lexical and morphological 
learning of a new language. Neuropsychologia, 101, 47–56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsycholo
gia.2017.04.005
Havas, V., Taylor, J., Vaquero, L., de Diego-Balaguer, R., Rodríguez-Fornells, A., & Davis, M.H. (2018). 
Semantic and phonological schema influence spoken word learning and overnight consolidation. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 71(6), 1469–1481. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470218.2017.1329325
Henke, K. (2010). A model for memory systems based on processing modes rather than consciousness. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 11(7), 523–532. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2850
Indefrey, P., & Levelt, W.J.M. (2004). The spatial and temporal signatures of word production components. 
Cognition, 92(1), 101–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2002.06.001
Kaczer, L., Bavassi, L., Petroni, A., Fernández, R.S., Laurino, J., Degiorgi, S., Hochman, E., Forcato, C., & 
Pedreira, M.E. (2018). Contrasting dynamics of memory consolidation for novel word forms and meanings 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
365
revealed by behavioral and neurophysiological markers. Neuropsychologia, 117, 472–482. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2018.07.001
Kan, P.F., Sadagopan, N., Janich, L., & Andrade, M. (2014). Effects of speech practice on fast mapping in mono-
lingual and bilingual speakers. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 57(3), 929–941. https://
doi.org/10.1044/2013_JSLHR-L-13-0045
Kapnoula, E.C., Packard, S., Gupta, P., & McMurray, B. (2015). Immediate lexical integration of novel word 
forms. Cognition, 134, 85–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2014.09.007
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: Finding meaning in the N400 component 
of the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62(1), 621–647. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.psych.093008.131123
Landi, N., Malins, J.G., Frost, S.J., Magnuson, J.S., Molfese, P., Ryherd, K., Rueckl, J.G., Mencl, W.E., & 
Pugh, K.R. (2018). Neural representations for newly learned words are modulated by overnight consoli-
dation, reading skill, and age. Neuropsychologia, 111, 133–144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsycholo
gia.2018.01.011
Lei, D., Liu, Y., & Van Hell, J.G. (2022). Novel word learning with verbal definitions and images: Tracking con-
solidation with behavioral and event-related potential measures. Language Learning, 72, 941–979. https://
doi.org/10.1111/lang.12502
Lindsay, S., & Gaskell, M.G. (2010). A complementary systems account of word learning in L1 and L2: Learning 
words in L1 and L2. Language Learning, 60, 45–63. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2010.00600.x
Lindsay, S., & Gaskell, M.G. (2013). Lexical integration of novel words without sleep. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(2), 608–622. https://doi.org/10.1037/
a0029243
Liu, Y., & Van Hell, J.G. (2020). Learning novel word meanings: An ERP study on lexical consolidation in 
monolingual, inexperienced foreign language learners. Language Learning, 70(S2), 45–74. https://doi.org/
10.1111/lang.12403
Luque, A. & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
McClelland, J.L., McNaughton, B.L., & O’Reilly, R.C. (1995). Why there are complementary learning systems in 
the hippocampus and neocortex: Insights from the successes and failures of connectionist models of learning 
and memory. Psychological Review, 102(3), 419–457. https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-295X.102.3.419
McCloskey, M., & Cohen, N.J. (1989). Catastrophic interference in connectionist networks: The sequential 
learning problem. In G.H. Bower (Ed.), Psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 24, pp. 109–165). 
Academic Press. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-7421(08)60536-8
McLaughlin, J., Osterhout, L., & Kim, A. (2004). Neural correlates of second-language word learning: Minimal 
instruction produces rapid change. Nature Neuroscience, 7(7), 703–704. https://doi.org/10.1038/nn1264
Morgan-Short, K., Steinhauer, K., Sanz, C., & Ullman, M.T. (2012). Explicit and implicit second language 
training differentially affect the achievement of native-like brain activation patterns. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience, 24(4), 933–947. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00119
Mottarella, M. & Prat, C.S. (this volume). Using quantitative electroencephalography (qEEG) to investigate 
second language learning. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Nadel, L., & Moscovitch, M. (1997). Memory consolidation, retrograde amnesia and the hippocampal complex. 
Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 7(2), 217–227. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0959-4388(97)80010-4
Nakayama, M., & Lupker, S.J. (2018). Is there lexical competition in the recognition of L2 words for different-
script bilinguals? An examination using masked priming with Japanese-English bilinguals. Journal of 
Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 44(8), 1168–1185. https://doi.org/10.1037/
xhp0000525
Ojima, S., Nakata, H., & Kakigi, R. (2005). An ERP study of second language learning after childhood: Effects 
of proficiency. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 17(8), 1212–1228. https://doi.org/10.1162/089892905
5002436
Oudiette, D., & Paller, K.A. (2013). Upgrading the sleeping brain with targeted memory reactivation. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 17(3), 142–149. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.01.006
Palma, P., & Titone, D. (2021). Something old, something new: A review of the literature on sleep-related 
lexicalization of novel words in adults. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28(1), 96–121. https://doi.org/
10.3758/s13423-020-01809-5
Price, C.J. (2012). A review and synthesis of the first 20 years of PET and fMRI studies of heard speech, spoken 
language and reading. NeuroImage, 62(2), 816–847. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.04.062
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Clara Ekerdt, Atsuko Takashima, and James M. McQueen
366
Qiao, X., & Forster, K.I. (2013). Novel word lexicalization and the prime lexicality effect. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 39(4), 1064–1074. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0030528
Qiao, X., & Forster, K.I. (2017). Is the L2 lexicon different from the L1 lexicon? Evidence from novel word 
lexicalization. Cognition, 158, 147–152. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2016.10.026
Rasch, B., & Born, J. (2013). About sleep’s role in memory. Physiological Reviews, 93(2), 681–766. https://doi.
org/10.1152/physrev.00032.2012
Rasch, B., Büchel, C., Gais, S., & Born, J. (2007). Odor cues during slow-wave sleep prompt declarative memory 
consolidation. Science, 315(5817), 1426–1429.
Sara, S.J. (2017). Sleep to remember. Journal of Neuroscience, 37(3), 457–463. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO
SCI.0297-16.2017
Schacter, D.L. (1997). The cognitive neuroscience of memory: Perspectives from neuroimaging research. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 352(1362), 1689–
1695. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.1997.0150
Schimke, E.A.E., Angwin, A.J., Cheng, B.B.Y., & Copland, D.A. (2021). The effect of sleep on novel word 
learning in healthy adults: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 28, 
1811–1838. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-021-01980-3
Schmolck, H., Kensinger, E.A., Corkin, S., & Squire, L.R. (2002). Semantic knowledge in patient H.M. and 
other patients with bilateral medial and lateral temporal lobe lesions. Hippocampus, 12(4), 520–533. https://
doi.org/10.1002/hipo.10039
Schreiner, T., & Rasch, B. (2015a). Cueing vocabulary in awake subjects during the day has no effect on 
memory. Somnologie–Schlafforschung Und Schlafmedizin, 19(2), 133–140. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11
818-015-0005-9
Schreiner, T., & Rasch, B. (2015b). Boosting vocabulary learning by verbal cueing during sleep. Cerebral 
Cortex, 25(11), 4169–4179. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhu139
Scoville, W.B., & Milner, B. (1957). Loss of recent memory after bilateral hippocampal lesions. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 20(1), 11–21. https://doi.org/10.1136/jnnp.20.1.11
Sharon, T., Moscovitch, M., & Gilboa, A. (2011). Rapid neocortical acquisition of long-term arbitrary associ-
ations independent of the hippocampus. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(3), 1146–
1151. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1005238108
Soskey, L., Holcomb, P.J., & Midgley, K.J. (2016). Language effects in second-language learners: A longitu-
dinal electrophysiological study of Spanish classroom learning. Brain Research, 1646, 44–52. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.brainres.2016.05.028
Squire, L.R., & Knowlton, B.J. (1995). Memory, hippocampus, and brain systems. In M.S. Gazzaniga (Ed.), The 
cognitive neurosciences (pp. 825–837). The MIT Press.
Takashima, A., & Bakker, I. (2016). Memory Consolidation. In H.-J. Schmid (Ed.), Entrenchment and the psych-
ology of language learning: How we reorganize and adapt linguistic knowledge (pp. 177–200). De Gruyter 
Mouton. https://doi.org/10.1037/15969-009
Takashima, A., Bakker, I., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2014). Richness of information 
about novel words influences how episodic and semantic memory networks interact during lexicalization. 
NeuroImage, 84, 265–278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.023
Takashima, A., Bakker, I., Van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2017). Interaction between episodic and 
semantic memory networks in the acquisition and consolidation of novel spoken words. Brain and Language, 
167, 44–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.05.009
Takashima, A., Bakker-Marshall, I., Van Hell, J.G., McQueen, J.M., & Janzen, G. (2019). Neural correlates 
of word learning in children. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 37, 100649. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.dcn.2019.100649
Tamminen, J., & Gaskell, M.G. (2013). Novel word integration in the mental lexicon: Evidence from unmasked 
and masked semantic priming. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66(5), 1001–1025. https://doi.
org/10.1080/17470218.2012.724694
Tartaro, G., Takashima, A., & McQueen, J.M. (2021). Consolidation as a mechanism for word learning in sequen-
tial bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(5), 864–878. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672892
1000286
Tononi, G., & Cirelli, C. (2006). Sleep function and synaptic homeostasis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 10(1), 49–
62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2005.05.002
Tse, D., Langston, R.F., Kakeyama, M., Bethus, I., Spooner, P.A., Wood, E.R., Witter, M.P., & Morris, R.G.M. 
(2007). Schemas and memory consolidation. Science, 316(5821), 76–82. https://doi.org/10.1126/scie
nce.1135935
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Memory Consolidation in Second Language Neurocognition
367
Tulving, E. (1972). 12. Episodic and semantic memory. In E. Tulving & W. Donaldson (Eds.), Organization of 
memory (pp. 381–403). Academic Press.
Tulving, E., Conway, M., Aggleton, J., & Tulving, E. (2001). Episodic memory and common sense: How far 
apart? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 356, 1505–
1515. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2001.0937
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The declarative/procedural model: A neurobiologically motivated theory of first and second 
language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition: An 
introduction (pp. 128–161). Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429503986-7
Van der Ven, F., Takashima, A., Segers, E., & Verhoeven, L. (2015). Learning word meanings: Overnight integra-
tion and study modality effects. PLOS ONE, 10(5), e0124926. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0124926
Winocur, G., & Moscovitch, M. (2011). Memory transformation and systems consolidation. Journal of the 
International Neuropsychological Society, 17(5), 766–780. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617711000683
Yum, Y.N., Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Grainger, J. (2014). An ERP study on initial second language vocabu-
lary learning. Psychophysiology, 51(4), 364–373. https://doi.org/10.1111/psyp.12183
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

368
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-34
27
CONTEXT OF LEARNING 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
Introduction and Critical Definitions
In this chapter, we undertake a novel exploration of theoretical perspectives and empirical evi-
dence regarding how the context in which one learns a second language (L2)—e.g., a classroom, an 
immersion setting, or virtual reality—may shape L2 neurocognition, that is, the neural representa-
tion and processing of language. To begin with, it is clear that one’s learning context can influence 
both the type and amount of input to which a learner is exposed, with immersion settings generally 
expected to offer a high quantity of input, but with little explicit instruction or information about 
the language, whereas a classroom setting will often offer much more explicit information, but per-
haps little authentic input and interaction. Such differences in quantity and quality of input with 
which the learner engages can, in turn, be expected to impact the learner’s representation and pro-
cessing of the L2. Beyond differences in input, different L2 learning contexts vary in terms of social 
support as well as motivation, such that particular settings are more likely to engender a virtuous 
cycle, driving further engagement with the L2. Different learning contexts may also tend to activate 
different brain networks for L2 neurocognition, due to any combination of these context-dependent 
factors. However, these relationships are not yet well understood. Hence, our aims for this chapter are 
to explore theoretical perspectives on L2 context and neurocognition and to examine extant evidence, 
in order to draw conclusions that can inform the field of Second Language Acquisition (SLA) and 
suggest fruitful avenues for future research.
We consider here the five theoretical perspectives addressed in this volume: the Declarative/
Procedural Model (Ullman & Morgan-Short, this volume), Generative Perspectives (Miller et al., this 
volume), the Dynamic Restructuring Model (Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume), Linguistic Relativity 
(Casaponsa & Thierry, this volume), and the Social L2 (Jeong & Li, this volume). For each perspec-
tive, we briefly describe its basic tenets and consider its explicit or implied predictions regarding the 
impact of learning context on L2 neurocognition. We then present empirical findings from relevant 
neurocognitive studies, where available. These studies vary in terms of learning context, and include 
learners in laboratory-based settings (which may manipulate particular aspects of a learning context, 
e.g., implicit vs. explicit or instructed vs. uninstructed learning conditions), classroom settings (which 
are often, but not necessarily, more instructed/explicit in nature), study abroad contexts (which may 
offer more implicit exposure, or a combination of implicit and explicit exposure), and immersion 
contexts (which would generally be expected to supply large amounts of implicit exposure). Next, we 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
369
relate empirical findings to each theory, consider what conclusions can be drawn, and suggest future 
directions for research under each perspective. To conclude, we broadly discuss trends and common-
alities in the perspectives and evidence, and discuss future directions for investigations of the role of 
learning context in L2 neurocognition.
Theoretical Perspectives and Evidence
The Declarative/Procedural Model of L2
The Declarative/Procedural Model of L2 and L2 Learning Context: Theory
The Declarative/Procedural (DP) Model (e.g., Ullman & Morgan-Short, this volume; Morgan-Short 
et al., 2022) claims that both first language (L1) and L2 learning and processing largely rely on two 
memory systems in the brain—the declarative memory (DM) and procedural memory (PM) systems. 
Reliance on these systems for language processing is influenced by the nature of the systems and by 
other factors, including learning context. In general, DM is the only memory system that subserves 
explicit knowledge—knowledge that is available to conscious awareness—and is very adept at 
quickly learning associations between pieces of information. PM, on the other hand, subserves 
implicit knowledge—knowledge that is unavailable to conscious awareness—and learns more grad-
ually. Turning to language, it is posited that some types of linguistic knowledge can be learned by 
only one system (e.g., idiosyncratic lexical knowledge depends on DM exclusively). However, for 
linguistic knowledge that can rely on either system (e.g., grammatical knowledge), this reliance 
depends on several factors. In the case of adult L2 acquisition, two important factors are the amount 
and type of input, both of which are likely to vary in different learning contexts (e.g., immersion vs. 
classroom contexts). According to the DP model, less input often leads to (initial) learning in DM, 
since DM can learn quickly, whereas more input may shift reliance to PM, and this system may 
become increasingly relied upon due to automatization (Morgan-Short et al., 2022). In addition, the 
DP model holds that the type of input as well as conscious attention matter:
Explicit instruction (e.g., of sequences), or conscious attention to input stimuli and an attempt 
to understand underlying rules or patterns, can increase learning in declarative memory. 
Conversely, a lack of explicit instruction, as well as manipulations that reduce attention to the 
stimuli (e.g., in dual-task paradigms in which the learner’s attention is shifted toward another 
task) or a high level of complexity of underlying patterns (thus decreasing the learner’s ability 
to explicitly detect them), can shift learning toward procedural memory.
(Ullman, 2020, pp. 133–134)
Thus, different L2 learning contexts may tend to foster greater reliance on either DM or PM for L2 
grammar. Specifically, to the extent that classroom instruction fosters less input, more explicit instruc-
tion, and more conscious attention, greater reliance on DM is predicted. Conversely, to the extent 
that immersive contexts foster more input, less explicit instruction, and less conscious attention, 
greater reliance on PM is expected (Ullman, 2020). (Note that we are not claiming that classroom 
vs. immersion are neatly divided into explicit vs. implicit instruction or learning; rather, amount 
and type of input may exist on a continuum within each context, even while generally, classroom 
L2 settings may tend to foster conscious attention and have more explicit instruction as compared 
to immersion contexts). In addition, greater reliance on PM for L2 grammar representation and 
processing is expected as experience and proficiency develop, regardless of the learning context. 
Moreover, individual differences in DM and PM ability may interact with L2 learning context, poten-
tially accounting for differences in behavioral performance (learning) and reliance on DM and PM.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
370
Declarative/Procedural Model and L2 Learning Context: Evidence
Here we present three longitudinal studies undertaken from a DP perspective that elucidate how L2 
learning context can influence neurocognition of aspects of L2 grammar (e.g., syntax, morphosyntax) 
in adult learners. All three studies also assess learners’ DM and PM abilities. Generally, in these 
studies, DM abilities are assessed using standardized measures of recall and recognition, such as the 
(verbal) Modern Language Aptitude Test, Part V—Paired Associates (Carroll & Sapon, 1959) and the 
(nonverbal) Continuous Visual Memory Task (Trahan & Larrabee, 1988). PM abilities are assessed 
via measures of probabilistic learning, such as the Alternating Serial Response Time Task (Howard & 
Howard, 1997) and the Weather Prediction Task (e.g., Knowlton et al., 1994).
Carpenter (2008) investigated the acquisition of an artificial language (Brocanto2) by learners who 
were randomly assigned to either an explicit/instructed or implicit/uninstructed training condition. 
Online processing of the L2 grammar (agreement, phrase structure, verb argument) was assessed via 
event-related potentials (ERPs) recorded during a sentence judgment task at low and advanced stages 
of proficiency. Analyses revealed that DM ability predicted behavioral performance at both early and 
advanced proficiency for learners receiving explicit training. PM ability, conversely, predicted both 
performance and ERP signatures of procedural processing (early anterior negativities) at advanced 
proficiency for learners receiving implicit training.
Morgan-Short et al. (2015) exposed participants to the same implicit training for Brocanto2, and 
neurocognitive processing of syntax (word order) was assessed at early and later stages of acquisition 
via fMRI. At early stages, better DM ability and higher behavioral performance were each associated 
with increased neural activation in areas related to L1 grammar and PM (e.g., left inferior frontal 
gyrus, Brodmann’s area 6, basal ganglia, thalamus). At later stages of learning, poorer PM abilities 
and poorer behavioral performance were associated with increased neural activation in areas not tied 
to grammar or PM (e.g., right middle frontal gyrus, insula, left lingual gyrus), taken to reflect “more 
effortful neural processing” (p. 412). Thus, DM and PM abilities correlated with neural representa-
tion of grammar at early and late stages of learning, respectively. These results indicate that neural 
representation of L2 grammar can vary for adult learners in an uninstructed condition, with some 
learners relying on neural circuits related to PM and L1 grammar at early stages, and others relying 
on circuits related to control mechanisms at more advanced stages of L2 learning.
Faretta-Stutenberg and Morgan-Short (2018) took this line of research to natural settings, exam-
ining L2 learners of Spanish in at-home (classroom) and study-abroad (immersion plus classroom) 
contexts. Intermediate-level learners’ ability to detect phrase structure violations was assessed at 
the beginning and end of the semester, and ERPs were used to explore online processing of the 
L2 (including group-level effects and individual-level response magnitude [size] and dominance 
[type]. The researchers were interested in exploring whether DM and PM abilities would account for 
changes in behavioral performance and online processing. At-home learners evidenced improvements 
in behavioral performance and changes in neurocognitive processing (group-level effects), but indi-
vidual differences in DM and PM abilities did not account for these changes. For study-abroad 
learners, similar improvements in behavioral performance were exhibited, and PM was a unique, 
positive predictor of these gains. Moreover, they evidenced changes in neurocognitive processing, 
both in group-level effects and individual response size and type. For study-abroad learners, PM 
(along with working memory) predicted an increase in ERP response magnitude, suggesting that 
higher-PM learners had a larger processing response to phrase structure violations, regardless of 
response type.
Taken together, these studies offer preliminary insight into how individual differences in cogni-
tive abilities may contribute to neurocognition for learners in different contexts. Interestingly, PM 
abilities were related to L2 grammar neurocognition in immersion-like contexts in all three studies, 
though in different ways. The fact that each of these studies found relationships between PM abilities 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
371
and learning in immersion-like contexts is striking, suggesting that in these contexts, PM ability 
modulates learning, particularly at later stages of proficiency.
Declarative/Procedural Model and L2 Learning Context: Future Directions
Empirical evidence supports the perspective that the relative role of DM and PM in L2 neurocognition 
may be mediated by context of learning. To date, however, a limited number of grammatical structures 
have been examined, and additional research is needed to fully understand these relationships. We 
note here that laboratory settings are particularly well-suited to examining relationships between DM 
and PM abilities and learning context, given that natural settings are much more difficult to control 
experimentally and often include a mixture of implicit and explicit exposure. Nonetheless, conver-
ging evidence from naturalistic settings is ideal to support strong conclusions regarding relationships 
among DM/PM, L2 neurocognition, and context of learning. Finally, note that a recent systematic 
review of evidence on DM and PM abilities (Morgan-Short et al., 2022) supports this general pic-
ture, but also underscores the need to investigate both instructed/explicit and uninstructed/implicit 
contexts in the same study in order to elucidate possible interactions between DM/PM abilities and 
context of learning.
Generative Perspectives on the Neurolinguistics of L2
Generative Perspectives and L2 Learning Context: Theory
Generative perspectives within the field of SLA aim to describe and explain the L2 know-
ledge system, “especially how it comes to be represented in the mind and brain of the learner” 
(Rothman & Slabakova, 2018, p. 419). In particular, Rothman and Slabakova (2018) state that 
much of SLA research from a generative perspective has aimed to elucidate the interplay among 
three knowledge systems: Universal Grammar, L1 knowledge, and knowledge that comes from 
L2 exposure or input. As compared to other perspectives, most generative perspectives in SLA 
“maintain that input factors have more limited effects” (Rothman & Slabakova, 2018), but none-
theless they do hold that input is crucial to L2 acquisition, as it provides the data that is taken to 
drive parameter resetting in the L2 (White, 1989, 2003, as cited by Rothman & Slabakova, 2018). 
Moreover, Rothman and colleagues (2019) highlight the “increasingly central position that input 
quantity and quality is assuming in generative SLA studies in recent times” (p. 19). Similarly, 
Miller et al. (this volume) state that the expanded scope of questions of interest to generative 
SLA research includes “better modeling of external factors such as quality and quantity of input” 
(among others).
Recognition of the crucial role of input leads some generative researchers to also address 
learning context as important for L2 acquisition. Rothman and Slabakova state that “context is 
a partial proxy for quantity and quality of input as well as a delimiter of potential language use” 
(Rothman & Slabakova, 2018, p. 429). In particular, they state: “[i]‌n the typical case, naturalistic 
exposure, especially study abroad, would furnish richer and more varied language experience” 
(Rothman & Slabakova, 2018, p. 429). Thus, it seems that generative perspectives would gener-
ally predict better or more native-like processing for more naturalistic, study-abroad L2 learning 
environments, to the extent that the learner engages fully with the environment and interacts with 
lots of native input, as compared to classroom learning contexts—though we reiterate our caveat 
that classroom vs. immersion contexts do not guarantee these prototypical conditions or engage-
ment. Although we have not found such claims made explicitly by generative theorists, this general 
pattern of predictions and caveats was affirmed via personal communication with Rothman (March 
4, 2022).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
372
Generative Perspectives and L2 Learning Context: Evidence
At present, we are not aware of any neurocognitive research from a generative perspective that is dir-
ectly relevant to predictions about how learning context is expected to influence L2 neurocognition. 
Despite the absence of specific predictions or research on these issues, generative SLA researchers 
have made advances in using neurocognitive methods to help address questions that are more trad-
itionally central from a generative perspective, such as whether a structure that is unique to the L2 
can be acquired by late learners, and moreover, processed in a nativelike way (see Miller et al., this 
volume, for details).
Generative Perspectives and L2 Learning Context: Future Directions
Neurolinguistic methods hold promise for more directly assessing whether or not L2 processing 
(as teased apart from performance issues) is indeed native-like (for overviews, see e.g., Perani & 
Abutalebi, 2005; Sabourin, 2014) or whether such fundamental concepts as “traces” show evidence 
of processing by L1 and L2 speakers alike (see Miller et al., this volume). However, what constitutes 
native-likeness is not always clear in some neurocognitive research methods (for example, in ERP 
research, there is debate on whether the left anterior negativity should be considered a hallmark of 
native-like syntactic processing—e.g., Freunberger et al., 2022); moreover, there appears to be con-
siderable processing variability (as reflected in ERP patterns) even among L1 speakers (e.g., Tanner 
& van Hell, 2014). Importantly, given that Generative SLA theorists are increasingly recognizing the 
roles of input quantity and quality (and hence learning context) in L2 acquisition, it seems likely that 
more explicit predictions as well as theoretical work on learning contexts from this perspective will 
be forthcoming. Indeed, it behooves any theorist to attempt to account for research findings, including 
those showing L2 neurocognitive differences that are associated with different contexts of learning.
The Dynamic Restructuring Model and L2
Dynamic Restructuring Model and L2 Learning Context: Theory
The Dynamic Restructuring Model (see Korenar & Pliatsikas, this volume) aims to explain how and 
why neural function and structure change as an effect of bilingualism. Based on evidence from neuro-
linguistic studies of various groups of bilinguals (e.g., simultaneous/sequential, early/later learners, 
immersed/non-immersed), Pliatsikas (2020) developed a model that views bilingualism as a “long-
term dynamic experience” (p. 461). The Dynamic Restructuring Model describes a non-linear tra-
jectory of experience-based neuroplasticity resulting from the cognitively demanding experience of 
acquiring a new language. More specifically, Pliatsikas (2020) proposes a three-stage continuum of 
bilingual development (initial exposure, consolidation, peak efficiency) and associated brain restruc-
turing (expansion, selection, renormalization) that is closely tied to language experiences, including 
the quality and quantity of exposure to bilingual settings. In terms of context of L2 learning, fun-
damental to this model is the notion that structural brain adaptations will depend on the “ways 
bilinguals use their languages, the contexts in which they operate, and… the timing of their language 
experiences” (this volume). Although a number of factors are tied to neural restructuring (overall pro-
ficiency, simultaneous vs. sequential acquisition, age of onset, amount of time spent using the L2), 
the experienced-based perspective is foundational to this model, and Pliatsikas (2020) highlights a 
number of neural adaptations, across all three stages, that appear to be related to context of learning.
First, during initial exposure, new L2 learners typically evidence increases in cortical grey matter 
volume, regardless of learning context. Based on comparisons across numerous studies, Pliatsikas 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
373
(2020) notes additional neural effects that are evidenced among learners with particular initial 
exposure experiences: among newly immersed bilinguals, adaptations of subcortical structures (cere-
bellum and caudate nucleus) are interpreted as reflecting “better control between languages as a result 
of newly applied linguistic immersion, with the sudden and increased learning and controlling needs 
it introduces” (p. 465); white matter adaptations evidenced among learners with intensive language 
training are interpreted as related to the intensity of language learning and amount of switching 
experience between languages. As L2 proficiency and experience increase, bilinguals enter consoli-
dation, where they undergo grey and white matter adaptations taken to reflect a shift from vocabulary 
acquisition to language control and more efficient L2 processing. Although many of these effects are 
evidenced in highly experienced bilinguals regardless of learning context, specific adaptations are 
predicted by type and amount of immersion(-like) experiences. For example, amount of immersion 
predicts adaptations in motor control and language production areas, posited to be related to motor 
skills needed to produce the L2 (Pliatsikas, 2020). Available data for brain adaptations during peak 
efficiency are more limited, as this stage is observed only in the most experienced groups of bilinguals 
(e.g., professional interpreters), and thus, examination of structural adaptations at this stage requires 
longitudinal examination of bilinguals over an extended period of time.
Dynamic Restructuring Model and L2 Learning Context: Evidence
In terms of empirical evidence, Pliatsikas’ (2020) review of studies whose participants have different 
types of linguistic exposure suggests that learning context may impact the type of brain restructuring 
evidenced across the bilingualism continuum (identified in the Dynamic Restructuring Model as ini-
tial exposure, consolidation, and peak efficiency) Here, we present two studies that elucidate the 
relevance of L2 learning context in neural restructuring.
DeLuca and colleagues (2019) report a longitudinal study testing the effects of continued 
immersion, in the absence of proficiency changes, for adult sequential bilinguals who were already 
highly proficient in the L2. Participants underwent two structural MRI scans, with three years between 
scans. Importantly, between testing sessions, participants continued to live in the L2 immersion envir-
onment, did not undergo language training, and did not evidence proficiency changes. Nonetheless, 
results revealed significant structural differences between the two scans: increases in grey matter 
volume, changes in white matter diffusivity, and reshaping of specific structures suggest that 
neurological changes continue to take place among proficient adult bilinguals who continue to be 
immersed. Further, participants’ total length of immersion and age of initial L2 acquisition predicted 
some of these changes, although, as is often the case in L2 research, these effects could not be entirely 
separated from L2 proficiency (see also Fromont, this volume). To help tease apart the relevance 
of age of acquisition, L2 proficiency, and length of immersion in accounting for changes in brain 
structures, Pliatsikas and colleagues (2017) report two cross-sectional experiments. The researchers 
examined relationships between reshaping of subcortical structures and amount of L2 immersion for 
(adult) sequential bilinguals. In Experiment 1, MRI scans were conducted on a group of L2 English 
learners with high proficiency and a wide range of immersion experience (13 months–31 years), and 
on a group of monolingual English controls. Results revealed significant reshaping of subcortical 
structures for immersed learners (as compared to monolinguals) and further, showed that some of 
these brain restructuring effects were predicted by amount of L2 immersion (but not proficiency or 
age of acquisition). To further disentangle proficiency level and immersion experience, Experiment 
2 was conducted with a group of sequential bilinguals whose proficiency and age of acquisition 
matched those of Experiment 1, but who had more limited immersion (1–13 months). A lack of evi-
dence of neural restructuring for these proficiency-matched learners suggested that the immersive 
context, rather than proficiency or bilingualism itself, was responsible for brain reshaping.
 
 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
374
Dynamic Restructuring Model and L2 Learning Context: Future Directions
The Dynamic Restructuring Model provides a number of testable predictions for researchers interested 
in examining the relationships between learning context and L2 neurocognition. In terms of study 
design, given the dynamic nature of structural brain adaptations, it is important to acknowledge that 
pre-post experimental designs are unlikely to capture non-linear changes in brain structure. Korenar 
and Pliatsikas (this volume) instead call for “complex longitudinal designs” to provide insight into 
the neural changes that accompany bilingual development. The authors note that level of similarity 
between languages can be a modulating factor (due to its relationship with cognitive control), but also 
that cultural differences may have an impact on neurocognitive effects. Study abroad programs and 
other immersion experiences are particularly well-suited to explore the effects of different language 
and cultural pairings on dynamic restructuring.
Linguistic Relativity and L2
Linguistic Relativity and L2 Learning Context: Theory
Building on the ideas of Sapir and Whorf (e.g., Whorf, 1956) that language use shapes thought, 
linguistic relativity is the idea that linguistic experience can shape perception and (non-verbal) cog-
nition (Casaponsa & Thierry, this volume). Casaponsa and Thierry (this volume) connect linguistic 
relativity to embodiment theory (Lakoff & Johnson, 1999; Zappa & Frenck-Mestre, this volume), 
which holds that our biophysiological and perceptual experiences of the world shape our mind and 
(neuro)cognition. From the perspective of linguistic relativity, because different languages encode 
such properties as object categories, color, motion events, and time in different ways, it stands to 
reason that our mental representations reflect these differences. Research has supported these notions 
in L1 (e.g., Athanasopoulos, 2009 for color; Boroditsky, 2001 for time), with differences in mental 
representations reflecting the languages’ ways of encoding these concepts. Casaponsa and Thierry (this 
volume) extend linguistic relativity to L2, proposing that not only L1 experience but also L2 experi-
ence can shape speakers’ cognition and neurocognition, including non-verbal neurocognition. Again, 
evidence suggests this is indeed the case (e.g., Athanasopoulos et al., 2010 for color). Moreover, with 
regard to learning context, Casaponsa and Thierry (this volume) theorize that neuroplasticity from L2 
learning likely depends on a number of factors including learning context—in particular, differences 
in “method, duration and rate of exposure.” In addition, they suggest that (a) a combination of explicit 
and implicit approaches may be useful for L2 learners, in drawing their attention to features that are 
salient to native speakers to facilitate grammatical and lexical consolidation, and (b) multimodal 
teaching tools may boost neural restructuring and L2 learning.
Linguistic Relativity and L2 Learning Context: Evidence
Importantly, by design, neurocognitive studies of Linguistic Relativity in L2 focus on non-verbal 
neurocognitive processing, to avoid the potential problem of circularity; thus, they do not examine 
whether the L2 is processed according to L2 distinctions, but rather whether non-verbal processing 
(e.g., of color) shows effects of L2 experience (see Athanasopoulos & Casaponsa, 2020). At least 
some empirical evidence indeed suggests that L2 learning context may influence neurocognition 
along these lines. For example, Athanasopoulos and colleagues (2010) found differences in ERP 
patterns related to color processing between groups with different lengths of immersion (those with 
an average of 3.5 years of immersion showed brain changes in color processing, whereas those with 
an average of 7 months did not). The authors attributed these changes to “the fact that living in the 
L2-speaking country provides a physical context in which linguistic and perceptual experience are 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
375
grounded” (p. 441). Thus the authors suggest that not only the amount of time but also the particular 
learning context can be important, although in this study there was no proficiency-matched com-
parison group from a non-immersive learning context. Thus, some evidence suggests that learning 
context may indeed influence linguistic relativity effects, but it is far from conclusive. To our know-
ledge, there is no neurocognitive research on Linguistic Relativity that teases apart the roles of profi-
ciency and length of immersion/exposure.
Linguistic Relativity and L2 Learning Context: Future Directions
As mentioned above, we are aware of no empirical research that teases apart L2 learning context as 
related to neural Linguistic Relativity effects. Thus, this is an area ripe for investigation, and moreover 
one that the suggestions made by theorists would seem to call for. In particular, future research could 
examine linguistic relativity effects as a function of immersion contexts, non-immersion contexts, 
and blended experience profiles in matched proficiency groups. It could additionally examine effects 
of multimodal teaching tools on such neural changes, including amount of exposure necessary to 
show brain changes in different learning contexts and indeed whether these are possible in non-
immersion settings.
The Social L2
Social L2 and L2 Learning Context: Theory
Li and Jeong (2020) take an approach to L2 neurocognition that they call “Social L2 Learning” (SL2). 
This approach is informed by the “New Science of Learning” transdisciplinary framework (Meltzoff 
et al., 2009), which takes language learning to be “a social-based process, supported by computa-
tional mechanisms and a neural circuit that links cognition, perception, and action” (Jeong & Li, this 
volume). Moreover, this notion of the socially embedded nature of language learning is consistent 
with many theoretical approaches to SLA, including sociocultural theory, usage-based learning, inter-
action hypotheses, and neuroemergentism (as pointed out by Jeong & Li, this volume). SL2, although 
L2 and L1 appear to largely recruit the same neural substrates for language, the L1 typically relies 
on a more integrated network—linking language areas with sensorimotor and semantic integration 
areas—whereas these linkages are weak or nonexistent in even highly proficient L2 learners. Li and 
Jeong, assert that children’s L1 learning experiences are more multimodal and embodied as compared 
to L2 classroom experiences, which may be partly responsible for these differences. Critically, how-
ever, the SL2 hypothesis holds that, like children, adults can be supported in learning language 
through social, multimodal, and embodied learning contexts, which may be real- life or simulated. 
Such contexts are claimed to lead to richer semantic and neural encoding (which is more L1-like), as 
well as to more robust L2 learning.
Social L2 and L2 Learning Context: Evidence
Broadly speaking, the relevant evidence reviewed by Li and Jeong (2020; Jeong & Li, this volume) 
supports the SL2 hypothesis, in that more socially mediated and embodied contexts of L2 vocabulary 
learning have been shown to lead to (a) more L1-like and more integrated L2 brain circuitry, espe-
cially in the right hemisphere, including the right temporo-parietal junction and adjacent areas (see 
their Figure 1; we will refer to all of the implicated areas as SL2 areas without distinguishing between 
them here), as well as (b) better L2 retention. This evidence comes largely from fMRI studies of L2 
word learning in different contexts that are more or less social, multimodal, or embodied. In these 
studies, brain activation is compared across different learning contexts (with fMRI data collected 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
376
during either target word learning/encoding or subsequent retrieval). In an early study, Jeong 
et al. (2010) examined fMRI data collected during word retrieval, after learning via translation vs. 
simulated social interaction (watching a video with social interaction). A later follow-up study (Jeong 
et al., 2021) examined fMRI data collected during encoding under these same contexts. Both studies 
showed greater activation in SL2 areas (for retrieval or encoding, respectively) for social learning; 
moreover, in the 2021 study, participants with greater activation of SL2 areas during learning also 
performed better on a delayed vocabulary test that required application of target words to novel 
situations.
Similarly, Verga and Kotz (2019) found greater activation in SL2 areas during a learning task 
when the task was preceded by a cover story that made the task seem partner-based (i.e., social) 
vs. when the exact same task was not preceded by this social pre-task. Moreover, within the social 
learning condition, learners with higher activation in particular SL2 regions had better learning 
outcomes. Along similar lines, Mayer et al. (2015) found that vocabulary learning accompanied by 
gestures (vs. learning with pictures or with no enrichment) led to more fMRI activation in SL2 areas, 
as well as correlations between this activation and behavioral performance. Using structural MRI 
scans, Legault and colleagues (2019) examined neural changes for learners trained on L2 vocabulary 
with or without a virtual environment (in which learners were able to interactively view and play 
with the objects whose names they learned). They reported that cortical thickness was enhanced 
in particular SL2 structures, and this thickness correlated with better delayed retention test scores, 
for learners trained in the virtual reality-based condition. Thus, Li and Jeong (2020; Jeong & Li, 
this volume) and Jeong et al. (2021) suggest that social-based L2 learning leads to distinct patterns 
of neural engagement, in particular linking language processing with brain networks that underlie 
visual and spatial processing; this richer representation and engagement may in turn support both L2 
learning and retrieval. This evidence does, broadly, seem consistent with the SL2 perspective, and 
indeed suggests that learning context has a demonstrable effect on L2 neurocognition, in particular 
involving right hemisphere networks in and near the temporoparietal junction, as well as integrating 
these more strongly with L2 representations.
Social L2 and L2 Learning Context: Future Directions
To date, there are relatively few neurocognitive SL2 studies, and existing research has focused 
exclusively on vocabulary or lexical learning, processing, and representation. As Jeong and Li (this 
volume) point out, research on other language domains (phonology, morphology, syntax, discourse, 
and pragmatics) is needed to better understand the neurocognition of L2. In addition, some research 
supporting social learning seems to in fact be more “embodied” than social (for example, virtual 
reality learning or learning with gestures); thus perhaps the social aspect is something of a misnomer, 
or rather one of several ways in which learning can be enhanced via activation of SL2 networks as 
part of L2 processing. Finally, somewhat like our caveats about the varying nature of contexts more 
generally, there seems to be an assumption that the L2 classroom is often not a social space; surely 
this varies by classroom and culture, but we hope that many if not most modern language classrooms 
are social in nature. It would be fruitful in the future to compare, for example, different classroom and 
real-world contexts in this research.
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
Concluding Remarks
The five theoretical perspectives presented here seem to converge on the notion that L2 learning 
context impacts neural representation and processing. In fact, all expect that more naturalistic and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
377
immersive (input-rich, embodied, and socially engaged) learning will tend to produce more L1-like 
or interconnected neurocognition as well as more robust learning outcomes. Empirical findings gen-
erally support these broad predictions.
The Declarative/Procedural (DP) Model, Dynamic Restructuring Model, Linguistic Relativity, 
and Social L2 (SL2) all make explicit predictions regarding neurocognitive changes that are expected 
to result from more immersion-like experiences (again, in general terms, to the extent that these 
indeed are input-rich, highly immersive learning environments). The models differ, however, both 
with regard to the specific brain structures posited to be involved as well as in how learning context 
is predicted to affect L2 neurocognition. For example, the DP model predicts a shift in reliance on 
memory systems (from declarative-based to procedural-based) for grammatical aspects of L2 pro-
cessing and representation, and predicts that immersive contexts will facilitate reliance on PM. In 
contrast, SL2 does not predict a shift in reliance on memory systems, but rather richer connections 
between L2 and particular non-linguistic networks, including those responsible for perception and 
action—especially in the right hemisphere—which are facilitated by social and multimodal engage-
ment with the L2. The Dynamic Restructuring Model, on the other hand, addresses structural changes 
in the bilingual brain that differ for bilinguals as a result of L2 experiences, including immersion.
Again, the limited evidence to date seems to be in line with the models, and some studies have 
been argued to offer empirical support for more than one model (e.g., Legault et al., 2019, which 
provides compelling evidence for a role for learning context in neural changes, is cited as evidence 
for both the Dynamic Restructuring Model and SL2). It is important to note that these models are 
often informed by different aspects of neurocognitive evidence, and much more research is clearly 
needed.
Future Directions
We see several directions that future research can take in order to better elucidate the role of learning 
context in L2 neurocognition. In terms of connections with theoretical predictions, given the dif-
ferential foci of the models presented, it may not yet be possible (or desirable) to obtain evidence 
to distinguish between models. It may, however, be fruitful for researchers to consider the neural 
networks identified by various models in order to determine whether empirical evidence can address 
claims made by more than one perspective. This practice may also aid in the convergence of models 
of L2 neurocognition and the refining of predictions regarding the role of context of learning on L2 
neurocognition.
In terms of study design, we suggest three considerations to guide future research. First, bilin-
gualism is a dynamic process and thus, longitudinal work is needed. Although difficult to carry out, 
it is critical that L2 neurocognition be examined within populations of learners in a longitudinal 
fashion to advance our understanding of how L2 processing and representation change across time, 
and to ensure that differences seen in cross-sectional research are also borne out in longitudinal 
studies. Longitudinal work will also allow for more holistic examinations of language learners’ 
experiences: Most learners who reach advanced stages of proficiency in their L2 will experience a 
variety of learning contexts, including both instructed and uninstructed settings. Longitudinal work 
can provide insights into relationships between learning context and L2 neurocognition at different 
stages of learning.
Second, individual differences should be considered and accounted for. The extant litera-
ture suggests that cognitive abilities play a differential role in different contexts of learning (e.g., 
Carpenter, 2008; Faretta-Stutenberg & Morgan-Short, 2018; Legault et al., 2019; see also Fromont, 
this volume; Luque & Covey, this volume). Future research that employs methods and analyses that 
can account for individual differences in cognitive abilities will aid in distinguishing between the 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
378
effects of the L2 learning context vs. the effects of individual differences in cognitive abilities on 
neurocognition, and moreover, will contribute to our understanding of the interactions between cog-
nitive abilities and context of learning.
Third, laboratory-based research should be replicated in naturalistic settings. Laboratory research 
provides a critical starting point to investigate the relationship between L2 learning context and L2 
neurocognition, allowing researchers to control factors of interest (e.g., learning condition, amount 
and type of input, prior exposure to the target language, L2 use) and pinpoint analyses targeting 
these factors. However, in order to connect research outcomes with applied questions and to make 
ecologically valid claims about learning contexts, it is important to investigate learning of natural 
languages in a wide variety of settings. As researchers, we must acknowledge the diverse and dynamic 
characteristics of such natural L2 learning settings (e.g., domestic/foreign language classrooms, study 
abroad contexts, uninstructed immersion settings) and recognize that such settings inherently lack 
control. Tools are available, however, to better understand features of the learning context such as 
quality and quantity of L2 contact: for example, some investigators have made use of social network 
analysis to capture richer information about learners’ study-abroad experiences (see e.g., Paradowski 
et al., 2022). Robust sample sizes, diverse populations, longitudinal investigations, and experimental 
designs that include measures of learner interaction with L2 input will all be important in disentan-
gling contributions of context (as opposed to other variables) in order to advance our understanding 
of how different real-world learning contexts influence L2 neurocognition.
Such research endeavors are worthwhile, as deeper understanding of the influence that L2 learning 
context may have on L2 neurocognition can provide important insights into questions about language 
processing and representation, as well as about L2 acquisition.
Further Readings
For a review of language neurocognition broadly, a meta-analysis that synthesizes the extant literature on func-
tional neuroimaging of adult language learning:
Tagarelli, K.M., Shattuck, K.F., Turkeltaub, P.E., Ullman, M.T. (2019) Language learning in the adult brain: A 
neuroanatomical meta-analysis of lexical and grammatical learning. NeuroImage, 193, 178–200. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.02.061
An article that is relevant to several studies and theoretical perspectives on the role of context in L2  
neurocognition:
Legault, J., Fang, S.Y., Lan, Y.J., & Li, P. (2019). Structural brain changes as a function of second language 
vocabulary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2018.09.004
References
Athanasopoulos, P. (2009). Cognitive representation of colour in bilinguals: The case of Greek blues. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12(1), 83–95. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672890800388X
Athanasopoulos, P. & Casaponsa, A. (2020) The Whorfian brain: Neuroscientific approaches to linguistic rela-
tivity. Cognitive Neuropsychology, 37(5–6), 393–412, https://doi.org/10.1080/02643294.2020.1769050
Athanasopoulos, P., Dering, B., Wiggett, A., Kuipers, J.R., & Thierry, G. (2010). Perceptual shift in bilin-
gualism: Brain potentials reveal plasticity in pre-attentive colour perception. Cognition, 116(3), 437–443. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2010.05.016
Boroditsky, L. (2001). Does language shape thought? Mandarin and English speakers’ conceptions of time. 
Cognitive Psychology, 43(1), 1–22. https://doi.org/10.1006/cogp.2001.074
Carpenter, H.S. (2008). A Behavioral and Electrophysiological Investigation of Different Aptitudes for L2 
Grammar in Learners Equated for Proficiency Level [Unpublished doctoral dissertation]. Georgetown 
University. www.proquest.com/dissertations-theses/behavioral-electrophysiological-investigation/docview/
304184923/se-2
Carroll, J.B., & Sapon, S.M. (1959). Modern language aptitude test. Psychological Corporation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Context of Learning in Second Language Neurocognition
379
Casaponsa, A., & Thierry, G. (this volume). Linguistic relativity and second language: How learning a second 
language may reshape cognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
DeLuca, V., Rothman, J., & Pliatsikas, C. (2019). Linguistic immersion and structural effects on the bilin-
gual brain: A longitudinal study. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(5), 1160–1175. https://doi.org/
10.1017/S1366728918000883
Faretta-Stutenberg, M., & Morgan-Short, K. (2018). The interplay of individual differences and context of 
learning in behavioral and neurocognitive second language development. Second Language Research, 34(1), 
67–101. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658316684903
Freunberger, D., Bylund, E., & Abrahamsson, N. (2022). Is it time to reconsider the “gold standard” for 
nativelikeness in ERP studies on grammatical processing in a second language? A critical assessment based 
on qualitative individual differences. Applied Linguistics, 43(3), 433–452. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/
amab058
Fromont, L.A. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Howard, J.H., & Howard, D.V. (1997). Age differences in implicit learning of higher order dependencies in serial 
patterns. Psychology and Aging, 12(4) 634–636. https://doi.org/10.1037//0882-7974.12.4.634
Jeong, H., & Li, P. (this volume). Neurocognition of social learning of second language: How can second lan-
guage be learned as first language? In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Jeong, H., Li, P., Suzuki, W., Sugiura, M., & Kawashima, R. (2021). Neural mechanisms of language learning 
from social contexts. Brain and Language, 212(2021), 104874. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2020.104874
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Wakusawa, K., Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Learning second 
language vocabulary: Neural dissociation of situation-based learning and text-based learning. NeuroImage 
50(2), 802–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.038
Knowlton, B., Squire, L.R., & Gluck, M.A. (1994). Probabilistic classification in amnesia. Learning and 
Memory, 1(2), 106–120.
Korenar, M., & Pliatsikas, C. (this volume). Second language acquisition and neuroplasticity: Insights from the 
dynamic restructuring model. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1999). Philosophy in the flesh: The embodied mind and its challenge to western 
thought. Basic Books.
Legault, J., Fang, S.Y., Lan, Y.J., & Li, P. (2019). Structural brain changes as a function of second language 
vocabulary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2018.09.004
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. Npj Science of Learning, 5, 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
Miller, D., DeLuca, V., Swanson, K., & Rothman, J. (this volume). Neurolinguistics methods and generative 
approaches to second language acquisition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge hand-
book of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Mayer, K.M., Yildiz, I.B., Macedonia, M., & von Kriegstein, K. (2015). Visual and motor cortices differentially 
support the translation of foreign language words. Current Biology, 25(4), 530–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2014.11.068
Meltzoff, A., Kuhl, P., Movellan, J., & Sejnowski, T. (2009). Foundations for a new science of learning. Science, 
325(5938), 284–288. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1175626
Morgan-Short, K., Deng, Z., Brill-Schuetz, K.A., Faretta-Stutenberg, M., Wong, P.C.M., & Wong, F.C.K. (2015). 
A view of the neural representation of second language syntax through artificial language learning under 
implicit conditions. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 37(2), 383–419. https://doi.org/10.1017/S02722
63115000030
Morgan-Short, K., Hamrick, P., & Ullman, M.T. (2022). Individual differences in declarative and procedural 
memory predict second language abilities: A systematic review of the evidence. In S. Li, P. Hiver, & M. Papi 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and individual differences (pp. 67–81). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003270546
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Harriet Wood Bowden and Mandy Faretta-Stutenberg
380
Paradowski, M.B., Cierpich–Kozieł, A., Chen, C., & Ochab, J.K. (2022). How output outweighs input and 
interlocutors matter for study-abroad SLA: Computational social network analysis of learner interactions. 
The Modern Language Journal, 106(4), 694–725. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12811
Perani, D., & Abutalebi, J. (2005). The neural basis of first and second language processing. Current Opinion in 
Neurobiology, 15(2), 202–206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.conb.2005.03.007
Pliatsikas, C. (2020). Understanding structural plasticity in the bilingual brain: The Dynamic Restructuring 
Model. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(2), 459–471. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
9000130
Pliatsikas, C., DeLuca, V., Moschopoulou, E., & Saddy, J.D. (2017). Immersive bilingualism reshapes the core 
of the brain. Brain Structure and Function, 222(4), 1785–1795. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-016-1307-9
Rothman, J., Bayram, F., Cunnings, I., & Gonzalez Alonso, J. (2019). Formal linguistics approaches to adult 
second language acquisition and processing. In J.W. Schwieter & A. Benati (Eds.), The Cambridge handbook 
of language learning (pp. 13–40). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108333603
Rothman, J., & Slabakova, R. (2018). The generative approach to SLA and its place in modern second lan-
guage studies. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 40(2), 417–442. https://doi.org/10.1017/S027226311
7000134
Sabourin, L. (2014). fMRI research on the bilingual brain. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 34, 1–14. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190514000038
Tanner, D., & Van Hell, J.G. (2014). ERPs reveal individual differences in morphosyntactic processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 56, 289–301. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.002
Trahan, D.E. & Larrabee, G.J. (1988). Continuous visual memory test. Psychological Assessment Resources.
Ullman, M.T. (2020). The Declarative/Procedural Model: A neurobiologically-motivated theory of first and 
second language. In B. VanPatten, G.D. Keating, & S. Wulff (Eds.), Theories in second language acquisition 
(pp. 128–161). Routledge.
Ullman, M.T., & Morgan-Short, K. (this volume). How the declarative and procedural memory brain circuits 
support second language: Electrophysiological, neuroimaging, and neurological evidence. In K. Morgan-
Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Verga, L., & Kotz, S.A. (2019). Spatial attention underpins social word learning in the right fronto-parietal net-
work. NeuroImage, 195, 165–173. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.03.071
White, L. (1989). Universal Grammar and Second Language Acquisition. John Benjamins.
White, L. (2003). Second Language Acquisition and Universal Grammar. Cambridge University Press.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf (J. B. Carroll, 
Ed.). MIT Press.
Zappa, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (this volume). Embodied second language processing and learning from a 
neurocognitive perspective. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

381
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-35
28
EMBODIED SECOND LANGUAGE 
PROCESSING AND LEARNING 
FROM A NEUROCOGNITIVE 
PERSPECTIVE
Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
Embodied Semantics
Finding the key to how we associate concepts to linguistic labels is fundamental for our understanding 
of how we acquire a first language and, later in life, learn a second one (see also Tokowicz & 
Tkacikova, this volume). Despite decades of research there is still little consensus on how the human 
brain associates the acoustic signal (e.g., [gɪˈtɑː]) to a specific concept (e.g., GUITAR) (Saussure, 
1916; Shapiro, 2011). There are currently two opposing views, which differ in relation to the type of 
representation that is constructed for conceptual information. According to classic amodal theories, 
cognition is a computational process that creates meaning from perception and for action through the 
manipulation of mental symbols (Fodor, 1998; Landauer & Dumais, 1997). This has been described 
via the “sandwich model” metaphor: sensorimotor systems simply perceive information (input) and 
subsequently produce action (output) (Hurley, 1998). Cognition is sandwiched between the two in 
order to 1) transform perceived input into amodal symbols and link them to relevant information in 
our semantic memory, and 2) perform operations on these symbols for output. In essence, know-
ledge is stored in an isolated semantic memory system, independent from sensorimotor processes. 
Classical amodal theories do not, however, provide an explanation for how we understand the real-
world meaning of these symbols, themselves defined by other symbols.
Challenging some of the fundamental beliefs of traditional cognitive research, embodied theories 
stipulate that conceptual symbols must, at some point, relate to the real world and be grounded in sen-
sorimotor experience (Hauk & Tschentscher, 2013). According to embodied semantics, conceptual 
representations are highly influenced by or even dependent on sensorimotor processes, and linguistic 
forms are grounded in our body’s system of perception and action planning (Barsalou, 1999; see also 
Casaponsa & Thierry, this volume). A key concept behind this is the “correlational learning prin-
ciple”, according to which the co-occurrence of action-perception and meaning results in the common 
firing of neurons, forming neural connections, or distributed neural networks, that subserve semantic 
processing (Pulvermüller, 1999; 2013). In short, “What fires together, wires together” (Hebb, 1949). 
So, for instance, if a child often hears the word “kick” while kicking a ball, lexico-semantic networks 
responsible for processing the word “kick” and those responsible for preparing and executing the 
movement necessary to kick a ball, will become a shared network over time. This could also apply 
to more abstract concepts such as freedom, which are, at least initially, tied to personal experience 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
382
(e.g., a child extracting herself from a playpen and hearing “You’re free!”). This idea stands in stark 
contrast to amodal theories, which claim that representations used for conceptual knowledge and 
language are independent from the body and its experiences. Whereas the embodied vs. disembodied 
debate was originally quite black and white, recent research in this area has become more nuanced 
and focused on when and how language is embodied, as illustrated by many of the studies described 
in this chapter.
Embodied Learning
The role of the body in encoding new linguistic information has been examined from an embodied 
semantics point of view. Similar to the above-described Hebbian theory of associative learning, 
Zwaan and Madden’s (2005) theory of experiential traces posits that when linguistic labels co-occur 
with our interactions with the environment, “experiential traces” are formed and associated with these 
labels. Later, when we encounter the same linguistic labels, these experiential traces are automatic-
ally reactivated. Supporting these theories, behavioral studies conducted in the last 40 odd years have 
amply demonstrated that when new linguistic content is learned with congruent physical movement, 
retention is improved. This is often referred to as the “enactment effect” (Engelkamp & Krumnacker, 
1980; Engelkamp & Zimmer, 1984). As early as 1980, Engelkamp and Krumnacker showed that 
verb phrases (e.g., “shuffle the cards”) were better memorized when representative gestures were 
performed during learning, as opposed to watching someone else perform the action, imagining the 
action, or just listening to the sentence. Encoding new information with action has more recently 
been termed “embodied learning.” Truly embodied learning is thought to involve “self-performed” or 
“self-generated” action that is congruent with learned content (James & Bose, 2011; James & Swain, 
2011; Johnson-Glenberg & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2017). In line with studies showing that math-
ematical (Kontra et al., 2015) and scientific (Johnson-Glenberg & Megowan-Romanowicz, 2017) 
principles are better integrated with physical activity compared to just verbally, language learning has 
also been shown to be enhanced by action and gestures, as we will discuss in sections “Behavioral 
evidence of embodied language learning” and “Neurocognitive evidence of embodied language 
learning.” But first we will review empirical research on embodied semantics more generally, in first 
(L1) and second (L2) language processing.
Embodied Semantics in the L1 and L2
Behavioral Evidence of Embodied Language Processing
With the goal of putting embodied semantics to the test, several behavioral studies have manipulated 
both the timing and compatibility of semantic and motor processes to examine motor-semantic 
interactions. L1 studies combining these two processes have found effects of both facilitation, as 
shown by facilitated movement primed by compatible meaning (Boulenger et al., 2006; de Vega et al., 
2013; Diefenbach et al., 2013; Kaschak & Borreggine, 2008; Zwaan & Taylor, 2006), and inhibition, 
as illustrated by hindered movement when motor and linguistic processes overlap (Buccino et al., 
2005; Boulenger et al., 2006). These interactions have generally been interpreted as evidencing that 
motor and semantic processes share resources. While the inhibition resulting from motor-semantic 
interactions may seem counterintuitive, the Hand-Action-Network Dynamic Language Embodiment 
(HANDLE) model (García & Ibáñez, 2016) holds that when motor and linguistic processes occur 
simultaneously, competition for shared neural resources causes interference.
A few behavioral studies have reported a similar pattern of effects in L2 learners (see Kogan 
et al., 2020 for a review). One such study, reported by Buccino and colleagues (2017), assessed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
383
the modulation of motor responses in proficient bilinguals during the processing of both auditory 
nouns and visual images as a function of the properties of these stimuli. As has been found in L1 
speakers (Marino et al., 2014), L2 speakers’ motor responses (i.e., the time needed to manually indi-
cate whether the stimuli represented real objects) was delayed for graspable objects, whether depicted 
by images or auditory words. Similarly, in line with L1 studies showing that detecting a target is 
facilitated if the location of the target matches the location of a word’s referent (Kaup et al., 2012), 
words referring to a known location (e.g., “star”) facilitated congruent motor responses (upward 
response for “star”) in the L2 (Dudschig et al., 2014). These results imply that physical experiences 
are reactivated during language processing in an L2, as in an L1.
However, embodied effects in an L2 are sometimes attenuated compared to L1 effects and may be 
at least partially contingent on language proficiency. Vukovic (2013) showed that the time needed to 
identify L2 verbs as the correct translation of L1 verb primes was significantly affected by the overlap 
of parts of the body between the L2 verb and the response mode. Manual responses were inhibited 
by L2 verbs involving the hand (e.g., “write”) but not by L2 verbs involving the mouth (e.g., “bite”); 
conversely, L2 verbs involving the mouth but not those involving the hand inhibited oral responses. 
This pattern of inhibition was only found, however, for participants with high L2 proficiency. In line 
with the Hebbian theory of associative learning, the authors suggested that the difference between 
their L2 participants stemmed from the amount of “real-life” usage of the L2, which becomes more 
situated over time, due to being used in varied contexts, and hence leads to the co-activation of extra-
linguistic neural substrates, including the motor cortex. Despite possible differences between L1 
and L2 embodiment as a function of L2 proficiency, motor-semantic effects in both the L1 and the 
L2 have been interpreted as evidencing shared neural resources for motor and semantic processes. 
Nevertheless, behavioral studies are limited in revealing the underlying neurocognitive mechanisms 
that govern embodied processes in language comprehension.
Neurocognitive Evidence of Embodied Language Processing
Neurocognitive studies have provided further support for the concept of embodied semantics by 
showing motor-semantic interactions during native language processing. These studies suggest that 
linguistic processes may employ the same neural substrates as those used in perception and action. 
Given its high spatial resolution, functional magnetic resonance (fMRI; see Kousaie & Klein, this 
volume) can reveal cerebral cortical networks and their organization, which can be key in embodied 
studies, allowing for the observation of networks that underlie semantic and motor processes, and 
their possible overlap. Indeed, in their seminal fMRI study, Hauk and colleagues (2004) showed that, 
during passive reading, action verbs referring to actions performed with the mouth, hand/arm or foot/
leg (e.g., lick, pick or kick) specifically activated overlapping or adjacent areas to those responsible 
for planning and executing actions involving those specific areas of the body. Several other fMRI 
studies have since shown similar somatotopical activation along the motor strip during action verb 
processing (Boulenger et al., 2009; Esopenko et al., 2012; Raposo et al., 2009). These activations 
would suggest that sensory and action language automatically triggers the areas involved in sensorial 
processes or action execution.
A handful of fMRI studies have since compared the neural correlates of L1 and L2 processing. 
Native Dutch speakers and German learners of Dutch performed a lexical decision task in which 
they saw Dutch action and non-action verbs (De Grauwe et al., 2014). Both groups showed greater 
motor and somatosensory area activation for action verbs, independent of cognate status, indicating 
that L2 semantic representations are embodied and cause motor activations. In contrast to this study, 
Zhang and colleagues (2020) found smaller effects in the L1 compared to the L2. L1 and L2 speakers 
of English performed a semantic judgment task while being scanned. L1 speakers outperformed L2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
384
speakers behaviorally when it came to both accuracy and speed of response. Importantly, L1 speakers 
recruited a larger cortical network during the task and showed more strongly engaged connections 
between the “semantic integration hub” (see Patterson & Ralph, 2016, for an explanation of the “hub-
and-spoke” model) and sensorimotor regions than L2 speakers. The authors concluded that weaker 
connections between the semantic integration hub and sensorimotor regions during L2 processing 
indicated that embodiment in the L2 differs from that of the L1.
Despite its spatial accuracy, fMRI is limited as concerns temporal precision (see Kousaie & Klein, 
this volume), making it difficult to pinpoint the processing stage at which these activations occur 
(Hauk & Tschentscher, 2013). Indeed, classical models of language processing often argue that the 
activations described above are post-lexical and do not play a causal role in understanding language 
(Mahon & Caramazza, 2008). Electroencephalography (EEG; see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume) on 
the other hand, offers much higher temporal resolution and can better identify cortical activity that 
contributes to earlier semantic processes, beginning around 150–200 msec after word onset (Amsel 
et al., 2013; Moseley et al., 2013, Pulvermüller et al., 2009). EEG has proven well-suited for meas-
uring early occurring motor-semantic interactions that could be interpreted as showing that motor 
processes influence semantic processes or vice versa, as opposed to motor resonance indexing post-
lexical effects. For example, Boulenger et al. (2008) presented action verbs and nouns sublimin-
ally as participants performed a grasping movement. EEG analyses showed that very early motor 
planning, as shown by the “readiness potential” (indexing motor preparation 200 msec prior to actual 
movement) was disrupted by linguistic processing as a function of word type (reduced motor prep-
aration for action verbs as compared to nouns). This was interpreted as showing interference due to 
motor and semantic processes occurring simultaneously. Similarly, Aravena and colleagues (2010) 
manipulated action and language compatibility to examine the brain markers of the bidirectional 
impact between linguistic and motor processes. Participants processed sentences describing hand 
actions while performing hand actions using a congruent or incongruent hand position (fist or open 
hand). As predicted, not only was motor preparation facilitated by compatible meaning, incompatible 
language/action pairs produced semantic interference, as shown by an N400-like effect. These results 
were interpreted as revealing clear bidirectional impact between language and motor processes, and 
hence shared resources for these processes.
Ibáñez and colleagues (2010) showed that linguistic embodied processes were affected by L2 
proficiency, as illustrated by a difference in semantic effects as a function of motor-semantic con-
gruency. While watching videos combining literal and metaphorical expressions with congruent and 
incongruent gestures, high and low proficiency L2 speakers showed an N400 effect for metaphor-
ical vs. literal sentences. More importantly, this effect was present for congruent vs. incongruent 
gestures, though only for advanced L2 speakers, indicating shared resources between visual and 
linguistic processing in an L2 for high-, but not for low-proficiency speakers. Similarly, Birba and 
colleagues (2020) examined the effect of age of acquisition and proficiency on the recruitment of 
embodied processes during reading. They measured functional connectivity (temporal coincidence) 
using EEG during naturalistic reading of action vs. neutral texts and were particularly interested in 
observing motor-related connectivity across central electrodes and source-space activity modulations 
in motor regions. In the L1, action texts produced greater motor connectivity, which the authors 
associated with participants reenacting sensorimotor experiences described by language. Although 
no effects emerged for L2 speakers (i.e., differences between action and neutral texts), a positive cor-
relation was found between enhanced motor-related connectivity and L2 proficiency during action 
text reading. Similarly, a negative correlation was found between motor-related connectivity and age 
of L2 acquisition. Both studies described above indicate that although non-native speakers can show 
embodied effects in L2 processing, proficiency in the L2 is likely what drives robust and reliable 
effects (Kogan et al., 2020).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
385
Time-frequency analysis has often been used to measure motor activation during language 
processing. Suppression, or desynchronization, of the μ (8-13Hz) and β (13-30Hz) rhythms (see 
Pfurtscheller & Lopes da Silva, 1999 for an explanation) reflects activity in the sensorimotor cortex, 
associated with performing and observing movement (Caetano et al., 2007; Niccolai et al., 2014; 
Pfurtscheller & Lopes da Silva, 1999) as well as motor imagery (Matsumoto et al., 2010). In the L1, 
action-related sentences produced early μ and β Event-Related Desynchronization (ERD), suggesting 
that motor resonance occurs during the retrieval of lexical-semantic information, as opposed to post-
lexical imagery (van Elk et al., 2010). Other L1 studies have contrasted action and abstract lan-
guage and shown greater motor activation for action language (Alemanno et al., 2012; Moreno et al, 
2015). In order to go beyond language comprehension and observe motor-language interactions using 
real action, we combined virtual reality (VR) and EEG in a novel paradigm (Zappa et al., 2019). 
Participants heard action verbs prior to manipulating virtual objects using real and varied actions, 
in an immersive virtual environment. We found μ and β ERD during verb processing, and prior 
to movement proper, for both Go and Nogo trials; μ ERD was greater for Go trials, suggesting an 
involvement of motor processes in language comprehension. Finally, a study comparing bilinguals’ 
L1 and L2 processing during a silent reading task showed significantly greater μ ERD over the left 
hemisphere for action compared to abstract words, around 150 msec post-stimulus, for both languages 
(Vukovic & Shtyrov, 2014). Once again, the early onset of motor activation was interpreted as indi-
cating that it was involved in lexico-semantic access as opposed to post-lexical processes, such as 
mental imagery. Interestingly, in the right hemisphere, effects were greater for the L1 in comparison 
to the L2. While verb-processing induced motor activation in both languages, these results confirm 
that such effects are weaker in the L2 than in the L1.
Generally, both behavioral and neurocognitive studies have found similar embodied effects in 
the L2 and the L1. However, these effects are often attenuated in the L2, and L2 proficiency seems 
to have a significant impact on the extent to which they resemble L1 embodiment. Furthermore, 
a consensus has yet to be reached as to why these differences exist. Numerous possibilities have 
been put forward, such as L2 speakers relying on mechanisms like lexical association or shallow 
translation instead of embodied mechanisms, or less experience leading to a poorer representational 
system in the L2 compared to the L1. The studies above point to the importance of taking profi-
ciency and possibly age of acquisition into account when examining embodied effects in the L2. 
Indeed, similarities between effects across the L1 and the L2 seem to be contingent on these factors, 
which could have important implications for both embodied semantics and the L2 processing lit-
erature (see also Fromont, this volume). As we will further discuss below, one way of gaining 
understanding as regards the relationship between language proficiency and embodied effects (i.e., 
how early on these effects emerge) is to examine these effects from the very beginning of new word 
encoding.
Behavioral Evidence of Embodied Language Learning
Studies using gestures to teach artificial languages and novel vocabulary in the L1 and the L2 have 
provided behavioral evidence that enacted or embodied learning enhances memory performance, in 
line with embodied semantics (Macedonia & Knösche, 2011; Mayer et al., 2015; de Nooijer et al., 
2013; Tellier, 2008). Associations between sensorimotor experiences (e.g., the location of an object) 
during novel word-learning have been shown to be reactivated during retrieval (Öttl et al., 2017). 
Along similar lines, gesture studies have investigated the influence of learning new vocabulary with 
concurrent gestures as a form of embodied learning. Children showed improved semantic encoding 
of L2 words when these were learned with iconic gestures, as compared to images (Tellier, 2008), 
and imitating gestures during encoding and retrieval helped children to learn novel verbs describing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
386
object manipulation (but not abstract words or words describing locomotion; de Nooijer et al., 2013). 
As for adults, performing a gesture congruent to word meaning (or “enactment”) supports learning an 
artificial language or novel words as evidenced by short- and long-term retention, as well as accessi-
bility in memory (Macedonia, 2003; Macedonia & Knösche, 2011).
But is improved encoding for words learned with action simply a result of motor activation, inde-
pendent of their meaning, during learning? A handful of studies have suggested that words learned 
with iconic gestures are better retained, both short- and long-term, compared to those learned with 
meaningless gestures (devoid of any symbolic image related to the word’s semantics; Macedonia 
et al., 2011) or no gestures (García-Gámez & Macizo, 2019). This indicates that the learning advan-
tage associated with iconic gestures does not rely merely on motor processes but also on their semantic 
content, or their motor image. Another frequent question is whether the learning advantage is a result 
of performing gestures or simply seeing them be performed (Macedonia & Knösche, 2011). Indeed, 
it has been argued that inducing a mental simulation of performing an action, or motor imagery, is 
enough to benefit recall (Kormi-Nouri, 2000). Sweller and colleagues (2020) taught participants L2 
verbs verbally compared to a condition where they also saw iconic gestures and one where they saw 
and performed iconic gestures. Short- and long-term recollection was improved for both gesture 
conditions compared to the verbal condition. Interestingly, no differences in learning were found 
between these two gesture conditions, suggesting that observing gestures may sufficiently activate 
the sensorimotor system to benefit learning.
On the other hand, Morett et al. (2018) found that, although viewing gestures did not enhance 
learning, retention was significantly improved when gestures were spontaneously produced, possibly 
due to a more direct involvement of the motor system. This implies that encoding new L2 words 
with action links motor traces to meaning, in line with the Hebbian and experiential trace theories 
(Hebb, 1949; Pulvermüller, 1999; Zwaan & Madden, 2005). The discrepancies between the results 
from Morett et al. (2018) and Sweller et al. (2020) may be due to Sweller et al. asking participants 
to imitate gestures versus Morett et al. observing the effect of spontaneously produced gestures on 
learning. Sweller and colleagues suggested that conscious imitation may have minimized embodied 
benefits. That said, most of the gesture studies showing a learning advantage for performing gestures 
also involved conscious imitation of iconic gestures. Further investigation is necessary to better 
understand whether and in which cases self-performance is a pre-requisite for benefitting from an 
embodied advantage in language learning.
Neurocognitive Evidence of Embodied Language Learning
As is the case with embodied language processing, cortical measures allow for a deeper examin-
ation of the neural correlates of embodied language learning. All in all, there is no clear answer as to 
whether words learned with action directly reactivate sensorimotor information, nor whether a correl-
ation exists between motor activation after embodied word learning and improved learning outcomes. 
Both Fargier et al. (2012) and Bechtold et al. (2018) taught participants novel words in association 
with self-performed actions and then measured motor activation as participants processed these novel 
words post-training. Neither study clearly indicated that learning with actions lead to greater motor 
activation post-training. Recently, Garagnani and colleagues (2021) explored the neural correlates of 
teaching participants to associate images of objects and actions to novel spoken words. Post-training, 
fMRI results showed that listening to novel object words associated with objects activated the pri-
mary visual cortex and secondary and higher visual areas, indicating that associative semantic links 
had been established between the word forms and concepts, and that the meaning of these newly 
learned object words was localized to the primary visual cortex. On the other hand, contrary to the 
authors’ hypothesis, listening to action words did not yield significant activation in the extrastriate 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
387
body area, possibly because action words were not as successfully learned as object words, as shown 
by behavioral results.
fMRI studies that focused on using iconic gestures during novel word encoding resulted in more 
reliable neural evidence of how embodied processes support word encoding. Mayer and colleagues 
(2015) showed that learning novel words was better supported when accompanied by self-performed 
congruent gestures compared to more traditional learning using images, which were more effi-
cient than verbal content alone. Most significantly, fMRI results showed a positive correlation 
between activity in specialized visual and motor brain areas and improved behavioral performance, 
suggesting that learning new linguistic content with accompanying gestures enhances learning by 
creating embodied representations of those words. Along similar lines, Macedonia and colleagues 
(2019) used fMRI to compare the effects of learning new L2 words through written translations of 
either printed or auditory words accompanied or not by the visualization of semantically related 
gestures. As expected, behavioral results showed improved learning for L2 words learned in con-
junction with visualizing gestures. Imaging results revealed more distributed sensorimotor networks 
contingent on the number of modalities to which the participants were exposed during learning; 
this was interpreted as showing deeper encoding. As in Sweller and colleagues’ (2020) behavioral 
study, these results seem to indicate that an embodied learning advantage can result from action 
observation alone. Finally, Macedonia and Mueller (2016) analyzed the BOLD response during the 
recognition of words learned with self-performed iconic gestures in order to identify the networks 
that subserve learning these words. Results showed activation not only of the core language net-
work, but of several premotor, motor and sensorimotor areas during word recognition. Importantly, 
as participants heard and read the novel words, a significant portion of the left premotor cortex, 
which is involved in movement preparation and simulation, became engaged. These activations 
were attributed to the embodied encoding of novel words engaging a complex sensorimotor network 
and improving retention.
In line with Macedonia et al. (2011), Krönke and colleagues (2013) aimed to identify the neural 
correlates of novel object words learned with meaningful gestures, meaningless gestures and without 
gestures (purely verbally). Although no behavioral differences were found between conditions, BOLD 
fMRI data showed deeper semantic encoding for words learned with meaningful gestures (greater 
activation of a semantic network including the left inferior frontal and inferior temporal gyri). This 
supports the idea that semantic meaning of novel object names is grounded in brain networks respon-
sible for processing experiences with such objects. Finally, using event-related potentials (ERPs), 
Kelly and colleagues (2009) examined the impact of gesture on learning L2 verbs. Words learned 
with iconic gestures were better learned compared to observing meaningless gestures, as evidenced 
by a larger late positive complex in bilateral parietal regions, an index of recollection. However, 
no differences were found as concerns the N400 component. This was interpreted as showing that 
embodied learning contributes to recollection of new L2 words, due to deeper memory traces, but not 
to their familiarity, as shown by the lack of differences in the N400 component (associated with famil-
iarity, among other processes). The authors further speculated that rather than facilitating memory for 
newly learned words and making them “superficially familiar”, gestures contribute to a later stage in 
learning that involves meaning retrieval.
Overall, the above-described studies provide evidence that embodied learning, mostly through 
performing or observing iconic gestures, improved retention of novel words. Learning with gestures 
or action also resulted in greater activations in motor, pre-motor and sensorimotor areas while pro-
cessing learned words compared to control conditions. Importantly, embodied learning can rap-
idly engage embodied mechanisms, sometimes even before behavioral effects can be seen (Krönke 
et al., 2013). These results seem to evidence a rapid, robust and lasting implication of sensorimotor 
networks during action verb learning.
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
388
Current Trends and Future Directions: Virtual Reality to Investigate  
Embodied Word Learning
A major challenge faced by embodied language learning studies is that of attaining ecological validity 
while maintaining strict experimental control. According to embodied semantics, physical contexts 
are essential for language processing and learning. Hence the need for experimental protocols that 
are multimodal and as close to real life as possible (Tromp et al., 2018; Peeters, 2019). VR has been 
thought to eliminate the spatial divide between stimulus and participant, which is particularly relevant 
for investigating embodied semantics (Peeters, 2019). L2 learning research has become increasingly 
invested in providing participants with more ecologically valid, multimodal environments where 
they can engage in semi-natural actions, leading to results that can generalize to everyday situations 
(Peeters, 2019; see also Jeong & Li, this volume). The rationale behind this is that the more real-
world and situated a language processing environment is, the more physically involved and natural 
participants will feel and the more similar their behavior will be to real-life processing. VR envir-
onments are both interactive and immersive, making them better suited to engage the sensorimotor 
system, compared to traditional experiments, and elicit real-life responses (Bohil et al., 2011).
In order to explore the neural correlates of L2 learning in virtual environments (VE), Legault 
and colleagues (2019) examined structural brain changes during L2 processing, as a function of L2 
learning context. Participants who learned in a VE condition showed increased structural changes 
in the right inferior parietal lobe (IPL) compared to those who learned via word-word association. 
Furthermore, two positive correlations emerged for the VE group: one between cortical thickness 
of the right IPL and learning performance across training sessions and the other between cortical 
thickness in the right supramarginal gyrus and accuracy in the delayed retention test. Given the 
IPL’s association with embodied cognition networks, VE learning was thought to stimulate the IPL’s 
involvement in interactive learning, which simulates real-life learning (Li & Jeong, 2020). Another 
study used transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) to examine the involvement of motor processes 
in L2 encoding more directly. Vukovic and Shtyrov (2019) tested whether inhibiting the primary 
motor cortex (M1) would hamper action verb learning (see Pandža, this volume, for more details 
about TMS). Participants learned novel labels for object nouns and action verbs via an interactive VR 
computer game where they manually manipulated virtual objects. In line with embodied semantics, 
the authors hypothesized that applying theta-burst TMS to the M1 prior to learning would prevent 
a motor trace from forming for the verb labels, impinging on learning. Indeed, stimulating the hand 
area of the left M1 lead to less successful encoding of novel verbs compared to nouns. This was not 
the case for the two control groups, indicating that motor cortex activity could be involved in the 
early stage of word encoding. Finally, Legault and colleagues (2019) used immersive VR (iVR) (i.e., 
encountering kitchen items in a kitchen) to teach participants Mandarin words and compared this 
to word-word paired association. Only less successful learners showed improved accuracy imme-
diately post-training for words learned in iVR, suggesting these learners might reap more benefits 
from embodied learning in iVR environments than successful learners. iVR allows for a fine-grained 
examination of embodied language learning through the manipulation of naturalistic movement and 
learning environments. In the future, the combination of iVR and neural data would provide a novel 
and highly precise measure of the neural correlates of embodied word learning.
Applications
The above evidence that embodied processes can be involved in both L2 processing and learning 
supports pedagogical approaches that teach semantic content using physical action. For instance, the 
Total Physical Response (TPR) method has children “act out” the meaning of L1 new vocabulary 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
389
words using gestures, facial expressions and props. Along similar lines, the Accelerative Integrative 
Method (AIM) uses drama, singing, dance and creative writing to help children to learn an L2. 
Children embody different characters in plays and sing and act out stories in the L2. Meanwhile, 
iconic gestures are associated to lexical items and syntactic content, building a repertoire of gesture-
verbal couples over time. Methods such these are thought to decrease learners’ inhibition and increase 
their confidence, while engaging and motivating children both physically and emotionally during lan-
guage learning. Examining the neurocognitive effect of embodied L2 learning using these methods 
would likely add to the ecological validity of embodied L2 learning research.
Further Readings
For an in-depth review of both behavioral and neurocognitive L2 studies that consider embodiment:
Monaco, E., Jost, L.B., Gygax, P.M., & Annoni, J.-M. (2019). Embodied Semantics in a Second Language: Critical 
Review and Clinical Implications. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13. www.frontiersin.org/articles/
10.3389/fnhum.2019.00110
Consensus paper that covers a wide range of neurobiological studies that address the role of motor and perceptual 
processes in language representation as indexed by language comprehension and learning:
Bechtold, L., Cosper, S., Malyshevskaya, A., Montefinese, M., Morucci, P., Niccolai, V., Repetto, C., Zappa, A., 
& Shtyrov, Y. (in press). Brain signatures of embodied semantics and language: A consensus paper. Journal 
of Cognition.
Review on the neural correlates of social L2 learning from a social cognitive perspective that also discusses the 
contribution of virtual environments:
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5, 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
Acknowledgments
This work, carried out within the Institut Convergence ILCB (ANR-16-CONV-0002), has benefited from 
support from the French government, managed by the French National Agency for Research (ANR) and 
the Excellence Initiative of Aix-Marseille University (A*MIDEX) as well as the European Union’s H2021-
MSCA-IF-2021 (project: BraSILL, No. 101062671).
References
Alemanno, F., Houdayer, E., Cursi, M., Velikova, S., Tettamanti, M., Comi, G., Cappa, S.F., & Leocani, L. 
(2012). Action-related semantic content and negation polarity modulate motor areas during sentence 
reading: An event-related desynchronization study. Brain Research, 1484, 39–49. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.brainres.2012.09.030
Amsel, B.D., Urbach, T.P., & Kutas, M. (2013). Alive and grasping: stable and rapid semantic access to an object 
category but not object graspability. NeuroImage, 77, 1–13. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.03.058
Aravena, P., Hurtado, E., Riveros, R., Cardona, J.F., Manes, F., & Ibáñez, A. (2010). Applauding with closed 
hands: Neural signature of action-sentence compatibility effects. PloS One, 5(7), e11751. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0011751
Barsalou, L.W. (1999). Perceptual symbol systems. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(4), 577–660. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0140525X99002149
Bechtold, L., Cosper, S., Malyshevskaya, A., Maria Montefinese, M., Morucci, P., Niccolai, V., Repetto, C., 
Zappa, A., & Shtyrov, Y. (in press). Brain signatures of embodied semantics and language: a consensus paper. 
Journal of Cognition.
Bechtold, L., Ghio, M., Lange, J., & Bellebaum, C. (2018). Event-related desynchronization of mu and beta 
oscillations during the processing of novel tool names. Brain and Language, 177–178, 44–55. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2018.01.004
Birba, A., Beltrán, D., Caro, M. M., Trevisan, P., Kogan, B., Sedeño, L., Ibáñez, A., & García, A.M. (2020). Motor-
system dynamics during naturalistic reading of action narratives in first and second language. NeuroImage, 
216. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116820
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
390
Bohil, C.J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F.A. (2011). Virtual reality in neuroscience research and therapy. Nature 
Reviews Neuroscience, 12(12), Article 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3122
Boulenger, V., Silber, B.Y., Roy, A.C., Paulignan, Y., Jeannerod, M., & Nazir, T.A. (2008). Subliminal display of 
action words interferes with motor planning: A combined EEG and kinematic study. Journal of Physiology-
Paris, 102, 130–136. https://doi:10.1016/j.jphysparis.2008.03.015
Boulenger, V., Hauk, O, Pulvermüller, F. (2009) Grasping ideas with the motor system: semantic somatotopy in 
idiom comprehension. Cerebral Cortex, 19, 1905–1914. https://doi:10.1093/cercor/bhn217
Boulenger, V., Roy, A., Paulignan, Y., Deprez, V., Jeannerod, M., & Nazir, T. (2006). Cross-talk between language 
processes and overt motor behavior in the first 200 msec of processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.10.1607
Buccino, G., Marino, B. ., Bulgarelli, C., & Mezzadri, M. (2017). Fluent speakers of a second language process 
graspable nouns expressed in L2 like in their native language. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 1306. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01306
Buccino, G., Riggio, L., Melli, G., Binkofski, F., Gallese, V., & Rizzolatti, G. (2005). Listening to action-related 
sentences modulates the activity of the motor system: A combined TMS and behavioral study. Cognitive 
Brain Research, 24(3), 355–363. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogbrainres.2005.02.020
Caetano, G., Jousmäki, V., & Hari, R. (2007). Actor’s and observer’s primary motor cortices stabilize similarly 
after seen or heard motor actions. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America, 104(21), 9058–9062. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0702453104
Casaponsa, A., & Thierry, G. (this volume). Linguistic relativity and second language: How learning a second 
language may reshape cognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
De Grauwe, S., Willems, R.M., Rueschemeyer, S.-A., Lemhöfer, K., & Schriefers, H. (2014). Embodied language 
in first–and second-language speakers: Neural correlates of processing motor verbs. Neuropsychologia, 56, 
334–349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.02.003
De Nooijer, J.A., Van Gog, T., Paas, F., & Zwaan, R.A. (2013). Effects of imitating gestures during encoding or 
during retrieval of novel verbs on children’s test performance. Acta Psychologica, 144(1), 173–179. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2013.05.013
De Vega, M., Moreno, V., & Castillo, D. (2013). The comprehension of action-related sentences may cause inter-
ference rather than facilitation on matching actions. Psychological Research, 77(1), 20–30. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s00426-011-0356-1
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Diefenbach, C., Rieger, M., Massen, C., & Prinz, W. (2013). Action-Sentence Compatibility: The role of action 
effects and timing. Frontiers in Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00272
Dudschig, C., De la Vega, I., & Kaup, B. (2014). Embodiment and second-language: Automatic activation of 
motor responses during processing spatially associated L2 words and emotion L2 words in a vertical Stroop 
paradigm. Brain and Language, 132, 14–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2014.02.002
Engelkamp, J., & Krumnacker, H. (1980). Image–and motor-processes in the retention of verbal materials. 
Zeitschrift Für Experimentelle Und Angewandte Psychologie, 27(4), 511–533.
Engelkamp, J., & Zimmer, H.D. (1984). Motor programme information as a separable memory unit. Psychological 
Research, 46(3), 283–299. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00308889
Esopenko, C., Gould, L., Cummine, J., Sarty, G.E., Kuhlmann, N., & Borowsky, R. (2012). A neuroanatom-
ical examination of embodied cognition: Semantic generation to action-related stimuli. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2012.00084
Fargier, R., Paulignan, Y., Boulenger, V., Monaghan, P., Reboul, A., & Nazir, T. A. (2012). Learning to associate 
novel words with motor actions: Language-induced motor activity following short training. Cortex, 48(7), 
888–899. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.07.003
Fodor, J.A. (1998). Concepts: Where Cognitive Science Went Wrong. Oxford University
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Garagnani, M., Kirilina, E., & Pulvermüller, F. (2021). Semantic grounding of novel spoken words in the primary 
visual cortex. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 15, 66. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2021.581847
García, A.M., & Ibáñez, A. (2016). A touch with words: Dynamic synergies between manual actions and lan-
guage. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 68, 59–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2016.04.022
García-Gámez, A.B., & Macizo, P. (2019). Learning nouns and verbs in a foreign language: The role of gestures. 
Applied Psycholinguistics, 40(2), 473–507. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716418000656
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
391
Hauk, O., Johnsrude, I., & Pulvermüller, F. (2004). Somatotopic representation of action words in human motor 
and premotor cortex. Neuron, 41(2), 301–307. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0896-6273(03)00838-9
Hauk, O., & Tschentscher, N. (2013). The body of evidence: What can neuroscience tell us about embodied 
semantics? Frontiers in Psychology, 4. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00050
Hebb, D.O. (1949). The organization of behavior; a neuropsychological theory. Wiley.
Hurley, S.L. (1998). Consciousness in Action. Harvard University Press.
Ibáñez, A., Manes, F., Escobar, M., Trujillo, N., Andreucci, P., & Hurtado, E. (2010). Gesture influences the 
processing of figurative language in non-native speakers: ERP evidence. Neuroscience Letters, 471, 48–52. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2010.01.009
James, K.H., & Bose, P. (2011). Self-generated actions during learning objects and sounds create sensori-motor 
systems in the developing brain. Cognition, Brain, Behavior: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 15(4), 485–503.
James, K.H., & Swain, S.N. (2011). Only self-generated actions create sensori-motor systems in the developing 
brain. Developmental Science, 14(4), 673–678. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.01011.x
Jeong, H., & Li, P. (this volume). Neurocognition of social learning of second language: How can second lan-
guage be learned as first language? In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Johnson-Glenberg, M.C., & Megowan-Romanowicz, C. (2017). Embodied science and mixed reality: How ges-
ture and motion capture affect physics education. Cognitive Research: Principles and Implications, 2(1), 24. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s41235-017-0060-9
Kontra, C., Lyons, D.J., Fischer, S.M., & Beilock, S.L. (2015). Physical experience enhances science 
learning: Psychological Science. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615569355
Kaschak, M.P., & Borreggine, K.L. (2008). Temporal dynamics of the action-sentence compatibility effect. 
Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology (2006), 61(6), 883–895. https://doi.org/10.1080/1747021070
1623852
Kaup B., De Filippis, M., Lachmair, M., De la Vega I., & Dudschig, C. (2012). When up-words meet down-
sentences: evidence for word–or sentence-based compatibility effects? Cognitive Processing, 13, S203–207. 
https://doi:10.1007/s10339-012-0453-0
Kelly, S.D., McDevitt, T., & Esch, M. (2009). Brief training with co-speech gesture lends a hand to word learning 
in a foreign language. Language and Cognitive Processes, 24(2), 313–334. https://doi.org/10.1080/016909
60802365567
Kogan, B., Muñoz, E., Ibáñez, A., & García, A.M. (2020). Too late to be grounded? Motor resonance for 
action words acquired after middle childhood. Brain and Cognition, 138, 105509. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2019.105509
Kormi-Nouri, R. (2000). The role of movement and object in action memory: A comparative study between 
blind, blindfolded and sighted subjects. Scandinavian Journal of Psychology, 41(1), 71–76. https://doi.org/
10.1111/1467-9450.00173
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion.. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Krönke, K.-M., Mueller, K., Friederici, A.D., & Obrig, H. (2013). Learning by doing? The effect of gestures 
on implicit retrieval of newly acquired words. Cortex, 49(9), 2553–2568. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cor
tex.2012.11.016
Landauer, T.K., & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to Plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of 
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2), 211–240. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-295X.104.2.211
Legault, J., Zhao, J., Chi, Y.-A., Chen, W., Klippel, A., & Li, P. (2019). Immersive virtual reality as an 
effective tool for second language vocabulary learning. Languages, 4(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.3390/
languages4010013
Legault, J., Fang, S.-Y., Lan, Y.-J., & Li, P. (2019). Structural brain changes as a function of second language 
vocabulary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandc.2018.09.004
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5, 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
Macedonia, M. (2003). Sensorimotor Enhancing of Verbal Memory Through “Voice Movement Icons” During 
Encoding of Foreign Language. PhD thesis, University of Salzburg.
Macedonia, M., & Knösche, T.R. (2011). Body in Mind: How gestures empower foreign language learning. 
Mind, Brain, and Education, 5(4), 196–211. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1751-228X.2011.01129.x
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Ana Zappa and Cheryl Frenck-Mestre
392
Macedonia, M., Müller, K., & Friederici, A.D. (2011). The impact of iconic gestures on foreign language word 
learning and its neural substrate. Human Brain Mapping, 32(6), 982–998. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21084
Macedonia, M., & Mueller, K. (2016). Exploring the neural representation of novel words learned through enact-
ment in a word recognition task. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, 953. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00953
Macedonia, M., Repetto, C., Ischebeck, A., & Mueller, K. (2019). Depth of encoding through observed gestures 
in foreign language word learning. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 33. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00033
Mahon, B.Z., & Caramazza, A. (2008). A critical look at the embodied cognition hypothesis and a new proposal 
for grounding conceptual content. Journal of Physiology-Paris, 102(1), 59–70. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jph
ysparis.2008.03.004
Marino, B.F.M., Sirianni, M., Volta, R.D., Magliocco, F., Silipo, F., Quattrone, A., & Buccino, G. (2014). 
Viewing photos and reading nouns of natural graspable objects similarly modulate motor responses. Frontiers 
in Human Neuroscience, 8. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2014.00968
Matsumoto, J., Fujiwara, T., Takahashi, O., Liu, M., Kimura, A., & Ushiba, J. (2010). Modulation of mu 
rhythm desynchronization during motor imagery by transcranial direct current stimulation. Journal of 
Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 7, 27. https://doi.org/10.1186/1743-0003-7-27
Mayer, K.M., Yildiz, I.B., Macedonia, M., & Von Kriegstein, K. (2015). Visual and motor cortices differentially 
support the translation of foreign language words. Current Biology, 25(4), 530–535. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cub.2014.11.068
Monaco, E., Jost, L.B., Gygax, P.M., & Annoni, J.-M. (2019). Embodied semantics in a second Language: Critical 
review and clinical implications. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13. www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/
fnhum.2019.00110
Moreno, I., De Vega, M., León, I., Bastiaansen, M., Lewis, A.G., & Magyari, L. (2015). Brain dynamics in the 
comprehension of action-related language. A time-frequency analysis of mu rhythms. NeuroImage, 109, 50–
62. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.01.018
Morett, L.M. (2018). In hand and in mind: Effects of gesture production and viewing on second language word 
learning. Applied Psycholinguistics, 39(2), 355–381. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716417000388
Moseley, R.L., Mohr, B., Lombardo, M.V., Baron-Cohen, S., Hauk, O., & Pulvermüller, F. (2013). Brain and 
behavioral correlates of action semantic deficits in autism. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7. https://doi.
org/10.3389/fnhum.2013.00725
Niccolai, V., Klepp, A., Weissler, H., Hoogenboom, N., Schnitzler, A., & Biermann-Ruben, K. (2014). Grasping 
hand verbs: Oscillatory beta and alpha correlates of action-word processing. PloS One, 9(9), e108059. https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108059
Ottle, B., Dudschig, C., & Kaup., B. (2017). Forming associations between language and sensorimotor traces 
during novel word learning. Language and Cognition, 9(1),156–171. http://doi.org/10.1017/langcog.2016.5
Pandža, N. (this volume). Using non-invasive brain stimulation to investigate second language. In K. Morgan-
Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. 
Routledge.
Patterson, K., & Ralph, M. (2016). The Hub-and-Spoke hypothesis of semantic memory. In G. Hickok and S.L. 
Small (Eds.), Neurobiology of language (pp. 765–775). https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-407794-2.00061-4
Peeters, D. (2019). Virtual reality: A game-changing method for the language sciences. Psychonomic Bulletin & 
Review, 26(3), 894–900. http://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-019-01571-3
Pfurtscheller, G., & Lopes da Silva, F.H. (1999). Event-related EEG/MEG synchronization and desyn-
chronization: Basic principles. Clinical Neurophysiology, 110(11), 1842–1857. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S1388-2457(99)00141-8
Pulvermüller, F. (1999). Words in the brain’s language. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 22(2), 253–336. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X9900182X
Pulvermüller, F. (2013). How neurons make meaning: Brain mechanisms for embodied and abstract-symbolic 
semantics. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 17(9), 458–470. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2013.06.004
Pulvermüller, F., Shtyrov, Y., & Hauk, O. (2009). Understanding in an instant: Neurophysiological evidence 
for mechanistic language circuits in the brain. Brain and Language, 110(2), 81–94. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.bandl.2008.12.001
Raposo, A., Moss, H.E., Stamatakis, E.A., & Tyler, L.K. (2009). Modulation of motor and premotor cortices 
by actions, action words and action sentences. Neuropsychologia, 47(2), 388–396. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2008.09.017
Saussure, F. de. (1916). Cours de linguistique générale. Lausanne & Paris.
Shapiro, L. (2011). Embodied cognition. Routledge.
Sweller, N., Shinooka-Phelan, A., & Austin, E. (2020). The effects of observing and producing gestures on 
Japanese word learning. Acta Psychologica, 207, 103079. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2020.103079
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Embodied Second Language Processing and Learning
393
Tellier, M. (2008). The effect of gestures on second language memorisation by young children. Gesture, 8(2), 
219–235. https://doi.org/10.1075/gest.8.2.06tel
Tokowicz, N., & Tkacikova, V. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language lexico-semantic 
system. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisi-
tion and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Tromp, J., Peeters, D., Meyer, A.S., & Hagoort, P. (2018). The combined use of virtual reality and EEG to study 
language processing in naturalistic environments. Behavior Research Methods, 50(2), 862–869. https://doi.
org/10.3758/s13428-017-0911-9
Van Elk, M., Van Schie, H.T., Zwaan, R.A., & Bekkering, H. (2010). The functional role of motor activation in 
language processing: Motor cortical oscillations support lexical-semantic retrieval. NeuroImage, 50(2), 665–
677. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.123
Vukovic, N. (2013). When words get physical: Evidence for proficiency-modulated somatotopic motor interfer-
ence during second language comprehension. Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science 
Society, 35(35). https://escholarship.org/uc/item/0jb6s58t
Vukovic, N., & Shtyrov, Y. (2014). Cortical motor systems are involved in second-language comprehen-
sion: Evidence from rapid mu-rhythm desynchronisation. NeuroImage, 102, 695–703. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.08.039
Vukovic, N., & Shtyrov, Y. (2019). Learning with the wave of the hand: Kinematic and TMS evidence of primary 
motor cortex role in category-specific encoding of word meaning. NeuroImage, 202, 116179. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.116179
Zappa, A., Bolger, D., Pergandi, J.-M., Mallet, P., Dubarry, A.-S., Mestre, D., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2019). 
Motor resonance during linguistic processing as shown by EEG in a naturalistic VR environment. Brain and 
Cognition, 134, 44–57. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandc.2019.05.003
Zhang, X., Yang, J., Wang, R., & Li, P. (2020). A neuroimaging study of semantic representation in first and 
second languages. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(10), 1223–1238. https://doi.org/10.1080/
23273798.2020.1738509
Zwaan, R.A., & Madden, C.J.D. (2005). Embodied sentence comprehension. In D. Pecher & R.A. Zwaan (Eds.), 
Grounding cognition: The role of perception and action in memory, language, and thinking. Cambridge 
University Press.
Zwaan, R.A., & Taylor, L.J. (2006). Seeing, acting, understanding: Motor resonance in language comprehension. 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 135(1), 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1037/0096-3445.135.1.1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

PART VII
Selective Topics in the Neurocognition 
of Second Language
 
 

 

397
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-37
29
THE NEUROCOGNITION 
OF FOREIGN ACCENT 
PERCEPTION
Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
Introduction and Critical Definitions
In our modern interconnected society, cross-cultural and cross-linguistic interactions are increasing. 
Due to this relatively new reality, the globalized population is exposed to foreign-accented speech 
on a near day-to-day basis. Foreign-accented speech is generally defined as linguistic output which 
possesses acoustic features that deviate from the native pronunciation of a given language. This type 
of speech is mainly produced by non-native speakers,1 who face the challenge of learning a new 
language and do not always reach native-like levels of proficiency. As a result, their non-native lan-
guage production may contain imprecisions/errors at various linguistic levels: the way the sounds 
are pronounced (phonology), the words that are chosen (semantics) and the manner in which these 
words are combined into full sentences (syntax). Hence, interacting with foreign-accented speakers 
may lead to challenging conversational settings (e.g., Van Engen et al., 2010), wherein the features 
of the accented speech differ from the expected properties of standard native accent, and processing 
is therefore complexified.
The increasing number of interactions between people from different language backgrounds 
has led the scientific community to investigate the ways in which native listeners manage foreign-
accented errors in order to achieve successful mutual understanding. Some of the current research 
questions examining this topic are the following: How is second-language production different from 
native production? Does the human brain treat linguistic information differently depending on the 
speaker’s linguistic background? Are distinct neural mechanisms needed to analyze native and non-
native speech input? Is the interpretation of a sentence impacted by the identity of the speaker (native 
or non-native) who produced it?
The majority of the classical sentence analysis research on this topic has been accomplished from 
the perspective of the non-native speaker.2 That is, a body of work has asked several questions about 
how second language learners can achieve levels of language proficiency that approximate those of 
native speakers. A more recent set of studies has (mostly) considered the point of view of the native 
listener during cross-linguistic interactions. As this listener will likely be confronted with foreign-
accented speech deviations, they may need to overcome a number of communication challenges, as 
detailed below:
(1)	 Phonological challenges. The listener must correctly detect and identify the series of sounds that 
are part of a foreign-accented spoken word. Depending on the speakers’ proficiency, this may 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
398
be difficult because of the potential gap between the acoustic properties of the foreign-accented 
pronunciations and those of native speakers. This means that listeners must adapt and/or adjust 
their perception to these relatively novel sounds to achieve efficient spoken word recognition of 
the accented input.
(2)	 Lexical-semantic challenges. The listener must combine words together and derive the intended 
semantic representation of the content produced by the foreign-accented speaker. This can prove 
to be challenging as the foreign-accented speaker might not always choose the most fitting word 
to convey the intended message. Hence, the listener must access multiple meanings, hypothesize 
a range of potential interpretations, and select the intended representation for a given foreign-
accented sentence.
(3)	 Syntactic/Morphosyntactic challenges. The listener must keep track of the grammatical depend-
encies within an utterance, and build a coherent and connective syntactic structure. Once again, 
the foreign-accented speaker may be inaccurate in selecting the grammatical features of the 
learned language, resulting in the production of syntactic/morphosyntactic imprecisions. This 
requires the listener to repair the grammatical errors in order to recover the foreign-accented 
speaker’s original message.
This chapter will focus on the last two challenges that listeners may face while interacting with 
foreign-accented speakers: semantic and syntactic imprecisions (for an overview on phonological 
challenges with foreign-accented speech see Flege, 1981; Major, 2001). We first offer a general over-
view of the current theoretical perspectives that account for the differences between the cognitive 
processing of foreign-accented speech and of native-accented speech. We then describe the main 
neuroscientific research findings related to foreign-accented speech perception by considering behav-
ioral, electrophysiological and neuroimaging methods.
Theoretical Perspectives and Approaches
The recent foreign-accented speech literature has mainly referred to three major (non-mutually exclu-
sive) theoretical frameworks in order to explain the manner in which non-native acoustic features 
may impact listeners’ sentence analysis. One theoretical account focuses on cognitive load and 
postulates related differences between foreign- and native-accented speech perception. The second 
theoretical framework highlights the probabilistic/stereotypical knowledge associated with foreign 
speakers and their speech production. Lastly, the final major framework centralizes the cascading 
effects of foreign-accented phonological analysis on higher levels of language processing.
Cognitive Load
Cognitive load refers to the amount of cognitive demands placed on the working memory system 
to perform a cognitive task (Pichora-Fuller et al., 2016). Relatedly, cognitive effort refers to the 
amount of cognitive resources one allocates to perform a task (De Jong, 2010). Cognitive Load 
Theory (Paas et al., 2003) operates on the premise that cognitive resources are limited and that the 
execution of every cognitive task requires different amounts of one’s total cognitive capacities. As the 
required effort increases, the cognitive load of the task is said to be greater. Traditionally, proponents 
of cognitive load theory argue that cognitively demanding tasks with a higher cognitive load will be 
associated with decreases in task performance and information retention.
Although the Cognitive Load Theory is broadly applied in the fields of education and memory, 
it has also been used to explain the decreases in performance associated to foreign-accented speech 
comprehension and retention; the idea is that the analysis of foreign-accented input may require the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
399
allocation of additional cognitive resources. This hypothesis thus predicts longer response times and 
more error-prone answers for non-native as compared to native input, with concomitant differences 
in neural correlates associated with speech perception.
Note that the competing Cognitive Effort Theory (Mayer et al., 2003; Tyler et al., 
1979) hypothesizes that increased cognitive effort associated with higher cognitive load may, 
in fact, lead to amelioration in task performance and information retention. This means that the 
proposed higher cognitive load of foreign-accented speech processing would boost retention and/
or task performance, as a result of the reallocation of attentional resources that are associated with 
cognitive effort.
Probabilistic and Stereotypical Knowledge Associated with Speaker Accent
Early research indicates that listeners quickly incorporate stereotypes about speaker identity (e.g., 
gender, socioeconomic status, education) during real-time language processing (Van Berkum et al., 
2008). Speech accent is one aspect of speaker identity that can trigger different types of expectations 
about the interlocutor (e.g., Vaughn, 2019). This means that listeners may form stereotypes about 
foreign-accented speech characteristics, and adapt their speech perception and sentence analysis 
accordingly.
Where does this accent-related stereotypical knowledge originate from? According to the the-
oretical framework of probabilistic knowledge, this information is learned by listeners, who come 
to identify the recurring patterns within the foreign-accented input. Such probabilistic knowledge 
can be learned as non-native speech often presents non-arbitrary phonological deviations; listeners 
may eventually adapt to these consistent acoustic distortions (Clayards et al., 2008; Kleinschmidt & 
Jaeger, 2015; Theodore & Monto, 2019). Moreover, such probabilistic learning is not restricted to 
the level of phonology; regularities within foreign-accented speech also emerge from higher levels 
of language analysis, such as semantics and syntax. For instance, some morphosyntactic/semantic 
errors are more typical than others in foreign-accented speech (e.g., Franceschina, 2001; Gosselin 
et al., 2021) and thus follow a learnable distribution. Altogether, this framework posits that listeners 
can detect and learn the distribution of characteristics within accented speech, leading to the eventual 
development of probabilistic/stereotypical ideas about such input. This higher-level knowledge can 
later be exploited during cross-linguistic interactions.
One prediction this theoretical model brings forth is the potential modulating role of accent famil-
iarity. If foreign-accented processing is influenced by listeners’ own probabilistic knowledge about 
accented speech, the degree of exposure to a certain accent should influence behavioral and neural 
correlates of utterance analysis. A second prediction is that of error typicality. If listeners base their 
processing of foreign-accented speech on learned frequency distributions, behavioral, and neural 
correlates of foreign accent perception should differ between typical and atypical foreign-accented 
speech productions. This is because typical imprecisions would adhere to the learned probabil-
istic knowledge, while outlier (atypical) imprecisions would not (see Section Electrophysiological 
findings: Syntax for further discussion).
Cascading Effects of Phonological Analysis
One final key theoretical perspective mainly focuses on the phonological challenges associated to 
foreign-accented speech processing. Concretely, what we perceive as a foreign accent is merely 
a series of physical acoustic divergences relative to “standard” native phonological categories. 
This means that native listeners attending to non-native utterances must manage the consistent 
gap between their underlying phonological representations and the foreign-accented input being 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
400
perceived. Such phonological challenges presumably impair single-word recognition, which, in 
turn, may cascade towards issues affecting higher levels of language comprehension (e.g., semantics 
and syntax).
It has been hypothesized that the pre-lexical phase of spoken word recognition involves a nor-
malization process designed to “filter out” speaker-specific acoustic divergences (i.e., accent of the 
speaker; Goslin et al., 2012). For foreign-accented speech processing, the normalization process aims 
to minimize the gap between the native listener’s underlying phonological representations and the 
acoustic distortions produced by the non-native speaker (Goslin et al., 2012; Sumner & Tilsen, 2011).
Although experimental evidence is still scarce, the degree of normalization seems to vary as a 
function of the sentential context and the type of accent. For instance, listeners appear to be more 
successful in normalizing familiar and/or native-like accents, at least in the case of single-word recog-
nition (Goslin et al., 2012; Thomas et al., 2022). However, for the comprehension of full utterances, 
most studies show that foreign-accented sentence processing is accompanied by a minimal (or even 
absent) normalization phase. Consequently, cascading accent-related processing issues are observed 
during later stages of word analysis and sentence comprehension (semantics and syntax; Goslin et al., 
2012; Gosselin et al., 2021). Hence, in most natural conversational contexts (that typically consist of 
full sentences, not isolated words), foreign-accented speech characteristics cannot be easily filtered 
out during an early phase of phonological analysis; cascading effects are thus detected within higher 
order cognitive processes.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
In this section, we provide a brief overview of the behavioral, electrophysiological and neuroimaging 
findings regarding potential accent-related differences in speech perception, specifically focusing on 
listeners’ semantic and syntactic analysis of foreign-accented speech.
Nearly all studies reviewed here have adopted a violation paradigm, wherein two main conditions 
are compared: a (semantically, grammatically) incorrect condition and a condition that is the canon-
ical (semantically, grammatically correct) version of the violated sentence. The logic behind this 
approach is the following: behavioral/neural changes observed for the incorrect compared to correct 
input reflects how the brain processes the specific linguistic feature that was violated. Researchers 
have utilized the violation paradigm in foreign-accented studies to examine whether listeners change 
the way they process (and/or repair) linguistic information depending on the speaker’s accent. These 
experimental designs also allow researchers to test the predictions of the three accented-speech the-
oretical frameworks described above.
Behavioral Findings
Accuracy and reaction time measures have been collected to estimate the degree of difficulty listeners 
encounter when processing native- and foreign-accented sentences.
Behavioral Findings: Semantics
A body of work has indicated that native listeners’ comprehension may be impeded by the presence of 
a foreign accent: accented input typically elicits longer reaction times during semantic tasks, such as 
truth evaluation judgements (Adank, Davis, et al., 2012; Adank et al., 2009; Munro & Derwing, 1995). 
Nonetheless, comprehension accuracy is generally equivalent for native and non-native accents (Grey 
& van Hell, 2017; Foucart & Hartsuiker, 2021). Thus, despite requiring longer processing times, 
listeners appear to reach accurate semantic comprehension of foreign-accented speech. The presence 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
401
of an informative or semantically constraining sentential context (i.e., top-down information) appears 
to be particularly helpful during foreign-accented semantic processing (Behrman & Akhund, 2013; 
Dijkgraaf et al., 2017; Schmid & Yeni-Komshian, 1999), possibly since it supplements the bottom-up 
information (i.e., potentially deviated acoustic input) that must be assimilated to the intended phono-
logical target by the listener (Goslin et al., 2012).
Foreign accents can also impact metalinguistic levels of semantic processing, such as feelings of 
truthfulness or credibility according to speaker identity. In general, non-native speech is rated as less 
credible by native listeners and non-native listeners alike (Hanzlíková & Skarnitzl, 2017; Podlipský 
et al., 2016). However, foreign-accented speakers are less likely to be penalized for doubtful vocal 
tones (Jiang et al., 2020), speech disfluencies (Bosker et al., 2014), or content omissions (Fairchild 
& Papafragou, 2018).
Behavioral Findings: Syntax
Sentence studies show that native listeners can accurately identify grammatical errors that are foreign-
accented, though they are slightly less successful in explicit error detection tasks for foreign-accented 
compared to native-accented input (Caffarra & Martin, 2019; Hanulíková et al., 2012). Nonetheless, 
listeners show excellent comprehension of native- and foreign-accented sentences, also when subtler 
morphosyntactic errors are examined (Caffarra & Martin, 2019; Grey & van Hell, 2017; Hanulíková 
et al., 2012). These errors do not seem to hinder the overall comprehension of the speaker’s intended 
message, as listeners can accurately respond to comprehension questions for content produced in both 
types of accents.
Overall, accent-related differences have occasionally been reported at the behavioral level, for 
both syntactic and semantic processing. The direction of these effects is consistent with the Cognitive 
Load Theory (e.g., reduced accuracy/longer response times for foreign-accented compared to native-
accented speech), rather than the Cognitive Effort Theory. However, it must be noted that behavioral 
accent effects are usually small, and native listeners generally attain excellent levels of non-native 
speech perception (assuming that speech intelligibility is medium-to-high). Overall, the behavioral 
literature suggests that native listeners can accurately understand speech in both native and foreign 
accents.
Electrophysiological Findings
Electrophysiology enables researchers to isolate and examine the neural correlates associated with 
the processing of a single word, even when it is presented in a complex sequence of constituents. For 
this reason, electroencephalography (EEG) is a valuable tool and has been widely used to study how 
the brain reacts to different types of sentential constituents. EEG records the continuous fluctuations 
in neural electrophysiological activity, via electrodes placed on the surface of the participant’s scalp. 
The EEG signal, time-locked to the presentation of a critical linguistic event (e.g., the onset of a 
spoken word produced in an utterance), is segmented and averaged, resulting in interpretable event-
related potentials (ERPs; see Dickson and Pelzl, this volume, for details). Table 29.1 lists the ERP 
correlates of language processing that will be discussed in the next sections.
Electrophysiological Findings: Semantics
Table 29.2 evinces the wide variation in findings for the interface of semantics. Indeed, the current 
literature indicates that 1) speaker accent has no influence on semantic processing (accent-independent  
N400s, Grey et al., 2019; Hanulíková et al., 2012; Holt et al., 2018); 2) semantic errors are not  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

402
Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
processed as errors in non-native speech (absent/reduced N400 for the foreign accent, Abdollahi  
et al., 2021; Foucart & Hartsuiker, 2021; Goslin et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2020); or 3) semantic errors  
incur increased lexical-semantic integration demands (increased N400 for the foreign accent, Jiang  
et al., 2020; Romero-Rivas et al., 2015; Strauber et al., 2021). Interestingly, findings 2) and 3) are  
not necessarily oppositional: both may be driven by cognitively more effortful processing of foreign- 
accented than of native-accented utterances. That is, while an increased N400 response can indicate  
that semantic processing was costly, the lack of an N400 may indicate that processing was so costly  
that the listener did not have sufficient cognitive resources to complete the semantic analysis.
It must be noted that the literature contains several methodological divergences, particularly 
regarding the types of semantic manipulations. In some cases, the critical manipulation may result 
in an outright semantic violation, wherein a target word from a canonical sentence is replaced with a 
word that is ostensibly nonsensical for the context (e.g., “Kaitlyn traveled across the ocean in a plane/
*cactus to attend the conference.”; Grey & van Hell, 2017). In other cases, the target word is replaced 
with a semantically plausible but less expected (i.e., anomalous: SA) counterpart (e.g., “During the 
argument Paul was furious so he hit below the belt/stomach and told the truth.”; Kędzierska, 2019). 
Table 29.1  Electrophysiological Correlates of Spoken Sentence Analysis Relevant for Accented Speech 
Literature
ERPs
Time window
Polarity
Distribution
Interpretation and study design
N400
300–500
Negative
Centro-posterior
The N400 has been related to aspects 
of lexical-semantic access and 
analysis, and was initially observed 
in response to semantic violations. 
The N400 effect typically entails 
a greater negative amplitude for 
violations compared to correct 
controls (Kutas & Federmeier, 2011).
Nref
>300
Negative
Frontal
The Nref has been related to pronoun 
resolution and referential processing 
difficulty when it comes to retrieving 
the proper antecedent (Nieuwland 
& Van Berkum, 2006). It shows 
an increased negativity in case of 
pronoun error.
P600
500–800
Positive
Centro-posterior
The P600 has been observed in 
response to a wide range of syntactic 
and semantic violations (e.g., word 
order violations, grammatical 
agreement violations, but also 
prediction errors). It is thought to 
be related to controlled processes of 
repair and analysis, usually carried 
out to overcome errors and achieve 
a broad comprehension of sentence 
meaning. The P600 effect consists of 
an increased positive amplitude for 
the violated condition as compared 
to the correct one (Osterhout & 
Mobley, 1995).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
403
Table 29.2  ERP Findings on Foreign-accented Semantic Processing
Paper
Language studied
Accents
Manipulation
N vs. F error effect
Abdollahi et al., 
2021
English
(older adults tested)
N: American English
F: Chinese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
N400 for N but not for F
Foucart & 
Hartsuiker, 2021*
Dutch
N: Flemish Dutch
F: Czech
UI, WKV
N400 for N but not for F
Goslin et al., 2012
English
N: English (South-West England)
R: English (South Wales, Yorkshire)
F: Italian, Polish
SA (low-cloze)
Reduced N400 for F compared to N and 
R; similar N400 for N and R
Gosselin et al., 2021
Spanish
N: Spanish (Spain)
F: Chinese
SSV (single phoneme 
replacement)
Similar early N400 for F and N; late 
N400 for F but not N
Grey & van Hell, 
2017
English
N: American English
F: Chinese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Long-lasting N400 for N and late N400 
for F
Grey et al.,  
2019
English (Dutch–English 
bilinguals tested)
N: American English
F: Chinese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Similar delayed N400 for N and F
Grey et al., 2020*
English
N: American English
F: Chinese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Long-lasting N400 for N and late N400 
for F
Hanulíková et al., 
2012
Dutch
N: Dutch
F: Turkish
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Similar N400 for F and N
Holt et al.,  
2018
English
N: Australian English
F: Chinese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Similar N400 for F and N; larger N400 
for accent-familiar participants
Jiang et al., 2020
English
N: Canadian English
R: Australian English
F: French (Québec)
Vocal confidence 
(confident vs. 
doubtful tone)
Doubtful tone generates N400 and late 
negativity for F and R but not N
Kędzierska, 2019
Polish
N: Polish
F: Ukrainian
SA (low-cloze)
N400-like response for N but not F
Romero-Rivas et al., 
2015
Spanish
N: Spanish (Catalonia)
F: French, Greek, Italian, Japanese
OSV (lexical 
replacement)
Larger and more widely-spread N400 
for F than N
Strauber et al., 2021
English
N: American English
F: Indian (Hindi)
SA (low-cloze)
Larger N400 for N than for F
Xu et al., 2020*
German
N: German
F: Chinese
SSV (slips of the 
tongue)
N400 for N but not for F
Notes: N: native accent; R: regional accent; F: foreign accent; OSV: outright semantic violations; SSV: subtle semantic violations; SA: semantic anomaly; UI: unknown 
information (e.g., “Usually the number of strings of a harp is forty-six.); WKV: world knowledge violations (e.g., “Usually the number of strings of a guitar is forty-
six.”). *participants see a face cue according to accent.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

404
Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
Other violations are more subtle. For example, a semantic anomaly may be engendered by a single-
phoneme substitution (e.g., Se escapo﻿́ el perro/*pelo de tu ti﻿́a. “Your aunt’s dog/*hair escaped.”; 
Gosselin et al., 2021); the error thus resembles the contextually appropriate word. It is important to 
consider these methodological differences, as there is reason to believe that outright violations, subtle 
violations, and semantic abnormalities trigger quantitatively and qualitatively distinct ERP effects in 
foreign-accented speech, just like in native-accented speech (Kutas & Hillyard, 1980).
These stimuli-related differences are also meaningful under the guise of theoretical frameworks 
for accented-speech processing, such as the Cognitive Load Theory. Crucially, the various types 
of semantic manipulations also likely differ in terms of required cognitive effort, with outright 
semantic violations being more effortful than semantic anomalies or subtle semantic violations. 
This point is critical, as cognitive resources are limited. If a listener has depleted their resources 
while processing an outright semantic violation, they may fail to exhibit accent-related differences 
(Abdollahi et al., 2021; Grey et al., 2019; Holt et al., 2018; Romero-Rivas et al., 2015) or only show 
a delayed effort for foreign-accented speech (Grey et al., 2020; Grey & van Hell, 2017). However, 
when the semantic manipulation requires less resources, listeners may exhibit accent effects in 
favor of foreign-accented speech (possibly in line with Cognitive Effort Theory: Goslin et al., 2012; 
Kędzierska, 2019; Strauber et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2020; though see Gosselin et al., 2021). In any 
case, that results vary with semantic manipulations used in experiments aligns with the Cognitive 
Load framework.
The variety of results in the accented-speech literature may also support the theoretical framework 
of probabilistic and stereotypical knowledge. Importantly, the different types of errors/manipulations 
used in semantic processing studies presumably vary in terms of frequency of attestation in foreign-
accented speech. Violations resulting from slips of the tongue or phonemic mispronunciations are 
likely more frequent than violations resulting from whole-word substitutions. As such, while a 
listener may grasp the probabilistic distribution of specific slips-of-the-tongue in a given accent, 
foreign-accented outright semantic violations might not follow any learnable distribution; this may 
partially explain why studies utilizing outright semantic violations tend to show delayed or absent 
accent effects, while experiments utilizing more frequent manipulations often exhibit effects in favor 
of accented speech (i.e., reduced N400 for foreign-accented speech). Curiously, however, at least one 
study shows that native listeners with more exposure to the accent under study (i.e., accent-familiar 
participants) exhibited the largest accent effects (Holt et al., 2018). This finding does not support 
the probabilistic knowledge framework; though accent-familiar participants presumably possess 
the most robust probabilistic knowledge, they exhibit the largest N400 effects for foreign-accented 
semantic violations.
Altogether, the current literature does not allow us to settle on a particular theoretical framework 
for foreign-accented semantic processing. Both the Cognitive Load and probabilistic knowledge 
perspectives are at least partially bolstered. The literature also shows cascading effects of phono-
logical analysis on higher-levels of foreign-accented speech processing: the accent-related N400 
modulation observed in most studies indicates quite clearly that the level of phonology can spill 
over to the semantic interface. Future studies should “embrace the complexity of the results” (Bak, 
2016: 752) to highlight potential patterns and develop testable hypotheses.
Electrophysiological Findings: Syntax
Table 29.3 consistently shows that listeners can change how they analyze grammatical violations  
depending on speaker identity (i.e., the accent; Caffarra & Martin, 2019; Gosselin et al., 2021; Grey  
et al., 2019, 2020; Hanulíková et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2020). This seems particularly true for grammat-
ical errors that are frequently produced by foreign-accented speakers (Caffarra & Martin, 2019;  
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
405
Hanulíková et al., 2012): native listeners can show a tolerance to typical foreign-accented errors, and  
therefore withhold from repairing such violations.
Overall, these findings support the theory that listeners exploit stereotypical/probabilistic know-
ledge associated with speaker identity in order to parse non-native input. For instance, while speaking 
Spanish, native speakers of English are more likely to produce gender errors than other morpho-
logical slips (e.g., Franceschina, 2001), given that their L1 is devoid of grammatical gender. This 
is known by native Spanish participants (either through direct exposure or stereotypical knowledge 
about the accent), who believe they are most likely to encounter gender errors from English-accented 
Spanish speakers (Caffarra & Martin, 2019). As a consequence of such learned awareness, listeners 
appear to adjust the way they process foreign-accented errors (e.g., by reducing their attempts to 
repair typical, expected errors and thus generating diminished P600 effects for such violations). In 
brief, the literature supports the idea that listeners’ higher-level knowledge related to speaker identity 
impacts their real-time (morpho)syntactic analysis.
Moreover, the most consistently reported accent-related effects in the syntactic domain consist of 
a reduction (instead of an increase) of syntactic violation ERP effects (e.g. P600) in foreign-accented 
Table 29.3  ERP Findings on Foreign-accented Syntactic Processing
Paper
Language 
studied
Accents
Error types
N vs F error effect
Abdollahi et al., 
2021
English (older 
adults tested)
N: American English
F: Chinese
S (pronoun 
violations)
Similar P600 for 
F and N
Caffarra & 
Martin, 2019
Spanish
N: Spanish
F: English
Typical and 
atypical MF 
(gender and 
number errors)
Reduced P600 for 
F in typical MF
Gosselin et al. in 
revision
Spanish
(English–
Spanish 
bilinguals 
tested)
N: Spanish
F: English
Typical and 
atypical MF 
(gender and 
number errors)
Similar P600 for 
F and N
Grey & van 
Hell, 2017
English
N: American English
F: Chinese
S (pronoun 
violations)
Nref for N and 
N400-like for 
F (only for 
listeners that 
recognized F)
Grey et al., 2019
English
(Dutch-English 
bilinguals 
tested)
N: American English
F: Chinese
S (pronoun 
violations)
Nref for N and 
no clear effect 
for F
Grey et al., 
2020*
English
N: American English
F: Chinese
S (pronoun 
violations)
Nref-P600 for N 
and P600 for F
Hanulíková 
et al., 2012
Dutch
N: Dutch
F: Turkish
MF (gender 
errors)
Reduced P600 
for F
Xu et al., 2020*
German
N: German
F: Chinese
MF (gender, 
number, and 
case errors)
P600 for N but 
not for F
Note: N: native accent; F: foreign accent; MF: morphosyntactic errors; S: syntactic errors; *participants see a 
face cue according to accent.
 

Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
406
speech (Caffarra & Martin, 2019; Grey et al., 2019, 2020; Hanulíková et al., 2012; Xu et al., 2020). 
This frequently observed ERP finding has, at times, been accompanied by a slight decrease of behav-
ioral performances for the foreign as compared to the native accent (e.g., reduction of grammatical 
error detection accuracy: Caffarra & Martin, 2019; Hanulíková et al., 2012). This trend is compat-
ible with the Cognitive Load Theory, which predicts that native listeners expend more cognitive 
resources when processing foreign-accented speech, as reflected via modulations of brain responses 
and decreases in task performance. However, the definite source of increased cognitive load is still 
unclear when it comes to foreign-accented speech parsing. One possible explanation, in line with 
the framework of cascading phonological effects, is that listeners experience difficulties in the early 
stages of foreign-accented phonological mapping, and that these issues bear consequences on higher 
levels of sentence analysis.
Finally, recent studies highlight the relevance of other demographic and language features that 
might affect how listeners manage foreign-accented grammatical errors. Some novel explorations 
include examining the impact of the native listeners’ age (i.e., older adults, Abdollahi et al., 2021) or 
shared language background (i.e., non-native listeners attending to non-native input, Grey et al., 2019; 
Gosselin et al., 2022). Additional research is needed to better understand the aspects of listeners’ and 
speakers’ profiles that hold a primary role in spoken sentence parsing.
Neuroimaging Findings
A relatively recent tool that has allowed neuroscientists to spatially localize brain activity is func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI; for see Kousaie & Klein, this volume, for details). Up  
to this point, very few studies have utilized neuroimaging techniques to investigate potential cog-
nitive differences between native- and foreign-accented speech processing. Instead of adopting a  
violation paradigm, most of these studies simply examined overall accent effects by comparing  
participants’ neuroimages while they listened to different types of accented speech (see Table 29.4). 
Overall, these studies report greater brain activity for foreign-accented utterances, specifically in  
brain regions associated with speech perception (i.e. temporal areas), and controlled cognitive  
processes (i.e., frontal areas, Adank, Davis, et al., 2012; Adank, Noordzij, et al., 2012; Yi et al.,  
2014; see also Blanco-Elorrieta et al., 2021 for further evidence on single word presentation).  
Such findings, together with concomitant lower performances for foreign accents (Adank et al.,  
2012), support the Cognitive Load Theory by demonstrating that foreign-accented speech requires  
greater cognitive resources during auditory processing and increased reliance on cognitive control  
mechanisms.
Table 29.4  fMRI Findings on Foreign-accented Speech Processing
Paper
Language 
studied
Accents
N vs F
Adank, Davis, et al., 2012
Dutch
N: Dutch
F: unfamiliar/novel
Higher activity for F in 
left STC
Adank, Noordzij, et al., 
2012
Dutch
N: Dutch
F: unfamiliar/novel
Higher activity for F in left 
STC, PT, IFG
Yi et al., 2014
English
N: English
F: Korean
Higher activity for F in 
primary auditory cortex 
and IFG
Note: N: Native, F: Foreign. IFG: inferior frontal gyri; STC: superior temporal cortex; PT: planum temporale; 
IFG: inferior frontal gyrus.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
407
Pedagogical and/or Clinical Implications
The study of foreign-accented speech perception carries several positive real-world applications and 
can improve the quality of intercultural exchanges in our highly globalized lives. Below, we discuss 
potential implications for education, social services, and technological advancements.
First, characterizing how interlocutors manage and understand non-native productions may serve 
as an educational tool for second-language speakers and native listeners alike. On one hand, empir-
ical studies may help identify foreign-accented errors/imprecisions that negatively impact mutual 
understanding. This knowledge is particularly valuable for second-language teaching programs. If 
mutual understanding is taken as the ultimate goal, instructors can emphasize the aspects of second-
language speaking that are most crucial to efficient communication. That is, second-language training 
programs can use science-based evidence to increase learners’ awareness of common pitfalls in cross-
cultural conversations, thus focusing on avoiding those errors that are less likely to be “forgiven” 
by listeners. Foreign-accented perception research can also benefit people that often interact with 
second language learners by identifying the most common imprecisions produced by non-native 
speakers with a given accent. Sharing these findings with the globalized population may result in 
native listeners’ increased awareness about frequent second-language errors, thereby bolstering more 
efficient cross-cultural communication.
Next, knowledge about foreign-accent perception is extremely useful in situations involving 
fundamental social services, wherein it is crucial that the intended meaning of a foreign-accented 
utterance is recovered prior to decision-making. For instance, awareness about second-language lin-
guistic imprecisions is essential in legal cases that require a reliable and efficient examination of 
foreigners’ deposition. This type of knowledge is also extremely valuable to public servants, who 
may need to quickly interpret foreign-accented utterances in potentially urgent or high-stakes situ-
ations (e.g., job interviews, hospitals, police reports; Lippi-Green, 1994, 2012).
Finally, the knowledge generated by this research is also valuable for a range of technological 
applications. Given that many individuals chose to live and work in their non-native language, day-
to-day and industry-related technological devices should be fit to manage foreign-accented speech. 
For instance, automatic speech recognition systems can be more precise if they include accent-
dependent speech distributions among their priors. Technological devices that predict speech or text 
might improve their accuracy if they are programmed to automatically correct the most common 
errors produced by certain groups of speakers. This critical information is yielded by studies exam-
ining foreign-accented speech processing.
Current Trends and Future Directions
Foreign-accented speech perception/processing has appreciated an upsurge of scientific interest and 
concomitant publications, but there are still many questions that are still relatively unexplored and 
merit further investigation:
	-
Can accent exposure reduce the processing gap between foreign-accented and native-accented 
sentence analysis?
	-
How is the processing of outright syntactic violation (e.g., word category violations, word order 
errors) affected by accent? Are there different accent-dependent effects for morphosyntactic errors 
and outright syntactic violations?
	-
Are there foreign-accented errors that cannot be overlooked by native listeners even after inten-
sive exposure?
	-
Are there conversational settings in which the predictions of the Cognitive Effort Theory hold true?
 
 
 
 

Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
408
	-
During semantic and syntactic analysis, do foreign and native accents recruit different brain areas? 
Or do they recruit similar brain areas but elicit quantitatively different brain responses?
	-
How is functional connectivity between brain regions affected by speech accent? Are there accent-
dependent functional neural networks?
To conclude, cross-linguistic social interactions represent a challenging conversational setting 
wherein listeners must put in place several adaptive brain responses in order to reach an accurate 
understanding of the conveyed message. During interactions with a foreign-accented speaker, the 
human brain can 1) flexibly change the amount of cognitive resources allocated to utterance compre-
hension; 2) rapidly adapt its processing according to stereotypical and probabilistic information about 
the interlocutor’s identity; and 3) deal with phonological challenges that might result into cascading 
effects on higher levels of language analysis.
Notes
1	 Note that our definition of foreign-accented speech does not include regional variations of native accent 
(i.e., regional-accented speech). For a discussion about the possible relationship between regional and for-
eign accent perception and related theoretical accounts, see Clarke and Garrett (2004) and Floccia et al. 
(2006).
2	 However, the literature that focused on the phonological analysis of speech has widely taken into account the 
perspective of native listeners (Baese-Berk et al., 2020; Bent & Baese-Berk, 2021).
Further Readings
A paper describing possible sources of a strong foreign accent:
Piske, T., MacKay, I.R.A., & Flege, J.E. (2001). Factors affecting degree of foreign accent in an L2: a review. 
Journal of Phonetics, 29(2), 191–215. https://doi.org/10.1006/jpho.2001.0134
A paper on the social consequences of having a foreign accent:
Gluszek, A., & Dovidio, J.F. (2010). The way they speak: a social psychological perspective on the stigma of 
nonnative accents in communication. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 14(2), 214–237. https://doi.
org/10.1177/1088868309359288
A paper that relates foreign-accented speech research to the topic of replicability in science:
Strauber, C.B., Ali, L.R., Fujioka, T., Thille, C., & McCandliss, B.D. (2021). Replicability of neural responses to 
speech accent is driven by study design and analytical parameters. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 4777. htps://doi.
org/10.1038/s41598-021-82782-4
Acknowledgments
SC was funded by the Programma Giovani Ricercatori “Rita Levi Montalcini”, FARDIPARTIMENTO2022, 
and FAR Mission Oriented (FAR2022INTERM_O_UNIM) granted by the Italian Ministry of University and 
Research (MUR). CM was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness [PID2020-
113926GB-I00] and the Basque Government [PIBA18-29] and funding from the European Research Council 
(ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant Agreement 
No: 819093).
References
Abdollahi, F., Grey, S., & Van Hell, J.G. (2021). Foreign-accented sentence comprehension is challenging for 
older adults: ERP evidence from semantic and grammar processing. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 60, 101023. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2021.101023
Adank, P., Davis, M.H., & Hagoort, P. (2012). Neural dissociation in processing noise and accent in spoken 
language comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 50(1), 77–84. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsycholo
gia.2011.10.024
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
409
Adank, P., Evans, B.G., Stuart-Smith, J., & Scott, S.K. (2009). Comprehension of familiar and unfamiliar native 
accents under adverse listening conditions. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and 
Performance, 35(2), 520–529. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0013552
Adank, P., Noordzij, M.L., & Hagoort, P. (2012). The role of planum temporale in processing accent vari-
ation in spoken language comprehension. Human Brain Mapping, 33(2), 360–372. https://doi.org/10.1002/
hbm.21218
Baese-Berk, M.M., McLaughlin, D.J., & McGowan, K.B. (2020). Perception of non-native speech. Linguistics 
Compass, 14(7), e12375. https://doi.org/10.1111/lnc3.12375
Bak, T.H. (2016). Cooking pasta in La Paz: Bilingualism, bias and the replication crisis. Linguistic Approaches 
to Bilingualism, 6(5), 699–717. https://doi.org/10.1075/sibil.57.06bak
Behrman, A., & Akhund, A. (2013). The influence of semantic context on the perception of Spanish-accented 
American English. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 56(5), 1567–1578. https://doi.org/
10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-0192)
Bent, T., & Baese-Berk, M.M. (2021). Perceptual learning of accented speech. In J.S. Pardo, L.C. Nygaard, R.E. 
Remez, & D.B. Pisoni (Eds.), The handbook of speech perception (pp. 428–464). John Wiley & Sons.
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., Gwilliams, L., Marantz, A., & Pylkkänen, L. (2021). Adaptation to mis-pronounced 
speech: evidence for a prefrontal-cortex repair mechanism. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 97. https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41598-020-79640-0
Bosker, H.R., Quené, H., Sanders, T., & De Jong, N.H. (2014). Native “um”s elicit prediction of low-frequency 
referents, but non-native “um”s do not. Journal of Memory and Language, 75, 104–116. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jml.2014.05.004
Caffarra, S., & Martin, C.D. (2019). Not all errors are the same: ERP sensitivity to error typicality in foreign 
accented speech perception. Cortex, 116, 308–320. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.03.007
Clarke, C.M., & Garrett, M.F. (2004). Rapid adaptation to foreign-accented English. The Journal of the Acoustical 
Society of America, 116(6), 3647–3658. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.1815131
Clayards, M., Tanenhaus, M.K., Aslin, R.N., & Jacobs, R.A. (2008). Perception of speech reflects optimal use of 
probabilistic speech cues. Cognition, 108(3), 804–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2008.04.004
De Jong, T. (2010). Cognitive load theory, educational research, and instructional design: Some food for thought. 
Instructional Science, 38(2), 105–134. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-009-9110-0
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dijkgraaf, A., Hartsuiker, R.J., & Duyck, W. (2017). Predicting upcoming information in native-language and 
non-native-language auditory word recognition. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 20(5), 917–930. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728916000547
Fairchild, S., & Papafragou, A. (2018). Sins of omission are more likely to be forgiven in non-native speakers. 
Cognition, 181, 80–92. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.08.010
Flege, J.E. (1981). The phonological basis of foreign accent: A hypothesis. TESOL Quarterly, 15(4), 443. https://
doi.org/10.2307/3586485
Floccia, C., Goslin, J., Girard, F., & Konopczynski, G. (2006). Does a regional accent perturb speech processing? 
Journal of Experimental Psychology. Human Perception and Performance, 32(5), 1276–1293. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0096-1523.32.5.1276
Foucart, A., & Hartsuiker, R.J. (2021). Are foreign-accented speakers that “incredible”? The impact of the 
speaker’s indexical properties on sentence processing. Neuropsychologia, 158, 107902. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2021.107902
Franceschina, F. (2001). Morphological or syntactic deficits in near-native speakers? An assessment of some 
current proposals. Second Language Research, 17(3), 213–247. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658301017003
Goslin, J., Duffy, H., & Floccia, C. (2012). An ERP investigation of regional and foreign accent processing. 
Brain and Language, 122(2), 92–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2012.04.017
Gosselin, L., Martin, C.D., Navarra-Barindelli, E., & Caffarra, S. (2021). The presence of a foreign accent 
introduces lexical integration difficulties during late semantic processing. Language, Cognition and 
Neuroscience, 36(9), 1086–1106. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2021.1909084
Gosselin, L., Martin, C.D., González Martin, A., & Caffarra, S. (2022). When a non-native accent lets you 
spot all the errors: Examining the syntactic interlanguage benefit. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 34, 
1650–1669. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01886.
Grey, S., Cosgrove, A.L., & Van Hell, J.G. (2020). Faces with foreign accents: An event-related potential study 
of accented sentence comprehension. Neuropsychologia, 147, 107575. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsyc
hologia.2020.107575
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Sendy Caffarra, Leah Gosselin, Trisha Thomas, and Clara D. Martin
410
Grey, S., Schubel, L.C., McQueen, J.M., & Van Hell, J.G. (2019). Processing foreign-accented speech in a 
second language: Evidence from ERPs during sentence comprehension in bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language 
and Cognition, 22(5), 912–929. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728918000937
Grey, S., & Van Hell, J.G. (2017). Foreign-accented speaker identity affects neural correlates of language com-
prehension. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 42, 93–108. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2016.12.001
Hanulíková, A., Van Alphen, P.M., Van Goch, M.M., & Weber, A. (2012). When one person’s mistake is another’s 
standard usage: the effect of foreign accent on syntactic processing. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 
24(4), 878–887. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00103
Hanzlíková, D., & Skarnitzl, R. (2017). Credibility of native and non-native speakers of English revisited: Do non-
native listeners feel the same? Research in Language, 15(3), 285–298. https://doi.org/10.1515/rela-2017-0016
Holt, R., Kung, C., & Demuth, K. (2018). Listener characteristics modulate the semantic processing of native 
vs. foreign-accented speech. PloS One, 13(12), e0207452. k https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0207452
Jiang, X., Gossack-Keenan, K., & Pell, M.D. (2020). To believe or not to believe? How voice and accent infor-
mation in speech alter listener impressions of trust. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 73(1), 
55–79. https://doi.org/10.1177/1747021819865833
Kędzierska, H. (2019). How does foreign accent affect template matching mechanisms? ERP evidence from 
Polish. Linguistics Beyond and Within (LingBaW), 5(5), 61–74. https://doi.org/10.31743/lingbaw.5380
Kleinschmidt, D.F., & Jaeger, T.F. (2015). Robust speech perception: recognize the familiar, generalize to the 
similar, and adapt to the novel. Psychological Review, 122(2), 148–203. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0038695
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kutas, M., & Federmeier, K.D. (2011). Thirty years and counting: finding meaning in the N400 component of 
the event-related brain potential (ERP). Annual Review of Psychology, 62, 621–647. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev.psych.093008.131123
Kutas, M., & Hillyard, S.A. (1980). Reading senseless sentences: brain potentials reflect semantic incongruity. 
Science, 207(4427), 203–205. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.7350657
Lippi-Green, R. (1994). Accent, standard language ideology, and discriminatory pretext in the courts. Language 
In Society, 23(2), 163–198. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0047404500017826
Lippi-Green, R. (2012). English with an accent: Language, ideology, and discrimination in the United States. 
Routledge.
Major, R. C. (2001). Foreign Accent: The Ontogeny and Phylogeny of Second Language Phonology. Routledge.
Mayer, R.E., Sobko, K., & Mautone, P.D. (2003). Social cues in multimedia learning: Role of speaker’s voice. 
Journal of Educational Psychology, 95(2), 419–425. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-0663.95.2.419
Munro, M.J., & Derwing, T.M. (1995). Processing time, accent, and comprehensibility in the perception of 
native and foreign-accented speech. Language and Speech, 38 (3), 289–306. https://doi.org/10.1177/00238
30995038003
Nieuwland, M.S., & Van Berkum, J.J.A. (2006). When peanuts fall in love: N400 evidence for the power of dis-
course. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(7), 1098–1111. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.7.1098
Osterhout, L., & Mobley, L.A. (1995). Event-related brain potentials elicited by failure to agree. Journal of 
Memory and Language, 34(6), 739–773. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1995.1033
Paas, F., Tuovinen, J.E., Tabbers, H., & Van Gerven, P.W.M. (2003). Cognitive load measurement as a means to 
advance cognitive load theory. Educational Psychologist, 38(1), 63–71. https://doi.org/10.1207/S15326985E
P3801_8
Pichora-Fuller, M.K., Kramer, S.E., Eckert, M.A., Edwards, B., Hornsby, B.W.Y., Humes, L.E., Lemke, U., 
Lunner, T., Matthen, M., Mackersie, C.L., Naylor, G., Phillips, N.A., Richter, M., Rudner, M., Sommers, 
M.S., Tremblay, K.L., & Wingfield, A. (2016). Hearing impairment and cognitive energy: the framework 
for understanding effortful listening (FUEL). Ear and Hearing, 37 Suppl 1, 5S–27S. https://doi.org/10.1097/
AUD.0000000000000312
Podlipský, V.J., Šimáčková, Š., & Petráž, D. (2016). Is there an interlanguage speech credibility benefit? Topics 
in Linguistics, 17(1), 30–44. https://doi.org/10.1515/topling-2016-0003
Romero-Rivas, C., Martin, C.D., & Costa, A. (2015). Processing changes when listening to foreign-accented 
speech. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9, 167. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00167
Schmid, P.M., & Yeni-Komshian, G.H. (1999). The effects of speaker accent and target predictability on percep-
tion of mispronunciations. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 42(1), 56–64. https://doi.
org/10.1044/jslhr.4201.56
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Foreign Accent Perception
411
Strauber, C.B., Ali, L.R., Fujioka, T., Thille, C., & McCandliss, B.D. (2021). Replicability of neural responses 
to speech accent is driven by study design and analytical parameters. Scientific Reports, 11(1), 4777. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-021-82782-4
Sumner, M., & Tilsen, S. (2011). Low-level adjustments to gross-categorical mismatches in the perception 
of accented speech. The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 130(4), 2571–2571. https://doi.org/
10.1121/1.3655300
Theodore, R.M., & Monto, N.R. (2019). Distributional learning for speech reflects cumulative exposure to a 
talker’s phonetic distributions. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 26(3), 985–992. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13
423-018-1551-5
Thomas, T., Martin, C.D., Caffarra, S. (2022). An ERP investigation of accented isolated single word processing. 
Neuropsychologia, 175, 108349. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2022.108349.
Tyler, S.W., Hertel, P.T., McCallum, M.C., & Ellis, H.C. (1979). Cognitive effort and memory. Journal 
of Experimental Psychology. Human Learning and Memory, 5(6), 607–617. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0278-7393.5.6.607
Van Berkum, J.J.A., Van den Brink, D., Tesink, C.M.J.Y., Kos, M., & Hagoort, P. (2008). The neural integra-
tion of speaker and message. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(4), 580–591. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn.2008.20054
Van Engen, K.J., Baese-Berk, M.M., Baker, R.E., Choi, A., Kim, M., & Bradlow, A.R. (2010). The Wildcat 
corpus of native-and foreign-accented English: Communicative efficiency across conversational dyads with 
varying language alignment profiles. Language and Speech, 53(4), 510–540. https://doi.org/10.1177/00238
30910372495
Vaughn, C.R. (2019). Expectations about the source of a speaker’s accent affect accent adaptation. The Journal 
of the Acoustical Society of America, 145(5), 3218. https://doi.org/10.1121/1.5108831
Xu, J., Abdel Rahman, R., & Sommer, W. (2020). Perceived language competence modulates criteria for speech 
error processing: evidence from event-related potentials. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 35(6), 
752–765. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1562558
Yi, H.-G., Smiljanic, R., & Chandrasekaran, B. (2014). The neural processing of foreign-accented speech 
and its relationship to listener bias. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 768. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2014.00768
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

412
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-38
30
DECISION MAKING AND SECOND 
LANGUAGE NEUROCOGNITION
Alice Foucart
Introduction and Critical Definitions
A or B? Wrong or right? We constantly make decisions, some more important than others, but we are 
continuously faced with choices. Although we are barely aware of it, our decisions can be affected 
by various factors that should, in principle, be irrelevant, such as the mood we are in (Hockey et al., 
2010) or the time of the day (Correa et al., 2016). Language is one such factor. You may have learned 
a foreign language at some point and have reached a good enough level of proficiency to under-
stand a situation in which you have to make a decision. For instance, when booking a trip abroad, 
you may have to choose whether to A) buy your ticket now or B) wait for a month to get a better 
price. You would think, however, that whether you choose A or B will not change depending on 
whether you are exposed to this situation in the foreign language or in your native language, although 
empirical evidence suggests it probably will. Indeed, recent studies have demonstrated that using a 
foreign language can modulate our economic decisions (Costa, Foucart, Arnon et al., 2014; Keysar 
et al., 2012) and our moral judgments (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014; Geipel et al., 2015a), 
among others. This phenomenon is referred to as the Foreign Language effect (FLe) (for a review, 
see Hadjichristidis et al., 2019). In this chapter I will first describe the FLe and its (potential) origin, 
then I will review behavioral and neurophysiological studies that have examined the factors under-
lying it, and finally I will propose future directions and further readings. To be consistent with the FLe 
literature, the terms native and foreign language will be used. However, the terms second language 
(L2, as opposed to first language, L1), will also be employed. Both foreign language and L2 refer to 
a language that has been learned later in life (after the age of 10) unless stated otherwise.
Critical Issues and Topics: The FLe and Its (Potential) Origin
The FLe was first reported in a study by Keysar and collaborators (2012) in which they investigated 
the effect of language on heuristics, which are simple strategies that humans use to make fast 
decisions. These strategies are beneficial because they allow one to make quick decisions while 
evaluating the most relevant aspects of a problem, but they can also lead to biases. In this study, 
the authors demonstrated that the cognitive bias that makes people risk averse for gains and risk 
seeking for losses, depending on whether a problem is framed positively or negatively, disappeared 
when decisions were made in a foreign language. More precisely, they presented participants with 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
413
the “Asian disease” problem (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979) either in their native language or a for-
eign language they had learned mainly in a classroom. This problem describes a situation in which a 
dangerous new disease has been going around and without medicine, 600,000 people will die from 
it. In order to save these people, two types of medicine are being made. The choices are framed 
either in “gain” or “loss.” In the gain frame, if you choose Medicine A, 200,000 people will be 
saved. If you choose Medicine B, there is a 33.3% chance that 600,000 people will be saved and a 
66.6% chance that no one will be saved. In the loss frame, if you choose Medicine A, 400,000 people 
will die, and if you choose Medicine B, there is a 33.3% chance that no one will die and a 66.6% 
chance that 600,000 people will die. Participants were randomly assigned to the gain or loss version 
and had to choose a medicine. Usually, results for this problem reveal an asymmetric pattern with 
people being risk-averse in the gain frame but risk-seeking in the loss frame (Kahneman & Tversky, 
1979). Keysar and colleagues also reported this asymmetric pattern; participants who performed the 
task in their native language chose the sure option (Medicine A) significantly more often in the gain 
frame than in the loss frame. However, when participants performed the task in a foreign language, 
this gain-loss asymmetry was significantly reduced, suggesting that they were not as biased by the 
framing of the problem as participants in the native condition were. This reduction of heuristic 
bias in decision-making was later replicated in relation to loss aversion and extended to decisions 
related to accounting, risk aversion and gambling (e.g., Costa et al., 2017; Costa, Foucart, Arnon 
et al., 2014; Hayakawa et al., 2017, 2019; but see Vives et al., 2018 for some limits of the FLe).
The FLe is not limited to decisions in the economic domain; the use of a foreign language has 
also been shown to affect decisions that have a more personal aspect such as moral judgments (e.g., 
Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014; Geipel et al., 2015b), honesty (e.g., Yang et al., 2021), the 
self-bias effect, which refers to the fact that self-related stimuli, compared to unrelated ones, increase 
performance by enhancing speed, accuracy and memory (e.g., Ivaz et al., 2016), superstitious beliefs 
(Hadjichristidis et al., 2019), or the disgust provoked by the idea of consuming sustainable products 
like recycled water or insect-based food (Geipel et al., 2018). Using a foreign language also seems to 
reduce biases such as the repetition truth bias, which leads people to perceive a statement as truer if it 
has been repeated (Nadarevic et al., 2018) or the causality bias, which refers to the illusion that two 
events are causally related when they are not (Díaz-Lago & Matute, 2019). The impact of language on 
moral decisions was first reported by Costa and collaborators (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014) 
who observed that the language context (native versus foreign) modulates our decisions of whether 
to kill one person to save five others. They presented participants with the Footbridge dilemma (Foot, 
1978; Thomson, 1985) in which a train has a problem and cannot stop. It is going to kill five people 
who are on the track if it is not stopped. The only way to stop the train is to drop a heavy weight on 
the track. You happen to be on a bridge next to a heavy man. You can decide whether to push the man 
onto the track, killing him but saving five people, or not to interfere with the outcome. Participants 
in the foreign language condition decided to push the man significantly more often than participants 
in the native language condition, suggesting that a foreign language context promotes utilitarian 
choices (the greater good) over deontological choices (essential rights of a person). In contrast, when 
presented with the Trolley dilemma (Foot, 1978), in which the option to save the five people is to 
divert the train onto another track in which a man is working, participants’ decisions were not distinct 
across the language conditions. The different results for the two dilemmas have been explained by 
their level of emotionality (Greene et al., 2001), which plays a role in the decision-making process, 
as further explained later in this chapter. This effect of language on moral judgments is referred to as 
the moral FLe (for a review, see Hayakawa et al., 2016) and has been replicated with different foreign 
languages (e.g., Brouwer, 2020; Cipolletti et al., 2016; Corey et al., 2017; Dylman & Champoux-
Larsson, 2020; Geipel et al., 2015a; Shin & Kim, 2017).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alice Foucart
414
Hence, the FLe has been observed with various types of decisions and its robustness has been 
confirmed through many replication studies and in three recent meta-analyses (Circi et al., 2021; Del 
Maschio et al., 2022; Stankovic et al., 2022). However, the origin of this phenomenon is still unclear. 
The FLe has been explained in the framework of dual-process accounts according to which (moral) 
decision making is driven by the interaction of two systems. System 1 involves fast, intuitive, auto-
matic, and essentially emotionally based processes, whereas System 2 involves slow, rational, con-
trolled, and effortful processes (Greene et al., 2001; Kahneman, 2003). According to these accounts, a 
cognitively demanding task would favor the implementation of System 2 and/or reduce that of System 
1. Given that comprehending a foreign language is usually a cognitively costlier and slower process 
than comprehending a native language (e.g., see Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume), the FLe has 
been associated with a promotion of System 2 over System 1. The original explanation proposed that 
the use of a foreign language increased cognitively controlled processes (System 2) that led to more 
rational decisions and utilitarian judgments (Cipolletti et al., 2016; Costa, Foucart, Arnon et al., 2014; 
Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014; Keysar et al., 2012). But later findings have suggested that 
the use of a foreign language does not increase utilitarian judgments but rather reduces deontological 
ones (Hayakawa et al., 2017). To reach this conclusion, the authors presented moral dilemmas to 
their participants in a native or foreign language and asked them whether the action was appropriate 
and whether they would be willing to perform it. They used a process dissociation task, which allows 
the separation of deontological and utilitarian responses, and observed that using a foreign language 
does not increase utilitarian responses but rather blocks deontological responses associated with the 
violation of moral rules. Using a similar process, other authors concluded that both deontological 
and utilitarian responses are reduced when using a foreign language (Muda et al., 2018, see also 
Hennig & Hütter, 2021 for no evidence of a promotion of System 2). Hence, it is not clear whether 
a foreign language promotes System 2, supresses System 1, or affects both. Note that the variation 
across studies may also originate from the tasks and methodologies employed (see Hennig & Hütter, 
2021, for a discussion). Other studies have also reported no reduction of biases in tasks that did not 
have an emotional component, such as the cognitive reflection task (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 
2014; Mækelæ & Pfuhl, 2019) or the Moses illusion (Geipel et al., 2015a; in this illusion, participants 
tend to answer “two” when asked “How many animals of each kind did Moses take on to the ark?,” 
when they should not be able to provide an answer because the biblical character is Noah). Finally, a 
reversed effect has also been shown (Białek et al., 2020).
The emotional component of the decision is important as it has also been proposed as one of the 
factors underlying the FLe. Indeed, Greene and collaborators have demonstrated that personal moral 
dilemmas (e.g., the Footbridge) are more emotional than impersonal dilemmas (e.g., the Trolley) in 
native speakers. They used functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), a technique that allows 
measuring brain activity by detecting changes associated with blood flow (for more about fMRI, see 
Kousaie & Klein, this volume) and observed that brain areas associated with emotion (i.e., medial 
frontal gyrus, posterior cingulate gyrus, and angular gyrus, bilateral) were significantly more active 
for personal than impersonal dilemmas. In relation to emotion in L2, it has often been claimed in 
the literature that the emotionality in a foreign language is reduced compared to a native language 
(Pavlenko, 2012, 2017). Indeed, while a native language is acquired through everyday life experi-
ence, a foreign language is often acquired in a classroom environment where the association between 
emotion and language is less natural and embodied.
The few neurophysiological studies that have examined emotion processing in L1 and L2 have 
reported differences. For instance, Chen and collaborators (Chen et al., 2015) used fMRI and event-
related brain potentials (ERPs), a technique that allows recording the brain activity to identify the 
nature and timing of cognitive processes (for more on ERPs, see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume) to 
investigate emotional words processing in L2. They observed reduced activation for L1 emotional 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
415
words in the left middle occipital gyrus and the left cerebellum but increased activation in the left 
cerebellum for L2 emotional words. The ERP data also revealed different patterns, i.e., compared to 
neutral words, positive words triggered a larger early posterior negativity and a smaller late positive 
component in L1, but no significant effect in L2. Another fMRI study (Hsu et al., 2015) examined 
emotional response to literary reading in L1 and L2. They compared responses to short passages of 
Harry Potter books characterised as negative, positive, or neutral. Among other observations, they 
reported stronger hemodynamic responses to positive than to neutral passages in bilateral amygdala 
and the left precentral cortex in L1 but not in L2. Moreover, in an ERP study, Optiz and Degner (2012) 
reported that (un)pleasant words triggered a larger early posterior negativity than neutral words in 
both languages, but this effect occurred later in L2, reflecting delayed lexical access. Thus, going 
back to moral dilemmas, although the neural response to personal and impersonal dilemmas has not 
been directly investigated in L2 yet, it is possible that the mechanisms responsible for the outcomes 
in the Footbridge and Trolley dilemmas in L1 might be differently implicated in L2. Hence, another 
explanation for the FLe is that the emotionality provoked by a situation is reduced when presented 
in a foreign language, which, consequently, decreases the implication of System 1 in the decision-
making process (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014; Hayakawa et al., 2016; Keysar et al., 2012). 
The idea that the environment in which a language is learned (natural vs. classroom) affects the 
perception of the emotions in this language has been extended to other aspects that are also encoded 
through language, for instance, social and moral norms (e.g., do not kill/steal). And indeed, studies 
have shown that using a foreign language reduces sensitivity to norms (Białek et al., 2019; Geipel 
et al., 2015b).
In sum, the FLe has been explained mainly by an increase of cognitive load and a reduction of 
emotionality when using a foreign language, which modulate the implication of the Systems 1 and 
2 in the decision-making process. The former is due to the difficulty to process the language and the 
latter to the context of acquisition. Hence, these factors may vary according to variables like language 
proficiency, language experience, or language similarity, which indeed have been shown to modulate 
the FLe (Čavar & Tytus, 2018, but see Białek & Fugelsang, 2019; Dylman & Champoux-Larsson, 
2020). In the next section, I will review behavioral and neurophysiological studies that have tested 
the role of these factors in the FLe.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
FLe: Emotional Response and Cognitive Load
As mentioned, many behavioral and (neuro-)physiological studies in the L2 literature have reported a 
reduced emotional reaction in an L2 compared to an L1. For instance, swear words and taboo words 
in an L2 are evaluated as less powerful (Dewaele, 2004), provoke reduced autonomic reaction (Harris 
et al., 2003), and require more effortful processing that engages additional brain areas (anterior cin-
gulate cortex, insula; Sulpizio et al., 2019). To our knowledge, only four neurophysiological studies 
have investigated the impact this reduction can have on our decisions.
One of the first studies to directly examined the role of language and emotion in the decision-
making process is an fMRI study by Zheng and colleagues (2020). The authors investigated the neural 
correlates linked with risk-taking in bilinguals’ native and foreign language. They used a gambling 
task in which Chinese–English bilinguals were asked to choose whether to play or leave gambles with 
a 50% chance of winning. Each gamble was followed by feedback consisting of emotional words 
(e.g., “great” or “damn”) presented either in their native or foreign language. The behavioral results 
showed similar patterns in the two language conditions that revealed that losing a gamble led to more 
betting than winning a gamble. The neural data showed an exaggerated response to positive feedback 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alice Foucart
416
in the brain network related to reward (i.e., higher activation in bilateral caudate and bilateral amyg-
dala), suggesting that foreign language processing enhanced neural responses to rewards. In contrast, 
no differences were observed across language conditions with negative feedback.
Following up on this study, He and colleagues (2021) further investigated the neural mechanisms 
underlying the interaction between language and emotion in decision making. They evaluated the 
possibility of the coexistence of two mechanisms in foreign language processing, one that would 
facilitate access to positive emotions and the other that would suppress access to negative ones. They 
conducted an fMRI study with Chinese–English bilinguals using a similar gambling task as Zhen et al. 
(2020), except that when participants gambled, they received positive or negative feedback (in their 
foreign or native language), but when they chose not to gamble, they were presented with the word 
“safe.” The authors reported different access to emotions in the two language contexts, as reflected by 
the activation in distinct brain areas. In the foreign language, greater activity in the dorsolateral pre-
frontal cortex was associated with loss aversion and suggested the existence of an avoidance mech-
anism for negative stimuli. The authors also observed greater activation of the hippocampus after 
positive versus neutral feedback, only in the foreign language condition. They concluded that emo-
tional stimuli were processed differently in the two language contexts, and that the different access 
mechanisms to emotion eventually influenced participants’ decisions by both regulating emotional 
response to negative stimuli and enhancing emotional response to positive stimuli.
To further understand the mechanisms underlying the FLe, the same authors conducted two 
other studies, one using fMRI (Liu et al., 2021) and the other using ERPs (Liu et al., 2022). They 
investigated the interaction of emotion and cognitive load in the decision-making process in foreign 
and native language. In both studies, Chinese–English bilinguals performed a lexico-semantic task 
in which they indicated whether the stimuli were real words or pseudowords. Stimuli consisted of 
neutral or negative (pseudo-)words presented either in participants’ native language (Chinese) or 
foreign language (English). Cognitive load was manipulated by using traditional characters instead 
of simplified ones in Chinese, and words with capital letters instead of lowercase letters in English. 
Each trial was followed by a gambling game in which participants had to decide whether to make 
a risky decision. Both studies revealed different neural patterns in the two language contexts. The 
fMRI data showed increased activity (left amygdala and right insula) after processing negative words 
compared to neutral words, but only in the native language condition. In the same condition, cogni-
tive load increased functional connectivity between the reward-related striatum and right insula. The 
ERP data showed that, under high-cognitive load, negative words triggered a larger P3 (component 
associated with feedback processing; see Bultena, this volume) than neutral words in the native con-
dition, whereas the reverse pattern was found in the foreign condition. The authors concluded from 
the overall findings that cognitive load facilitates access to emotion in a native language, which can 
promote impulsive decisions. On the other hand, in a foreign language, cognitive load limits access 
to emotion, resulting in more rational decisions.
FLe: Language Proficiency, Language Experience, and Language Similarity
The FLe has been explained by an increase of cognitive load and a reduction of emotionality in a 
foreign language compared with a native language. These factors very much depend on variables 
like language proficiency, language experience, and language similarity. The few studies that have 
investigated the influence of these variables on the FLe led to mixed results.
Costa and colleagues (Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al., 2014) who first demonstrated the FLe on 
moral judgment examined the potential impact of proficiency on the effect. All their participants had 
a moderate level in their foreign language. Based on their self-rated proficiency scores, the authors 
split them as either above-average or below-average. For the Footbridge dilemma, they observed that 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
417
both groups had higher utilitarian responses in the foreign condition than in the native condition, but 
the effect was larger in the below-average group. A similar correlation was reported by Geipel and 
collaborators (2015b). Corey et al. (2017) who examined the role of proficiency in moral judgments 
in nine experiments confirmed the observation made by Costa, Foucart, Hayakawa et al.—that the 
magnitude of the FLe reduces as proficiency increases. However, they also showed that self-reported 
proficiency in foreign language was not a significant predictor of utilitarian choices and argued that 
even though proficiency does contribute to the FLe, it does not account for a large part of it. Note that 
most studies examining the FLe have used different measures of proficiency (e.g., self-rating, transla-
tion), which renders complex the evaluation of the implication of proficiency in the effect.
To further investigate the role of proficiency in the FLe, studies tested high-proficient bilinguals. 
For instance, Winskel and Bhatt (2019) examined the impact of proficiency and language immersion 
on moral decision-making in Hindi–English high-proficient bilinguals compared with English 
monolinguals in Australia. They presented moral dilemmas in English and found no differences in 
the responses of the two language groups. Similarly, Čavar & Tytus (2018) tested Croatian–German 
high-proficient successive bilinguals and reported no differences across foreign and native language 
conditions for the same type of dilemmas (but see, Białek & Fugelsang, 2019; Krautz & Čavar, 2019 
for commentaries). In contrast, Wong and Ng (2018) presented early high-proficient English-Chinese 
bilinguals from Singapore with personal and impersonal moral dilemmas. They observed a signifi-
cant relationship between the responses and language dominance. The more dominant (and therefore, 
more proficient) participants were in the language in which they were tested, the larger the difference 
between their choice in personal and impersonal dilemmas. Given that the FLe is usually observed 
in response to personal dilemmas, these results suggest that language dominance may contribute to 
this effect. Similarly, Huang and Rau (2018) reported an FLe with Chinese–English early bilinguals 
who had learned both languages before the age of six. They presented their participants with the 
financial crisis problem originally used in Costa, Foucart, Arnon et al. (2014), which is similar to 
the Asian disease problem (Kahneman & Tversky, 1979; Keysar et al., 2012) described above but 
adapted to finance. The authors reported a similar asymmetric pattern as that observed by Keysar 
et al. (2012), that is, early bilinguals who were equally high-proficient in both languages were risk-
averse for gains and risk-seeking for losses when the problem was presented in Chinese, but this 
asymmetry disappeared when the problem was presented in English. This reduction of the framing 
effect in balanced bilingual suggests that proficiency may not be the only linguistic variable influen-
cing the FLe.
Indeed, the mixed results regarding proficiency imply that other variables, such as language simi-
larity and culture, may also play a role. To test the hypothesis of cultural influence, Dylman and 
Champoux-Larsson (2020) presented the Asian Disease problem and the Footbridge dilemma to 
Swedish-English bilinguals (strong influence of English in Sweden) and Swedish-French bilinguals 
(weak influence of French). They observed an FLe when participants were tested in French but not 
when they were tested in English, suggesting that close cultural links reduce the effect. To test the 
language similarity hypothesis, they presented the Footbridge dilemma in linguistically similar 
languages, Swedish and Norwegian, and observed no increase of utilitarian choices in foreign lan-
guage. Brouwer (2019) also reported no significant differences in Dutch (native) and English (for-
eign), two linguistically close languages in written modality (but refer to the article for a discussion 
about the role of presentation modality). Finally, Miozzo et al. (2020) observed an FLe (i.e., less 
bias in the Asian Disease problem and more utilitarian decisions in the Footbridge dilemma) when 
native bilinguals made choices in an Italian dialect (Venetian or Bergamasque) they spoke fluently 
at home or in informal contexts, compared to when then made choices in Italian, which they also 
used in formal contexts. The authors concluded that the language context, rather than emotionality, 
modulates decisions in the case of these bilinguals.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alice Foucart
418
Finally, three recent meta-analysis have confirmed the robustness of the FLe but failed to converge 
on the influence of linguistic variables on the effect. Whereas Stankovic et al. (2022) claimed that low 
self-reported reading proficiency modulates the effect, Circi et al. (2021) argued that language simi-
larity and not proficiency moderates it, and Del Maschio et al. (2022) observed no influence of such 
variables. Hence, although their role in the FLe is not entirely clear, it seems that language variables 
somehow modulate the effect.
FLe: Implications and Future Directions
The impact language has on our decisions in everyday life can be beneficial, for instance, in clinical 
trials to talk about traumatic events or phobia (García-Palacios et al., 2018; Pavlenko, 2012), but can 
also lead to disadvantages for foreign speakers, like in the case of police interviews or court trials 
(Pavlenko, 2017). Furthermore, we have seen that when dealing with moral dilemmas and financial 
scenarios in a foreign language, individuals are less concerned about negative consequences and less 
averse to risk, which is highly relevant given that politicians usually make crucial decisions with 
significant consequences for our world in a foreign language. Hence, the implications of the FLe are 
irrefutable, and although the exact role emotionality, cognitive load, and linguistic variables play in 
this effect still needs to be determined, the implications that learning a new language can have on our 
behavior cannot be ignored.
As mentioned above, while a native language is acquired through everyday life experience, a for-
eign language is often acquired in a classroom environment where the association between emotion 
and language is less natural and embodied. It has been shown that individuals can reach native-like 
sensitivity on various linguistic levels in their L2 with enough experience, even when the language 
was learned late in life (e.g., syntax, Foucart & Frenck-Mestre, 2011; emotion, Conrad et al., 2011). 
The learning process seems to benefit greatly from a multimodal learning environment that represents 
human experience (Barsalou, 2008). According to the social L2 learning approach proposed by Li 
and Jeong (2020; see also, Jeong & Li, this volume), experiencing language is based on social inter-
action. For instance, the simple presence of a social partner results in facilitated word learning and 
higher learning outcomes, as reflected by greater neural activity (right supramarginal gyrus and right 
inferior frontal gyrus) compared to individual learning (Verga & Kotz, 2019). Similarly, L2 words 
learned through real-life situations (videos) compared to written translation generate activation in a 
brain area (supramarginal gyrus) also activated by words acquired through childhood in a native lan-
guage (Jeong et al., 2010). One new technique that is useful to recreate a real-world, richer learning 
environment than a classroom or a laboratory is virtual reality (Peeters, 2019; see also Zappa & 
Frenck-Mestre, this volume). Legault et al. (2019) contrasted neural changes (cortical thickness and 
grey matter volume) related to vocabulary learned with paired picture-word association or virtual 
environments in which learners could interact with the objects. The data revealed changes in the 
brain structure after training in both conditions, which varied based on the learning context. Virtual 
environments stimulate brain regions related to sensorimotor perception that would not be stimulated 
otherwise in a typical classroom environment, which facilitates word encoding and retrieval from 
memory (Jeong et al., 2021; Li & Jeong, 2020). Based on these results, we can hypothesize that L2 
emotional stimuli learned in virtual environment may stimulate the same brain areas as L1 stimuli, 
which would generate a similar physiological reaction in L2 than in L1 speakers, and consequently, 
would reduce the modulation of our behavior by the use of a foreign language.
In relation to the neuro-mechanisms of the FLe, it would be interesting to investigate whether the 
brain areas activated by personal dilemmas in L2 are the areas associated with emotion, like in L1 
(Greene et al., 2001), and whether they are more active than for impersonal dilemmas. The fMRI 
results would indicate whether the mechanisms responsible for the outcomes in the Footbridge and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
419
Trolley dilemmas in L1 are differently implicated in L2, which would partly explain the FLe. Also, 
it is still not clear whether using a foreign language modulates the evaluation of the consequences of 
an action (e.g., pushing a man to save five lives), norm-endorsement (e.g., do not kill), or passivity 
in front of a situation (e.g., not pushing the man). Using ERPs, it would be possible to compare the 
emotional response (early and late positive components) to each of the situation in L1 and in L2 and 
better understand the underlying mechanisms of the FLe. ERPs would also allow examining indi-
vidual differences in (non)emotional responses in different tasks, which may explain converging 
findings in the FLe literature.
Let’s now turn to the extension of the FLe to other linguistic aspects. Until now most of the studies 
investigating this phenomenon have focused on the influence of a foreign language on our decisions 
from the point of view of the foreign language user. However, conversations in our multilingual soci-
eties usually imply that native speakers interact with individuals who speak with a foreign accent. 
Interestingly, processing foreign-accented speech has been shown to modulate emotionality and 
increase cognitive load because of the speech disfluency provoked by the unfamiliarity of the accent 
(e.g., Foucart et al., 2020; Hatzidaki et al., 2015; Munro & Derwing, 1995). Given that these factors 
have been proposed to contribute to the FLe, Foucart and Brouwer (2021) recently tested whether a 
similar effect would be observed when processing a dilemma in one’s own language but spoken by 
a foreign-accented speaker. Indeed, they observed that when participants were presented with the 
Trolley and the Footbridge dilemmas, there was an increase in utilitarian decisions when they were 
spoken in a foreign accent compared with a native accent. This study was the first demonstration of 
a Foreign Accent effect on moral judgments, which suggests that a foreign accent, like a foreign lan-
guage, is a linguistic context that modulates (neuro)cognitive mechanisms and, consequently, impacts 
our behavior.
To conclude, since the first demonstration of the FLe, studies have mainly focused on the situ-
ations in which a foreign linguistic context (language or accent) affects our decisions, but the 
mechanisms underlying this effect are still unclear. Neurophysiological research could help under-
stand the involvement of factors such as emotion reduction, cognitive load, and language experience 
in the FLe. Moreover, longitudinal studies could inform us on the neural development of L2 acqui-
sition and the evolution of its impact on our behavior throughout the development process. Finally, 
techniques like virtual reality should be used to test 1) whether the FLe stands in real-life situations, 
and 2) the benefit of embodied learning for L2 processing.
Further Readings
This article reviews the impact of using a foreign language on risk, inference, and morality, and discuss potential 
explanations.
Hayakawa, S., Costa, A., Foucart, A., & Keysar, B. (2016). Using a foreign language changes our choices. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 20(11), 791–793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.08.004
This article reviews previous studies in affective and cognitive neuroscience an provides new insights to study 
the social brain of language and L2 learning.
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: Grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5(1), 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
This article reviews recent developments in the study of multilingualism and emotion.
Pavlenko, A. (2017). Do you wish to waive your rights? Affect and decision-making in multilingual speakers. 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 17, 74–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COPSYC.2017.06.005
References
Barsalou, L. W. (2008). Grounded cognition. Annual Review of Psychology, 59(1), 617–645. https://doi.org/
10.1146/annurev.psych.59.103006.093639
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alice Foucart
420
Białek, M., & Fugelsang, J. (2019). No evidence for decreased foreign language effect in highly proficient and 
acculturated bilinguals: a commentary on Čavar and Tytus (2018). Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural 
Development, 40(8), 679–686. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2018.1547072
Białek, M., Muda, R., Stewart, K., Niszczota, P., & Pieńkosz, D. (2020). Thinking in a foreign language distorts 
allocation of cognitive effort: Evidence from reasoning. Cognition, 205, 104420. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cognition.2020.104420
Białek, M., Paruzel-Czachura, M., & Gawronski, B. (2019). Foreign language effects on moral dilemma 
judgments: An analysis using the CNI model. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 85, 103855. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2019.103855
Brouwer, S. (2019). The auditory foreign-language effect of moral decision making in highly proficient 
bilinguals. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 40(10), 865–878. https://doi.org/10.1080/
01434632.2019.1585863
Brouwer, S. (2020). The interplay between emotion and modality in the Foreign-Language effect on moral deci-
sion making. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 24(2), 223–230. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672892
000022X
Bultena, S. (this volume). Feedback in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Čavar, F., & Tytus, A.E. (2018). Moral judgment and foreign language effect: When the foreign language 
becomes the second language. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 39(1), 17–28. https://
doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2017.1304397
Cipolletti, H., McFarlane, S., & Weissglass, C. (2016). The moral foreign-language effect. Philosophical 
Psychology, 29(1), 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/09515089.2014.993063
Chen, P., Lin, J., Chen, B., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2015). Processing emotional words in two languages with one 
brain: ERP and fMRI evidence from Chinese–English bilinguals. Cortex, 71, 34–48. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.CORTEX.2015.06.002
Circi, R., Gatti, D., Russo, V., & Vecchi, T. (2021). The foreign language effect on decision-making: A meta-
analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 28(4), 1131–1141. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-020-01871-z
Conrad, M., Recio, G., & Jacobs, A.M. (2011). The time course of emotion effects in first and second language 
processing: A cross cultural ERP Study with German-Spanish bilinguals. Frontiers in Psychology, 2, 351. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00351
Corey, J.D., Hayakawa, S., Foucart, A., Aparici, M., Botella, J., Costa, A., & Keysar, B. (2017). Our moral 
choices are foreign to us. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory and Cognition, 43(7), 
1109. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000356
Correa, A., Ruiz-Herrera, N., Ruz, M., Tonetti, L., Martoni, M., Fabbri, M., & Natale, V. (2016). Economic 
decision-making in morning/evening-type people as a function of time of day. Chronobiology International, 
34(2), 139–147. https://doi.org/10.1080/07420528.2016.1246455
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Arnon, I., Aparici, M., & Apesteguia, J. (2014). “Piensa” twice: On the foreign language 
effect in decision making. Cognition, 130, 236–254. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2013.11.010
Costa, A., Foucart, A., Hayakawa, S., Aparici, M., Apesteguia, J., Heafner, J., & Keysar, B. (2014). Your morals 
depend on language. PLoS ONE, 9(4), e94842. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0094842
Costa, A., Vives, M., & Corey, J.D. (2017). On language processing shaping decision making. Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 26(2), 146–151. https://doi.org/10.1177/0963721416680263
Del Maschio, N., Crespi, F., Peressotti, F., Abutalebi, J., & Sulpizio, S. (2022). Decision-making depends on 
language: A meta-analysis of the Foreign Language Effect. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 25(4), 
617–630. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921001012
Dewaele, J.M. (2004). The emotional force of swearwords and taboo words in the speech of multilinguals. 
Journal of Multilingual & Multicultural Development, 25, 204–222. https://doi.org/10.1080/0143463040
8666529.
Díaz-Lago, M., & Matute, H. (2019). Thinking in a foreign language reduces the causality bias. Quarterly 
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 72(1), 41–51. https://doi.org/10.1177/1747021818755326
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electro encephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dylman, A.S., & Champoux-Larsson, M.F. (2020). It’s (not) all Greek to me: Boundaries of the foreign language 
effect. Cognition, 196, 104148. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COGNITION.2019.104148
Foot, P. (1978). The problem of abortion and the doctrine of the double effect in virtues and vices. Basil Blackwell.
Foucart, A., & Brouwer, S. (2021). Is there a foreign accent effect on moral judgment? Brain Sciences, 11(12), 
1631. https://doi.org/10.3390/BRAINSCI11121631
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
421
Foucart, A., Costa, A., Morís-Fernández, L., & Hartsuiker, R.J. (2020). Foreignness or processing fluency? On 
understanding the negative bias toward foreign-accented speakers. Language Learning, 70(4), 974–1016. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12413
Foucart, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (2011). Grammatical gender processing in L2: Electrophysiological evidence 
of the effect of L1–L2 syntactic similarity. Bilingualism, 14(3), 379–399. https://doi.org/10.1017/S13667
2891000012X
García-Palacios, A., Costa, A., Castilla, D., del Río, E., Casaponsa, A., & Duñabeitia, J. (2018). The effect 
of foreign language in fear acquisition. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1157. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41
598-018-19352-8
Geipel, J., Hadjichristidis, C., & Klesse, A.K. (2018). Barriers to sustainable consumption attenuated by foreign 
language use. Nature Sustainability, 1(1), 31–33. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41893-017-0005-9
Geipel, J., Hadjichristidis, C., & Surian, L. (2015a). How foreign language shapes moral judgment. Journal of 
Experimental Social Psychology, 59, 8–17. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jesp.2015.02.001
Geipel, J., Hadjichristidis, C., & Surian, L. (2015b). The foreign language effect on moral judgment: The role of 
emotions and norms. PloS One, 10(7), e0131529. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131529
Greene, J.D., Sommerville, R.B., Nystrom, L.E., Darley, J.M., & Cohen, J.D. (2001). An fMRI investigation 
of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science, 293(5537), 2105–2108. https://doi.org/10.1126/scie
nce.1062872
Hadjichristidis, C., Geipel, J., & Keysar, B. (2019). The influence of native language in shaping judgment and 
choice. Progress in Brain Research, 247, 253–272. https://doi.org/10.1016/bs.pbr.2019.02.003
Hadjichristidis, C., Geipel, J., & Surian, L. (2019). Breaking magic: Foreign language suppresses super-
stition. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 72(1), 18–28. https://doi.org/10.1080/17470
218.2017.1371780
Harris, C., Aycicegi, A., & Gleason, J.B. (2003). Taboo words and reprimands elicit greater autonomic reactivity 
in a first than in a second language. Applied Psycholinguistics, 24, 561–578. https://doi.org/10.1017.S01427
16403000286
Hatzidaki, A., Baus, C., & Costa, A. (2015). The way you say it, the way I feel it: Emotional word processing in 
accented speech. Frontiers in Psychology, 6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2015.00351
Hayakawa, S., Costa, A., Foucart, A., & Keysar, B. (2016). Using a foreign language changes our choices. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 20(11), 791–793. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.08.004
Hayakawa, S., Lau, B.K.Y., Holtzmann, S., Costa, A., & Keysar, B. (2019). On the reliability of the foreign 
language effect on risk-taking. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 72(1), 29–40. https://doi.org/
10.1177/1747021817742242
Hayakawa, S., Tannenbaum, D., Costa, A., Corey, J.D., & Keysar, B. (2017). Thinking more or feeling less? 
Explaining the foreign-language effect on moral judgment. Psychological Science, 28(10), 1387–1397. 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797617720944
He, Y., Margoni, F., Wu, Y., & Liu, H. (2021). fMRI evidence reveals emotional biases in bilingual decision 
making. Brain Structure & Function, 226(5), 1405–1421. https://doi.org/10.1007/S00429-021-02246-3
Hennig, M., & Hütter, M. (2021). Consequences, norms, or willingness to interfere: A procni model analysis 
of the foreign language effect in moral dilemma judgment. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 95, 
104148. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JESP.2021.104148
Hockey, G.R.J., Maule, A.J., Clough, P.J., & Bdzola, L. (2010). Effects of negative mood states on risk in 
everyday decision making. Cognition and Emotion, 14(6), 823–855. https://doi.org/10.1080/0269993005
0156654
Hsu, C.T., Jacobs, A.M., & Conrad, M. (2015). Can Harry Potter still put a spell on us in a second language? 
An fMRI study on reading emotion-laden literature in late bilinguals. Cortex, 63, 282–295. https://doi.org/
10.1016/J.CORTEX.2014.09.002
Huang, H., & Rau, P.L.P. (2018). The first–second language influence on framing effects and loss aversion of 
balanced bilinguals. International Journal of Bilingualism, 24(2), 129–140. https://doi.org/10.1177/13670
06918813646
Ivaz, L., Costa, A., & Duñabeitia, J. (2016). The emotional impact of being myself: Emotions and foreign-
language processing. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 42(3), 489–
496. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000179
Jeong, H., & Li, P. (this volume). Neurocognition of social learning of second language: How can second lan-
guage be learned as first language? In K. Morgan-Short & J. G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of 
second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Jeong, H., Li, P., Suzuki, W., Sugiura, M., & Kawashima, R. (2021). Neural mechanisms of language learning 
from social contexts. Brain and Language, 212, 104874. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BANDL.2020.104874
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Alice Foucart
422
Jeong, H., Sugiura, M., Sassa, Y., Wakusawa, K., Horie, K., Sato, S., & Kawashima, R. (2010). Learning second 
language vocabulary: Neural dissociation of situation-based learning and text-based learning. NeuroImage, 
50(2), 802–809. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROIMAGE.2009.12.038
Kahneman, D. (2003). A perspective on judgment and choice: Mapping bounded rationality. The American 
Psychologist, 58(9), 697–720. https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.58.9.697
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979). Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk. Econometrica, 47(2), 
263. https://doi.org/10.2307/1914185
Keysar, B., Hayakawa, S., & An, S.G. (2012). The foreign-language effect: Thinking in a foreign tongue reduces 
decision biases. Psychological Science, 23(6), 661–668. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797611432178
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Krautz, A.E., & Čavar, F. (2019). “Moral foreign language effect–claims we have never made” (response to com-
mentary by Białek and Fugelsang, in press). Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 40(8), 
687–690. https://doi.org/10.1080/01434632.2018.1547074
Legault, J., Fang, S.Y., Lan, Y.J., & Li, P. (2019). Structural brain changes as a function of second language 
vocabulary training: Effects of learning context. Brain and Cognition, 134, 90–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.BANDC.2018.09.004
Li, P., & Jeong, H. (2020). The social brain of language: Grounding second language learning in social inter-
action. npj Science of Learning, 5(1), 8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-020-0068-7
Liu, L., Margoni, F., He, Y., & Liu, H. (2021). Neural substrates of the interplay between cognitive load and emo-
tional involvement in bilingual decision making. Neuropsychologia, 151, 107721. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2020.107721
Liu, L., Schwieter, J.W., Wang, F., & Liu, H. (2022). First and second languages differentially affect ration-
ality when making decisions: An ERP study. Biological Psychology, 169, 108265. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.BIOPSYCHO.2022.108265
Mækelæ, M.J., & Pfuhl, G. (2019). Deliberate reasoning is not affected by language. PLoS One, 14(1), e0211428. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211428
Miozzo, M., Navarrete, E., Ongis, M., Mello, E., Girotto, V., & Peressotti, F. (2020). Foreign language 
effect in decision-making: How foreign is it? Cognition, 199, 104245. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COGNIT
ION.2020.104245
Muda, R., Niszczota, P., Bialek, M., & Conway, P. (2018). Reading dilemmas in a foreign language reduces both 
deontological and utilitarian response tendencies. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning Memory 
and Cognition, 44(2), 321–326. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000447
Munro, M.J., & Derwing, T.M. (1995). Processing time, accent, and comprehensibility in the perception of native 
and foreign-accented speech. Language and Speech, 38(3), 289–306. https://doi.org/10.1177/00238309950
3800305
Nadarevic, L., Plier, S., Thielmann, I., & Darancó, S. (2018). Foreign language reduces the longevity of 
the repetition-based truth effect. Acta Psychologica, 191, 149–159. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ACT
PSY.2018.08.019
Opitz, B., & Degner, J. (2012). Emotionality in a second language: It’s a matter of time. Neuropsychologia, 
50(8), 1961–1967. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.04.021
Pavlenko, A. (2012). Affective processing in bilingual speakers: Disembodied cognition? International Journal 
of Psychology, 47(6), 405–428. https://doi.org/10.1080/00207594.2012.743665
Pavlenko, A. (2017). Do you wish to waive your rights? Affect and decision-making in multilingual speakers. 
Current Opinion in Psychology, 17, 74–78. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.COPSYC.2017.06.005
Peeters, D. (2019). Virtual reality: A game-changing method for the language sciences. Psychonomic Bulletin 
and Review, 26(3), 894–900. https://doi.org/10.3758/S13423-019-01571-3
Shin, H.I., & Kim, J. (2017). Foreign language effect and psychological distance. Journal of Psycholinguistic 
Research, 46(6), 1339–1352. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10936-017-9498-7
Stankovic, M., Biedermann, B., & Hamamura, T. (2022). Not all bilinguals are the same: A meta-analysis 
of the moral foreign language effect. Brain and Language, 227, 105082. https://doi.org/10.1016/
J.BANDL.2022.105082
Sulpizio, S., Toti, M., Del Maschio, N., Costa, A., Fedeli, D., Job, R., & Abutalebi, J. (2019). Are you really 
cursing? Neural processing of taboo words in native and foreign language. Brain and Language, 194, 84–92. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.BANDL.2019.05.003
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Decision Making and Second Language Neurocognition
423
Tokowicz, N., & Tkacikova, V. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language lexico-semantic 
system. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Thomson, J. (1985). The trolley problem. Yale Law Journal, 94, 1395–1415. https://doi.org/10.2307/796133
Verga, L., & Kotz, S.A. (2019). Putting language back into ecological communication contexts. Language, 
Cognition and Neuroscience, 34(4), 536–544. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1506886
Vives, M., Aparici, M., & Costa, A. (2018). The limits of the foreign language effect on decision-making: The 
case of the outcome bias and the representativeness heuristic. PLOS ONE, 13(9), e0203528. https://doi.org/
10.1371/journal.pone.0203528
Winskel, H., & Bhatt, D. (2019). The role of culture and language in moral decision-making. Culture and Brain, 
8(2), 207–225. https://doi.org/10.1007/S40167-019-00085-Y
Wong, G., & Ng, B.C. (2018). Moral judgment in early bilinguals: Language dominance influences responses 
to moral dilemmas. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 1070. https://doi.org/10.3389/FPSYG.2018.01070/BIBTEX
Yang, X., Li, L., & Li, R. (2021). Foreign language effect on dishonesty. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, 4871. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/FPSYG.2021.633016/BIBTEX
Zappa, A., & Frenck-Mestre, C. (this volume). Neurocognition of social learning of second language: How can 
second language be learned as first language? Embodied second language processing and learning from a 
neurocognitive perspective. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second 
language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Zheng, L., Mobbs, D., & Yu, R. (2020). The behavioral and neural basis of foreign language effect on risk-taking. 
Neuropsychologia, 136, 107290. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.NEUROPSYCHOLOGIA.2019.107290
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

424
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-39
31
COGNITIVE CONTROL 
IN SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
Introduction to Cognitive Control in L2
In today’s world, more and more people have become bilinguals. As bilinguals, they are able to 
switch between their two languages at will, including selecting the intended language for production. 
Bilingualism has been widely regarded as a continuum described based on a range of factors, such as 
age of acquisition of the second language (L2), proficiency of L2, and language immersion (in first 
language, L1, or L2). The current chapter focuses on L2 learners who acquired L2 at a much later 
stage of life than their L1. They constitute an important sub-population of bilinguals and sometimes 
referred to as late bilinguals. Previous research in the past decades has shown that when L2 learners 
intend to speak the L2, words in L1 are activated in parallel, leading to interference from L1 (e.g., 
Costa et al., 2000; Guo & Peng, 2006; Kroll et al., 2008). Then, an important question arises: How 
do L2 learners select words in L2? Prevailing evidence has suggested that cognitive control plays 
a crucial role in L2 language production. The current literature has also revealed some key aspects 
of the cognitive neural mechanisms of bilingual language control during production. In this chapter, 
we first briefly introduce the cognitive mechanisms of language control. Next, we discuss the rela-
tionship between bilingual language control and domain-general cognitive control, as informed by 
behavioral and neurocognitive empirical data. Lastly, we discuss the (neuro)plasticity of bilingual 
language control revealed by a more recent, dynamic approach, and point out some directions for 
future research.
The Cognitive Mechanisms of Bilingual Language Control
In the past decades, substantial theoretical and experimental progress has been made to characterize 
bilingual language control (see for example, Calabria et al., 2022 and Declerck & Philipp, 2015, 
for reviews). In this section, we briefly introduce two influential models and some evidence for the 
modulation of several factors. In this process, we also introduce the key terms that are critical to the 
current discussion.
In the bilingual language control literature, one influential model is the inhibitory control model 
(IC; Green,1998). According to this model, bilinguals need to inhibit the language schema and lex-
ical items in the native language to guarantee selection of the target word in L2. This happens at 
two stages: The language schema phase and the lexical selection phase. During the first stage, both 
L1 and L2 schemas compete with each other. Typically, the intended L2 schema wins by achieving 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
425
a relatively higher activation. In the second phase, the L2 schema inhibits the lexical items in L1, 
reducing its activation level. It is noteworthy that the two stages could be related with two types of 
bilingual language control: Proactive and reactive control (see also Ma et al., 2016). Proactive control 
refers to the adjustment of activation levels of two languages before the activation of specific target 
lexical items. Reactive control, on the other hand, is the regulation to resolve interference after acti-
vation of lexical items. These two types of language control have been examined in many empirical 
studies reviewed in the current chapter.
Additionally, the IC model assumes that relative language proficiency between bilinguals’ two 
languages determines the amount of inhibition required: The stronger language needs to be inhibited 
more than the weaker language. Relative language proficiency has been tested as a modulating factor 
for bilingual language control during speech production. Indeed, evidence has suggested comparable 
inhibition between languages in simultaneous balanced bilinguals (e.g., Costa & Santesteban, 2004, 
Experiment 2, Experiment 3; Costa et al., 2006) and stronger inhibition of the dominant language 
in sequential unbalanced bilinguals (e.g., Costa & Santesteban, 2004; Linck et al., 2012; Meuter & 
Allport, 1999, Experiment 1). In addition, bilinguals may switch to a language control mechanism 
that does not necessarily involve inhibition with increasing proficiency of L2. In other words, profi-
cient L2 learners may adopt a language-specific selection mechanism, in which lexical items in the 
non-target language do not compete with those in the target language during word production (Costa 
et al., 2006). It is noteworthy that the two factors of relative language proficiency and age of acquisi-
tion are often confounded, such that early bilinguals tend to achieve a high proficiency level in their 
L2 (see also Fromont, this volume).
The context of language use has been identified as another modulating factor of bilingual lan-
guage control. That is, bilinguals may adjust language control with 此处和下一个句子里内容重
复。 the specific contexts of language use, a main claim of the adaptive control hypothesis (ACH, 
Green & Abutalebi, 2013), which proposes a range of cognitive mechanisms of bilingual language 
control. The demands of each mechanism are contingent on the specific contexts of language use to 
achieve successful communication goals. For example, in a dense code-switching context, where 
speakers frequently incorporate elements (morphemes, words, or phrases) from one language into a 
sentence in the other language, it was hypothesized that opportunistic planning (i.e., planning to use 
any resources available at the moment of interaction) plays a critical role, whereas other processes, 
such as goal maintenance, interference control, response inhibition, disengagement (e.g., from a pre-
vious target language), and engagement (e.g., of a new target language) would not be so important. 
In contrast, in dual language contexts, where participants need to use two languages with different 
speakers, all the cognitive processes except for opportunistic planning would be more engaged. These 
assumptions have received support from empirical data (e.g., Green & Wei, 2014; Green, 2011; Wu 
et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021). For example, Wu et al. (2020) examined how language control would 
be modulated by language contexts, i.e., the L1 single-language context with relatively low language 
conflict, the L2 single-language context with relatively high language conflict, and the dual-language 
context with the strongest language conflict. They found that in the high-conflict L2-single context, 
extra adjustments of the brain network were needed, including improving the global efficiency and 
relying on clearer core-periphery structures, as compared to the low-conflict L1-single context. (For 
more on the role of context in L2 neurocognition, see Bowden & Faretta-Stutenberg, this volume.)
Bilingual Language Control and Domain-General Cognitive Control
One critical issue that has been the focus of research is the relationship between bilingual language 
control and domain-general cognitive control mechanisms. It has been widely held that bilingual lan-
guage control originated from cognitive control outside of the language system (Green, 1998; Meuter 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
426
& Allport, 1999; Timmer et al., 2018), which enables the management, coordination, and organiza-
tion of thoughts and behavior (Braver, 2012; Miller, 2000).
A number of studies have examined the behavioral performance and brain activities associated 
with linguistic and non-linguistic tasks to reveal the relationship between bilingual language control 
and domain-general cognitive control (e.g., Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkanen, 2016; Branzi et al., 2015; 
Branzi et al., 2016; de Bruin et al., 2014). Relevant to the current discussion of control in production, 
in an magnetoencephalography study (see Kousaie & Klein, this volume for information about this 
method), Blanco-Elorrieta and Pylkkanen (2016) found that bilinguals relied on the prefrontal cortex 
(PFC) to perform both language switching and task (i.e., semantic category) switching production 
tasks. An interesting difference was also observed: Language switching relied more on the left PFC, 
whereas task switching relied more on the right PFC.
Other studies have utilized correlation analyses between bilinguals’ behavioral performance in 
language control tasks and non-linguistic control tasks to examine the relationship between bilingual 
language control and domain-general cognitive control (Branzi et al., 2016; Calabria et al., 2013; de 
Bruin et al., 2014; Declerck et al., 2017; Jylkkä, Lehtonen, Lindholm et al., 2018; Linck et al., 2008; 
Linck et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2016; Pivneva et al., 2014; Timmer et al., 2018; Woumans et al., 2015). 
The underlying logic is that if bilingual language control (partially) overlaps with domain-general 
cognitive control, performances on the two types of tasks should correlate with each other. If they 
do not overlap, there should be no correlations observed. Indeed, some studies found that bilinguals 
who performed better in non-linguistic control tasks also showed better performance in the language 
control tasks, suggesting that the bilingual language control relies on the domain-general cognitive 
control (de Bruin et al., 2014; Declerck et al., 2017; Linck et al., 2008; Linck et al., 2012; Liu et al., 
2016; Pivneva et al., 2014; Timmer et al., 2018; Woumans et al., 2015).
Among different domain-general cognitive abilities examined through this correlational approach, 
inhibitory control (e.g., Linck et al., 2012) and cognitive flexibility (e.g., Liu et al., 2013) have 
received considerable scholarly attention in both cross-sectional studies comparing two sub-groups 
of participants and longitudinal studies comparing the same group’s performance before and after 
training. For example, in a cross-sectional study, Linck et al. (2012) first examined the modulation 
of domain-general inhibitory control, one important type of executive control, on bilingual language 
control. They reported that the Simon effect (i.e., the differences in reaction times and accuracy 
rates between the congruent condition, where the stimulus and response were on the same side, 
and the incongruent condition, where the stimulus and response were on opposite sides) indexing 
inhibitory control correlated with the L1 switching cost: the smaller the Simon effect, the smaller 
the L1 switching cost. The researchers concluded that participants with higher inhibitory control 
abilities exert language control more effectively. Further, in a longitudinal training study, Liu et al. 
(2016) documented that participants with low inhibitory control ability (measured by a Simon task) 
exhibited asymmetrical language switching costs at first, but they showed symmetrical language 
switching costs behaviorally after inhibitory control training with the Simon task. In addition, event-
related potential (ERP) data, reflecting neural activity (see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume), in these 
participants revealed a more positive late positive complex (i.e., a positive-going brainwave peaking 
at around 450–600 ms after stimulus onset, here associated with releasing inhibition of lexical items 
that were previously suppressed) in the L2 switch trials than L1 switch trials only after training. 
These results indicate that inhibition training improves the efficiency of exerting bilingual language 
control.
The studies reviewed above mainly examined whether one aspect of domain-general executive 
control impacts bilingual language control. However, executive functions (also referred to as execu-
tive control or cognitive control) include a range of high-level cognitive processes responsible for 
regulating control, consisting of inhibiting, shifting, and updating (e.g., Huizinga et al., 2006; Lehto 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
427
et al., 2003; Miyake et al., 2000). Miyake et al. (2000) proposed that inhibition is exerted over the 
prepotent response for bilingual language control. Other scholars have further distinguished two 
types of inhibition: interference suppression (i.e., inhibition of irrelevant information to guarantee 
making the correct response) and response inhibition (i.e., inhibition over the dominant response) 
(e.g., Friedman & Miyake, 2004; Nigg, 2000; Van Boxtel et al., 2001). Shifting (also referred to as 
“cognitive flexibility”) refers to switching between multiple tasks or mental sets (i.e., inhibiting the 
previous task or mental set to meet the current response demand) (Miyake et al., 2000). Updating 
is defined as updating and monitoring working memory representations. It involves monitoring the 
information of the upcoming task, searching for the information available, and replacing the old, 
irrelevant information with updated information of the current task (Miyake et al., 2000). To gain 
a deeper understanding of the relationship between bilingual language control and domain-general 
executive control, it is necessary to detail whether different high-level cognitive processes of domain-
general control modulate bilingual language control.
So far, only a few recent studies have made such attempts (e.g., Jylkkä et al., 2017; Kang et al., 
2020; Li et al., 2021). For example, in Kang et al. (2020), the flanker task, the task switching task, 
and the 3-back task were used to measure unbalanced bilinguals’ inhibition, shifting, and updating 
capabilities, respectively. Also, a cued language switching paradigm (cue presented prior to stimulus) 
was used to investigate bilingual language control. The paradigm examined cue-locked ERPs at a 
task schema phase and stimulus-locked ERPs at a lemma selection phase proposed in the IC model 
(Green, 1998). In both phases, switching was indexed by an N2 effect (i.e., a centro-frontal negative-
going ERP component peaking at around 200–300 ms after stimulus onset, widely associated with 
cognitive abilities, particularly inhibition). Results showed that a smaller flanker effect was correlated 
with a larger N2 switch effect in stimulus-locked ERPs. These results suggest that bilinguals with 
stronger domain-general interference inhibition ability exert stronger language inhibitory control 
over lexical items in the non-target language during the lemma selection phase.
The Neural Mechanisms of Language Control and Domain-General Control
Over the past decades, neuroimaging studies have provided important insights into the neural 
mechanisms of language control (e.g., Guo et al., 2011; Yuan, Ma, et al., 2021; Yuan, Wu, et al., 
2021; see Kousaie & Klein, this volume, for an overview to neuroimaging methods to examine 
neural activation). For example, Yuan, Ma, et al. (2021) used multivoxel pattern analysis (MVPA) 
to examine patterns of neural activity in bilingual language switching. Results showed that switch 
and non-switch conditions elicited different neural activities in frontal brain regions, including the 
left dorsolateral PFC, left inferior frontal gyrus, left supplementary motor area, anterior cingulate 
cortex, bilateral precentral gyri, and the left cerebellum, suggesting their roles in language control. 
Furthermore, these regions interacted with each other to form a frontal and fronto-cerebellar lan-
guage control network.
A number of studies have documented that the brain regions involved in bilingual language control 
have also been reported to be activated in studies on domain-general cognitive control (Iannaccone 
et al., 2015; Kerns, 2006; Kim et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2004; Nee, et al., 2007; Zhu et al., 2010), 
which leads to the conclusion that bilingual language control (at least partially) relies on the domain-
general cognitive control mechanisms (de Bruin et al., 2014; Hernandez et al., 2001; Wang et al., 
2007; Xue et al., 2008). More recent research (Anderson et al., 2018; Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkanen, 
2016; De Baene et al., 2015; Wu et al., 2018) has compared the brain activities when the same bilin-
gual populations performed linguistic and domain-general control tasks to investigate the potential 
overlap between the neural mechanisms of the bilingual language control and the domain-general 
cognitive control. For example, De Baene et al. (2015) found that a language-switching task and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
428
a task-switching task activated largely shared areas in trilinguals, including the left inferior frontal 
junction (extending into the inferior frontal gyrus), the medial PFC, comprising the dorsal anterior 
singular cortex (dACC) and pre-supplementary motor area (preSMA), and the parietal lobe (including 
inferior and superior parietal lobules).
Other studies showed that the degree of activation differed in the commonly activated regions in 
linguistic and domain-general control tasks (Blanco-Elorrieta & Pylkkanen, 2016; Branzi et al., 2015; 
Magezi et al., 2012). More specifically, researchers have attempted to identify neural mechanisms that are 
specific for bilingual language control, but the reported divergent activation patterns between linguistic 
and non-linguistic control tasks are not considered as typical brain regions responsible for domain-
general cognitive control. As discussed earlier, Blanco-Elorrieta and Pylkkanen (2016) reported that lan-
guage switching relied more on the left PFC, whereas task switching relied more on the right PFC. In 
addition, some researchers hold that the left caudate may be a language-specific control region (Abutalebi 
et al., 2008; Abutalebi et al., 2013; Abutalebi & Green, 2008, 2016; Cattaneo et al., 2015; Cattaneo et al., 
2019; Kang, Fu, et al., 2017). However, other researchers disagree on the role that the left caudate plays 
in language-specific control (Hervais-Adelman et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2013; Zou et al., 2012), as the 
activation of this region has been reported in some non-linguistic control studies (Grahn et al., 2008; Kim 
et al., 2012; Wang et al., 2013). Nonetheless, the left caudate may play a unique coordinating role in exer-
cising language and non-linguistic control. To our knowledge, few related studies have explored whether 
there are any specific brain areas associated with language control coordination.
To sum up, current evidence suggests that bilingual language control and non-linguistic control 
largely share neural correlates, but it is debated whether there are specific brain regions for language 
control. In addition, few studies have examined the relationship between the two types of control from 
the perspective of brain connectivity among brain regions. In an exploratory study on of the brain net-
work (or subnetwork) supporting bilinguals’ domain-general and language-specific control, Wu et al. 
(2019) showed that bilingual language control relied on a highly cooperative network, including the 
frontal lobe, the parietal cortex, subcortical areas, and the cerebellum. Moreover, this network exerted 
control over linguistic and non-linguistic representations by means of reconfiguration. Specifically, 
language control needed to depend more on the connections from frontal to subcortical areas and 
those inside the subcortical nucleus than the domain general cognitive control, indicating the recon-
figurable nature of the brain network. The brain networks of bilingual language control and domain 
general cognitive control exhibited similar connectivity patterns and strengths in the PFC, with the 
dACC/pre-SMA and the right thalamus serving as hubs. These represented the relatively stable aspects 
during brain network reconfiguration. This study provided the first piece of empirical evidence for the 
connectivity patterns in the bilingual language control brain network and shed light on the relation-
ship between language control and general cognitive control from the perspective of neural network 
reconfiguration.
Current Trends: Dynamic Adaptations of Domain-General and Language-Specific 
Control During Bilingual Language Production
The studies discussed above mainly examined the domain-general cognitive functions and language-
specific control during bilingual language production in an indirect and static manner by comparing 
the behavioral performance and brain activities when bilinguals completed linguistic and non-
linguistic control tasks. In the past few years, however, an emerging trend is to investigate this issue 
using a direct and dynamic approach (Li, et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2016; Prior & Gollan, 2013).
One line of studies has examined bilingual domain-general and language-specific control during 
language production from the perspective of the functional changes in certain brain regions in a short 
experimental session (Cattaneo et al., 2015; Cattaneo et al., 2019; Li et al., 2018). For example, Li 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
429
et al. (2018) used transcranial direct current stimulation to change the activity of the right dorsolateral 
PFC, a typical region involved in domain-general cognitive control. Results showed that compared 
with the control condition, cathodal stimulation caused (a) more symmetrical switching costs in reac-
tion times and accuracy rates, and (b) a late positive component effect (i.e., larger magnitude when 
switching into L2 than when switching into L1, associated with inhibition of lexical items in the 
non-target language) in ERP data from a subsequent language switching task. The authors concluded 
that the right dorsolateral PFC was critical in inhibiting the non-target language during language 
switching after cathodal stimulation.
Another line of studies has examined the plasticity of domain-general and language-specific con-
trol during bilingual production using training paradigms (Chen et al., 2020, 2021; Kang, Fu, et al., 
2017; Liu et al., 2016; Prior & Gollan, 2013; Wu et al., 2018, 2022; Yuan et al., 2021; Zhang et al., 
2015). First of all, a few studies investigated how language training affects domain-general con-
trol. For example, Kang, Ma, and Guo (2017) provided Chinese–English bilinguals with intensive, 
short-term language control training and found that the N2 latency was shortened after training. As 
the N2 has been believed to reflect domain-general conflict monitoring and interference inhibition 
(Jackson et al., 1999; Nieuwenhuis et al., 2004), this result may suggest that short-term language 
control training improves the efficiency of domain-general control during bilingual language pro-
duction. Considering that the N2 component originates from the dACC (Nieuwenhuis et al., 2003; 
Veen & Carter, 2002), Kang, Fu, et al. (2017) examined whether the modulation could be reflected 
in the dACC, which is associated with domain-general cognitive control. They found that language 
switching training reduced the activation level of this region, which further indicates that language 
switching training improves domain-general ability. From a cross-task adaption perspective, Yuan 
et al. (2021) examined whether bilingual language switching would modulate the immediate adap-
tation of the cognitive control network. Results showed that a language switching task induced 
effective connectivity changes in the following domain-general task switching task, as reflected in 
the nodal degrees and connectivity strength of the dACC/pre-SMA and the right thalamus. The results 
further highlight the crucial, leading roles of the dACC/pre-SMA responsible for conflict monitoring 
and the right thalamus responsible for control execution in the overlap between language control and 
domain-general control.
Looking in the opposite direction, Wu et al. (2021) examined whether cognitive control training 
affects the neural mechanisms of bilingual language control and observed a negative correlation 
between changes in activation levels in the left dorsolateral PFC and changes in the switching cost 
magnitude in the language-switching task in the training group but not in the control group, suggesting 
that the dorsolateral PFC plays a critical role in the transfer effect from domain-general executive 
functions to language control.
Researchers are also interested in what changes language switching training induces for the bilin-
gual language control mechanisms. As expected, there has been new neuroimaging and ERP evi-
dence showing that language switching training enhances proactive and reactive language control 
mechanisms (Chen et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2015). Chen and colleagues (2020) reported that lan-
guage switching training reduced the activation of brain regions of reactive control, and this training 
effect could be transferred to proactive control, particularly in low-proficiency bilinguals. Also, Zhang 
et al. (2015) found ERP evidence (enlarged N2) indicating that dual language training enhanced pro-
active control over L1.
Together, more recent evidence from a dynamic perspective converges with previous findings, 
providing more direct evidence suggesting causal relations between the bilingual language con-
trol and domain-general language control, and thus more support for the notion of adaptive 
and dynamic nature of bilingual language control proposed by the ACH hypothesis (Green & 
Abutalebi, 2013).
 
 
 
 
 

Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
430
Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
In conclusion, early studies mainly examined the bilingual language control mechanisms during lan-
guage production from a static perspective to test the IC model (e.g., Green, 1998); whereas more 
recent studies have investigated the adaptive nature of the bilingual language control dynamically, 
focusing on its changes over time proposed by the ACH hypothesis (e.g., Green & Abutalebi, 2013). 
Functional changes in the brain regions subserving domain-general and language-specific control 
impact bilingual language control. At the same time, training in linguistic or non-linguistic con-
trol induces adaptive changes of bilinguals’ brain regions involved in domain-general and language-
specific control. The latest research on the brain network in L2 learners shows that the neural 
networks of the domain-general and language-specific control overlap largely but differ in certain 
aspects. Furthermore, this network shows both temporary changes depending on the specific lan-
guage contexts and relatively long-lasting changes according to experience. These adaptive changes 
provide novel evidence and new perspectives for the investigations of the neural mechanisms of bilin-
gual language control. They also offer valuable insights into the debate on bilingual cognitive benefits 
(e.g., Bialystok & Craik, 2022).
Further novel insights can be brought about through the use of non-invasive brain stimulation 
techniques (e.g., transcranial magnetic stimulation and transcranial direct current stimulation) to 
examine neural mechanisms of cognitive processing. To further explore the relationship between lan-
guage control and cognitive control in L2 learners, it would be interesting to apply these techniques 
to interfere with the activities of one or several brain regions during language control and cogni-
tive control tasks. In addition, L2 learner patients with lesions of certain brain structures could also 
provide valuable data to elucidate the neural networks subserving language and cognitive control. 
Additionally, the potential combination of non-invasive brain stimulation with functional magnetic 
resonance imaging techniques (e.g., Jung & Lambon Ralph, 2016; Tang et al., 2021) will allow more 
direct investigations of how brain stimulations potentially modulate neural activities and correlate 
with behavioral data.
Finally, in the future, regardless of the method, it would be important to further examine how 
different cognitive components of the domain-general cognitive control, including inhibition and 
other aspects of attentional control, are related to bilingual language control (see also Bialystok & 
Craik, 2022). Additionally, based on the multifaceted bilingual experience, a number of factors, such 
as sociolinguistic contexts (Titone & Tiv, 2023), should be considered and systematically investigated 
to determine their potential roles in bilingual language control. Bilingualism is a complex phenom-
enon, which brings both challenges and opportunities for researchers to proceed in the process of 
unveiling more fascinating and significant facets of human brain and cognition that could not be 
revealed by examining monolinguals only.
Further Readings
This paper proposes an attentional control account that includes a range of processing operations in bilinguals, 
which are not constrained to inhibition, and discusses how this framework could explain the evidence available 
on bilingual cognitive benefits across the lifespan.
Bialystok, E., & Craik, F.I. (2022). How does bilingualism modify cognitive function? Attention to the mech-
anism. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-022-02057-5
Grounded in neuroimaging findings reported in both healthy individuals and brain-damaged patients, these 
authors discuss the neural network subserving various processes during bilingual language control, highlighting 
its adaptive nature and neural effects.
Calabria, M., Costa, A., Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2018). Neural basis of bilingual language control. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1426(1), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13879
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
431
In this paper, a systems framework of bilingualism is proposed to characterize different layers of sociolinguistic 
contexts. The framework embraces the complex social contexts of bilingual speakers and invites further studies 
on how factors of each layer would potentially modulate bilingual language control.
Titone, D.A., & Tiv, M. (2023). Rethinking multilingual experience through a Systems Framework of Bilingualism. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 26(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921001127
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (31871097 to T.G.).
References
Abutalebi, J., Annoni, J.M., Zimine, I., Pegna, A.J., Seghier, M.L., Lee-Jahnke, H., Lazeyras, F., Cappa, S.F., 
& Khateb, A. (2008). Language control and lexical competition in bilinguals: An event-related fMRI study. 
Cerebral Cortex, 18(7), 1496–1505. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhm182
Abutalebi, J., Della Rosa, P.A., Ding, G., Weekes, B., Costa, A., & Green, D.W. (2013). Language proficiency 
modulates the engagement of cognitive control areas in multilinguals. Cortex, 49(3), 905–911. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.cortex.2012.08.018
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D.W. (2008). Control mechanisms in bilingual language production: Neural evidence 
from language switching studies. Language and Cognitive Processes, 23(4), 557–582. https://doi.org/
10.1080/01690960801920602
Abutalebi, J., & Green, D.W. (2016). Neuroimaging of language control in bilinguals: Neural adaptation and 
reserve. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 19(4), 689–698. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
6000225
Anderson, J.A.E., Chung-Fat-Yim, A., Bellana, B., Luk, G., & Bialystok, E. (2018). Language and cognitive 
control networks in bilinguals and monolinguals. Neuropsychologia, 117, 352–363. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuropsychologia.2018.06.023
Bialystok, E., & Craik, F.I. (2022). How does bilingualism modify cognitive function? Attention to the mech-
anism. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 29(4), 1246–1269. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-022-02057-5
Blanco-Elorrieta, E., & Pylkkanen, L. (2016). Bilingual language control in perception versus action: MEG 
reveals comprehension control mechanisms in anterior cingulate cortex and domain-general control of pro-
duction in dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 36(2), 290–301. https://doi.org/10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.2597-15.2016
Bobb, S. C., & Wodniecka, Z. (2013). Language switching in picture naming: What asymmetric switching costs 
(do not) tell us about inhibition in bilingual speech planning. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 568–
585. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.792822
Bowden, H., & Faretta-Stutenberg, M. (this volume). Context of learning in second language neurocognition. 
In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Branzi, F.M., Calabria, M., Boscarino, M.L., & Costa, A. (2016). On the overlap between bilingual language 
control and domain-general executive control. Acta Psychologica, 166, 21–30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.act
psy.2016.03.001
Branzi, F.M., Della Rosa, P.A., Canini, M., Costa, A., & Abutalebi, J. (2015). Language control in 
bilinguals: Monitoring and response selection. Cerebral Cortex, 26(6), 2367–2380. https://doi.org/10.1093/
cercor/bhv052
Braver, T.S. (2012). The variable nature of cognitive control: A dual mechanisms framework. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences, 16(2), 106–113. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2011.12.010
Calabria, M., Branzi, F.M., Marne, P., Hernández, M., & Costa, A. (2013). Age-related effects over bilingual lan-
guage control and executive control. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 18(1), 65–78. https://doi.org/
10.1017/s1366728913000138
Calabria, M., Costa, A., Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2018). Neural basis of bilingual language control. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1426(1), 221–235. https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13879
Cattaneo, G., Calabria, M., Marne, P., Gironell, A., Abutalebi, J., & Costa, A. (2015). The role of executive con-
trol in bilingual language production: A study with Parkinson’s disease individuals. Neuropsychologia, 66, 
99–110. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2014.11.006
Cattaneo, G., Costa, A., Gironell, A., & Calabria, M. (2019). On the specificity of bilingual language control: A 
study with Parkinson’s disease patients. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 23(3), 570–578. https://doi.
org/10.1017/s136672891900004x
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
432
Chen, M., Ma, F., Wu, J., Li, S., Zhang, Z., Fu, Y., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2020). Individual differences in lan-
guage proficiency shape the neural plasticity of language control in bilingual language production. Journal of 
Neurolinguistics, 54, Article 100887. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100887
Chen, M., Ma, F., Zhang, Z., Li, S., Zhang, M., Yuan, Q., Wu, J., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2021). Language switching 
training modulates the neural network of non-linguistic cognitive control. PLoS ONE, 16(4), Article 
e0247100. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0247100
Costa, A., Caramazza, A., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2000). The cognate facilitation effect: implications for models 
of lexical access. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 26(5), 1283. 
https://doi.org/10.1037//0278-7393.26.5.1283
Costa, A., & Santesteban, M. (2004). Lexical access in bilingual speech production: Evidence from language 
switching in highly proficient bilinguals and L2 learners. Journal of Memory and Language, 50(4), 491–511. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2004.02.002
Costa, A., Santesteban, M., & Ivanova, I. (2006). How do highly proficient bilinguals control their lexicalization 
process? Inhibitory and language-specific selection mechanisms are both functional. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 32(5), 1057. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.32.5.1057
De Baene, W., Duyck, W., Brass, M., & Carreiras, M. (2015). Brain circuit for cognitive control is shared by 
task and language switching. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(9), 1752–1765. https://doi.org/10.1162/
jocn_a_00817
de Bruin, A., Roelofs, A., Dijkstra, T., & Fitzpatrick, I. (2014). Domain-general inhibition areas of the brain are 
involved in language switching: fMRI evidence from trilingual speakers. Neuroimage, 90, 348–359. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.049
Declerck, M., Grainger, J., Koch, I., & Philipp, A.M. (2017). Is language control just a form of executive con-
trol? Evidence for overlapping processes in language switching and task switching. Journal of Memory and 
Language, 95, 138–145. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jml.2017.03.005
Declerck, M., & Philipp, A.M. (2015). A review of control processes and their locus in language switching. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 22(6), 1630–1645. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-015-0836-1
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electro encephalography to investigate second language 
organization. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acqui-
sition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Friedman, N.P., & Miyake, A. (2004). The relations among inhibition and interference control functions: a 
latent-variable analysis. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 133(1), 101. https://doi.org/10.1037/
0096-3445.133.1.101
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Garbin, G., Costa, A., Sanjuan, A., Forn, C., Rodriguez-Pujadas, A., Ventura, N., Belloch, V., Hernandez, M., 
& Ávila, C. (2011). Neural bases of language switching in high and early proficient bilinguals. Brain and 
Language, 119(3), 129–135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2011.03.011
Grahn, J.A., Parkinson, J.A., & Owen, A.M. (2008). The cognitive functions of the caudate nucleus. Progress in 
Neurobiology, 86(3), 141–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pneurobio.2008.09.004
Green, D.W. (1998). Mental control of the bilingual lexico-semantic system. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 1(02), 67–81. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728998000133
Green, D.W. (2011). Language control in different contexts: The behavioral ecology of bilingual speakers. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 2, Article103. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2011.00103
Green, D.W., & Wei, L. (2014). A control process model of code-switching. Language, Cognition and 
Neuroscience, 29(4), 499–511. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2014.882515
Green, D.W., & Abutalebi, J. (2013). Language control in bilinguals: The adaptive control hypothesis. Journal of 
Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 515–530. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.796377
Guo, T., & Peng, D. (2006). Event-related potential evidence for parallel activation of two languages in bilingual 
speech production. Neuroreport, 17(17), 1757–1760. https://doi.org/10.1097/01.wnr.0000246327.89308.a5
Hernandez, A.E., Dapretto, M., Mazziotta, J., & Bookheimer, S. (2001). Language switching and language 
representation in Spanish-English bilinguals: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 14(2), 510–520. https://doi.org/
10.1006/nimg.2001.0810
Hervais-Adelman, A., Moser-Mercer, B., & Golestani, N. (2015). Brain functional plasticity associated with the 
emergence of expertise in extreme language control. Neuroimage, 114, 264–274. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.neuroimage.2015.03.072
Huizinga, M., Dolan, C.V., & Van der Molen, M.W. (2006). Age-related change in executive function: Developmental 
trends and a latent variable analysis. Neuropsychologia, 44(11), 2017–2036. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuro
psychologia.2006.01.010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
433
Iannaccone, R., Hauser, T.U., Staempfli, P., Walitza, S., Brandeis, D., & Brem, S. (2015). Conflict monitoring 
and error processing: new insights from simultaneous EEG-fMRI. Neuroimage, 105, 395–407. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.10.028
Jung, J., & Lambon Ralph, M.A. (2016). Mapping the dynamic network interactions underpinning cognition: A 
cTBS-fMRI study of the flexible adaptive neural system for semantics. Cerebral Cortex, 26(8), 3580–3590. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhw149
Jylkkä, J., Lehtonen, M., Lindholm, F., Kuusakoski, A., & Laine, M. (2018). The relationship between general 
executive functions and bilingual switching and monitoring in language production. Bilingualism: Language 
and Cognition, 21(3), 505–522. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728917000104
Kang, C., Fu, Y., Wu, J., Ma, F., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2017). Short-term language switching training tunes the 
neural correlates of cognitive control in bilingual language production. Human Brain Mapping, 38(12), 
5859–5870. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23765
Kang, C., Ma, F., & Guo, T. (2017). The plasticity of lexical selection mechanism in word produc-
tion: ERP evidence from short-term language switching training in unbalanced Chinese–English bilinguals. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 21(2), 296–313. https://doi.org/10.1017/s1366728917000037
Kang, C., Ma, F., Li, S., Kroll, J.F., & Guo, T. (2020). Domain-general inhibition ability predicts the intensity of 
inhibition on non-target language in bilingual word production: An ERP study. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 23(5), 1056–1069. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728920000085
Kerns, J.G. (2006). Anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortex activity in an FMRI study of trial-to-trial adjustments 
on the Simon task. Neuroimage, 33(1), 399–405. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.06.012
Kim, C., Cilles, S.E., Johnson, N.F., & Gold, B.T. (2012). Domain general and domain preferential brain regions 
associated with different types of task switching: A meta-analysis. Human Brain Mapping, 33(1), 130–142. 
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.21199
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kroll, J.F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for asym-
metric connections between bilingual memory representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 33(2), 
149–174. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1994.1008
Lehto, J.E., Juujärvi, P., Kooistra, L., & Pulkkinen, L. (2003). Dimensions of executive functioning: Evidence 
from children. British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 21(1), 59–80. https://doi.org/10.1348/0261510
03321164627
Li, B., Liu, H., Perez, A., & Xie, N. (2018). Cathodal transcranial direct current stimulation over right dorsolat-
eral prefrontal cortex improves language control during language switching. Behavioural Brain Research, 
351, 34–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2018.05.026
Linck, J.A., Hoshino, N., & Kroll, J.F. (2008). Cross-language lexical processes and inhibitory control. Mental 
Lexicon, 3(3), 349–374. https://doi.org/10.1075/ml.3.3.06lin
Linck, J.A., Schwieter, J.W., & Sunderman, G. (2012). Inhibitory control predicts language switching perform-
ance in trilingual speech production. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(03), 651–662. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S136672891100054X
Liu, H., Liang, L., Dunlap, S., Fan, N., & Chen, B. (2016). The effect of domain-general inhibition-related 
training on language switching: An ERP study. Cognition, 146, 264–276. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2015.10.004
Liu, X., Banich, M.T., Jacobson, B.L., & Tanabe, J.L. (2004). Common and distinct neural substrates of atten-
tional control in an integrated Simon and spatial Stroop task as assessed by event-related fMRI. Neuroimage, 
22(3), 1097–1106. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.02.033
Ma, F.Y., Li, S. C., & Guo, T.M. (2016). Reactive and proactive control in bilingual word production: An 
investigation of influential factors. Journal of Memory and Language, 86, 35–59. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.jml.2015.08.004
Magezi, D.A., Khateb, A., Mouthon, M., Spierer, L., & Annoni, J.M. (2012). Cognitive control of language pro-
duction in bilinguals involves a partly independent process within the domain-general cognitive control net-
work: evidence from task-switching and electrical brain activity. Brain and Language, 122(1), 55–63. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2012.04.008
Meuter, R.F.I., & Allport, A. (1999). Bilingual language switching in naming: Asymmetrical costs of language 
selection. Journal of Memory and Language, 40(1), 25–40. https://doi.org/DOI 10.1006/jmla.1998.2602
Miller, E.K. (2000). The prefontral cortex and cognitive control. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 1(1), 59–65. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/35036228
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Taomei Guo and Fengyang Ma
434
Miyake, A., Friedman, N.P., Emerson, M.J., Witzki, A.H., Howerter, A., & Wager, T.D. (2000). The unity and 
diversity of executive functions and their contributions to complex “frontal lobe” tasks: A latent variable ana-
lysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), 49–100. https://doi.org/10.1006/cogp.1999.0734
Nee, D.E., Wager, T.D., & Jonides, J. (2007). Interference resolution: Insights from a meta-analysis of 
neuroimaging tasks. Cognitive, Affective, & Behavioral Neuroscience, 7(1), 1–17. https://doi.org/10.3758/
cabn.7.1.1
Nieuwenhuis, S., Yeung, N., & Cohen, J.D. (2004). Stimulus modality, perceptual overlap, and the go/no-go N2. 
Psychophysiology, 41(1), 157–160. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1469-8986.2003.00128.x
Nigg, J.T. (2000). On inhibition/disinhibition in developmental psychopathology: views from cognitive and per-
sonality psychology and a working inhibition taxonomy. Psychological Bulletin, 126(2), 220–246. https://doi.
org/10.1037/0033-2909.126.2.220
Philipp, A.M., & Koch, I. (2009). Inhibition in language switching: what is inhibited when switching between 
languages in naming tasks? Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 35(5), 
1187–1195. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0016376
Pivneva, I., Mercier, J., & Titone, D. (2014). Executive control modulates cross-language lexical activation 
during L2 reading: Evidence from eye movements. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 40(3), 787–796. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035583
Prior, A., & Gollan, T.H. (2013). The elusive link between language control and executive control: A case of limited 
transfer. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 25(5), 622–645. https://doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2013.821993
Reverberi, C., Kuhlen, A.K., Seyed-Allaei, S., Greulich, R.S., Costa, A., Abutalebi, J., & Haynes, J.D. (2018). 
The neural basis of free language choice in bilingual speakers: Disentangling language choice and language 
execution. Neuroimage, 177, 108–116. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.05.025
Schwieter, J.W., & Sunderman, G. (2008). Language switching in bilingual speech production: In search of 
the language-specific selection mechanism. The Mental Lexicon, 3(2), 214–238. https://doi.org/10.1075/
ml.3.2.06sch
Timmer, K., Calabria, M., Branzi, F.M., Baus, C., & Costa, A. (2018). On the reliability of switching costs across 
time and domains. Frontier in Psychology, 9, Article 1032. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01032
Titone, D.A., & Tiv, M. (2023). Rethinking multilingual experience through a Systems Framework of Bilingualism. 
Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 26(1), 1–16. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728921001127
Van Boxtel, G.J., Van der Molen, M.W., Jennings, J.R., & Brunia, C.H. (2001). A psychophysiological analysis 
of inhibitory motor control in the stop-signal paradigm. Biological Psychology, 58(3), 229–262. https://doi.
org/10.1016/s0301-0511(01)00117-x
Verhoef, K., Roelofs, A., & Chwilla, D.J. (2009). Role of inhibition in language switching: evidence from event-
related brain potentials in overt picture naming. Cognition, 110(1), 84–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2008.10.013
Wang, X., Wang, Y.Y., Jiang, T., Wang, Y.Z., & Wu, C.-X. (2013). Direct evidence of the left caudate’s role in 
bilingual control: an intra-operative electrical stimulation study. Neurocase, 19(5), 462–469. https://doi.org/
10.1080/13554794.2012.701635
Wang, Y., Xue, G., Chen, C., Xue, F., & Dong, Q. (2007). Neural bases of asymmetric language switching 
in second-language learners: an ER-fMRI study. Neuroimage, 35(2), 862–870. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu
roimage.2006.09.054
Woumans, E., Ceuleers, E., Van der Linden, L., Szmalec, A., & Duyck, W. (2015). Verbal and nonverbal cog-
nitive control in bilinguals and interpreters. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 
Cognition, 41(5), 1579–1586. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000107
Wu, J., Kang, C., Ma, F., Gao, X., & Guo, T. (2018). The influence of short-term language-switching training 
on the plasticity of the cognitive control mechanism in bilingual word production. Quarterly Journal of 
Experimental Psychology, 71(10), 2115–2128. https://doi.org/10.1177/1747021817737520
Wu, J., Yang, J., Chen, M., Li, S., Zhang, Z., Kang, C., Ding, G., & Guo, T. (2019). Brain network reconfiguration 
for language and domain-general cognitive control in bilinguals. Neuroimage, 199, 454–465. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2019.06.022
Wu, J., Zhang, Z., Chen, M., Yuan, Q., Zhang, M., Yang, J., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2020). Language context tunes 
brain network for language control in bilingual language production. Neuropsychologia, 147, Article 107592. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2020.107592
Xue, G., Aron, A.R., & Poldrack, R.A. (2008). Common neural substrates for inhibition of spoken and manual 
responses. Cerebral Cortex, 18(8), 1923–1932. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhm220
Yuan, Q., Ma, F., Zhang, M., Chen, M., Zhang, Z., Wu, J., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2021). Neural interaction between 
language control and cognitive control: Evidence from cross-task adaptation. Behavioural Brain Research, 
401, Article 113086. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bbr.2020.113086
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cognitive Control in Second Language Neurocognition
435
Yuan, Q., Wu, J., Zhang, M., Zhang, Z., Chen, M., Ding, G., Lu, C., & Guo, T. (2021). Patterns and networks of 
language control in bilingual language production. Brain Structure and Function, 226(4), 963–977. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00429-021-02218-7
Zhang H., Diaz M. T., Guo T., Kroll J. F. (2021). Language immersion and language training: Two paths to 
enhanced language regulation and cognitive control. Brain and Language, 223, 105043. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.bandl.2021.105043
Zhang, H., Kang, C., Wu, Y., Ma, F., & Guo, T. (2015). Improving proactive control with training on language 
switching in bilinguals. Neuroreport, 26(6), 354–359. https://doi.org/10.1097/WNR.0000000000000353
Zhu, D.C., Zacks, R.T., & Slade, J.M. (2010). Brain activation during interference resolution in young and older 
adults: An fMRI study. Neuroimage, 50(2), 810–817. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.087
Zou, L., Ding, G., Abutalebi, J., Shu, H., & Peng, D. (2012). Structural plasticity of the left caudate in bimodal 
bilinguals. Cortex, 48(9), 1197–1206. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2011.05.022
 
 
 
 
 
 

436
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-40
32
THE NEUROCOGNITION OF  
CHILD SECOND LANGUAGE 
DEVELOPMENT
Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
Introduction and Critical Definitions
For young children, exposure to a new or additional language often comes at a time when their lan-
guage systems, and the neural mechanisms that support them, are undergoing an active process of 
development. Neurodevelopmental evidence on language suggests that until adolescence, children 
and adults differ at the neural level in how they process language, with some changes continuing into 
and during adult years (Perani et al., 1998; Skeide & Friederici, 2016). Specifically, language devel-
opment is supported by a prolonged period of neurodevelopmental plasticity that can coincide with 
major changes in a child’s life. For instance, kindergarteners may start with a primary Language A and 
a secondary Language B, but these patterns of language use may become completely reversed by the 
end of elementary school. We examine the neurodevelopmental processes that support dual language 
acquisition, with a particular focus on what child second language (L2) learning experiences in this 
context tell us about the plasticity of the human mind and brain development.
Two types of childhood bilinguals are generally examined in neuroscience research: world lan-
guage and dual language learners. World language learners are exposed to a new language as an L2 
in a formal classroom environment. These children exhibit clear and stable first language (L1) and 
L2 distinctions in their patterns of dual language proficiency and use (Gass & Glew, 2011). Dual lan-
guage, or bilingual L1 learners, acquire two languages in immersive contexts. The category includes 
heritage language learners as well as children growing up in communities with more than one official 
language (Tominey et al., 2018). Child heritage language learners are exposed to a home language, 
generally, from birth, that is distinct from the wider speech community’s language, such as minority 
language Spanish speakers in the United States (Valdés, 2000). Dual language learners may shift 
patterns of language dominance and use multiple times throughout childhood as a result of changes in 
their family or schooling environments. Studies may use the age of acquisition (AoA) to dichotomize 
childhood dual language learners into those who are “early (simultaneous)” and “late (successive),” 
with a cut-off of approximately age five as suggested by some researchers (e.g., Weber-Fox & Neville, 
2001). Importantly, however, the prolonged brain development for language function coincides with 
changes in children’s sociolinguistic environments (e.g., family, school, neighborhood); thus, AoA is 
best considered on a continuum and in the context of children’s past and current language experiences 
(Bedore et al., 2012). In order to best contextualize the research, we provide detailed information on 
the age of exposure, age at testing, as well as past and current patterns of language proficiency and 
use, for each study population described in our review of child L2 acquisition.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
437
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
Distinct domains of linguistic competence take precedence at different developmental stages. We 
begin with a brief overview of each domain, starting with phonology, followed by the lexicon and 
semantics, and concluding with sentence-level morpho-syntax and semantics. Throughout the chapter, 
we discuss key issues such as AoA effects, proficiency, patterns of language use, and crosslinguistic 
interactions in language processing (for more on age and proficiency, see Fromont, this volume; for 
more on crosslinguistic interactions, see Sabourin & Manning, this volume; Xu & Wong, this volume) 
Since nearly all the reviewed research was published in English, our survey reflects both limitations 
in access to non-English language and the limitation of the field in general. Indeed, although bilin-
gualism is one of the most common states in children’s language learning experience remarkably 
little is known about bilingual brain development.
Phonology
At a theoretical level, psychology researchers consider sensitive periods in brain development as 
periods during which certain neural mechanisms exhibit heightened responsiveness to a given input 
or stimulation thereby promoting (accelerated) development (Werker & Hensch, 2015). In early 
phonological development, sensitive periods refer to the restricted window of time during which 
the neural system involved in phonological processing is responsive to (re)structuring through 
environmental input. A question of interest for bilingualism has been whether early dual-language 
experiences alter (e.g., extend) the sensitive periods for phonological development (e.g., Petitto et al., 
2012; Reh et al., 2021).
Phonological discrimination is the ability to distinguish phonemes (e.g., /b/ and /d/), and is gen-
erally posited to tap into children’s emerging representations of language sounds. To uncover the 
effects of bilingualism on children’s developing phonological discrimination abilities, García-Sierra 
et al. (2011) studied Spanish–English bilingual infants, ages 6–9 months and 10–12 months, in each 
of their two languages. Researchers used event-related potential (ERP) methods, which reflect elec-
trophysiological neural activity (see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume, for a description of ERPs), to 
capture the mismatch negativity (MMN) response. This response is considered to be a neural index 
of an individual’s ability to distinguish phonemic contrasts (e.g., /ba/ vs /da/). Yet, because the ERP 
response can be positive in infants and young children, some have also termed it a mismatch response 
(MMR). When participants are presented with multiple repetitions of one “standard” syllable (e.g.,  
/ba/) and infrequently occurring “deviant” or “odd-ball” syllable (e.g., [da]), ERP analyses typically 
reveal an MMR for the “deviant” syllable. In contrast to the group’s earlier studies with monolinguals 
(Rivera-Gaxiola et al., 2005), bilingual infants at 6–9 months failed to produce an MMR response 
to the phonemic contrasts. Rather, the MMR response was detected in both languages at the ages of 
10–12 months. Notably, the strength of bilinguals’ MMR response in each language was associated 
with the amount of exposure the infants had received in the respective languages. According to 
García-Sierra et al. (2011), the outcome suggests that the more versatile phonological experience 
in bilingualism extends infants’ neurodevelopmental window of sensitivity and plasticity for the 
development of phonological representations. (See Dickson & Pelzl, this volume, and Kappenman & 
Luck, 2011, for more on specific ERP effects mentioned in this review, e.g., N400, P600, N2, P300, 
among others.)
Phonological Discrimination as a Language-Switching Tool
Phonological cues help bilinguals not only detect a change in words, but also a shift in language input, 
or code-switching. An ERP study examining monolingual and Welsh-English toddlers’ response to 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
438
word-level switching during a picture-word pairing paradigm found that the bilinguals’ response 
to a language switch fell into an earlier time window (within 200 ms of spoken word onset) than 
that of the monolinguals (closer to 300 ms; Kuipers & Thierry, 2012). Researchers concluded that 
bilinguals’ faster neural response was indicative of more advanced language monitoring capabilities 
that support efficient dual language processing. In contrast, an electroencephalogram (EEG) study 
by Nacar-García et al. (2018) examining infants’ phonological discrimination at sentence-leveling 
switching at 4–5 months revealed that only monolinguals showed a neural discrimination index 
(P200) within the early time window, whereas bilinguals showed a neural discrimination index (theta 
band range) within a later time-frame (400–1800 ms). The authors interpreted these neural findings 
as evidence for bilinguals’ stronger attention to the speech signal (Nacar-García et al., 2018). The 
few studies examining phonological discrimination in the context of language switching advance the 
notion of neurodevelopmental changes that help children adjust their perceptual, linguistic, and cog-
nitive processes for dual-language input.
Phonology Summary
With respect to bilingual infants’ phonological development, existing neuroimaging evidence 
points to two directions of analysis. The first concerns sensitive periods, or extended windows of 
neuroplasticity drawn upon in the bilingual development of language. The second is the increased 
engagement of attentional resources during phonological tasks as a likely precursor to emerging 
dual-language switching capabilities. The first set of findings relates to the field’s persistent question 
of whether dual-language experiences delay language development, in this case for early-life phono-
logical acquisition (Werker & Hensch, 2015). On the one hand, neuroimaging evidence supports 
a more protracted developmental trajectory in the formation of neural specificity in language pro-
cessing in bilinguals (García-Sierra et al., 2011; Nacar-García et al., 2018). On the other hand, there 
is also evidence to suggest that bilinguals develop heightened attention to language input, potentially 
to help support language discrimination and other dual language processing capabilities (Kuipers & 
Thierry, 2012; see also Ferjan-Ramírez et al., 2017). Critically, more replication of studies is needed, 
since neuroimaging investigations on phonological development in young bilinguals are at once 
sparse yet also highly heterogeneous in terms of language populations, ages, experimental protocols, 
and imaging methods.
Lexicon and Semantics
Cognitive models of word meaning typically specify three levels of processing: words, sublexical 
units (phonemes and bound morphemes), and conceptual representations. Theoretical perspectives 
on bilingualism word processing such as the bilingual interaction model (Dijkstra & Van Heuven, 
2002) and the revised hierarchical model (Kroll & Stewart, 1994) are described in detail in Tokowicz 
and Tkacikova (this volume). These models have been largely developed based on adult data. 
Nevertheless, they are conceptually commensurate with developmental models such as processing 
rich information from multidimensional interactive representations (PRIMIR) model, which have 
been built to better address perceptual, cognitive, and neuro-developmental changes that accompany 
child word acquisition (Curtin et al., 2011).
Neuroanatomical Location for a Dual Lexicon
PRIMR and adult-level models posit that among the different levels of lexical processing, word-
level processes should be most language-specific. From a neurobiological standpoint, then, what 
does “language-specificity” look like? Does it imply that lexical items in different languages are 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
439
processed across distinct locations in the brain? To answer these questions, researchers often employ 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) methods, which track changes in blood oxygenation 
(hemodynamic response) across the brain and help identify active brain regions during a given task 
(for more detail see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). Xue et al. (2004) examined Chinese-speaking 
children aged 10–12 who were taking L2 English classes for two hours per week. The children were 
asked to judge semantic relatedness within word pairs in Chinese (L1) or English (L2). Although 
children performed better in Chinese than in English, the task engaged similar parts of the brain, 
including the left inferior frontal gyrus, which was the loci of strongest task-related activity in both 
languages. Additionally, English L2 incurred stronger activation in the cingulate and left inferior par-
ietal regions than in Chinese L1. No single region incurred stronger activation for Chinese L1. These 
findings are generally consistent with those obtained with adult bilinguals (Abutalebi et al., 2007; 
Perani et al., 2003) and are often thought to reflect shared neural bases for dual-language lexical pro-
cessing, with added activations for L2 reflecting the added processing demands of recognizing words 
in a less familiar language.
The question of whether bilinguals engage in similar processes to access words in each of their 
languages has also received attention in ERP methods. Conboy and Mills (2006) measured 19–22-
month-old Spanish-English bilingual children’s ERP responses to known and unknown words in 
each of their languages. All children were exposed to both languages before the age of 6 months, and 
at the time of testing exhibited either Spanish or English language dominance as measured through 
vocabulary and parental reports. Whereas the children exhibited similar components in each of their 
languages (P100, N200–400), the differential between “known versus unknown” word response 
amplitudes was stronger in their dominant language relative to the nondominant. Similarly, Ojima 
et al. (2011) uncovered a positive association between N400 amplitude and hours of L2 English 
exposure in Japanese children, ages 6–9 at the onset of the study who were followed longitudinally 
over the course of three years.
More detailed observations were obtained by Sirri and Rämä (2019) who presented 2–4-year-
old French–Spanish bilingual toddlers with related or unrelated within-language word pairs. In 
both languages, the children exhibited a similar N2 component that was interpreted as a semantic 
relatedness effect. The neural responses diverged across the two languages during the 400–750 ms 
period. French, the dominant language, elicited an N400 semantic priming response over the right 
parietal regions, whereas Spanish, the non-dominant language, elicited left anterior negativity (LAN) 
semantic integration and attention responses over the left frontal regions. This line of lexical research 
with bilingual children suggests both convergent and divergent word-processing mechanisms support 
word recognition across bilinguals’ two languages, with dual-language experience and proficiency 
playing a key role in influencing these processes.
Insofar as childhood bilingual experiences yield balanced dual-language proficiency in adulthood, 
such balanced adults may develop similar neural processes in each language. Duñabetia et al. (2010) 
asked balanced early Basque–Spanish bilingual adults to complete a masked priming task that 
included both within and between language conditions. Within-language conditions elicited N250 
and N400 priming effects that were similar in both of the bilinguals’ languages. Between-language 
priming also elicited a similar response limited to the N400 component. The outcomes suggest that 
balanced-proficiency speakers with early or simultaneous dual-language exposure develop similar 
neural processing mechanisms for each language. Moreover, cross-linguistic word exposure also 
results in an N400 lexical priming effect but skips the sublexical analyses reflected in components 
detected prior to N400. Duñabetia et al.’s (2010) findings of qualitatively similar within and between 
language responses in balanced young adult bilinguals stand in contrast to those described above 
(e.g., Sirri & Rämä, 2019; Xue et al., 2004) for the less balanced bilinguals, and serve as an indicator 
of plasticity in the developing human brain as it accommodates multiple languages.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
440
Finally, the temporal precision of ERP methods has also been leveraged to flesh out when and 
how childhood bilinguals recognize word language membership. Hoversten et al. (2015) asked early 
(~4.2 years) Spanish–English balanced bilingual adults to either categorize visually presented words 
as living/non-living (semantic decision) or as belonging to Spanish/English (language membership). 
Results showed that neural response to language membership (300 ms, P300) preceded the semantic 
category response (400ms, P400), across both languages.
Taken together, the ERP findings address questions advanced by frameworks such as PRIMIR, 
asking when and how bilingual infants and young children’s lexical and sublexical processes become 
language-specific. ERP findings suggest that between the ages of 2–4 years, bilingual word processing 
can already be predicted by bilingual adult-based models such as the bilingual interaction model. At 
the initial bottom-up driven phases of word recognition, around the time that N2 is detected, the pro-
cess appears to be language-neutral. Yet, by the time N400 is observed, a period of lexico-semantic 
analyses and retrieval, the process becomes more language-specific. Moreover, the nature of these 
processes, as reflected in the amplitude of the N400 response, can differ across the bilinguals’ two 
languages as a function of dual-language experiences and proficiency.
Lexicon and Semantics Summary
The ease with which young bilinguals acquire lexical items in different languages and use them 
appropriately in unilingual and multilingual contexts is a long-standing topic in the field. Language 
proficiency, dominance, and patterns of daily language use appear to be key factors in how words 
and meanings are processed across the two languages. In balanced bilinguals, evidence shows that 
language-specificity may be achieved through selective patterns of activation/inhibition of language-
specific neural networks within the shared brain regions (e.g., Duñabetia et al., 2010). In non-
balanced bilinguals, the two languages may also engage different brain regions/networks in a more 
automated manner for the dominant language and a more attention/effort-demanding manner for the 
non-dominant language (e.g., Sirri & Rämä, 2019; Xue et al., 2004). Finally, there is a critical need 
for additional research on the underlying nature of early bilingual word learning and emergent lexical 
organization (see also Beatty-Martínez & Titone, this volume).
Sentence-Level Syntax and Semantics
Research with monolinguals suggests a cascade of substantial neurodevelopmental changes that 
take place within the first 7–10 years of life and support children’s emerging morpho-syntactic 
competences (Skeide & Friederici, 2016). These changes include a progression in functional special-
ization for language comprehension from posterior left superior and middle temporal gyrus (STG/
MTG) to anterior (left inferior frontal gyrus, IFG) brain regions, which is thought to reflect the pro-
gression in the development of bottom-up mechanisms for recognizing commonly occurring regular-
ities to the development of top-down mechanisms for complex linguistic analyses (Enge et al., 2020). 
ERP research commonly shows early emerging N400s that reflect the fundamental role of semantic 
processes in bootstrapping, not only the emergence of language meaning, but also that of struc-
ture. Later emerging P600 and (early) LAN responses are associated solely with syntactic processes 
(Skeide & Friederici, 2016). Compared to early childhood bilinguals, then, do child learners who 
acquire a new language after 7–10 years have less efficient neural machinery for mastering linguistic 
regularities in the L2 grammar?
At the core of this neurodevelopmental question lies the ongoing discussion of whether bilinguals’ 
neural specialization for language resembles that of monolinguals, and how this specialization may 
vary for the bilinguals’ respective languages, in relation to language experiences and proficiency. 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
441
Additional issues that must be taken into account include cognitive cross-linguistic interaction and 
transfer in childhood bilinguals’ sentence-level competence and processes.
Does Bilingual (Overall) Neural Specialization for Language  
Resemble that of Monolinguals?
Jasinska and Petitto (2013) explored this question by comparing performance-matched bilingual 
Spanish–English children with a range of ages of exposure, early-exposed bilingual adults, and mono-
lingual English children and adults. During functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), a method 
in which brain hemodynamics are imagined using near-infrared light, neuroimaging participants 
listened to sentences of varied syntactic complexity. Prior research with English monolinguals 
indicates that in English, adults show stronger left IFG activation in response to more analytically 
complex subject–object sentence structure, relative to the easier-to-process object-subject sentences 
(Caplan, 2001; Kovelman et al., 2008). Consistent with previous findings suggesting temporo-frontal 
trajectory for brain development (Skeide & Friederici, 2016), bilingual and monolingual children 
exhibited a stronger response to subject–object vs. object–subject sentences in the temporal lobe, 
whereas adults showed a stronger response in the left IFG. Both bilingual and monolingual children 
appear to share a temporo-frontal trajectory in neural specialization for language function.
Bilingual children and adults in Jasinska and Petitto (2013) also showed an overall stronger 
engagement of the left hemisphere regions classically associated with language processing and 
their right hemisphere homologues than monolinguals. The researchers interpreted this finding as 
reflecting neurodevelopmental plasticity that makes it possible for childhood bilinguals to acquire 
and efficiently process the two languages (Kovelman et al., 2008). Finally, the authors found AoA 
effects, with later-exposed bilingual children showing stronger engagement of bilateral temporal 
and frontal regions associated with both basic and analytically complex demands of processing L2 
information. These findings are generally consistent with recent meta-analyses on bilingualism that 
point to stronger activation patterns during language processing. The activation occurs primarily in 
the frontal lobes and most notably in later learners of the language (Cargnelutti et al., 2019). The 
frontal hyperactivation in bilinguals is often attributed to dual language monitoring and switching 
needs, which may develop more efficiently in children exposed to two languages during the early key 
periods of neurodevelopmental plasticity for language function.
Arredondo et al. (2019) focused on the idea of bilingual children being “on time” or “delayed” in 
the neural patterns of organization for language function. During fNIRS neuroimaging, performance-
matched Spanish–English bilingual and monolingual English children listened to sentences that 
presented the correct or incorrect use of earlier and later-acquired verbal morphemes (e.g., bake+ing; 
bake+ed/s, respectively). Bilingual children displayed stronger and more adult-like patterns of neural 
activity than monolingual children (Enge et al., 2020). Bilinguals, in particular, showed more focal 
activation in left IFG relative to monolinguals, whereas monolinguals showed a more distributed 
and bilateral pattern of frontal lobe activation. Therefore, dual-language experience may advance 
or otherwise enhance the functionality of the traditional Broca’s area (left IFG) to support increased 
diversity in linguistic input and language learning demands.
Effects of Dual-Language Use
To examine the effect of bilinguals’ dual-language experience and use, Bice and Kroll’s ERP (2021) 
study focused on bilingual Spanish-English adults who learned their two languages during childhood. 
Participants completed sentence judgment tasks that included either syntactic or lexico-semantic 
violations. First and foremost, there were no differences in N400 and P600 responses between 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
442
bilinguals and monolinguals in English. However, the strength of the neural responses correlated 
with monolinguals’ verbal working memory abilities; whereas, in bilinguals, neural responses were 
associated with English language proficiency. The group’s findings suggest that in bilinguals, lan-
guage processing at the neural level is closely related to linguistic proficiency and the use of a given 
language, rather than to general and stable cognitive factors. Finally, a direct comparison between 
bilinguals’ two languages revealed a dominance effect such that the participants’ neural responses in 
English, their dominant language of daily use, were stronger than in their heritage language, Spanish.
For the totality of studies comparing the nature of neural specificity for language function 
across childhood bilinguals and monolinguals, outcomes suggest that bilingual children undergo 
a monolingual-like pattern of neural development that proceeds along the temporo-frontal trajec-
tory, resulting in specialized neural pathways for syntactic and semantic processing in each of their 
languages. The quality of these neural mechanisms may further reflect AoA (Jasinska & Petitto, 2013) 
and patterns of language use/dominance (Bice & Kroll, 2021) in relation to the two languages.
Effects of AoA and Proficiency
As noted, much of the speaker’s morphosyntactic knowledge is established during the first 7–10 years 
of life. How might the age of bilingual exposure during or after this period influence the neural organ-
ization for language function? Wartenburger et al. (2003) employed fMRI to examine effects of AoA 
and proficiency on neural correlates of grammatical and semantic processing in early and late Italian-
German bilingual adults. All early learners had high dual-language proficiency, whereas late bilingual 
learners included those with either high L2 or low L2 proficiency. Participants completed a sen-
tence judgment task with syntactic and semantic violations. Syntax-related findings revealed an inter-
action between proficiency and AoA: among high-proficiency bilinguals, late but not early bilinguals 
showed a bilateral IFG activation in their L2. Moreover, high-proficiency bilinguals showed stronger 
activation in the left parietal region than low-proficiency bilinguals. Conversely for semantic pro-
cessing, proficiency effects, but not AoA, was reported: there were no differences between early and 
late high proficiency bilinguals, whereas late low proficiency bilinguals showed greater activation in 
the left IFG and right middle frontal gyrus than late high proficiency bilinguals. These findings are 
similar to those reported by Weber-Fox and Neville (2001), who observed that as AoA increased, so 
did the participants’ N280 response latency for grammatical closed-class words (e.g., prepositions, 
pronouns, etc.), especially when passing the AoA age 7 mark. In contrast, neural responses to lexico-
semantic open-class words (e.g., nouns, verbs) were less affected by AoA. Taken together, these 
studies advance the hypothesis that neural organization for syntactic processing is impacted both by 
age and proficiency, with neural correlates of semantic processing being more susceptible to profi-
ciency and use than AoA.
Cross-Linguistic Influences
To study language-specific effects of bilingualism researchers often focus on the influences of cross-
linguistic transfer. A notable example is that of Erdocia and Laka (2018), who examined early-exposed 
Spanish–Basque bilinguals who were either balanced speakers of the two languages or Spanish-
dominant. The participants were asked to read sentences in Basque that included conditions of cross-
linguistic similarity (object–verb–subject word order) and differences (subject–verb–object word 
order) during ERP neuroimaging. During the cross-linguistic similarity condition, the late anterior 
negativity neural response was similar across the two groups. During the cross-linguistic difference 
condition, Spanish-dominant bilinguals exhibited a P600 response typical of processing syntactic 
violations even though the sentences were grammatical, though of a lower frequency/non-canonical 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
443
type for Basque. The researchers explain this outcome as Spanish language transfer into Basque, 
which then interferes with the efficacy of Basque language processing in Spanish-dominant bilinguals.
Researchers also find evidence of cross-linguistic transfer in individuals with substantial co-
dominance in their dual language proficiency. Sanoudaki and Thierry (2015) examined two groups 
of Welsh–English bilingual adults who were exposed to their two languages as infants (on average 
at age 1) and were matched in having high English language proficiency, but either high or low 
Welsh language proficiency. The study included a monolingual English control group. During ERP 
neuroimaging, participants saw an image of a colored object and read a sentence that either matched 
or mismatched the object and its color (e.g., an image of a red box appearing with a sentence either 
about a red box (match) or a blue box or red pen (mismatches). The word order for adjective–noun 
pairings was either adjective-noun (red box) or noun-adjective (box red). The latter structure is gen-
erally ungrammatical in English but grammatical in Welsh. The findings revealed that during the 
adjective-first condition all participants showed an N2 (260–360 ms) response for the mismatching 
adjectives. However, for the noun-first conditions, a higher negative N2 response was only present 
in highly fluent Welsh bilinguals, suggesting a transfer effect. In other words, participants’ high 
proficiency with Welsh grammar supported or otherwise optimized the bilinguals’ ability to also 
extract meaning from ungrammatical English sentences. The researchers attribute the findings to 
cross-language syntactic activation in the early-exposed bilinguals that is in turn constrained by dual 
language proficiency. In sum, childhood bilinguals’ two languages can have a bi-directional influence 
on the language faculty, fostering the efficacy of processing linguistically similar but requiring add-
itional resources for the processing of linguistically dissimilar structures.
Sentence-Level Syntax and Semantics Summary
A key finding from the bilingual literature is that the general neurodevelopmental pattern is similar 
across bilingual and monolingual children (Jasinska & Petitto, 2013; but see also Arredondo 
et al., 2019 who suggest a more accelerated neurodevelopment in bilinguals). Second, bilinguals’ 
neurodevelopmental trajectory for sentence comprehension and its outcomes in early-exposed bilin-
gual adults is jointly influenced by factors of AoA, proficiency, and the type of linguistic construct 
under consideration (e.g., syntax vs. semantics; Bice & Kroll, 2021; Wartenburger et al., 2003; 
Weber-Fox & Neville, 2001). Language-specific effects are also found as bilinguals’ two languages 
interact, yielding cross-linguistic transfer effects across both balanced and unbalanced proficiency 
bilinguals (Erdocia & Laka, 2018; Sanoudaki & Thierry, 2015; for additional evidence, see Diaz 
et al., 2016; Kotz et al., 2008). The developmental evidence as it pertains to sentence processing 
generally suggests that although both semantic and syntactic domains are susceptible to profi-
ciency effects, the syntactic domain might be more susceptible to the effects of AoA (Wartenburger 
et al., 2003).
Clinical Implications
Deficits in sentence production and comprehension are often diagnosed in children with lan-
guage impairments, and we would be remiss if we did not address certain ramifications in the 
literature regarding “at-risk learners.” Due to long-standing concerns that dual language acqui-
sition has negative effects that impede or disadvantage language development, “at-risk” is often 
an umbrella term encompassing both bilingual children with language impairments and those 
who are typically developing. Clinicians have been known to encourage a maximally “monolin-
gual” approach to foster “improved” skills in bilingual learners, using the rationale that acquiring 
two languages doubly taxes the developing brain, and therefore should be avoided in “at-risk” 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
444
learners. We could attribute these reductive strategies to the paucity of bilingual therapists, but the 
limited understanding of bilingual learners stems more directly from a lack of neurodevelopmental 
research. The current chapter presents the available empirical evidence demonstrating that young 
children’s dual-language processing is not “inefficient,” in and of itself (e.g., Arredondo et al., 2019; 
Sanoudaki & Thierry, 2015). Rather, we have aimed to present our readers with evidence that any 
differences between bilinguals and monolinguals often reflect children’s varied experiences with 
the given languages, including proficiency, AoA, learning contexts, and cross-linguistic reciprocity 
between the two languages.
Current Trends and Future Directions
In this chapter, we reviewed works on the neurobiology of dual language acquisition and processing 
in infants and children as well as adults who learned their two languages during childhood. We 
discussed at length how the brain makes efficient parallel processing and multisystem synthesis pos-
sible within one or more languages (e.g., phonology and semantics at a word level, or morpho-
syntax and semantics at the sentence level; Bastiaansen & Hagoort, 2015). Advancing the field’s 
understanding of exactly how the bilingual brain makes processing possible in multiple different 
languages (that are likely to be co-active even during single-language contexts) will require the use 
of multimodal neuroimaging approaches that consider both neuroanatomical and temporal properties 
of the brain signal. The current overview suggests that differences in processing lie at the intersec-
tion of bilingual children’s language characteristics (differences/similarities) and patterns of dual 
language use. Taken together, the evidence on neural processing demonstrates the plasticity of the 
developing human brain along with its efficacy in organizing input to optimize underlying dual-
language representations and processing mechanisms (Satterfield, 2021).
Further Readings
This video article provides a visualization of the use of fNIRS in the study of infants and children.
Shalinsky, M.H., Kovelman, I., Berens, M.S., & Petitto, L.A. (2009). Exploring cognitive functions in babies, 
children & adults with near-infrared spectroscopy. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 29, Article e1268. 
https://doi.org/10.3791/1268
This video article provides a visualization of the use of fMRI in the study of children’s language and literacy.
Raschle, N.M., Lee, M., Buechler, R., Christodoulou, J.A., Chang, M., Vakil, M., Stering, P.L., & Gaab, N. 
(2009). Making MR imaging child’s play-pediatric neuroimaging protocol, guidelines and procedure. Journal 
of Visualized Experiments, 29, Article e1309. https://doi.org/10.3791/1309
This video article provides a visualization of the use of ERP technologies to study children’s auditory processing, 
which is often similar to how researchers study early infants’ early phonological development.
Musacchia, G., Ortiz-Mantilla, S., Realpe-Bonilla, T., Roesler, C.P., & Benasich, A.A. (2015). Infant auditory 
processing and event-related brain oscillations. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 101, Article e52420. 
https://doi.org/10.3791/52420
This chapter offers more detailed descriptions of neuroimaging methods used to study childhood bilingualism.
Nickerson, N., & Kovelman, I. (2022). Brain imaging methods. In Y. Goto Butler & B. Huang (Eds), Research 
methods for understanding child second language development (pp. 144–163). Routledge.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the editors, Drs. Morgan-Short and Van Hell for the opportunity to showcase 
advancements in neurodevelopmental bilingualism research. We also thank the National Institutes of Health 
(R01HD092498) for funding our work.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
445
References
Abutalebi, J., Brambati, S.M., Annoni, J.-M., Moro, A., Cappa, S.F., & Perani, D. (2007). The neural cost of 
the auditory perception of language switches: An event-related functional magnetic resonance imaging 
study in bilinguals. Journal of Neuroscience, 27(50), 13762–13769. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEURO
SCI.3294-07.2007
Arredondo, M.M., Hu, X.-S., Seifert, E., Satterfield, T., & Kovelman, I. (2019). Bilingual exposure enhances left 
IFG specialization for language in children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(04), 783–801. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S1366728918000512
Bastiaansen, M., & Hagoort, P. (2015). Frequency-based segregation of syntactic and semantic unification during 
online sentence level language comprehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(11), 2095–2107. 
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00829
Beatty-Martínez, A.L., & Titone, D.A. (this volume). De-generacy as an organizing principle of bilingual lan-
guage processing. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Bedore, L.M., Peña, E.D., Summers, C.L., Boerger, K.M., Resendiz, M.D., Greene, K., Bohman, T.M., & Gillam, 
R.B. (2012). The measure matters: Language dominance profiles across measures in Spanish–English bilin-
gual children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(3), 616–629. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
2000090
Bice, K., & Kroll, J.F. (2021). Grammatical processing in two languages: How individual differences in language 
experience and cognitive abilities shape comprehension in heritage bilinguals. Journal of Neurolinguistics, 
58, Article 100963. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jneuroling.2020.100963
Caplan, D. (2001). Functional neuroimaging studies of syntactic processing. Journal of Psycholinguistic 
Research, 30, 297–320. https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1010495018484
Cargnelutti, E., Tomasino, B., & Fabbro, F. (2019). Language brain representation in bilinguals with different 
age of appropriation and proficiency of the second language: A meta-analysis of functional imaging studies. 
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, Article 154. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2019.00154
Conboy, B.T., & Mills, D.L. (2006). Two languages, one developing brain: Event-related potentials 
to words in bilingual toddlers. Developmental Science, 9(1), F1–F12. https://doi.org/10.1111/
j.1467-7687.2005.00453.x
Curtin, S., Byers-Heinlein, K., & Werker, J.F. (2011). Bilingual beginnings as a lens for theory develop-
ment: PRIMIR in focus. Journal of Phonetics, 39(4), 492–504. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wocn.2010.12.002
Díaz, B., Erdocia, K., de Menezes, R. ., Mueller, J.L., Sebastián-Gallés, N., & Laka, I. (2016). Electrophysiological 
correlates of second-language syntactic processes are related to native and second language distance regard-
less of age of acquisition. Frontiers in Psychology, 7, Article 133. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00133
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electro encephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Dijkstra, T., & Van Heuven, W.J. (2002). The architecture of the bilingual word recognition system: From iden-
tification to decision. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 5(3), 175–197. https://doi.org/10.1017/S13667
28902003012
Duñabeitia, J.A., Dimitropoulou, M., Uribe-Etxebarria, O., Laka, I., & Carreiras, M. (2010). Electrophysiological 
correlates of the masked translation priming effect with highly proficient simultaneous bilinguals. Brain 
Research, 1359, 142–154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.066
Enge, A., Friederici, A.D., & Skeide, M.A. (2020). A meta-analysis of fMRI studies of language comprehension 
in children. NeuroImage, 215, Article 116858. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2020.116858
Erdocia, K., & Laka, I. (2018). Negative transfer effects on L2 word order processing. Frontiers in Psychology, 
9, 337. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2018.00337
Ferjan Ramírez, N., Ramírez, R.R., Clarke, M., Taulu, S., & Kuhl, P.K. (2017). Speech discrimination in 11-
month-old bilingual and monolingual infants: A magnetoencephalography study. Developmental Science, 20, 
Article e12427. https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12427
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Garcia-Sierra, A., Rivera-Gaxiola, M., Percaccio, C.R., Conboy, B.T., Romo, H., Klarman, L., Ortiz, S., & 
Kuhl, P.K. (2011). Bilingual language learning: An ERP study relating early brain responses to speech, 
language input, and later word production. Journal of Phonetics, 39(4), 546–557. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.wocn.2011.07.002
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Valeria Ortiz-Villalobos, Ioulia Kovelman, and Teresa Satterfield
446
Gass, S., & Glew, M. (2011). Second language acquisition and bilingualism. In J. Altarriba & R.R. Heredia 
(Eds.), An introduction to bilingualism (2nd ed., pp. 285–314). Psychology Press.
Hoversten, L.J., Brothers, T., Swaab, T.Y., & Traxler, M.J. (2015). Language membership identification precedes 
semantic access: suppression during bilingual word recognition. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 27(11), 
2108–2116. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_00844
Jasinska, K.K., & Petitto, L.A. (2013). How age of bilingual exposure can change the neural systems for lan-
guage in the developing brain: A functional near infrared spectroscopy investigation of syntactic processing 
in monolingual and bilingual children. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 6, 87–101. https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.dcn.2013.06.005
Kappenman, E.S., & Luck, S.J. (2011). The Oxford handbook of event-related potential components. Oxford 
University Press.
Kotz, S.A., Holcomb, P.J., & Osterhout, L. (2008). ERPs reveal comparable syntactic sentence processing in 
native and non-native readers of English. Acta Psychologica, 128(3), 514–527. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.act
psy.2007.10.003
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Kovelman, I., Baker, S.A., & Petitto, L.A. (2008). Bilingual and monolingual brains compared: a functional 
magnetic resonance imaging investigation of syntactic processing and a possible “neural signature” of bilin-
gualism. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 20(1), 153–169. https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2008.20011
Kroll, J.F., & Stewart, E. (1994). Category interference in translation and picture naming: Evidence for asym-
metric connections between bilingual memory representations. Journal of Memory and Language, 33(2), 
149–174. https://doi.org/10.1006/jmla.1994.1008
Kuipers, J.R., & Thierry, G. (2012). Event-related potential correlates of language change detection in bilingual 
toddlers. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 2(1), 97–102. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2011.08.002
Musacchia, G., Ortiz-Mantilla, S., Realpe-Bonilla, T., Roesler, C.P., & Benasich, A.A. (2015). Infant auditory 
processing and event-related brain oscillations. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 101, Article e52420. 
https://doi.org/10.3791/52420
Nacar Garcia, L., Guerrero-Mosquera, C., Colomer, M., & Sebastian-Galles, N. (2018). Evoked and oscillatory 
EEG activity differentiates language discrimination in young monolingual and bilingual infants. Scientific 
Reports, 8(1), 2770. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-20824-0
Nickerson, N., & Kovelman, I. (2022). Brain imaging methods. In Y. Goto Butler & B. Huang (Eds), Research 
methods for understanding child second language development (pp. 144–163). Routledge.
Ojima, S., Matsuba-Kurita, H., Nakamura, N., Hoshino, T., & Hagiwara, H. (2011). Age and amount of exposure 
to a foreign language during childhood: Behavioral and ERP data on the semantic comprehension of 
spoken English by Japanese children. Neuroscience Research, 70(2), 197–205. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neu
res.2011.01.018
Perani, D., Paulesu, E., Galles, N.S., Dupoux, E., Dehaene, S., Cappa, S.F., Fazio, F. & Mehler, J. (1998). 
The bilingual brain. Proficiency and age of acquisition of the second language. Brain, 121(10), 1841–1852. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/brain/121.10.1841
Perani, D., Abutalebi, J., Paulesu, E., Brambati, S., Scifo, P., Cappa, S. F., & Fazio, F. (2003). The role of age 
of acquisition and language usage in early, high-proficient bilinguals: An fMRI study during verbal fluency. 
Human Brain Mapping, 19(3), 170–182. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.10110
Petitto, L.A., Berens, M.S., Kovelman, I., Dubins, M.H., Jasinska, K., & Shalinsky, M. (2012). The “Perceptual 
Wedge Hypothesis” as the basis for bilingual babies’ phonetic processing advantage: New insights from 
fNIRS brain imaging. Brain and Language, 121(2), 130–143. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2011.05.003
Raschle, N.M., Lee, M., Buechler, R., Christodoulou, J.A., Chang, M., Vakil, M., Stering, P.L., & Gaab, N. 
(2009). Making MR imaging child’s play-pediatric neuroimaging protocol, guidelines and procedure. Journal 
of Visualized Experiments, 29, Article e1309. https://doi.org/10.3791/1309
Reh, R.K., Hensch, T.K., & Werker, J.F. (2021). Distributional learning of speech sound categories is gated by 
sensitive periods. Cognition, 213, Article 104653. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104653
Rivera-Gaxiola, M., Silva-Pereyra, J., & Kuhl, P.K. (2005). Brain potentials to native and non-native speech 
contrasts in 7- and 11-month-old American infants. Developmental Science, 8(2), 162–172. https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1467-7687.2005.00403.x
Sabourin, L., & Manning, G. (this volume). Cross-linguistic transfer in second language neurocognition. In 
K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and 
neurolinguistics. Routledge.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The Neurocognition of Child Second Language Development
447
Sanoudaki, E., & Thierry, G. (2015). Language non-selective syntactic activation in early bilinguals: The role of 
verbal fluency. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 18(5), 548–560. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13670050.2015.1027143
Satterfield, T. (2021). Dual competence in dual language learners: Gradience and variability of object clitics in 
Spanish heritage language learners. In T. Gupton & E. Gieslau (Eds.), Festschrift for Paula Kempchinsky  
(pp. 189–213). John Benjamins.
Shalinsky, M.H., Kovelman, I., Berens, M.S., & Petitto, L.A. (2009). Exploring cognitive functions in babies, 
children & adults with near-infrared spectroscopy. Journal of Visualized Experiments, 29, Article e1268. 
https://doi.org/10.3791/1268
Skeide, M.A., & Friederici, A.D. (2016). The ontogeny of the cortical language network. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience, 17(5), 323–332. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn.2016.23
Sirri, L., & Rämä, P. (2019). Similar and distinct neural mechanisms underlying semantic priming in the 
languages of the French–Spanish bilingual children. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(1), 93–102. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728917000578
Tokowicz, N., & Tkacikova, V. (this volume). The neurolinguistics of the second language lexico-semantic 
system. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Tominey, S., O’Bryon, E.C., & Díaz, G. (2018). 45 strategies that support young dual language learners. Paul 
H. Brookes Publishing Company.
Valdés, G. (2000). Spanish for native speakers: AATSP professional development series handbook for teachers 
K-16 (Vol. 1). New York.
Wartenburger, I., Heekeren, H.R., Abutalebi, J., Cappa, S.F., Villringer, A., & Perani, D. (2003). Early 
setting of grammatical processing in the bilingual brain. Neuron, 37(1), 159–170. https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0896-6273(02)01150-9
Weber-Fox, C., & Neville, H.J. (2001). Sensitive periods differentiate processing of open–and closed-class 
words: An ERP study of bilinguals. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing Research, 44(6), 1338–1353. 
https://doi.org/10.1044/1092-4388(2001/104)
Werker, J.F., & Hensch, T.K. (2015). Critical periods in speech perception: New directions. Annual Review of 
Psychology, 66(1), 173–196. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010814-015104
Xu, E.S., & Wong, P.C.M. (this volume). First language/second language cross-linguistic influence on third 
language acquisition via neurocognitive memory systems. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The 
Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Xue, G., Dong, Q., Jin, Z., Zhang, L., & Wang, Y. (2004). An fMRI study with semantic access in low profi-
ciency second language learners. NeuroReport, 15(5), 791–796. https://doi.org/10.1097/00001756-200404
090-00010
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

448
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-41
33
THE NEUROCOGNITION 
OF LEARNING A SECOND 
LANGUAGE IN THE VISUAL-
MANUAL MODALITY
Gabriela Meade
Introduction and Critical Definitions
A comprehensive account of the neurocognition of second language (L2) acquisition requires con-
sideration of languages in all modalities, where modality refers to the channel in which linguistic 
information is exchanged. Spoken languages use the vocal tract and oral structures as articulators to 
produce language, and information is received through the auditory system. Signed languages use 
the hands as the primary articulators, and the visual system is responsible for receiving that informa-
tion.1 Someone who knows two languages in the same modality is referred to as a unimodal bilingual. 
Examples would be a native speaker of English learning Dutch or a native signer of American Sign 
Language (ASL) learning British Sign Language (BSL).With respect to acquisition, someone who 
is learning a second language in the same modality as their first is an M1L2 learner (Chen Pichler & 
Koulidobrova, 2015). The overwhelming majority of the existing research on the neurocognition of 
L2 acquisition pertains to spoken language M1L2 acquisition.
The contribution of this chapter is a review of the literature pertaining to acquisition of a signed 
language by hearing adults who have a spoken native language. How the brain accommodates L2 
acquisition in a modality that differs from the native language (L1), or M2L2 learning (Chen Pichler 
& Koulidobrova, 2015), is largely uncharted territory with theoretical and practical implications. 
Empirical characterization of M2L2 learning and bimodal bilingualism is critical for understanding 
both language universals and the modality-specific aspects of language. It also has the potential to 
guide instructional practice as the number of M2L2 learners skyrockets around the world. Although 
spoken language users can draw on their experience with co-speech gesture, which also occurs in the 
visual-manual modality, learning a signed language requires tuning of their visual system to recog-
nize manual linguistic units and learning to articulate those units with their hands, faces, and bodies. 
Before reviewing specific aspects of this learning process in detail, I briefly situate M2L2 acquisition 
in a broader cultural and neurolinguistic landscape.
Historically, signed languages were misunderstood as gestural systems and perceived as inferior 
to spoken languages. These misconceptions reflected the negative stigma associated with deafness 
and were perpetuated through a long history of audism and oralism that continues to influence M2L2 
classrooms (e.g., Quinto-Pozos, 2011). Although the medical model in which deafness is viewed 
as a hearing impairment that requires fixing persists in certain circles to this day, there is a growing 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
449
appreciation for the cultural perspective that embraces deafness and the rich linguistic traditions 
in the Deaf community.2 The recognition of ASL as a complete and independent language in its 
own right (Stokoe, 1960) was pivotal in initiating this transformation. Since the initial recognition, 
linguists have documented the structure of signed languages, including representations at the levels 
of phonology, morphology, semantics, syntax, and pragmatics (for reviews, see Emmorey, 2002; 
Sandler & Lillo-Martin, 2006). A complete review of the linguistics of signed languages is beyond 
the scope of this chapter, but pertinent aspects thereof will be introduced as they relate to the studies 
of M2L2 acquisition reviewed here.
In recent years, neurocognitive research with bimodal bilinguals has further validated the status 
of signed languages as natural languages by revealing similarities in how the brain processes both 
spoken and signed languages (see Emmorey, 2021 for a review). For example, the event-related 
potential (ERP) waveform reflects the electrical activity in the brain and shows similar sensitivity 
to variables such as frequency, concreteness, and semantic similarity independent of modality (e.g., 
Emmorey et al., 2020; Meade et al., 2018; for details on ERPs, see Dickson & Pelzl, this volume). 
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) has revealed a distinction between neural regions 
that process modality-specific perceptual information and those that process language irrespective 
of modality (for details on the fMRI technique, see Kousaie & Klein, this volume). For example, 
Emmorey (2021) highlights the supramarginal gyrus (SMG) as a region that is activated during both 
spoken and signed language processing and could be involved in amodal phonological computations. 
Taken together, the linguistic characterization of signed languages and investigations into how they 
are processed in native signers and proficient L2 signers set the stage for an in-depth consideration 
of M2L2 learning.
Critical Research Outcomes and Current Empirical Knowledge
The following sections outline the state of the literature pertaining to signed language learning at 
various levels of representation. Although the emphasis is on what sets M2L2 learning apart from 
M1L2 learning, parallels are drawn with the M1L2 literature where appropriate to illustrate the uni-
versality of many of the principles of L2 acquisition. Following general theories of bilingualism, the 
assumption is that the semantic store is largely shared between languages in bimodal bilinguals (e.g., 
Morford et al., 2017). Thus, the emphasis is on acquisition of phonology and spatial grammar as two 
of the aspects of language that are unique to the visual-manual modality.
Sublexical Phonology in the Visual-Manual Modality
Signs, like words, are systematic combinations of sublexical units. Just as words are made up of 
sounds, or phonemes, signs combine the phonological parameters of handshapes, movements, and 
locations (orientation is another parameter, but is often analyzed as a subfeature of handshape; 
Brentari, 1998). Just as changing one sound in a word can yield a minimal pair in English (e.g., care 
and cake), modifying one of these parameters often yields a different sign. For example, the ASL 
signs for MOTHER and FINE are considered the sign equivalent of a minimal pair (see Figure 33.1). 
Both of these signs are produced with an open-palm 5 handshape with a double tapping motion, but 
MOTHER is produced on the chin whereas FINE is produced on the chest, so they differ in location. 
M2L2 learners must attend to, and retain, each of these parameters in order to grow their vocabulary 
and recognize contrasts in meaning between signs. They must also learn to produce the parameters 
accurately with their hands.
Studies with non-signers indicate that they are able to reliably perceive the differences between  
sign pairs that are phonologically (and thus visually) similar without any exposure to the target  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
450
signed language (Bochner et al., 2011; Meade et al., 2022). For example, non-signers could identify 
sign repetitions when they were embedded in lists of ASL sign pairs that overlapped in location  
only, handshape only, location and handshape, or were unrelated. They did so with similar accuracy  
and speed as a group of deaf signers, although differences in the ERP waveforms between groups  
indicated that sign knowledge modulated processing in this task (Meade et al., 2022). Target signs  
in related pairs generally elicited smaller negativities (i.e., facilitated processing) than those in unre-
lated pairs in both groups. In signers, the priming effect onset in the N400 window associated with  
lexico-semantic processing and was especially prominent for sign pairs that overlapped in handshape.  
In non-signers, the priming effect onset in a post-N400 window and was strongest for pairs that  
overlapped in location. These results could be interpreted to reflect modulation of lexicosemantic  
processing in the deaf signers as compared to modulation of later attentional processes in non-signers  
who identified the perceptual overlap in a more explicit fashion. Hildebrandt and Corina (2002) asked  
non-signers to choose which of four alternative pseudosigns was most similar to a target pseudosign.  
Pseudosign stimuli were phonologically plausible productions that do not exist in ASL. Three of the  
options formed a minimal pair with the target and the fourth was a randomly selected pseudosign  
that acted as a control. Non-signers rated the pseudosign that shared movement and location with the  
target as most similar. In a follow-up study where the target pseudosigns shared only one parameter  
with the target, they rated the pseudosigns that shared movement or location as most similar. Thus,  
learners are likely able to perceive differences between similar signs with little to no exposure to the  
language.
While being able to identify differences between signs is a start, it can be accomplished solely 
based on perceptual differences and does not imply that the parameters are being represented lin-
guistically. Longitudinal fMRI studies suggest that processing signs as phonological units takes 
Figure 33.1  Example Signs in ASL to Illustrate Phonological Overlap.
Note: The ASL signs for MOTHER (left) and FINE (right) are considered the sign equivalent of minimal pairs; they have 
the same “5” handshape and movement, but differ in location. These exemplars, as well as those in Figures 2 and 3, were 
extracted from the videos available through the ASL-LEX 2.0 database (Sehyr et al., 2021).
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
451
time in M2L2 learners (e.g., Banaszkiewicz et al., 2020; Newman-Norlund et al., 2006; Williams 
et al., 2016b). For example, Williams and colleagues asked university classroom learners of ASL 
to do a phonetic categorization task based on location (i.e., identify whether signs were produced 
near the head or elsewhere), a task that can presumably be done with no knowledge of the language. 
During the first week of instruction, neural activity elicited by signs was largely limited to regions 
associated with general motion processing, perception of human actions, and spatial-motor behavior. 
After one semester, activation of the bilateral SMG during this task increased; as discussed above, 
this region is associated with amodal phonological processing. In addition to functional plasticity 
in the SMG, Banaszkiewicz and colleagues found an increase in activation of the left superior par-
ietal lobe (SPL) following just over 30 hours of instruction in Polish Sign Language. Both studies 
illustrate that learners begin to develop a phonological system in the visual-manual modality after 
relatively little instruction. Whereas the SMG is implicated in domain-general phonological pro-
cessing, SPL seems to be more specific to signed languages (see Emmorey, 2021, for a review); 
what determines which of these regions comes online in learners (or the relative timing of them) 
remains to be investigated.
Examining the errors in the learners’ productions of the signs may be an alternative indicator of 
their sensitivity to the phonological structure in the visual-manual modality (e.g., Ebling et al., 2021; 
Hilger et al., 2015; Mirus et al., 2000; Rosen, 2004; Schlehofer & Tyler, 2016). When they make 
mistakes, are they producing well-formed signs that differ from the target production by a single 
parameter or are their mistakes unsystematic? The answer to that question is unknown, but there is 
some evidence to suggest that movement is the most difficult parameter for learners to master, both 
in comprehension (Williams & Newman, 2016) and production (e.g., Ebling et al., 2021; Schlehofer 
& Tyler, 2016). The caveat to using sign productions as an index of phonological knowledge is 
that it introduces the confound of motor planning and execution in the new modality. For example, 
Mirus and colleagues (2000) found that hearing learners tend to “proximalize” their sign productions 
by making the movement with joints closer to their torso. The authors stipulate that that pattern is 
consistent with other motor learning activities and simplifies motor planning and execution by elim-
inating more distal articulators. Because the pattern was not observed for deaf signers who were 
imitating L2 signs, they argued that the proximalization is a strategy to counteract the overwhelming 
motor planning demands associated with the new linguistic modality. M2L2 learners of different 
proficiency levels were also less consistent than deaf signers across successive productions of the 
same sign (e.g., Hilger et al., 2015), potentially further evidence of an underdeveloped motor system. 
Interestingly, even though L2 signers make fewer production errors as they become more proficient 
and develop a more refined motor system, a similar pattern of relative parameter difficulty persists 
(Schlehofer & Tyler, 2016). In sum, M2L2 learners are able to develop a phonological system in the 
visual-manual modality, but learning to perceive the individual parameters as linguistic units and to 
produce them accurately is a prolonged process.
Leveraging World Knowledge to Map Form to Meaning
Beyond learning the individual phonological parameters, the M2L2 learner must recognize combin-
ations of those parameters as lexical items that can then be associated with meaning. In this section, 
I review how learners’ knowledge of the visual world provides an entry point into the new linguistic 
modality for them. Much of this research has revolved around iconicity, which reflects how closely a 
lexical form resembles its meaning. Spoken languages can be iconic (e.g., onomatopoeias), but to a 
lesser extent than signed languages given the constraints of a one-dimensional phonological system. 
In signed languages, highly iconic signs closely resemble their referent, whereas non-iconic signs do 
not (see Figure 33.2).
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
452
Ortega (2017) proposed that iconicity bolsters activation of semantics for learners during sign  
comprehension, but has a negative influence on acquisition of the precise phonological form that  
is required during production. In support of this argument, there is evidence to suggest that M2L2  
learners retrieve the translations of iconic signs faster and more accurately than non-iconic signs (e.g.,  
Baus et al., 2013; Mott et al., 2020) and retain the meanings of iconic signs longer (Morett, 2015).  
For example, Mott and colleagues found that non-signers who learned 80 ASL signs in the laboratory 
were faster and more accurate for iconic signs compared to non-iconic signs in a forced-choice  
translation task. The size of the effect disappeared over the three iterations of the task, but was also  
reflected in ERPs elicited during a cross-modal translation task during the final session. During the  
ERP task, participants saw English word primes followed by ASL signs that were either the transla-
tion of the English prime or unrelated. They were faster to identify signs that were preceded by  
their translations, but only if the signs were iconic. In the ERP waveform, the priming effect (i.e.,  
smaller amplitude negativities when signs were preceded by their translations compared to an unre-
lated prime word) started earlier for iconic signs than for non-iconic signs, suggesting that the resem-
blance between form and meaning accelerated semantic access. This contrasted with deaf native  
signers, who only showed iconicity effects long after lexico-semantic access had occurred, reflecting  
the general finding in the literature that iconicity has a special facilitatory status for M2L2 learners,  
but not for more proficient signers.
In contrast, in studies that focus on production in the new modality, iconicity tends to have a  
negative effect on learning. Ortega and Morgan (2015) found that learners produced iconic signs less  
accurately than non-iconic signs after 22 hours of BSL instruction. They speculated that the overlap  
between iconic signs and related co-speech gestures distracted the learners from attending to the pre-
cise phonological structure of the signs, thereby decreasing the accuracy of their productions. Ortega  
Figure 33.2  Example Signs in ASL to Illustrate Iconicity.
Note: The ASL sign for UNICORN (left) reflects the horn of the animal and therefore has a high iconicity rating, whereas 
the form of the ASL sign for COMMUTE (right) does not have a clear connection with its meaning for non-signers, and 
therefore has a low iconicity rating.
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
453
and colleagues have since systematically studied the influence of the repertoire of co-speech gestures  
on L2 acquisition of a signed language, coining the term “manual cognates” for signs that overlap  
in form with the corresponding gesture. For example, the ASL sign for DRINK (see Figure 33.3) is  
almost identical to the gesture that many non-signers use to refer to the same concept. Learners cap-
italize on their gesture repertoire to guess the meanings of unfamiliar signs (e.g., Ortega et al., 2019).  
Comparing the ERP waveforms elicited by iconic signs from the Sign Language of the Netherlands  
(NGT) that either had high or low overlap with the corresponding gestures, Ortega et al. (2020)  
concluded that learners use their knowledge of gesture to generate predictions about the form of  
the to-be-learned sign. Before and after learning the meaning of the signs, learners saw printed  
Dutch word primes followed by the corresponding NGT sign. Before learning, signs with low gesture 
overlap elicited larger late positivities than those with high gesture overlap, an effect that the  
authors associated with stimulus novelty. Signs with high gesture overlap were perceived as relatively  
less novel because they could be predicted based on the learners’ gesture repertoire. After learning,  
signs in both conditions were predictable and the difference between conditions disappeared. Thus, it  
seems that M2L2 learners draw on their gesture repertoire while learning a signed language and that  
this facilitates a gestalt representation that does not contain the same fine-grained information about  
phonological form.3
Taken together, this work on iconicity and gesture illustrates how world knowledge can scaffold 
the development of lexico-semantic representations in M2L2 learning. How those individual 
representations are organized into a network remains largely unexplored except for one behavioral 
study that suggests that phonological neighborhood effects differ between native signers and M2L2 
learners (Williams & Newman, 2017).
Figure 33.3  An Example Sign in ASL to Illustrate Manual Cognates.
Note: The ASL sign for DRINK is an iconic sign that could be considered a manual cognate given that it is similar to the 
gesture that is commonly used among non-signers for sthe same concept.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
454
Constructing Sentences and Narratives in Space
Beyond learning individual signs, M2L2 learners must learn how to combine signs in the correct 
order. They have a tendency to transfer syntax from their L1 spoken language and translate each word 
consecutively into the signed language (see, e.g., Stokoe, 1960), which often differs from the order 
preferred by native signers and does not make full use of movement and space to represent syntax 
and discourse entities. By no means an extensive review of the syntax of signed languages, the focus 
here is on two key aspects of syntactic elements that have been explored in M2L2 learners. The first 
is assigning a referent to a specific location in signing space, which allows the signer to point to 
that space anaphorically and to direct the movement trajectories of agreement verbs, among other 
functions. The second is non-manual markers, or using body parts other than the hands to portray 
linguistic information.
Spatial Referents
One way that signers use space linguistically is by assigning people or places to locations in signing 
space that can subsequently be referenced. For example, in the retell of a story that involves a teacher, 
the signer might associate that teacher with an arbitrary location to their right. Each time that they 
want to refer to the teacher, they can point back to that space rather than repeating the sign for 
teacher. These same space assignments can also be used for agreement of directional verbs. If the 
signer telling the story had given something to that teacher, then the movement trajectory of the verb 
TO GIVE would originate at the signer’s body and move toward the location that had previously 
been assigned to the teacher. That is, the English sentence “I gave it to him.” could be conveyed 
with a single sign in ASL, making use of spatial assignments and directional movement to establish 
the argument structure.4 If the teacher had given something to the signer (i.e., “He gave it to me.”), 
then the movement would be in the reverse direction (i.e., originate at the location associated with 
the teacher and move toward the signer’s body). Thus, M2L2 learners must learn to explicitly assign 
referents to specific locations and keep track of the assignments to reference them later in the dis-
course. Neuroimaging and lesion studies suggest that the right parietal lobe supports production and, 
perhaps to a lesser extent, comprehension of these depicting signs, or classifier constructions, in pro-
ficient signers (see Emmorey, 2021 for a review), but the neural changes that support learning of these 
structures are unknown at present.
The behavioral literature indicates that M2L2 learners are able to draw on their gesture rep-
ertoire to bootstrap early acquisition of agreement for specific verbs, but systematic use of space 
requires prolonged development (e.g., Boers-Visker & Van den Bogaerde, 2019; Boers-Visker & 
Pfau, 2020; Ferrara & Nilsson, 2017; Marshall & Morgan, 2015). For example, Marshall and Morgan 
demonstrated that non-signers who had had no exposure to BSL were able to understand these visu-
ally salient classifier structures, presumably by capitalizing on their gestures and the iconic mappings 
to real world spatial relations. M2L2 learners further leveraged their linguistic understanding of the 
structures to outperform the non-signers, performing at near ceiling in the comprehension task, even 
though they continued to make errors when producing the structures themselves. In a longitudinal 
study reported by Boers-Visker and Pfau, 15 M2L2 learners of NGT completed an elicitation task 
several times over their first year of instruction and a separate group of L1 signers and teachers served 
as a comparison group. Participants were asked to sign agreement verbs (e.g., GIVE, SEND, HELP, 
CALL-BY-PHONE) with either a picture, a drawing, or a Dutch sentence as a prompt. Whereas the 
proficient comparison group produced >99% of the verbs with agreement, learners produced approxi-
mately 50% of the verbs in the unmodified “standard” version with no modulation of the direction of 
the movement to specify arguments (see also Ferrara & Nilsson, 2017). Interestingly, they found that 
learners frequently established spatial loci for the referents in the prompt, but then failed to use those 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
455
locations to anchor the movement trajectories for their verbs. In a closer analysis of two case studies, 
Boers-Visker and Van den Bogaerde reported that M2L2 learners can spatially modify verbs after 
only 16 weeks of instruction, but during the first year or so of instruction, their spatial modification 
is limited to verbs that have a gestural counterpart with salient spatial information (e.g., PUT-IN-
BAG). Reminiscent of the evidence related to iconicity that was reviewed previously, these findings 
further support the facilitatory role of the gesture repertoire during early learning. These authors also 
measured emergence of referential pointing, where the signer points to the assigned location after 
the initial reference assignment, similar to the use of pronouns in spoken language. After about 200 
hours of instruction, there was a dramatic increase in their use of referential pointing (i.e., pointing 
to the location of a previously established person or place). However, their application was far from 
native-like; they often “stacked,” meaning that they (incorrectly) used the same location in space for 
more than one referent. The explanation for these differences in syntactic and discourse complexity 
is multifactorial and not well understood. Similar to M1L2 acquisition, the cognitive load required 
to process complex structures in the L2 likely exceeds the resources that the learner has available. 
Unique to M2L2 acquisition, learners must also learn to use space efficiently and effectively when 
retelling a narrative.
Non-manual Markers
To add further complexity, signed languages also convey critical syntactic information through so-
called non-manual markers that involve body parts other than the hands (e.g., facial expressions, eye 
gaze, torso orientation). This requires that M2L2 learners attend to those signals during comprehen-
sion and utilize them during production. Ferrara (2019) has suggested that coordinating articulators 
in these ways may take a while to develop in M2L2 learners. Beginning signers focus first on pro-
ducing lexicalized signs and simple classifier constructions before they acquire the ability to coord-
inate those productions with other articulators to produce a cohesive scene description. One of the 
non-manual markers that learners tend to use more often than L1 signers is mouthings (Mesch & 
Schönström, 2021). The mouth plays a number of linguistic roles in signed languages, one of them 
is the visual production of the word from the corresponding spoken language, particularly to dif-
ferentiate ambiguous signs. For example, the signer in the left panel of Figure 33.2 is mouthing the 
initial sound of the English word “unicorn.” In the context of M2L2 acquisition, the overuse of these 
mouthings can be considered one way that learners are transferring knowledge of their L1 during 
the learning process. Overall then, the cognitive demands required to acquire more complex spatial 
structures and inhibit excessive L1 transfer place unique demands on M2L2 learners.
Individual Differences
The emphasis thus far has been on average performance among groups of M2L2 learners at 
various proficiency levels, but the field of the neurocognition of L2 acquisition has moved beyond 
that to identify the factors that make individual learners more successful than others. The list of 
factors to consider is extensive (see Fromont, this volume; Luque & Covey, this volume); here, 
I limit the discussion to the association between working memory and L2 vocabulary acquisi-
tion. Individuals who have strong phonological working memory excel at learning L2 vocabulary, 
which bootstraps more complex aspects of L2 learning (e.g., Linck et al., 2014; Meade, 2020, 
for reviews). By testing whether this association generalizes to a phonological system in another 
modality, investigating sign learning has the potential to elucidate how phonological skills boot-
strap L2 acquisition.
Evidence to date suggests that select L1 skills contribute to individual differences in M2L2 vocabu-
lary acquisition, but that these relationships might be mitigated by L2 skills. For example, Williams 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
456
et al. (2017) demonstrated that baseline L1 English vocabulary knowledge and phonetic categor-
ization (i.e., is the initial sound visible on the lips?) predicted ASL vocabulary knowledge after one 
semester of learning, as measured by translation performance. However, the authors acknowledged 
that baseline L1 English and L2 ASL phonetic categorization abilities were correlated and that phono-
logical processing relies on similar neural substrates irrespective of modality. The same group of 
researchers had previously demonstrated that left inferior frontal gyrus, SPL, and precuneus were 
activated for L2 learners of both ASL and Spanish when they did a phonetic categorization task 
(Williams et al., 2015a). Thus, the ability to segment linguistic information might be a key predictor 
of L2 learning, irrespective of modality.
There is also evidence to suggest that M2L2 learning requires the development of unique skills 
in the visuospatial modality and that these skills contribute to increased proficiency. For example, 
Williams et al. (2015b) asked L1 speakers who were classroom learners of either ASL or Spanish 
to complete an L2 listening span task in which they saw or heard a series of recorded sentences and 
had to report the last word or sign at the end of each sentence. This L2 listening span test served as a 
proxy for phonological memory. L1 short term memory, as measured by a digit span task, correlated 
with the L2 listening span for Spanish learners, but not for ASL learners. Moreover, there was a trend 
toward a correlation between L2 listening span and overall L2 proficiency in the ASL learners, but not 
the Spanish learners. Perhaps the most parsimonious account of these results is that Spanish learners 
could complete the L2 listening span task by using the same verbal phonological loop that they had 
mastered in their L1, whereas the M2L2 learners were relying on a separate, more visual encoding 
system. Encoding language visually is a skill set that is unique to M2L2 learning, and those who were 
more successful at acquiring that skill tended to be more proficient in the language.
Martinez and Singleton (2018; 2019) found similar correlations between short term memory and 
associative learning performance in sign-naïve participants who had no visual-manual phonology, 
leading them to propose that these relationships emphasize the role of perceptual-motor skills, rather 
than phonological processing per se. Thus, further research is needed to disentangle the factors that 
mediate the relationship between M2L2 learning and L1 phonological skills versus modality-specific 
M2 skills. Neuroimaging might be beneficial in differentiating between these alternatives.
Future Directions
Much of the research described here has been conducted in the last decade; this field is in its infancy 
and many open questions remain. Most studies have focused on L2 acquisition of a signed language 
in hearing adults who have a spoken L1. Moving forward, developing a comprehensive examination 
of L2 acquisition in the visual-manual modality will require investigation of other modality combin-
ations. For example, L1 signers who have an established phonological system in the visual-manual 
modality have the potential to help us dissociate which of the effects described above can be attributed 
to learning a new phonological system versus learning new lexical representations (e.g., Mirus et al., 
2000). They also offer the intriguing possibility of investigating how L1 transfer manifests itself in 
the visual-manual modality. Are sign cognates easier to acquire than signs with distinct L2 forms 
or do they lead to more production errors as has been documented for co-speech gesture transfer? 
More generally, direct comparisons of M1L2 and M2L2 acquisition of signed languages would be 
beneficial to delineate which components of learning are modality-specific (e.g., Schönström & 
Holmström, 2022). This would ideally be done within the same group of learners to control for 
potential contributions of individual differences among learners, with neuroimaging to further our 
understanding of modality specificity in the brain. Emphasizing written language instead of spoken 
language would allow for these studies to include deaf L1 signers.
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
457
Another intriguing avenue to pursue would be how learning of a(nother) signed language 
influences L1 processing. Numerous studies in the M1L2 spoken language acquisition literature have 
used differences in L1 processing to index L2 learning (e.g., Gaskell & Dumay, 2003; Takashima 
et al., 2017; see also Ekerdt et al., this volume). There is some suggestion in the literature that learning 
a signed language impacts co-speech gesture during spoken language production (e.g., Casey et al., 
2012) and audiovisual speech perception (Williams et al., 2016a). There is also growing evidence that 
translations are co-activated across modalities in more proficient bimodal bilinguals (e.g., Lee et al., 
2019; Meade et al., 2018; Morford et al., 2017). Thus, it seems feasible that learning an L2 signed 
language would impact L1 processing, but the presence and boundaries of such influences still need 
to be established. Detecting these effects may well require sensitive electrophysiological methods 
that can measure more subtle changes in processing over time.
These are but a few examples of how further investigation of M2L2 acquisition could enrich our 
general understanding of the neurocognition of L2 acquisition. The possibilities are limitless; the-
oretically, any general principle of L2 acquisition should hold for M2L2 learners, but this remains 
to be systematically investigated. The opposite is also true; extending what we know about the 
neurocognition of L2 acquisition to M2L2 learning would benefit learners and teachers of signed 
languages. Only recently have there been efforts to bring the empirical and pedagogical literatures 
into conversation with one another (e.g., Haug et al., 2020), but the opportunities to do so will increase 
as knowledge grows in the respective areas.
Notes
1	 Language can also be conveyed in the written modality, but literacy is considered secondary here given that 
it is a learned representation of the corresponding spoken language.
2	 I follow the convention of using a lowercase deaf to refer specifically to hearing status and uppercase Deaf to 
refer to the community of people who use a signed language and identify with Deaf culture.
3	 The study of cognates in the M1L2 literature is heavily weighted toward cognate facilitation effects (e.g., 
De Groot & Keijzer, 2000; Van Hell & Tanner, 2012). However, reminiscent of the manual cognate effect, 
acoustic analyses suggest that L2 words that are cognates are produced less accurately than those that are 
not. For example, voice onset time (VOT) tends to be longer in English relative to Spanish. Native English 
speakers have longer, more native-like VOTs for L2 Spanish cognates compared to otherwise similar L2 
Spanish control words, but only at lower levels of proficiency (Amengual, 2011; Jacobs et al., 2016).
4	 The handshape that is used for these partially lexicalized signs can also be modified to add further semantic 
information. For example, someone walking toward the teacher would be signed with an upright index finger 
(to signify the body) moving toward the location assigned to the teacher, whereas someone driving toward the 
teacher would be signed using the same movement trajectory with the 3 handshape that is conventionally used 
to represent vehicles. Additional information about speed and manner of movement can also be depicted.
Further Readings
An investigation into changes in task-based BOLD signal, connectivity, and neural structure as adults learned 
Polish Sign Language over the course of eight months:
Banaszkiewicz, A., Matuszewski, J., Bola, Ł., Szczepanik, M., Kossowski, B., Rutkowski, P., Szwed, M., 
Emmorey, K., Jednoróg, K., & Marchewka, A. (2020). Multimodal imaging of brain reorganization in hearing 
late learners of sign language. Human Brain Mapping, 42, 384–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25229
Description of the acquisition of spatial grammar in two adults who were learning Sign Language of the 
Netherlands over the course of four years:
Boers-Visker, E., & Van den Bogaerde, B. (2019). Learning to use space in the L2 acquisition of a signed lan-
guage. Sign Language Studies, 19(3), 410–452. https://doi.org/10.1353/sls.2019.0003
Hearing adult learners of Swiss German Sign Language were found to make more errors on movement than 
on the other parameters when producing signs, which the authors attribute to the complexity of that parameter:
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
458
Ebling, S., Tissi, K., Sidler-Miserez, S., Schlumpf, C., & Boyes Braem, P. (2021). Single-parameter and param-
eter combination errors in L2 productions of Swiss German Sign Language. Sign Language & Linguistics, 
24(2), 143–181. https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.19002.ebl
Important review regarding what sets instruction of L2 signed languages apart from instruction of L2 spoken 
languages, with emphasis on consideration of the larger socio-political history of the Deaf community:
Quinto-Pozos, D. (2011). Teaching American Sign Language to hearing adult learners. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31, 137–158. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190511000195
Acknowledgments
This chapter is dedicated to my Aunt Theresa, who always made it a point to support my learning endeavors, 
including agreeing to accompany to my first community ASL classes. I am also grateful to Karen Emmorey and 
colleagues at the SDSU Laboratory for Language and Cognitive Neuroscience for fostering my curiosity for how 
signed languages are represented in the brain. Finally, immense gratitude to Brittany Lee and Mathieu Declerck 
for their unwavering support over the years, including reading previous drafts of this chapter.
References
Amengual, M. (2011). Interlingual influence in bilingual speech: Cognate status effect in a continuum of bilin-
gualism. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(3), 517–530. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
1000460
Banaszkiewicz, A., Matuszewski, J., Bola, Ł., Szczepanik, M., Kossowski, B., Rutkowski, P., Szwed, M., 
Emmorey, K., Jednoróg, K., & Marchewka, A. (2020). Multimodal imaging of brain reorganization in hearing 
late learners of sign language. Human Brain Mapping, 42, 384–397. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.25229
Baus, C., Carreiras, M., & Emmorey, K. (2013). When does iconicity in sign language matter? Language and 
Cognitive Processes, 28(3), 261–271. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690965.2011.620374
Bochner, J.H., Christie, K., Hauser, P.C., & Searls, J.M. (2011). When is a difference really different? Learners’ 
discrimination of linguistic contrasts in American Sign Language. Language Learning, 61(4), 1302–1327. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2011.00671.x
Boers-Visker, E., & Pfau, R. (2020). Space oddidities: The acquisition of agreement verbs by L2 learners of 
Sign Language of the Netherlands. The Modern Language Journal, 104(4), 757–780. https://doi.org/10.1111/
modl.12676
Boers-Visker, E., & Van den Bogaerde, B. (2019). Learning to use space in the L2 acquisition of a signed lan-
guage. Sign Language Studies, 19(3), 410–452. https://doi.org/10.1353/sls.2019.0003
Brentari, D. (1998). A prosodic model of sign language phonology. The MIT Press.
Casey, S., Emmorey, K., & Larrabee, H. (2012). The effects of learning American Sign Language on co-speech 
gesture. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 15(4), 677–686. https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891
1000575
Chen Pichler, D., & Koulidobrova, E. (2015). Acquisition of sign language as a second language. In M. 
Marschark & P. E. Spencer (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of deaf studies in language (pp. 218–230). Oxford 
University Press.
De Groot, A.M.B., & Keijzer, R. (2000). What is hard to learn is easy to forget: The roles of word concrete-
ness, cognate status, and word frequency in foreign-language vocabulary learning and forgetting. Language 
Learning, 50(1), 1–56. https://doi.org/10.1111/0023-8333.00110
Dickson, D., & Pelzl, E. (this volume). Using time-based electroencephalography to investigate second lan-
guage. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Ebling, S., Tissi, K., Sidler-Miserez, S., Schlumpf, C., & Boyes Braem, P. (2021). Single-parameter and param-
eter combination errors in L2 productions of Swiss German Sign Language. Sign Language & Linguistics, 
24(2), 143–181. https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.19002.ebl
Ekerdt, C., Takashima, A., & McQueen, J.M. (this volume). Memory consolidation in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Emmorey, K. (2002). Language, Cognition, and the Brain: Insights from Sign Language Research. Lawrence 
Erlbaum and Associates.
Emmorey, K. (2021). New perspectives on the neurobiology of sign languages. Frontiers in Communication, 
6(748430), 1–20. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomm.2021.748430
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Learning a Second Language in the Visual-Manual Modality
459
Emmorey, K., Winsler, K., Midgley, K.J., Grainger, J., & Holcomb, P.J. (2020). Neurophysiological correlates 
of frequency, concreteness, and iconicity in American Sign Language. Neurobiology of Language, 1(2), 249–
267. https://doi.org/10.1162.nol_a_00012
Ferrara, L. (2019). Coordinating signs and eye gaze in the depiction of directions and spatial scenes by fluent and 
L2 signers of Norwegian Sign Language. Spatial Cognition and Computation, 19(3), 220–251. https://doi.
org/10.1080/13875868.2019.1572151
Ferrara, L., & Nilsson, A.-L. (2017). Describing spatial layouts as an L2M2 signed language learner. Sign 
Language & Linguistics, 20(1), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.20.1.01fer
Fromont, L. (this volume). Age and proficiency in second language neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. 
van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Gaskell, M.G., & Dumay, N. (2003). Lexical competition and the acquisition of novel words. Cognition, 89, 
105–132. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0010-0277(03)00070-2
Haug, T., Boers-Visker, E., Van den Bogaerde, B. (2020). Testing sign language learns. In P. Winke & T. Brunfaut 
(Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition and language testing (pp. 432–442). 
Routledge.
Hildebrandt, U., & Corina, D. (2002). Phonological similarity in American Sign Language. Language and 
Cognitive Processes, 17(6), 593–612. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690960143000371
Hilger, A.I., Loucks, T.M.J., Quinto-Pozos, D., & Dye, M.W.G. (2015). Second language acquisition across 
modalities: Production variability in adult L2 learners of American Sign Language. Second Language 
Research, 31(3), 375–388. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658315570648
Jacobs, A., Fricke, M., & Kroll, J.F. (2016). Cross-language activation begins during speech planning and extends 
into second language speech. Language Learning, 66(2), 324–353. https://doi.org/10.1111/lang.12148
Kousaie, S., & Klein, D. (this volume). Using functional neuroimaging to investigate second language organiza-
tion. In K. Morgan-Short & J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language acquisition 
and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Lee, B., Meade, G., Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Emmorey, K. (2019). ERP evidence for co-activation of 
English words during recognition of American Sign Language signs. Brain Sciences, 9(148), 1–17. https://
doi.org/10.3390/brainsci9060148
Linck, J.A., Osthus, P., Koeth, J.T., & Bunting, M.F. (2014). Working memory and second language comprehen-
sion and production: A meta-analysis. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 21, 861–883. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13423-013-0565-2
Luque, A., & Covey, L. (this volume). Factors accounting for individual differences in second language 
neurocognition. In K. Morgan-Short and J.G. van Hell (Eds.), The Routledge handbook of second language 
acquisition and neurolinguistics. Routledge.
Marshall, C.R. & Morgan, G. (2015). From gesture to sign language: Conventionalization of classifier 
constructions by adult hearing learners of British Sign Language. Topics in Cognitive Science, 7(1), 61–80. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/tops.12118
Martinez, D., & Singleton, J.L. (2018). Predicting sign learning in hearing adults: The role of perceptual-motor 
(and phonological?) processes. Applied Psycholinguistics, 39, 905–931. https://doi.org/10.1017/S014271641
8000048
Martinez, D., & Singleton, J.L. (2019). Individual differences in lexical learning across two language modal-
ities: Sign learning, word learning, and their relationship in hearing non-signing adults. Acta Psychologica, 
198(102892). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2019.102892
Meade, G. (2020). The role of phonological recoding during visual word learning in adults: An integrative 
review. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 27(1), 15–23. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-019-01647-0
Meade, G., Lee, B., Massa, N., Holcomb, P.J., Midgley, K.J., & Emmorey, K. (2022). Are form priming effects 
phonological or perceptual? Electrophysiological evidence from American Sign Language. Cognition, 
220(104979), 1–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2021.104979
Meade, G., Lee, B., Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Emmorey, K. (2018). Phonological and semantic priming 
in American Sign Language: N300 and N400 effects. Language, Cognition and Neuroscience, 33(9), 1092–
1106. https://doi.org/10.1080/23273798.2018.1446543
Mesch, J., & Schönström, K. (2021). Use and acquisition of mouth actions in sign language learners. Sign 
Language & Linguistics, 24(1), 36–62. https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.19003.mes
Mirus, G., Rathmann, C.G., & Meier, R.P. (2000). Proximalization and distalization of sign movement in adult 
learners. In V. Dively, M. Metzger, S. Taub, & A.M. Baer (Eds.), Signed languages: Discoveries from inter-
national research (pp. 103–119). Gallaudet University Press.
Morett, L.M. (2015). Lending a hand to signed language acquisition: Enactment and iconicity enhance sign recall 
in hearing adult American Sign Language learners. Journal of Cognitive Psychology, 27(3), 251–276. https://
doi.org/10.1080/20445911.2014.999684
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Gabriela Meade
460
Morford, J.P., Occhibo-Kehoe, C., Piñar, P., Wilkinson, E., & Kroll, J.F. (2017). The time course of cross-
language activation in deaf ASL-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 20(2), 337–350. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S136672891500067X
Mott, M., Midgley, K.J., Holcomb, P.J., & Emmorey, K. (2020). Cross-modal translation priming and icon-
icity effects in deaf signers and hearing learners of American Sign Language. Bilingualism: Language and 
Cognition, 23, 1032–1044. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1366728919000889
Newman-Norlund, R.D., Frey, S.H., Petitto, L.-A., & Grafton, S.T. (2006). Anatomical substrates of visual and 
auditory miniature second-language learning. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience, 18(12), 1984–1997. https://
doi.org/10.1162/jocn.2006.18.12.1984
Ortega, G. (2017). Iconicity and sign lexical acquisition: A review. Frontiers in Psychology, 8(1280), 1–14. 
https://doi.org/doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01280
Ortega, G., & Morgan, G. (2015). Phonological development in hearing learners of a sign language: The influ-
ence of phonological parameters, sign complexity, and iconicity. Language Learning, 65(3), 660–668. https://
doi.org/10.1111/lang.12123
Ortega, G., Özyürek, A., & Peeters, D. (2020). Iconic gestures serve as manual cognates in hearing second lan-
guage learners of a sign language: An ERP study. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 46(3), 403–415. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0000729
Ortega, G., Schiefner, A., & Özyürek, A. (2019). Hearing non-signers use their gestures to predict iconic form-
meaning mappings at first exposure to signs. Cognition, 191(103996). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognit
ion.2019.06.008
Quinto-Pozos, D. (2011). Teaching American Sign Language to hearing adult learners. Annual Review of Applied 
Linguistics, 31, 137–158. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0267190511000195
Rosen, R.S. (2004). Beginning L2 production errors in ASL lexical phonology: A cognitive phonology model. 
Sign Language & Linguistics, 7(1), 31–61. https://doi.org/10.1075/sll.7.1.04beg
Sandler, W., & Lillo-Martin, D. (2006). Sign Language and Linguistic Universals. Cambridge University Press.
Schlehofer, D.A., & Tyler, I.J. (2016). Errors in second language learners’ production of phonological contrasts 
in American Sign Language. International Journal of Language and Linguistics, 3(2), 30–38.
Sehyr, Z.S., Caselli, N.K., Cohen-Goldberg, A.M., & Emmorey, K. (2021). The ASL-LEX 2.0 Project: A data-
base of lexical and phonological properties for 2,723 signs in American Sign Language. Journal of Deaf 
Studies and Deaf Education. https://doi.org/10.1093/deafed/enaa038
Stokoe, W. (1960). Sign language structure: An outline of the visual communication systems of the American 
deaf. In Studies in Linguistics: Occasional Papers. University of Buffalo.
Takashima, A., Bakker, I., van Hell, J.G., Janzen, G., & McQueen, J.M. (2017). Interaction between episodic and 
semantic memory networks in the acquisition and consolidation of novel spoken words. Brain and Language, 
167, 44–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bandl.2016.05.009
Van Hell, J.G., & Tanner, D. (2012). Second language proficiency and cross-language lexical activation. 
Language Learning, 62(Suppl 2), 148–171. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2012.00710.x
Williams, J., Darcy, I., Newman, S. (2015a). Modality-independent neural mechanisms for novel phonetic pro-
cessing. Brain Research, 16(1620), 107–115. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2015.05.014
Williams, J., Darcy, I., & Newman, S. (2015b). Second language working memory deficits and plasticity in 
hearing bimodal learners of sign language. Psychology of Language and Communication, 19(2), 128–148. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/plc-2015-0008
Williams, J., Darcy, I., & Newman, S. (2016a). Bimodal bilingualism as multisensory training?: Evidence for 
improved audiovisual speech perception after sign language exposure. Brain Research, 1633, 101–110. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brainres.2015.12.046
Williams, J., Darcy, I., & Newman, S. (2016b). Modality-specific processing precedes amodal linguistic pro-
cessing during L2 sign language acquisition: A longitudinal study. Cortex, 75, 56–67. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.cortex.2015.11.015
Williams, J., Darcy, I., & Newman, S. (2017). The beneficial role of L1 spoken language skills on initial L2 sign 
language learning: Cognitive and linguistic predictors of M2L2 acquisition. Studies in Second Language 
Acquisition, 39, 833–850. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263116000322
Williams, J., & Newman, S. (2016). Phonological substitution errors in L2 ASL sentence processing by hearing 
M2L2 learners. Second Language Research, 32(3), 347–366. https://doi.org/10.1177/0267658315626211
Williams, J., & Newman, S. (2017). Spoken language activation alters subsequent sign language activation in 
L2 learners of American Sign Language. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 46, 211–225. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10936-016-9432-4
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

461
DOI: 10.4324/9781003190912-42
34
APHASIA, REHABILITATION, 
AND SECOND LANGUAGE 
NEUROCOGNITION
Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
Introduction and Clinical Definitions
Aphasia is a language disorder, commonly observed following stroke or other acquired-brain injury 
(ABI) that arises from damage to regions involved in language processing. Nearly all individuals with 
aphasia will experience anomia, or deficits in naming, in addition to a variety of difficulties producing 
and comprehending language across spoken and written modalities. Classifying language impair-
ment for monolingual patients with aphasia (MPWA) entails administering a battery of language 
assessments aimed at measuring deficits in language abilities across modalities as they compare 
to a normative sample of data. Evaluating language impairments in bilingual patients with aphasia 
(BPWA), however, is a much more complex task. It is well accepted that bilingual individuals cannot 
simply be considered “two monolinguals in one person” (Grosjean, 1989) and as a result, language 
impairments cannot be quantified in the same manner as MPWA. Indeed, bilinguals present as a 
heterogeneous population with varying combinations of language profiles and proficiency (Fabbro, 
2001; Paradis, 2004). Therefore, bilingual aphasia presents as varying degrees of language impair-
ment in production and/or comprehension abilities in at least one of a bilingual’s two languages. In 
order to determine the presence of aphasia in bilingual individuals, premorbid language abilities 
in both first language (L1) and second language (L2) must be considered as they relate to post-
ABI language impairment. This information is critical to determine the difference between aspects of 
language that may not have been fully acquired or mastered pre-ABI as they relate to aspects of lan-
guage that were impaired post-ABI. Consequently, characterizing L1 and L2 language loss in BPWA 
constitutes an important first step in designing assessment and intervention tools to support language 
recovery processes.
Historical Perspectives
L1 and L2 Language Impairment in Bilingual Aphasia
Although it is well known that assessing damage to the bilingual language system—which is multi-
dimensional and shaped by personal experience—requires careful consideration of a variety of pre-
morbid proficiency and injury-related factors, the literature remains divided about how to approach 
this endeavor. Historical perspectives on language loss in bilingual aphasia have emerged from 
the classic debate between Pitres and Ribot, who each postulated that linguistic deficits occurred 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
462
asymmetrically, with one language more spared than the other. According to Ribot’s law (1887), 
earlier acquired linguistic information should be better preserved following acquired brain injury, 
whereas Pitres’s law (1895) suggested that the pre-morbid dominant language—which may not be 
L1—emerges less affected.
Strict adherence to these frameworks, however, is complicated by repeated observations of par-
allel patterns of language impairment in many BPWA (Gray & Kiran, 2013; Paradis, 2004; Peñaloza, 
Barrett, & Kiran, 2020). Such parallel deficits can be explained under the assumption that brain 
damage occurs in regions that share language representations for L1 and L2. Indeed, Green (2003), 
Perani and Abutalebi (2005), and others have argued that cognitive-linguistic representations for L1 
and L2 in healthy bilinguals are supported by similar neural substrates and this organization may be 
modulated by language exposure, use, and age of acquisition (Abutalebi et al., 2008; Fromont, this 
volume). Similarly, researchers have proposed that various levels of linguistic representation are 
arranged in a common network regardless of linguistic similarity (Costa, 2005; Kuzmina et al., 2019; 
Miozzo et al., 2010).
Patterns of Language Impairment in Bilingual Aphasia
In his seminal work, Paradis (2004) reviewed the different patterns of impairment observed in bilin-
gual aphasia that have been identified through empirical evidence, including parallel, differential, and 
selective impairment. These patterns of impairment can be understood as deficits in each language 
relative to an individual’s premorbid proficiency. As such, a crucial first step in identifying these 
patterns is determining pre-ABI language abilities in both languages, typically measured via language 
use questionnaires. Here, parallel impairment represents a similar reduction in L1 and L2 relative to 
premorbid language abilities. For example, if an individual’s L1 was the more dominant language 
pre-ABI, it would remain the dominant language post-ABI; likewise, if an individual demonstrated 
similar proficiency in each language pre-ABI, deficits in L1 and L2 would be comparable post-ABI. 
Differential impairment occurs when one language is impacted to a greater extent than the other. 
Finally, selective impairment is characterized by deficits in one language with no measurable deficits 
in the other language. There is much debate on how and why different patterns of impairment arise 
in bilingual patients with aphasia. One such hypothesis, discussed by Paradis (2004), is that some of 
these patterns of impairment, specifically differential and selective impairment, arise from inappro-
priate inhibition of one or both languages.
Contemporary Perspectives of Bilingual Aphasia
Language Impairment in L1 and L2 in Bilingual Aphasia
In contrast to historical views of bilingual aphasia, more contemporary approaches emphasize the 
importance of quantifying pre-morbid language abilities to better understand post-ABI language 
impairment, especially for communication deficits in L2. The complex interaction between pre-morbid 
proficiency and impairment remains a central focus, as it is also critical to consider proficiency versus 
impairment to develop appropriate rehabilitation plans. To quantify patterns of impairment, it is first 
necessary to measure L1 and L2 language abilities prior to aphasia onset. It should be noted, how-
ever, that factors underlying language abilities such as proficiency and dominance may shift over the 
lifespan (Heredia, 1997). Indeed, L2 does not always remain the less proficient language throughout 
a bilingual’s lifetime, and therefore, understanding dominance requires a more in-depth analysis of 
language experiences beyond just collecting age of acquisition (AoA) information. For example, 
when an individual immigrates to an almost exclusively L2 environment, increased exposure to and 
use of L2 over time may lead to this language becoming more dominant. Such dynamic changes in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aphasia, Rehabilitation, and Second Language Neurocognition
463
pre-morbid language proficiency and dominance must be captured to accurately determine the nature 
and extent of post-morbid impairment.
Various frameworks have also been developed to examine changes in language processing post-
ABI. Based on clinical evaluation, Gray and Kiran (2013) introduced a highly interactive model 
of post-ABI processing that included strong connections between non-linguistic semantics, lexical-
semantics, comprehension, word recognition, word translation, and expression in both languages. 
Further, they noted that when one domain was impaired, it negatively affected performance in other 
domains. Additionally, they found that pre-ABI language ability ratings (LAR) were predictive of 
post-ABI performance on standardized assessments, highlighting the importance of understanding 
pre-morbid language proficiency as it relates to post-ABI language impairment. Similarly, Peñaloza, 
Barrett, & Kiran (2020) found that pre-ABI L1 and L2 proficiency (as measured by language his-
tory metrics) were predictive of post-ABI performance on standardized assessments for BPWA, with 
a larger effect for L2 compared to L1. This study also highlighted that language use questionnaire 
(Kastenbaum et al., 2019) data combined with post-ABI language assessment data were useful in 
identifying patterns of impairment in bilingual aphasia. Consistent with prior research (see Paradis, 
2004 for a review), the authors found that parallel impairment was the most common pattern of 
impairment identified in a large cohort (N = 27) of BPWA, with differential impairment being much 
less common. Although standardized assessments cannot be used to determine pre-morbid language 
proficiency following ABI, since post-ABI language impairment confounds pre-morbid language 
abilities, these studies suggest that collecting bilingual language experience metrics may serve as a 
reliable proxy for quantifying pre-morbid proficiency and relative dominance in each language (Gray 
& Kiran, 2013; Peñaloza, Barrett, & Kiran, 2020).
In a recent systematic review, Kuzmina and colleagues (2019) also demonstrated that pre-morbid 
proficiency metrics were associated with post-ABI language abilities in analyses that included a large 
cohort of BPWA across studies (N = 119). First, they found an effect of AoA, such that individuals 
who learned their L2 later generally demonstrated better performance in L1 relative to L2 post-
ABI, whereas early bilinguals showed comparable performance between languages post-ABI. When 
looking at pre-ABI proficiency in comparison to post-ABI language performance, they found that 
individuals who reported either higher L1 proficiency or balanced proficiency pre-ABI performed 
better in L1 post-ABI, whereas individuals who reported higher proficiency in L2 pre-ABI remained 
better in L2 post-ABI. Results for language use indicated that individuals who reported greater use 
of L1 demonstrated better performance in L1 post-ABI, whereas those who reported greater use of 
L2 demonstrated comparable performance across both languages. These studies highlight the import-
ance of considering how premorbid language abilities interact with post-ABI language impairment in 
order to accurately quantify aphasia in BPWA.
Finally, understanding pre-morbid language abilities and language impairment in bilingual aphasia 
is also critical when considering rehabilitation outcomes for BPWA. A case study by Gil and Goral 
(2004) showed that language recovery can vary as a function of pre-ABI proficiency. Their patient, who 
was a late sequential bilingual who had attained high proficiency in L2 prior to aphasia onset, recovered 
to a greater extent in L1 when receiving treatment in L2 even though both languages were equally 
impaired upon initial evaluation. These findings underscore the importance of considering pre-ABI 
language proficiency, use, and preference when selecting the language for intervention and suggest that 
this information may be useful in ultimately predicting treatment-induced recovery in both languages.
Language Control in Bilingual Aphasia
In recent years, new evidence has distinguished deficits in language control from overt language loss 
in BPWA. In healthy bilinguals, language control is implemented in order to produce the intended 
 
 
 
 

Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
464
language in a contextually appropriate manner (Green, 1998; Green & Abutalebi, 2013). This 
dependence on language control for bilingual individuals has implications for aphasia as language 
impairments following ABI may reflect, at least to some extent, deficits in language control abilities 
rather than language loss. In the context of bilingual aphasia, language control deficits may mani-
fest as pathological switching and mixing of languages (Abutalebi et al., 2000; Fabbro et al., 2000). 
Evidence for these clinical presentations comes from case studies that have revealed that lesions 
to areas implicated in domain-general cognitive control (i.e., frontal regions and subcortical areas 
including the caudate nucleus of the basal ganglia), resulted in an inability to remain in one language 
exclusively (e.g., pathological switching and mixing) as well as inappropriate language use (e.g., 
using their L2 with an interlocutor who solely speaks their L1). These observations have suggested 
that language loss may represent altered “access” to lexical representations in one or both languages, 
whereas impairments in language control prevent appropriate activation of the intended language and 
inhibition of the unintended language. Support for this view is available from a number of clinical 
studies. For example, Keane and Kiran (2015) observed an increase in cross-linguistic intrusions 
during naming for a trilingual individual with aphasia following treatment-induced recovery in 
the individual’s L1. Given the presence of domain-general cognitive control impairments in this 
patient’s profile, the authors argued that the naming impairments were a result of underlying control 
impairments, which resulted in pathological mixing. In a second study, Goral et al. (2019) found 
severity-modulated patterns of language switching and mixing among a group of BPWA. Results 
revealed that patients with more severe impairment switched and mixed more frequently than patients 
with milder impairment. Furthermore, patients tended to switch languages more when being tested 
in their weaker language, underscoring that aphasia severity and language proficiency are also key 
factors to consider when characterizing language control deficits.
Theoretical Accounts of Lexical-Semantic Impairment  
and Language Control in Bilingual Aphasia
Lexical-Semantic Impairment in L1 and L2 (Error Analyses)
Another area of focus in current bilingual aphasia work is the relative impairment of L2 versus L1. 
Numerous models of bilingual word-retrieval have been proposed to identify and describe the patterns 
of lexical-semantic deficits frequently seen in aphasia post-ABI. In healthy bilinguals, most models 
agree that the process of lexical-retrieval begins at a semantic-conceptual system shared between the 
two languages. Under the revised hierarchical model (RHM; Kroll & Stewart, 1994) for example, 
activation from the semantic system proceeds along proficiency-mediated connections to separate 
lexical maps for L1 and L2 (Tokowicz & Tkacikova, this volume). Similarly, the distributed feature 
model (De Groot, 1992; Van Hell & De Groot, 1998) upholds the framework for a shared semantic 
system and separate L1 and L2 lexical maps, but posits that the degree of overlap (i.e., connections) 
between the two lexical systems is mediated by a) psycholinguistic factors, such as word frequency, 
and b) semantic-syntactic distinctions, such as word class (Kroll & Tokowicz, 2005).
In 2014, Kiran et al. used these bilingual word-retrieval frameworks to organize and describe 
errors elicited from Spanish–English BPWA during a standardized picture-naming task. Participants 
displayed a variety of error types that were grouped based on four hypothesized loci of damage 
during lexical-semantic processing: a) no-responses, neologisms, and perseverations signaled diffi-
culty accessing the semantic system in general; b) unrelated words, circumlocutions, and semantic 
paraphasias arose from incomplete activation in the semantic system; c) mixed errors (including some 
combination of semantic and phonological difficulties) reflected damage to connections between the 
semantic and L1/L2 lexical maps; and d) phonological paraphasias, dysarthric/apractic errors, and 
accent-influenced productions emerged following word-retrieval in a specific lexicon. It is important 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aphasia, Rehabilitation, and Second Language Neurocognition
465
to note that all error types could have occurred in the target language or non-target language during 
the naming task; furthermore, any responses that were correct in the non-target language were still 
counted as errors.
In L2 English, after no response in the target language, circumlocutions and correct responses in 
the non-target language emerged as the most common error types. These latter response types suggest 
that participants attempted to use L1 lexical information to compensate for weaker word-retrieval 
during L2 naming. In L1 Spanish, however, no response, circumlocutions, semantic paraphasias, and 
neologisms in the target language constituted the most frequent error types. These response patterns 
suggest that performance in L1 was fundamentally different than in L2 as participants were far less 
likely to a) switch languages and use L2-lexical information during the L1 naming task, and b) pro-
vide the correct picture name in the non-target language (English). Overall, error analyses in bilingual 
aphasia may improve our understanding of individual variation in lexical-retrieval abilities post-ABI 
and suggest that patterns of behavior may differ according to relative frequency and type of error in 
L1 and L2.
Recent work has begun to examine naming errors over time for Spanish-English BPWA under-
going semantic-feature based treatment for word-retrieval deficits to determine if specific patterns 
of errors will predict treatment gains and generalization effects in a treated and untreated language. 
Preliminary evidence for some BPWA, reported in Peñaloza et al. (2021), suggests that as participants 
show more improvement on trained items in a treated language, they produce fewer semantically-
severe errors (no response, neologisms, etc.) and more semantic-based errors (i.e., unrelated words, 
circumlocutions, etc.) for a) semantically-related targets in the treated language as well as b) direct 
translations of the trained and semantically-related items in the untreated language. Additionally, 
these effects may be magnified if the individual is treated in their L1 given that bilingual models 
of lexical access generally predict stronger connections between the semantic-conceptual system 
and the L1 lexicon (Kroll & Stewart, 1994). Thus, the increased frequency of semantic-based errors 
in both languages may reflect rehabilitation and strengthening of the semantic system following 
treatment in L1 or L2 and further suggests that despite incorrect word production, semantic-feature 
based treatment may increase communicative content in bilingual aphasia.
Inhibitory Control and Its Application to Bilingual Aphasia
The inhibitory control model (Green, 1998) has been used to describe the control mechanisms 
implicated in bilingual language production as they relate to relative proficiencies in L1 and L2 and 
has important implications for understanding bilingual aphasia. The inhibitory control model outlines 
language control in bilingual speakers, which explains how bilingual individuals retrieve lexical 
candidates in one language while managing competing alternatives from both languages. In this 
model, language task schemas compete to control output of the lexical-semantic system by altering 
their levels of activation, and lexical representations of the non-target language are expected to be 
inhibited after all associated concepts have been activated. This model follows other frameworks 
of bilingual language processing, including the bilingual interactive activation models (Dijkstra & 
Van Heuven, 1998; 2002), in assuming that lexical selection is language non-specific, such that an 
activated representation will not only activate associated concepts in the same language, but will also 
activate associated concepts in the other language (e.g., dog activates cat in English, as well as perro 
and gato in Spanish) (Bialystok et al., 2009; Colomé, 2001; Costa et al., 2000; Kroll et al., 2006). 
Since multiple candidates are activated in tandem, control processes are required to manage the acti-
vation and inhibition of targets and non-targets (Green, 1998). It is postulated that increased language 
control is required to inhibit the dominant language in favor of the weaker language during retrieval 
in L2 as proficiency modulates the resting level activation of lexical candidates (Paradis, 1993). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
466
However, increased proficiency in L2 can lead to a shift from highly controlled to more automatic 
and less effortful language processing (Abutalebi & Green, 2007).
Unlike monolingual speakers, bilingual speakers employ language control and semantic execu-
tive control (i.e., the control mechanisms that direct and control lexical activation in a contextually 
appropriate manner) to manage the language-non-specific nature of lexical activation (Jefferies et al., 
2008). Since numerous lexical representations are activated in tandem, language control designates 
the intended language of use at the level of task schemas while semantic executive control is required 
to manage activation of specific lexical candidates and inhibition of unintended representations 
(Jefferies et al., 2008). Figure 34.1 aims to explain the complex dynamic between language control 
and semantic executive control in bilingual speakers. Figure 34.1 represents a dual-language context 
(Green & Abutalebi, 2013), where inhibition arises from the level of language task schemas to inhibit 
lexical representations from the unintended language (in this case L2). Additionally, semantic execu-
tive control is implemented to inhibit semantically-related lexical representations in the intended 
language as well as to inhibit previously activated lexical representations in the now unintended lan-
guage. Recent work suggests that this linguistic context proves to be the most challenging for BPWA 
and leads to communicative breakdowns (Carpenter et al., 2020; Carpenter et al., 2021), underscoring 
how BPWA have difficulty effectively managing competition between two levels of control.
Recent empirical work has shed light on the interaction between language control, semantic execu-
tive control, and domain-general cognitive control, in healthy bilinguals and BPWA using verbal flu-
ency tasks. Before discussing the outcomes of these studies, it is important to first operationalize these 
different levels of control. Language control and semantic executive control, described above, direct 
activation and inhibition across different levels of the bilingual language system (see Figure 34.1), 
while domain-general cognitive control, consists of mental processes (e.g., response selection and 
inhibition, response monitoring, planning, etc.) that regulate functions across different domains, 
including language (Braver, 2012; Hammond & Summers, 1972; Miyake et al., 2000; see Guo & Ma, 
this volume). Several studies examining healthy bilinguals have linked performance on verbal flu-
ency tasks, a well-known measure of lexical retrieval, to tasks examining domain-general cognitive 
control, such as operation span (O-Span) tasks (Shao et al., 2014) and Stroop tasks (Patra et al., 2020). 
These results suggest domain-general cognitive control plays a role in lexical retrieval in neurotypical 
bilinguals. However, studies involving BPWA have been much more variable, suggesting potential 
differences in the interaction between control levels in this population. For example, some studies 
have found no link between verbal fluency performance and Stroop performance in BPWA (Faroqi-
Shah et al., 2018), whereas others have found that altering the language control demands of the task 
revealed a clear interaction between language control and cognitive control, with increasing control 
demands leading to poorer performance for BPWA (Carpenter et al., 2020). Furthermore, although 
automatic spreading activation of lexical candidates within the bilingual lexico-semantic system 
(Dell, 1986; Dell & O’Seaghdha, 1992) does not appear to be impacted by increased language con-
trol demands, semantic executive control is susceptible to these increased demands (Carpenter et al., 
2021). Importantly, these authors found that for BPWA only, performance was predicted by language 
experience metrics. These findings suggest that increased language demands hinder semantic execu-
tive control in BPWA and reveal a relationship between language experience and control abilities 
in BPWA.
Other work has also used non-linguistic control tasks to explain interactions between the three 
levels of cognitive control and distinguish them in healthy bilinguals and BPWA. For example, prior 
work has demonstrated that healthy bilinguals and BPWA display different patterns of results across 
control tasks (e.g., language control tasks vs. semantic executive control tasks vs. domain-general 
cognitive control tasks)(Gray, 2020; Gray & Kiran, 2016), which may be more informative than verbal 
fluency tasks alone given the nature of language impairment in aphasia (see section above). Some 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

467
Aphasia, Rehabilitation, and Second Language Neurocognition
Figure 34.1  Levels of Representation and Control in a Dual-Language Context.
Notes: Language control and semantic executive control schema in a dual-language context, where bilingual speakers switch between languages in response 
to external environmental cues. Inhibition is represented with subtraction signs. Automatic activation is represented with arrows; forward activation is shown 
using a solid line and backward activation is shown using a dashed line. Activation for the intended word, dog, is represented with addition signs. Degree 
of activation is represented by different shades of blue with darker shades representing larger degrees of activation and lighter shades representing smaller 
degrees of activation.
 
 
newgenrtpdf

Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
468
studies have revealed dissociations between language control and domain-general cognitive control 
in BPWA (Dash & Kar, 2014; Gray & Kiran, 2019), which appears to be modulated by language pro-
ficiency (Dash & Kar, 2014). These findings suggest that BPWA may present with impairments in a 
specific type of control, and control impairments post-ABI may be influenced by bilingual language 
experience. Furthermore, Gray (2020) found that healthy bilinguals were better able to implement 
language control, which may be intrinsic to everyday bilingual language experiences, as compared 
to semantic executive control, suggesting that language control is less effortful for healthy bilinguals 
as compared to managing semantic interference. In the same study, BPWA showed no differences 
between language control and semantic executive control performance, suggesting that BPWA 
either had a) specific deficits in language control, or b) the interaction between language control and 
semantic control in these patients caused reduced performance across both tasks. Given that language 
control impairments are observed infrequently in bilingual aphasia and usually result from subcor-
tical lesions, the authors suggested that semantic executive control deficits may have led to reduced 
performance on the two tasks given the use of linguistic stimuli in both. Overall, these studies pro-
vide initial support for a dissociation between levels of control in BPWA that diverges from healthy 
bilinguals. This work also emphasizes the need for future research to a) investigate different levels of 
control in BPWA using tasks specifically designed to measure these constructs, b) demonstrate how 
these levels interact to cause communicative breakdowns, and c) account for control elements when 
designing rehabilitation plans in bilingual aphasia.
Clinical Intervention in Bilingual Aphasia
Treatment-Induced Recovery
Despite a growing research interest in bilingual aphasia, literature in the field remains skewed towards 
describing linguistic impairment post-ABI rather than investigating treatment-induced recovery 
(Peñaloza & Kiran, 2019). Thus far, most treatment studies have consisted of single case studies or 
case series that have varied according to the target language selected for intervention, the type of 
therapy administered, and the type of stimuli and general procedures used to evaluate cross-language 
generalization (Lorenzen & Murray, 2008). Overall, small sample sizes and variation between studies 
have complicated the development of comprehensive guidelines for intervention in bilingual aphasia 
(Roberts & Kiran, 2007).
Despite these limitations, treatment studies have generally shown that therapy in L1 or L2 leads to 
direct improvement in that language (Edmonds & Kiran, 2006; Faroqi-shah et al., 2010; Gil & Goral, 
2004; Kiran & Roberts, 2010; Kiran, Sandberg, et al., 2013; Kohnert, 2004; Li et al., 2020). Indeed, a 
recent systematic review of bilingual treatment by Faroqi-Shah et al. (2010) concluded that treatment 
gains in L2 were equivalent to those reported in studies that administered therapy in L1. Furthermore, 
treatment gains following therapy in L2 were not systematically predicted by age of acquisition nor 
proficiency characteristics, which may suggest that L2 be considered alongside L1 as the language of 
intervention in future clinical interventions.
Other measures of treatment efficacy such as different patterns of generalization to untrained items 
have been reported in many studies. For example, lexical-semantic based treatments for anomia have 
revealed within-language generalization to untrained cognate/non-cognate word pairs (Kohnert, 2004) 
and semantically-related items (e.g. apple→orange; Edmonds & Kiran, 2006; Kiran & Roberts, 2010; 
Kiran, Sandberg et al., 2013). Verb-retrieval therapy for grammatical impairments has also revealed 
within-language patterns of generalization (Li et al., 2020). Additionally, cross-language generaliza-
tion to untrained items (e.g., translation equivalents) in the untreated language has been noted across 
broad receptive and expressive intervention types. Significant improvement in the untreated language 
has been documented following therapy in a) the weaker language, or L2 (Edmonds & Kiran, 2006; 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Aphasia, Rehabilitation, and Second Language Neurocognition
469
Gil & Goral, 2004; Kiran & Roberts, 2010), as well as b) the stronger language, or L1 (Edmonds 
& Kiran, 2006; Gil & Goral, 2004; Kohnert, 2004). However, not all studies find evidence of cross-
language generalization (Faroqi-Shah et al., 2010), which suggests that additional factors such as 
pre- and post-morbid language proficiency, language similarity, and intervention type (Ansaldo & 
Saidi, 2014) may be useful in differentiating outcomes in the untreated L1 or L2.
Neural Correlates of Treatment-Induced Recovery
Neuroimaging work has shed light on the neural mechanisms behind language recovery in bilingual 
aphasia. In a longitudinal, dynamic causal modeling (DCM) study, Radman and colleagues (2016) 
revealed that language recovery was linked to alterations in connections between language and con-
trol regions in five BPWA. Specifically, patients who recovered in only one language demonstrated 
increased connections between language and control regions when naming in that language, whereas 
recovery in both languages was related to a redistribution of connections over time, such that compar-
able connections between both languages and control regions were observed in the chronic phase. In 
line with this work, Abutalebi and colleagues (2009) investigated treatment-induced neural changes 
and found global increases in connections for trained L2 and decreases in connections for untrained 
L1 from pre-treatment to post-treatment. These neural changes paralleled the patient’s behavioral 
changes, in which L2 language abilities returned to premorbid function, whereas L1 experienced a 
worsening or “inhibitory effect,” where the patient produced more cross-linguistic errors in L1 at 
post-treatment. Overall, these findings add to the growing body of literature supporting a “dynamic” 
view of language recovery in which language-control plays a critical role in both spontaneous and 
treatment-induced language recovery in bilingual aphasia (Abutalebi et al., 2009; Abutalebi & Green, 
2007; Green & Abutalebi, 2008).
Computational Approaches to Treatment
Historically, optimizing treatment recommendations in bilingual aphasia has been difficult given 
the neurological, linguistic, and sociocultural factors that affect individual response to therapy. 
Recently, computational modeling has been used to overcome this problem by simulating many 
more treatment styles based on various combinations of clinical factors than would be possible 
or practical in real-world scenarios (Grasemman et al., 2011). The foundation for this work was 
established with the creation of DISLEX, a computational account of healthy bilingual lexical 
access whose architecture incorporated aspects of the RHM (Kroll & Stewart, 1994), including 
the semantic/conceptual system, the two language maps, and the associative connections between 
them (Grasemman et al., 2011).
By varying L2 age of acquisition, pre-stroke language proficiency, and post-stroke naming impair-
ment, Grasemman et al. (2011) demonstrated that individual bilingual models of lexical access 
could be trained, lesioned, and retrained to successfully (>80% accuracy) simulate word-retrieval. 
In a follow-up study, Kiran, Grasemann, et al. (2013) administered therapy to a group of BPWA 
in accordance with simulation parameters from individual models. Overall, the models accurately 
simulated improvement in the treated language for the majority of participants for whom treatment 
data was already collected; additionally, they showed efficacy in simulating a) cross-language 
improvement for patients who showed this pattern of generalization after treatment, and b) no 
improvement for patients who did not show these cross-language effects.
In addition to simulating treatment outcomes, computational methods may also be used to pre-
dict treatment results based on a bilingual individual’s specific pre- and post-stroke language profile. 
Under this approach, a computational model can operationalize the large degree of variation in the 
bilingual experience as a set of learning parameters, simulate individual language profiles pre- and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Michael Scimeca, Erin Carpenter, and Swathi Kiran
470
post-ABI (Grasemann et al., 2011; Peñaloza et al., 2019), and generate personalized treatment 
recommendations, including the appropriate target language for intervention (Peñaloza, Dekhtyar 
et al., 2020).
Perhaps the true value of an individualized approach to treatment planning is best illustrated in 
clinical-decision making scenarios where speech-language providers can discuss options with clients 
and their families. For example, let’s consider the case of Ruben, a bilingual adult who grew up in 
Mexico, immigrated to the U.S. for college, lived in the country after graduation, and experienced a 
stroke when he was 65. Just before the stroke, Ruben reported using both Spanish and English in his 
daily life. A model for Ruben might predict that the optimal language for intervention is L1 Spanish 
based on pre-and post-ABI language proficiency and clinical assessment scores. However, Ruben and 
his family believe that treatment in his L2, English, would be more functional given that his language 
use and exposure patterns have shifted to favor English post-ABI following greater impairment in his 
L1. In these cases, computational approaches empower clients and their families to remain involved 
in clinical decision-making and allow speech-language providers to structure a course of treatment 
that considers best practices and individual preferences.
Progressive Aphasia and Dementia
A newer area of bilingual aphasia research concerns impairments associated with neurodegenerative 
disorders resulting in dementias such as primary progressive aphasia (PPA) and Alzheimer’s Disease 
(AD). Language deficits in dementia are common though they differ from focal aphasias given their 
progressive nature and relationship with other cognitive impairments (Kempler & Goral, 2008). 
Thus far, the majority of studies that have analyzed bilingual language impairments and dementia 
have focused on individuals with AD. These studies have demonstrated mixed findings: some have 
suggested that the non-dominant language emerges as the more impaired language in bilingual AD 
(Mendez et al., 1999), whereas others have found parallel language impairments (Costa et al., 2012).
PPA diagnoses are considerably rarer and despite international consensus criteria (Gorno-Tempini 
et al., 2011) that have identified three variants of the disorder, the ways in which these subtypes 
interact with bilingualism remain poorly understood. Nevertheless, the primacy of language difficul-
ties in PPA relative to other cognitive impairments has generated clinical interest in assessment and 
treatment opportunities for bilingual individuals. For example, recent evidence from Grasso et al. 
(2021) demonstrated that language decline may be slowed or partially ameliorated after a group of 
bilinguals with PPA showed significant gains in word-retrieval following lexical-semantic therapy. 
Although these preliminary results suggest that clinical intervention may enhance communication 
and quality of life following neurodegeneration, further evidence is needed to determine to what 
extent language improvement may be expected in bilingual PPA.

Author’s Note
Michael Scimeca and Erin Carpenter are co-first authors.
