EUI - Series A - 8 
Teubner (Ed.), Autopoietic Law: A New Approach to Law and Society 

European University Institute 
Institut Universitaire Europeen 
Europäisches Hochschulinstitut 
Istituto Universitario Europeo 
Series A 
Law/Droit/Recht/Diritto 
8 
Badia Fiesolana — Firenze 

Autopoietic Law: 
A New Approach to Law and 
Society 
Edited by 
Gunther Teubner 
W 
DE 
1988 
Walter de Gruyter · Berlin · New York 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication 
Data 
Autopoietic law. 
(Series A — Law ; 8) 
Includes index and bibliography. 
1. Law — Philosophy. 2. Sociological jurisprudence. 3. Order 
(Philosophy) I. Teubner, Gunther. II. Series. 
K235.A97 
1987 
340M15 
87-30301 
ISBN 0-89925-3903-0 (U.S.) 
CAP- Kur^titelaufnähme 
der Deutschen 
Bibliothek 
Autopoietic law — a new approach to law and society / ed. 
by Gunther Teubner. — Berlin ; New York : de Gruyter, 1987. 
(European University Institute : Ser. A, Law ; 8) 
ISBN 3-11-011459-3 
NE: Teubner, Gunther [Hrsg.]; Istituto Universitario Europeo 
<Fiesole>: European University Institute / A 
© Copyright 1987 by Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin. 
All rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. No part of this 
book may be reproduced in any form — by photoprint, microfilm, or any other means — 
nor transmitted nor translated into a machine language without written permission from 
the publisher. 
Dust Cover Design: Rudolf Hübler, Berlin. 
Setting: Arthur Collignon GmbH., Berlin. — Printing: Gerike GmbH., Berlin 
Binding: Verlagsbuchbinderei Dieter Mikolai, Berlin. 
Printed in Germany 

Preface 
This book grew out of a conference held at the European University 
Institute in Florence. Legal theorists and legal sociologists from different 
countries had been asked to discuss the potential of the theory of autopoiesis 
for the analysis of law. Contributions that deal with issues of legal theory — 
legal system, autonomy of law, legal evolution and cognition in law — are 
presented in this volume. Contributions that deal with law's relation to 
politics and the economy will be published in a second volume, entitled 
"State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems" (de Gruyter, Berlin, 1988). 
I would like to thank Joyce Reese for her precise and thorough editorial 
assistance, Ian Fraser for his sensitive translation of complex texts, and the 
Institute's Publications Officer, Brigitte Schwab, for her helpful activities 
in coordinating the publication. 
November 1987 
Gunther Teubner 


Table of Contents 
Preface 
V 
GUNTHER TEUBNER, Bremen, Firenze 
Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
1 
NIKLAS LUHMANN, Bielefeld 
The Unity of the Legal System 
12 
FRANCOIS EWALD, Paris 
The Law of Law 
36 
JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY, Paris 
On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
51 
F R A N C I S OST, Bruxelles 
Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
70 
HUBERT ROTTLEUTHNER, Berlin 
Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
97 
HANS-GEORG DEGGAU, Hannover 
The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
128 
RICHARD LEMPERT, Ann Arbor 
The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
152 
DAVID NELKEN, London 
Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
191 
GUNTHER TEUBNER, Bremen, Firenze 
Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
217 
K A R L - H E I N Z LADEUR, Bremen 
Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law: A Critique of Niklas 
Luhmann, 'The Unity of the Legal System' 
242 

VIII 
Table of Contents 
THOMAS HELLER, Stanford 
Accounting for Law 
283 
PATRICK NERHOT, Montpellier, Firenze 
The Fact of Law 
312 
NIKLAS LUHMANN, Bielefeld 
Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
335 
PETER KENNEALY, Firenze 
Talking About Autopoiesis — Order from Noise? 
349 
Authors' Biographical Sketches 
369 
Name Index 
373 
Subject Index 
378 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
GUNTHER TEUBNER 
Bremen, Firenze 
Is the practice of legal reasoning bound to end in "strange loops", "tangled 
hierarchies", and "reflexivity dilemmas" (Hofstadter, 1979: 692; 1985: 70)? 
Is the legal process nothing but a closed cycle of recurrent legal operations: 
"computation of computation of computation..." (von Foerster, 1981: 296)? 
And are the social dynamics of the legal system based upon the "paradoxes 
of self-reference" (Wormell, 1958; Quine, 1976)? Up to now, the intricate 
problems of self-referential relations have not been part of the discourse 
of lawyers; they have been discussed outside the law, in logic, linguistics, 
cybernetics and general systems theory. Now the theory of legal autopoiesis 
is importing the logic of self-referentiality into the legal world. Legal 
autopoiesis breaks a taboo in legal thinking — the taboo of circularity. 
Legal doctrine, legal theory and legal sociology have all regarded circularity 
as a subject not to be broached. Circular arguments have been viewed as 
petitio principii 
forbidden by the iron law of legal logic. Legal autopoiesis 
now presumes to invalidate this iron law by transferring circularity from 
the world of ideas to that of hard facts. The message is that circularity is 
not a flaw in legal thinking which ought to be avoided (Fletcher, 1985: 
1263), but rather that the reality of law consists of a multitude of circular 
processes. 
Autopoiesis proposes, as a new and promising research strategy, to 
identify circular relationships within the legal system and to analyze their 
internal dynamics and their external interactions. What has been done so 
far in this field seems to be marginal. Legal methods are only slightly 
informed about the circular relation between purpose and norm in teleologi-
cal reasoning (Alexy, 1978: 289 ff.); legal hermeneutics have only begun to 
study the perplexities of the hermeneutic circle in "Vorverständnis 
und 
Methodenwahl" 
(Esser, 1970); legal sociology has so far granted the luxury 
of circularity in feedback loops only between law and society. In the 
autopoietic perspective, these phenomena are viewed as only a few special 
cases in the encompassing circular self-referential reality of law. The whole 
legal system is seen as a dynamic cyclical reproduction of legal elements 
embedded in hypercyclical relations of legal structures and processes (see 

2 
Gunther Teubner 
Teubner, 1987 a). Law, like other autopoietic systems, is nothing but an 
"endless dance of internal correlations in a closed network of interacting 
elements" (Maturana, 1982: 28). 
Circularity suggests closure. Thus, an autopoietic legal system is seen as 
operationally closed. Apparently, this runs against modern conceptions of 
an open responsive legal order, adapting to, and at the same time, shaping 
the social environment. Operational closure of law raises the suspicion of 
a new legal formalism, of a self-sustaining autarchy of law, of a new 
ideology for the legal profession — especially in the minds of legal 
sociologists. However, operational closure is only a half-truth. "L'ouvert 
s'appuye sur le ferme" (Morin, 1977: 197 ff.). A radical closure of the 
system — under certain conditions — means its radical openness. This is 
one of the most challenging theses of autopoietic theory. The more the 
legal system gains in operational closure and autonomy, the more it gains 
in openness toward social facts, political demands, social science theories, 
and human needs. This sounds paradoxical, and many formulations within 
this new theory seem to enjoy paradoxes. However, if it can be shown that 
this combination of openness and closure renders the legal system more 
responsive to social reality, and if concrete mechanisms coupling normative 
closure with cognitive openness can be identified, then legal autopoiesis 
has a potential of going beyond the theory of "open systems" which views 
itself as the legitimate successor of the older concepts of closed systems. 
This book launches an inquiry into the world of legal autopoiesis — it 
is a project in interdisciplinary theory building. Our collective effort is to 
transfer a new and complex theory, the theory of autopoietic systems, from 
the general context of systems theory to the context of legal theory. This 
is done with the cooperation of international experts in the fields of both 
legal theory and systems theory. The book represents the first major 
endeavor to develop this approach within the field of law. 
What sense is there for legal theory to make use of the theory of 
autopoietic systems? This newly developed theory, formulated by biologists 
(Maturana, 1970; Maturana et al., 1974; Varela, 1979; Zeleny, 1981; Roth 
and Schwegler, 1981) and transferred to the social sciences (Hejl, 1982 a; 
1982 b; Luhmann, 1981; 1984; 1985; Teubner, 1985; 1987 a; 1987 b; Teubner 
and Willke, 1984) cannot yet claim with authority to be a fruitful paradigm. 
It is thus used in a more experimental manner as a strictly heuristic 
device. What follows for the problematic law and society relation if it is 
reformulated in terms of autopoiesis and self-referentiality? What hypo-
theses and consequences are implied with regard to doctrinal practice and 
legal policy? 
While the relations between law and other spheres of society will be 
dealt with in a separate volume (Teubner, 1987 c), the idee directrice of this 
book is to examine the potential of autopoiesis for legal theory and to 
reformulate fundamental legal concepts in the light of this theory. Although 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
3 
it is tempting to start with a critical assessment of autopoiesis as such, it 
seems to be a more fruitful approach if we first explore the changes in 
legal theory suggested by the concept, and then follow up with a critical 
examination of the concept and its legal consequences. Thus, the book is 
organized as a debate between protagonists and critics of autopoiesis 
concentrating on the following issues: 
— Legal System 
— Legal Autonomy 
— Legal Change 
— Legal Cognition 
1. Legal System 
What is autopoiesis? An autopoietic system produces and reproduces its 
own elements by the interaction of its elements. According to 
Niklas 
Luhmann, the main representative of social autopoiesis, the decisive innova-
tion in comparison to older theories of self-organization is that certain 
systems are capable not only of creating an autonomous order but of 
creating their own elements as well. Autopoietic systems are not only 
identified in biology as cells and organisms, on the basis of life, but they 
can also be identified as social systems (interaction, organization, society), 
on the basis of meaning. The basic element of a social system is communica-
tion — not the human being. Communication as the unity of utterance, 
information and understanding constitutes social systems by recursively 
reproducing communication. This conceptualization of social systems 
brings about three important changes in social theory: (1) a radical tempora-
lization of social systems — this means that the elements are not "stable" 
but are "events" which necessitate the system to recursively use events to 
produce events; (2) a reformulation of the old maintenance problem: what 
has to be maintained is the recursively closed organization of an open 
system; closure as a condition for openness is one of the central tenets of 
autopoiesis; (3) epistemological consequences: for the theory of autopoiesis, 
observation is an activity which can be performed by living systems, 
psychic systems and social systems. Observation is itself an operation of 
an autopoietic system. 
If society is an autopoietic system of recursively self-reproducing commu-
nication, can one then also identify the law as being an autopoietic system 
of its own? In other words: Is there a legal autopoiesis, beyond social 
autopoiesis? According to Luhmann, in his essay, "The Unity of the Legal 
System", the basic units of a legal system are neither, as lawyers are used 
to describing them, legal norms, nor, as sociologists define them, actors 
and organizations — law is a system of communications. However, legal 

4 
Gunther Teubner 
autopoiesis is brought about only if an emergent element of the legal 
system is created: the legal act. Legal acts are those communicative events 
that change legal structures. Here we find the basic circularity that defines 
the legal system: the circular relationship between legal acts and legal 
norms. Circularity replaces extra-legal foundations of law as does Kelsen's 
fictitious Grundnorm. If the recursive reproduction of legal acts constitutes 
legal autopoiesis, then operational closure is the main condition for its 
environmental openness. This interplay of openness and closure is repre-
sented in the legal system by the combination of normative closure and 
cognitive openness. The important consequence is that only a limited 
scope exists for the combination of normative expectations with cognitive 
expectations. This, according to Luhmann, is the key to the explanation 
of the modern crisis phenomena of law. Finally, autopoiesis of law limits, 
to a considerable degree, the variability of legal functions. The autopoietic 
closure sets effective limits to the political instrumentalization of law. 
What is the significance of legal autopoiesis in the history of legal 
thought and what is its role in modern society? "The Law of Law" is 
Francois Hwald\ answer to this question by which he attempts a contextual 
interpretation of legal autopoiesis. He deals with two issues: What role 
does autopoiesis play in the conflict between legal theory and legal soci-
ology? Does autopoiesis supply an adequate theory for the law of the 
modern age which Ewald calls the "social law"? 
In the contemporary dilemmatic schism between formal analytical the-
ories of law and more empirically-based legal sociology, legal autopoiesis 
appears in Ewald's view as a kind of "Columbus' egg". Legal autopoiesis 
is at the same time post-Kelsen and post-sociological. Both the internal 
viewpoint of the Kelsenian tradition which has been unable to account for 
differences between legal systems, and the critical project that inspired the 
external viewpoint of legal sociology are in deep crisis today. In this 
historical situation of legal thought, autopoiesis is emerging as an ambitious 
attempt to reconcile the antagonistic views. Autopoiesis transcends and 
conserves at the same time the split between pure theory and sociology. 
The view of law as a self-reproductive system of communication, the legal 
act as the element of the legal system, the combination of normative closure 
and cognitive openness — these features of legal autopoiesis give it a 
chance, Ewald maintains, to overcome the contemporary crisis in legal 
theory and sociology. 
In Ewald's view the significance of legal autopoiesis is not confined to 
its role in legal thought. What is at stake is an adequate theory of law under 
conditions of modernity which Ewald characterizes by the destruction of 
natural law concepts, the loss of universalism, the particularization of 
political sovereignty and the relativization of science. Under these circum-
stances law can no longer be founded on principles outside itself. Legal 
practice in the twentieth century, according to Ewald, has found a solution 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
5 
to this need for self-foundation: the formulation of principles of law based 
exclusively on legal reflexivity. Legal autopoiesis may well serve as a 
theoretical re-formulation of those factual developments in modern legal 
practice which Ewald describes as "social law". 
But is autopoiesis in a position to act as a critique of the legality of 
social law? Ewald argues that as long as autopoiesis seeks to develop in 
the traditional forms of theoretical discourse, it is condemned to reformulate 
empty tautologies. The practice of social law is in need of a self-description 
and self-critique that makes objectivity of legal judgment possible but 
avoids at the same time universal statements: objectivity without universal-
ity. Ewald asserts that legal autopoiesis must take on a "resolutely atheoreti-
cal form" if it is to become the critical legal philosophy of our time. 
Jean-Pierre 
Dupuy 
continues these efforts to locate legal autopoiesis in 
the context of contemporary social and legal philosophy by confronting it 
with the normative theories of Robert Nozick and Friedrich von Hayek. 
He takes up the paradox of closure and openness in autopoietic systems 
and supplies three different interpretations of how the legal system can be 
open and closed at the same time: (a) closure/openness refer to different 
domains of the legal system (normatively closed, but cognitively open); (b) 
legal closure implies legal openness ("order from noise"); and (c) self-
transcendence of a normative order, the distancing of law in relation to 
itself, what he considers to be the most subtle form of openness. His main 
thesis is that a unit is self-transcending insofar as the complexity of the 
behavior of which it is capable is infinitely superior to the control capacities 
of the unit. In this perspective, Dupuy analyzes Nozick's theory of entitle-
ment with its self-referential character of pure procedural justice and 
Hayek's theory of law as a "spontaneous" social order. In both theories, 
he identifies important parallels to the constructs of self-reference and 
autopoiesis. Dupuy ends with a paradoxical interpretation of legal auto-
poiesis locating it at the "height of modernity": If, at the same time, one 
sees the irreducible Grundlosigkeit 
of law and its very necessity, the "squaring 
of the circle" is to posit that law is self-legitimizing and self-founding. 
"The autonomy of the legal system is, finally, undecidably, decided". 
The dialectics of legal openness and closure are taken up by Francois 
Ost 
from a different angle — from the angle of the individual actor in the 
perspective of game theory. He criticizes the autopoietic paradigm in its 
almost autistic closure by contrasting it with three positions. (1) Ashby's 
theorem: A program programming itself is a logical impossibility; changes 
must be produced from the outside; (2) Atlan's auto-organisation 
relative·. 
according to the "order from noise" principle the internally undetermined 
system transforms external perturbations into an organizational order; (3) 
Castoriadis' societe autonome·, a society is autonomous when it is constantly 
able to free itself of the laws, values and traditions which it has imposed 
on itself. Ost develops a model of le jeu 
du droit 
in which closure is 

6 
Gunther Teubner 
represented by regulation and convention while openness and dynamics 
are introduced into the system by individual actors and their strategies. 
One of the crucial steps in legal autopoiesis is the transfer of biological 
models into social and legal spheres. Hubert Rottleuthner 
analyzes and 
criticizes the use of "Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought". He asks the 
question: How are concepts changed when they are transferred from one 
field to another and how does a biological metaphor allow the solution of 
major problems in social and legal contexts? He begins with an historical 
analysis of the conceptual transfer describing how the concepts of "organ-
ism" and "evolution" have been used in legal thinking. He then critically 
assesses the transplantation of autopoiesis into the field of law. He identifies 
three areas in which the concept of autopoiesis can help solve specific 
problems: (1) A new concept of law can be explicated which would enable 
hitherto disparate elements of legal theory to be integrated or seen in a 
different light. In this context, Rottleuthner examines the concept of 
autopoiesis by referring to the legal theories of Kant, Kelsen and Hart; (2) 
Legal regulation processes can be explained by pointing to the limits of 
law's capacity for social control and identifying information requirements 
for legal control. According to Rottleuthner, autopoiesis helps identify 
autonomous social structure and organization. What is missing, however, 
is a more concrete analysis of regulated systems; (3) Theories of evolution 
are reinterpreted in terms of social and legal change. Autopoiesis stresses 
the role of an internal evolution of law. Again, Rottleuthner insists on a 
more empirically-oriented formulation of the theory of autopoiesis, which 
would lead to the identification of concrete evolutionary mechanisms. 
2. Legal Autonomy 
Legal autopoiesis is probably most controversial in its insistence on legal 
autonomy. After all, modern law is shaped by external constraints, social 
pressures and political decisions. How can one, after the social science 
revolution in law, after sociological jurisprudence and legal economics, still 
describe the legal system as autonomous (Friedman, 1985)? Hans-Georg 
Deggau, in his essay on the "Communicative Autonomy of the Legal 
System", carefully elaborates the conditions of the possibility of legal 
autonomy based upon legal communications as elementary units of a legal 
system. Deggau identifies legal autonomy in the "conditionalized legal 
normativity" which is capable of producing the necessary surplus for 
autopoietic closure. Normativity, as the basis of legal autonomy, produces, 
at the same time, the specific relation of law to other social systems, since, 
in its normative structures, law has a "structural affinity" towards other 
social systems. The very function of law is to congruently generalize 
normative structures in its social environment. 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
7 
This is a concept of legal autonomy which stands in sharp contrast to 
classical socio-legal assumptions about the interrelations between law and 
society. It is precisely this difference which Richard Lempert focuses on in 
his critique of legal autopoiesis. He constructs two models of legal auton-
omy. An "Anglo-American vision" as an empirically-oriented theory about 
actual operations of law is contrasted with a "Continental vision" which 
is abstract — developed by logic, analogy and a firm a priori theoretical 
commitment to a model. While the latter stems from a general concept of 
autopoietic legal autonomy as a radical operational closure, the Anglo-
American vision is able to distinguish varying degrees of autonomy by 
defining empirically testable criteria of relative autonomy. From this clear-
cut juxtaposition it becomes evident that autonomy of the law in the 
autopoietic sense is either "palpably wrong" or "trivial". This is a harsh 
statement. Perhaps it tells something about the relationship between "auto-
poiesis" and "law and society" as the well-known incompatibility between 
competing pradigms. 
This is precisely the point where David Nelken picks up the argument. 
He interprets the controversy between Luhmann and Lempert on legal 
autonomy as a conflict indicative of a paradigm change. This enables him 
to point to radical differences in the conception of legal autonomy, in 
regard to its theoretical framework, its characteristic meaning, its policy 
concerns, and methods of investigation. His main point, however, is to 
show that legal autopoiesis represents a full-fledged paradigm change from 
mainstream law and society. For this purpose, Nelken draws an intellectual 
map of competing socio-legal approaches placing "law and society" at the 
intersection of two axes, one dealing with the relationship between law 
and society (conceived ontologically), the other with that between law and 
sociology (conceived as epistemologies). Nelken sees the great merit of 
autopoiesis theory to collapse these axes into each other by showing how 
the extremes do in fact meet up. Two consequences are important: auto-
poietic theory shows how, where and why law, society and sociology 
actually became distinguished from each other as an evolutionary outcome 
of functional differentiation. At the same time autopoiesis theory resists 
characterizing law as a mere passive object of the sociological gaze and 
treats it rather as a subject reproducing its own conceptions of itself and 
of society. 
3. Legal Change 
If the identity of an autopoietic system is defined by its organizational 
closure, by the recursive reproduction of its elements, then autopoiesis 
appears to be resistant to change, learning and evolution. However, if 
one takes into account the fundamental distinction between autopoietic 

8 
Gunther Teubner 
organization, which is kept constant, and concrete structures of the system, 
which can change within the boundaries of the autopoietic organization 
(Maturana, 1982: 282 f.), then it becomes clear that autopoiesis does not 
exclude evolution but implies a redefinition of evolution. Gunther Teubner, 
in his essay on "Evolution of Autopoietic Law", attempts to resolve two 
problems of autopoietic evolution. How does the legal system evolve into 
autopoietic closure? How does legal evolution operate after an autopoietic 
closure of the legal system? The first question of pre-autopoietic evolution 
is answered with reference to the construction of a "hypercycle" (Eigen 
and Schuster, 1979). It is by mechanisms of "blind" evolution that "socially 
diffuse law" develops higher forms of autonomy via the cyclical constitution 
of its system components. It gains autopoietic closure by the hypercyclical 
connection between them. The answer to the second question of post-
autopoietic evolution is "internalization". Autopoietic law is separated from 
the general evolution of its social environment and develops internal legal 
mechanisms for the evolutionary functions of variation, selection and 
retention. At the same time, legal development is coupled to broader social 
developments by specific mechanisms of co-evolution. 
Karl-Hein£ Ladeur's contribution is also concerned with legal change, 
focusing on the adaptability of law under modern conditions. Ladeur asks 
if and to what degree the functions of modern law, understood as an 
autopoietic system, can vary. He criticizes Luhmann's version of legal 
autopoiesis as too static in regard to the variability of functions, and 
develops a three-level-model of the relationship between legal structures 
and functions. Social functions of law change through the interaction of 
those three levels: (I) the organized level (structure — subsumption model 
in the classical sense); (II) the level of the "organizing function" (controlling 
transformations on level I); (III) the level of "virtualizing" structure and 
function. On this level potential destabilization leads to "strange loops" 
intertwining all three levels with the result that fluctuations of level I, 
being mitigated on level II, are strengthened on level III and lead to a 
change of function of level II. More concretely, Ladeur observes not only 
structural but functional changes in modern law which point to an emerging 
function of law that could consist in securing an abundance of alternatives, 
openness, flexibility for a new legal rationality of bargaining and compatibi-
lization as opposed to the classical function of law which consisted in 
congruently generalizing social expectations. 
While Ladeur and Teubner stress the internal dynamics of legal evolution, 
Thomas Heller focuses on the co-evolution of different autopoietic systems, 
more precisely, on the evolutionary dynamics in the interaction between 
law, economy and culture. Drawing on the Hispano-American biculturalism 
controversy in the United States, Heller stresses the intersystemic origins 
of perturbations of the legal system and develops a model of autopoietic 
co-evolution, based on the assumptions of self-referential reproduction of 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
9 
core practices, system closure, instability and locality. The goals of the 
analysis are: (1) to define precisely the reproductive autopoietic core in the 
legal system; (2) to describe the interactive effects among co-existent 
systems, law, economy and culture; (3) to explain the internal dynamics of 
self-reproduction that create, at the same time, variation under the influence 
of external perturbations. Heller construes a multitude of cyclically organ-
ized system-internal "matching processes". Under the influence of environ-
mental perturbations, the legal system develops a heuristic model of pro-
cessed information as legal claims and matches it against existing legal 
practices. In the negative case this leads to the development of "causal 
models" and even "causal models of causal models" which in turn are used 
for reworking the system's prefiguration rules. Heller discusses the political 
relevance of such a cyclical model as a problem of "the politics of auto-
poiesis". In opposition to both neo-liberal and structuralist theories, auto-
poiesis is situated in a post-structuralist discourse, emphasizing the complex, 
the local, the closed and the unstable against global, coherent, artificing 
and equilibrating mechanisms. 
4. Legal Cognition 
Legal autopoiesis suggests to rethink questions of legal epistemology, 
especially in its insistence on normative closure and cognitive openness. 
"The Fact of Law" is one of the most important epistemological questions 
that Patrick Nerhot takes up. He contrasts traditional realist positions in 
law, especially positions of legal positivism, with a "radically constructivist" 
position which is suggested by legal autopoiesis. Legal facts are not 
imported into the law from the outside, they do not represent an indepen-
dent reality, but they are constructed within the law by operations of the 
legal system. This view does not render the distinction between law and 
fact meaningless, but it reinterprets and connects this distinction to the 
difference between normative and cognitive operations. 
Nik/as Luhmann, in his concluding essay "Closure and Openness: On 
Reality in the World of Law", takes up themes of legal epistemology in 
order to answer to the objections which have been raised during the 
proceedings of the conference. The main issues are: How can one dissolve 
the paradox that law is at the same time an open system and a closed 
system? How can one insist on legal autonomy and stress at the same time 
its inter-dependencies with society at large? How is co-evolution of law 
and society conceivable under the premise that law as well as society are 
autopoietic systems of their own? How can one account for the apparent 
contradiction that the legal system is constructing its own reality by 

10 
Gunther Teubner 
recursive legal operations and is at the same time exposed to the constraints 
of extra-legal reality? 
Luhmann approaches these interrelated questions first by posing a di-
lemma and second by proposing a solution. The theory of self-referential 
systems, he maintains, leads inevitably to the following dilemma: on the 
one hand, no system is in a position to operate outside its boundaries; no 
system has a direct access to reality "out there". On the other hand, 
the rate of structural evolution requires the assumption that a system's 
environment is non-random and structured and produces effective con-
straints for the system. An epistemological theory must be in a position to 
resolve this dilemma. Luhmann's proposal consists in a distinction. He 
distinguishes between internal information processing and external con-
straints via a materiality continuum and via simultaneous presence of 
events. 
Luhmann insists on the strictly system-specific and exclusively internal 
character of information processing. A transfer of information from the 
environment to the system and vice versa is impossible. Via information 
the environment is inaccessible to the system. However, the environment 
effects its presence upon the system by imposing drastic constraints which 
limit the system's operational potential. Luhmann identifies two mechan-
isms of environmental coupling. One mechanism he calls materiality conti-
nuum. It is the material-energetic "basis" of meaning systems which exerts 
considerable constraints on them. The second mechanism is the simultane-
ous presence of events in several meaning processing systems. This allows 
for the interpenetration of autonomously operating mechanisms. 
With this dualism of information and interpenetration, Luhmann at-
tempts to answer the above-mentioned questions. Legal operations cannot 
reach beyond the boundaries of law. In this respect law is a closed system. 
In its cognitive operations law still can operate only within its boundaries, 
but it opens itself to its environment by constructing a legal reality. Beyond 
those mechanisms of normative closure and cognitive openness, the law is 
coupled to its social environment via mechanisms of interpenetration. Law 
participates in language structures and reality constructions of general social 
communication. And it is connected to other spheres of society by the 
simultaneous presence of social events which are selectively processed in 
law and in its environmental subsystems. 
This implies a new understanding of legal autonomy. Autonomy is no 
longer internal causal determination of the system's operations. Legal 
autonomy is the selective combination of legal operations with legal opera-
tions. This autonomy is compatible with political and economic pressures 
on the legal system. Autonomy is in danger only once the legal coding as 
such is in danger of being replaced by criteria of economic utility and 
political expediency. 

Introduction to Autopoietic Law 
11 
Bibliography 
ALEXY, ROBERT ( 1 9 7 8 ) Theorie der juristischen 
Argumentation. 
Die Theorie des 
rationalen 
Diskurses als Theorie der juristischen 
Begründung. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
ESSER, JOSEF ( 1 9 7 0 ) Vorverständnis und Methodenwahl 
in der Rechtsfindung: 
Rationalitätsgaran-
tien der richterlichen 
Entscheidungspraxis. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Athenäum. 
EIGEN, MANFRED and PETER SCHUSTER ( 1 9 7 9 ) The Hypercycle: 
A Principle of Natural 
Self-
organi^ation. Berlin: Springer. 
FLETCHER, GEORGE P. ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Paradoxes in Legal Thought", 8 5 Columbia Law 
Review 
1 2 6 3 . 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON (1981) Observing Systems. Seaside: Intersystems Publications. 
FRIEDMAN, LAWRENCE ( 1 9 8 5 ) Total justice. 
New York: Russell Sage. 
H E J L , PETER M. (1982 a) "Die Theorie autopoietischer Systeme. Perspektiven für die 
soziale Systemtheorie", 13 Rechtstheorie 
45. 
— (1982 b) So^ialwissenschaft 
als Theorie selbstreferentieller 
Systeme. Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS R . ( 1 9 7 9 ) Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal 
Golden Braid. New 
York: Basic Books. 
— (1985) "Nomic: A Self-Modifying Game Based on Reflexivity in Law" in D. Hofstad-
ter, Metamagical 
Themes. New York: Bantam. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1981) "Evolution des Rechts" in N . Luhmann, Ausdifferen^ierung 
des 
Rechtssystems. 
Beiträge %ur Rechtsso^iologie 
und Rechtstheorie. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp, 
— (1984) Sociale Systeme. Grundriß einer allgemeinen 
Theorie. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1985) "The Self-Production of Law and its Limits" in G. Teubner (ed.) Dilemmas 
of 
Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R . (1970) Biology of Cognition. 
Urbana. 
— (1982) Erkennen: 
Die Organisation 
und Verkörperung 
von Wirklichkeit. 
Braunschweig: 
Vieweg. 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R., FRANCISCO E . VARELA and R. URIBE ( 1 9 7 4 ) "Autopoiesis: 
The Organization of Living Systems, Its Characterisation and a Model", 5 Bio Systems 
187. 
MORIN, EDGAR ( 1 9 7 7 ) La methode, Vol. 1, La nature de la nature. Paris: Seuil. 
QUINE, WILLARD V. ( 1 9 7 6 ) The Ways of Paradox. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
ROTH, 
GERHARD and HELMUT 
SCHWEGLER (eds.) ( 1 9 8 1 ) Self-organising 
Systems. 
An 
Interdisciplinary 
Approach. 
Frankfurt a. Μ.: Campus. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER 
( 1 9 8 5 ) "After Legal Instrumentalism? Strategic Models of Post-
Regulatory Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de 
Gruyter. 
— (1987 a) "Hypercycle in Law and Organization", European Yearbook for Legal 
Sociology. 
— (1987 b) "Social Order from Legislative Noise" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, 
Law, 
Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1987 c) State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER and HELMUT WILLKE ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Kontext und Autonomie. Gesellschaft-
liche Selbststeuerung durch reflexives Recht", 5 Zeitschrift für Rechtsso^iologie 
4. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO J. (1979) Principles 
of Biological Autonomy. New York: Elsevier. 
WORMELL, C. P. (1958) "On the Paradoxes of Self-Reference", 67 Mind 267. 
ZELENY, MILAN (1981) Autopoiesis: 
A Theory of Living Organisation. 
New York: North 
Holland. 

The Unity of the Legal System 
NIKLAS LUHMANN 
Bielefeld 
I. 
Whenever the word "system" is used, the unity of the system is usually 
tacitly assumed. An older epistemological tradition defined a system ex-
plicitly as a construction from a principle.1 Neo-Kantianism in particular 
took up this idea and developed it further, defining it as the appropriate 
way of ordering legality of objects which lay claim not to empirical existence 
but to validity (see for example Liebert, 1920: 108 ff.). Jurisprudence has 
remained true to this interpretation, though the unity of knowledge has 
now been replaced by the unity of state and nation.2 Coing for example 
writes that "by a system we mean the ordering of knowledge (!) according 
to a uniform perspective" (1956: 26). Insofar as the science of law regards 
itself not simply as jurisprudence but as the particular science of valid 
objects, it seems an obvious step to combine this claim with the theory of 
validity and thus to adopt the neo-Kantian definition of system. But, as 
jurists realize perfectly well there is no equivalent for this in the actuality 
of the practice of law.3 In system-theoretical research it is not even men-
1 In this context, unity was often understood as "purpose", as in the Critique of Practical 
Reason. In Grimm's Dictionary (1942: col. 1433) both these elements are included in 
the definition: "a meaningfully structured whole, the parts of which are connected 
for a purpose or are ordered together under a higher principle, an idea or a law". 
But Schleiermacher's interpretation differed considerably from this definition, particu-
larly — and characteristically — with reference to the problem of contingency. "The 
purpose moves further away from the idea [i. e., the inner unity of the work, N. L.] 
the more arbitrary its production is" (Schleiermacher, 1977: 175). 
2 Cf. Engisch (1936). This position is by no means as extreme and as isolated as it may 
appear in a political analysis after the event. The interpretation of the legal order as 
an institution (Dürkheim, Duguit, Santi Romano) also attributed its unity to the 
extra-legal fact of society, and in German sociology after 1933 the concept of society 
was simply replaced by that of Volk (people, nation). 
3 Accordingly the idea of unity plays a less important part in more recent publications 
on legal theory, where greater stress is laid on the method and technique of systematiza-
tion. Cf. for example Pawlowski (1981: 220ff.); Krawietz (1981: 299-335). 

The Unity of the Legal System 
13 
tioned. The unity of the system is simply assumed and no thought is given 
to the question of how the system acquires this unity. 
This is an unsatisfactory state of affairs. It seems to lead to a situation 
where sociologists leave it to jurists and jurists leave it to sociologists to 
formulate theories on the unity of law. Jurists basically content themselves 
with considerations of consistency, i. e., interpret unity as (relative) inter-
dependence of decisions. Unity is posited to the extent that a change in 
legal practice would involve too many other changes to remain practicable. 
The sociology of law is interested only in correlations between legal and 
extra-legal variables and, though it may talk of a legal system, it never 
clearly perceives the unity of this system.4 Thus many relevant and widely 
discussed problems remain unclarified: for example the problems of the 
demarcation (or fusion?) of law and politics, of the implications of social 
engineering in law, of the relevance of result orientation or of that new 
critique of law which argues that there is too much law. 
These new theoretical approaches as well as the traditional approaches 
are hampered by the fact that no clear concept of the unity of law exists, 
indeed that one cannot be sure that this is a conceptual problem at all, or 
to what extent it is one. Nor is it certain that there is one (and only one) 
concept which could express the unity of an object. Systems theory is 
certainly not necessarily the only way of tackling the question of the unity 
of law. But as no other methods can be seriously contemplated at the 
moment, we will work on the assumption that the unity of law must be 
realized and we will therefore examine how the unity of the legal system 
is to be interpreted. 
II. 
New departures in systems theory have sought an answer to precisely this 
problem. In this connection they use the idea of self-reference or ideas 
derived from it. What is proposed amounts in fact to a theory of self-
referential systems. Here the traditional linking of the idea of self-reference 
to consciousness as the basis of operation is abandoned. Thus the theory 
of the subject-ness of consciousness (in the sense of subiectum, hypokeimenon) 
and with it the primacy of the epistemological difference between subject 
and object are rejected. Instead, two kinds of operations are distinguished, 
i. e., self-reproduction and observation. Observation in this context may 
mean both self-observation and observation of others. 
If one connects this still embryonic theoretical development with the 
old question of unity in multiplicity (to which the theory of the transcenden-
tality of consciousness sought a possible answer) then one can define self-
4 See for example Friedman (1975); Aubert (1983: 28). Aubert explicitly states that a 
concept of law and a precise determination of the limits of the legal system are of no 
sociological interest. 

14 
Niklas Luhmann 
referential systems as systems which themselves produce as unity everything 
which they use as unity. The resultant widening of the theoretical frame-
work is underlined by the fact that both "produce" and "unity" have 
manifold meanings. "Produce" has very different meanings depending on 
whether it refers to chemical, organic, conscious, or communicative pro-
cesses (i.e., chemical, organic, mental or social systems).5 "Unity" means 
not only unity of the system itself but also and above all: unity of the final 
elements of which the system consists and unity of the processes into which 
the operations of this system combine these elements. 
The innovative aspect of this theory is the extension of the concept of 
unity to cover the constitution of the elements of which the system consists. 
This theoretical advance is underlined by the increasing use of the term 
"autopoietic" systems, "autopoiesis" being a term originally coined by 
Maturana (see Maturana, 1982). It is no longer merely a matter of "exist-
ence" or "preservation of existence"6 nor merely of problems of self-
organization which relate only to the structural level.7 It is a question of 
the elements of which the system consists. The crucial insight is that 
elements presuppose enormous complexity in terms of their energy/matter 
basis but nonetheless function within systems as indissoluble units in terms 
of the respective system — for example as molecules, cells, ideas, actions. 
The indissoluble unity of an element for the system can be constituted only 
by the system; it follows from its capacity to associate which is produced 
within the system. An autopoietic system therefore constitutes the elements 
of which it consists through the elements of which it consists. In doing so 
it sets limits which do not exist in the substructure complexity of the 
environment of the system.8 
5 The extensibility of the theory of self-referential systems beyond this overall area is 
a matter of controversy. Whereas it was traditionally limited to consciousness, the 
tendency today is to limit it to living systems (or even only to cells in their genetic 
context). See for example Varela (1979; 1981: 3 6 - 4 9 ) . 
6 Nor is it an extension of the irreducible doubling of self-preservation and self-
consciousness — which Henrich regards as the basic structure of modern philosophy. 
See Henrich (1976: 9 7 - 1 4 3 , especially llOff.). 
7 On this discussion, which as started in the 1950s and 1960s by speculations on self-
programming by computers, cf. Yovits and Cameron (1960); Yovits, Jacobi, and 
Goldstein (1962); von Foerster and Zopf (1962). Even in contemporary literature, 
self-reference is still seen largely in terms of self-organization. A representative work 
in this respect is Jansch (1980). Self-organization, however, always means the capacity 
of systems to change their own structures on the basis of their own experience with 
their environment. 
8 Accordingly, Maturana formulates as follows: "We maintain that there are systems 
that are defined as unities as networks of productions of components that: (1) 
recursively, through their interactions, generate and realize the networks that produces 
them; and (2) constitute, in the space in which they exist, the boundaries of this 
network as components that participate in the realization of the network" (Maturana, 
1981: 21). However, the formulation does not clarify what I am primarily concerned 
with in the text above: the production of the unity of the element. 

The Unity of the Legal System 
15 
In the sphere of action systems, Parsons explicitly queried the constitution 
of the "unit act" but perceived only two possible answers, one subjective-
voluntaristic, the other cognitive-analytical (1937: 43 ff.). The more evident 
it became in the development of the theory that the personal system can 
only contribute one component to action, the greater was the compulsion 
to adopt a "purely analytical" theory of the system of action. The decompo-
sition of action and the conception of the emergent unity of action based 
on it was an act which could only be performed by an outside observer 
(analyst). This theory, with its unclarified epistemological foundations, thus 
amounted to a kind of "arranged marriage" between analysis and reality. 
It is precisely at this point that the theory of self-referential systems moves 
into a new and different starting position. Even a system of action consists 
only of elements which are formed by the operations of the elements of 
the system itself. It therefore cannot, as Parsons pointed out, decompose 
its elements itself. But (in contrast to Parsons' position) there is no point 
in entrusting this task to an analyst because in each decomposition of the 
elements he would fail to realize that the system produces and reproduces 
itself.9 
In contrast to some previous attempts to introduce the idea of autopoiesis 
into the sphere of sociology, we regard autopoiesis not only as a new 
explanation of the individuality of organic systems or systems of conscious-
ness (cf. Hejl, 1982a; 1982b: 45-88). 1 0 If this were the case, the concept 
would contribute little to the analysis of social systems. In fact, social 
systems can themselves be regarded as special kinds of autopoietic systems. 
Only thus can one arrive at an explanation of the unity of a social system 
(in this case the legal system) by the autopoiesis of the unity of precisely 
this system. 
Perhaps the most important result of this movement towards a theory 
of self-referential systems is a new conception of the closed nature of 
these systems. This closure does not, however, mean the absence of an 
environment nor does it mean complete determination by itself.11 Rather, 
closure consists in the fact that all operations always reproduce the system. 
For sense-systems this can also be expressed as follows: the system, with 
every operation, controls its own possibilities of negation and thus performs 
precisely what Heinz von Foerster describes as computation of computa-
9 It is obvious that here not only analytical reductionism but every reduction of self-
referential systems to another level of reality is rejected. Ergo: no reduction of 
consciousness to life, no reduction of life to chemical processes, etc. 
10 Dias' attempt to apply the idea of autopoiesis to the judicial decision-making process 
presupposes its subjective bases and treats the legal system only as a "consensual 
domain" of subjective will-formation but not as an autopoietic system in its own 
right (Dias, 1980: 257-82). 
11 The older system-theoretical tradition was always based solely on this interpretation. 
See Hall and Fagen (1956: 25 ff.). 

16 
Niklas Luhmann 
tion.12 In other words, the system must have at its disposal the code 
difference between "yes" and "no", and must always be able to re-negate 
the constantly concomitant, constantly implied negations. The law-code of 
legal and illegal is merely an application of this very general principle and 
juristic reality is nothing but the correlate of a self-referential mode of 
operation which reproduces itself according to this code. 
I I I . 
What, then, is this elemental unity, this "unit act", this non-decomposable 
quasi-atom the production of which — in a closed, recursive procedure — 
constitutes the legal system? In a theory of autopoietic systems in which 
the unity of the system is simply the recursive closure of the production 
of the elements of the system by the elements of the system, everything 
depends on the answer to this question. 
However, we cannot immediately give an unequivocal answer but must 
first introduce a clarifying distinction; namely, a distinction between commu-
nication and action and, correspondingly, between reproduction and self-observa-
tion] self-description 
of the system. The reason for this difficulty lies in the 
general theory of social systems (cf. Luhmann, 1982: 366 — 79). Social 
systems can only reproduce themselves by (always self-referential) commu-
nication. It is only by means of understanding (i. e., through a "second 
mind") that a communication system reproduces itself. Here, because it is 
a question of the openness of the situation for acceptance or rejection, the 
smallest still negatable sense unit functions as an element. But at the same 
time this process necessitates a reduction to action, which determines who 
can continue to communicate with whom.13 A powerfully simplifying self-
observation or self-description of the system by itself must therefore be 
introduced into the self-reproducing social system in order that sufficiently 
simplified connections (partners, subjects, information, communications, 
and in all these respects, the corresponding omissions) for the formation 
of further elements can be pinpointed sufficiently rapidly. This is, as stated, 
the necessity of constant self-continuation. Without it the system would 
simply cease to exist. 
12 Or simply as "computation". See von Foerster (1973: 35—46). Reality according to 
this view is simply that which makes this process — as self-restriction — possible. 
13 The argument is neither logically nor theoretically completely persuasive. As always 
with function data, other, functionally equivalent reductions cannot be ruled out. But 
reduction to action has become so widespread and prevalent that even sociology 
scarcely perceives this as a problem but interprets social systems simply as systems of 
action. Frequently the error is made — a fatally obvious linguistic error — of 
interpreting communication simply as a kind of action and thereby including communi-
cation in a general theory of action. See for example Moles and Rohmer (1977: 15 ff.). 

The Unity of the Legal System 
17 
If one interprets the legal system as a social system, one finds the same 
relations here. Law exists only as communication (or, in psychological 
terms, as the prospect of communication). Communication here means a 
synthesis of information, communication and comprehension, and not 
merely the action of communication as such. The differentiating-out of law 
therefore lies first of all in the thematic control of communicative processes. 
Every meaning, even the meaning of purely factual events, can become 
legally relevant, i. e., can enter into the self-reproduction of the legal system. 
The practice of jurisprudence calls for knowledge of the world. But within 
this sphere of relevance there exists the core of legally valid action which 
changes the legal position, engenders legal consequences, and thereby 
makes possible new normative expectations which would not have acquired 
a legal quality without this action of engendering. The legal system itself 
determines what kind of events have this effect. It is impossible to identify 
these events without a knowledge of the legal system. The constitution of 
these elements is an autonomous achievement of the legal system which 
occurs in the process of self-observation and self-description of this system. 
The related dogmatic questions of a juristic theory of action, of problems 
of omission, attribution, etc., cannot be dealt with here. We wish only to 
propose the argument that the differentiation of the legal system requires 
the universalization of possible relevances and it also requires that the 
system describe itself as an action system.14 The main theoretical conse-
quence of this is that events can only maintain the quality of elementary 
unity of the legal system when they change the legal position. The reason 
for the attribution of unity is that through it the difference between 
continuity and discontinuity can be operationalized and it is therefore 
normally possible to determine easily and rapidly enough what has and 
what has not changed as a result of a certain legal action. 
The function of formation of unity — always presupposing differentia-
tion — lies in the autopoiesis of the system, i. e., as in all systems in the 
both continuing and discontinuing production of ever new elements.15 
This means that the self-reproduction of law takes the form of change of 
law, of the transference of the quality of normative validity to partially 
new expectations. Law, therefore, finds itself in constant trivial variation, 
14 Particularly interesting in this context are the threshold cases of birth, giving birth, 
and death, which, although they change the legal position, can neither be understood 
as legal acts nor do they owe their relevance to other acts. It could be said that they 
owe their legal relevance to a decision by the legislator. (Note the formulation of 
Para. 1 of the German Civil Code (BGB) which is concerned only with dating.) The 
option of interpreting law as the codification of over-positive human rights is at least 
left open. 
15 Analyses which concentrate radically on the temporal dimension are rare not only in 
legal-theoretical but also in sociological literature. However, one example of such an 
approach is 0sterberg (1976, especially 64 ff.). 

18 
Niklas Luhmann 
and the proven major forms such as the contract and the statute are merely 
differentiated forms of this state. The positivity of law is its autopoiesis 
and, precisely because of this, divergent reproduction is possible — whether 
in the form of almost imperceptible evolution or in the form of planned 
structural change. Structural changes, therefore, do not require any special 
"legitimating" principle, ius eminent or super-norm. They are in any event 
only possible in law. 
IV. 
The new perspective in the theory of self-referential systems changes the 
starting point from which sociology must examine the relationship between 
society and law. The binding power of law is not merely a symbolic 
expression of society as a social fact. The unity of law cannot in this direct 
manner be explained in terms of the unity of society, and normative validity 
certainly cannot be explained in terms of an evaluated and assessed social 
fact. On the contrary, when one enquires into the autopoiesis of the 
comprehensive social system of society, one first encounters a fundamental 
problem, and only when this has been solved can the question of the unity 
of the legal system be answered. 
The social system consists of meaningful communications — only of 
communications, and of all communications. It forms its elementary units 
from the synthesis of information, communication, comprehension, i. e., 
from the synthesis of three selections, which can be partially (but only 
partially) controlled by the system. As such element formation always 
presupposes society and always continues society, there is no communica-
tion outside society and therefore no communication of society with 
its environment. No man can communicate (in the sense of achieving 
communication) without thereby constituting society, but the social system 
itself (precisely for this reason!) is not capable of communication: it can 
find no addressees outside itself to which it could communicate anything. 
To this extent, society is an autopoietic system in the strict sense of the 
thoery of self-referential systems. It possesses its own unity as autopoiesis 
and only as autopoiesis. In this respect it is a recursively closed system, which 
can neither derive its operations from its environment nor pass them on 
to that environment. It cannot communicate with the environment but it 
can and must necessarily communicate about the environment. Granted, 
communication always implies communication about communication and 
reproduces itself by this means, but it cannot communicate only about 
communication. 
This is a very clear, very unequivocal state of affairs, which does not pose 
any fundamental difficulties in the concept of unity or in the demarcation of 
system from environment. All social systems which form within society 

The Unity of the Legal System 
19 
are therefore bound to form their final elements as communications. The 
legal system, too, consists only of communicative actions which engender 
legal consequences — it does not, for example, consist of physical events 
nor of isolated individual behavior which no one sees or hears. It consists 
solely of the thematization of these and other events in a communication 
which treats them as legally relevant and thereby assigns itself to the legal 
system. 
The problem is that no other social system, no partial system which 
forms within society can also be a unity in this sense, as typology of 
operation and therefore as communication. For in all other social systems 
there is communication within the intra-social environment and possibly 
also communication with the respective environments. All partial systems 
execute and reproduce society insofar as they are communicative systems — 
and it is only this that makes them social systems. This alone does not 
confer on them either unity or self-referential self-containedness, for these 
attainments are for them only reached through their differentiation from 
an intra-social environment which also communicates. Mere participation 
in the autopoiesis of society does not in itself make the partial systems 
autopoietic systems, nor does it make them masters of their own unity. 
According to the theory of self-referential systems, "unity" is a non-
transferable quality. We are therefore confronted with the questions of if 
and how a partial system of society, in this case the legal system, can 
nevertheless organize its own recursive closure. Or in other words how, 
while participating in social communication, it can still find its own mode 
of forming basic elements for which there are no equivalents in the partial 
system environment. 
V. 
The example of the legal system illustrates how the problem of differentia-
tion is solved in social systems — of course no direct conclusions can be 
drawn from this about other kinds of systems. The clarification of this 
problem is a step forward in two areas, namely in the theory of the legal 
system and also in the more general theory of social differentiation. The 
differentiation of a legal system is fundamentally based on the distinguish-
ability of normative and cognitive expectations. The solution of the prob-
lem lies in the utilization of this difference with an orientation towards the 
function of law (see Section VII, infra. For a detailed treatment see also 
Luhmann, 1985). 
Expectations are fixed as normative if when these expectations are created 
it is decided that they do not need to be changed in the event of being 
disappointed. The opposite is true of cognitive expectations. It is therefore 
a matter of the difference between not learning and learning in still 

20 
Niklas Luhmann 
uncertain future situations, of the advance choice of strategy, of the 
absorption of uncertainty. This contingent relation, i. e., the function which 
determines the normative or cognitive nature of the expectation, is then 
removed in the determination of meaning and is expressed only in the 
quality of the expectation. Its quality of expectation or of knowledge 
depends on the form of uncertainty absorption on which it is based. In 
any event this is an artificial difference which certainly does not have to 
apply to all behavioral expectations but is only used when an advance 
determination of the strategy of dealing with disappointment in the commu-
nication context of society is required. 
Legal systems use this difference to combine the closure of recursive 
self-production and the openness of their relation to the environment. In 
other words law is a normatively closed but cognitively open system.16 
The autopoiesis of the legal system is normatively closed in that only the 
legal system can bestow legally normative quality on its elements and 
thereby constitute them as elements. Normativity has no purpose beyond 
this (in the sense of an intendible end). Its function is continuous making 
possible of self, from moment to moment, from event to event, from case 
to case and it is designed precisely to have no end. The system therefore 
reproduces its elements by its elements by transferring this quality of 
meaning from moment to moment and thereby always providing new 
elements with normative validity. In this respect it is closed to the environ-
ment. This means that no legally relevant event can derive its normativity 
from the environment of the system. In this respect it remains dependent 
on the self-generating connection of legal elements and on the limits of 
this connection. 
At the same time, and precisely in relation to this closure the legal 
system is a cognitively open system. In each of its elements and in their 
constant reproduction it is dependent on being able to determine whether 
certain conditions have been met or not. By programming it makes itself 
dependent on facts and it can also change its programs when the pressure 
of facts dictates this. Every operation in law, every juristic processing of 
information therefore uses normative and cognitive orientations simultane-
ously — simultaneously and necessarily linked but not having the same 
function. The norm quality serves the autopoiesis of the system, its self-
continuation in difference to the environment. The cognitive quality serves 
the coordination of this process with the system's environment.17 If the 
16 Formulations of this kind in systems theory can be traced back to the famous definition 
of a cybernetic system by Ashby (1956: 4). Ashby defined such a system as one "open 
to energy but closed to information and control". 
17 It may be useful for purposes of clarification to examine a parallel case. The economic 
system is also differentiated as an autopoietic system. It ties all operations to payments 
and is, in monetary terms, a closed system. Outside the economy there are no 

The Unity of the Legal System 
21 
cooperation of (normative) closure and (cognitive) openness is a condition 
of constant self-reproduction and if this in turn is nothing but the unity 
of the system, "self-reference" can never be total self-determination nor 
can it ever be total (or even adequate) self-observation. It is always only 
concomitant self-reference, and is to a certain extent the relation of unity 
which makes possible the self-realization of unity. It is not a "grounding" 
principle or a regulative idea and it is certainly not an all-justifying meta-
norm. If one compares theories here, it is clear that "concomitant self-
reference" occupies the space which a theological construction of the world 
assigned to creatio continua, a space which transcendental theory called on 
certain privileged facts of consciousness to fill. But the theoretical proposal 
outlined here eschews any kind of asymmetrical superposition of that 
concomitant principle.18 Our primary concern here is with the fundamental 
asymmetry without which recursive (i. e., symmetric) autopoiesis cannot 
form systems. 
Autopoietic processes are recursive, i. e., necessarily symmetrically struc-
tured — and this is an aspect of this theoretical approach which has significant 
and wide-ranging implications for legal theory. The norm quality of each 
element is owed to the norm quality of other elements, to which the same 
rule applies. There can therefore be no norm hierarchies.19 In terms of norma-
tivity a strict symmetry exists even between the law and the judge's decision. 
Laws are only regarded as norms because they are intended to be used in 
decisions, just as these decisions can only function as norms because this is 
provided for in laws. In terms of normativity, the relationship between the 
rule and its application is circular (cf. Eckhoff and Sundby, 1975: 123 — 51 
[The authors equate this circularity with cybernetic feedback, a view I do not 
share]; Eckhoff, 1978: 41—51).20 Autopoiesis operates beyond the sphere of 
payments, not even as input or output of the economy. Payments serve the exclusive 
purpose of making other payments possible, i. e., they serve the autopoiesis of the 
system. But precisely this closure is also the basis of the wide-ranging openness of 
the system, because every payment requires a motive which is ultimately related to 
the satisfaction of a demand. Cf. also Luhmann (1983: 153). 
18 The tradition is, however, indicated by the use of the word "concomitant". 
19 The same applies — here, too, in contrast to current theoretical ideas — to the 
autopoiesis of the life of organic systems. Cf. Roth (1981: 1 0 6 - 1 2 0 ; 1982: 3 7 - 4 8 ) . 
20 Less radical is the theory (first formulated by Adolf Merkl and Hans Merkl) of the 
graduated structure of the legal order. It states that at every stage the creation and 
the application of law are in a hybrid relation to each other and that only this hybrid 
relation is graduated. Cf. Ohlinger (1975, especially 10 f., 38 f.). This is how one has 
to think if one wishes to construct a hierarchy with more than two levels. (This is 
the same problem with clean/unclean in the Indian caste system.) It would be taking 
one step beyond this to interpret the relation of the creation/the application of law 
as circular at every level, i. e., as self-referential. Then graduated structure would be 
a decomposition and hierarchization of the fundamental self-reference of the system. 

22 
Niklas Luhmann 
deduction and beyond the sphere of causality.21 Thus there is no attribution of 
norms to final principles or authorities in which normativity and cognitivity, 
validity and being fuse.22 Normativity as a clinging to expectations despite 
disappointments is always and everywhere the same. 
Even Hart's theory of law (1961) has to come to terms with these 
presuppositions. On a superficial view this theory constitutes the unity of 
law as a self-compensatory relation. A layer of primary rules, because of 
their immanent weaknesses (uncertainty, static character, inefficiency), has 
to be complemented by a layer of secondary rules. But in legal operations 
the interrelationship of these two spheres can only be recognized and only 
be practiced if the same norm quality is involved in both spheres. Otherwise 
compensation for the inadequacies of law would lie outside the law (which 
is of course possible). 
Of course there are also asymmetries in the legal system. No system can 
get by without them, for this would mean existing as pure tautology in total 
indeterminability. However, all asymmetries must be introduced into the legal system 
via cognitive orientations, and they thus articulate willingness to learn. The judge 
is only cognitively, not normatively, dependent on the law:23 he must find 
out whether a law has been passed or not, he can err in this respect, in which 
case he has to correct his error. In principle, the same applies to asymmetries 
on an equal level in the time dimension: if a judge wishes to make his decision 
dependent on other decisions, then he must include these decisions as a fact 
requiring recognition in his information processing method. The medium of 
normativity in which the system reproduces itself is structured in this manner. 
But this always presupposes the basic circularity which differentiates the sys-
tem and compels it into autonomy. 
The theory of the closed and thereby open system makes it possible to 
grasp the function of formality in law and to see this in connection with 
the peculiar susceptibility to disturbance of law on the symbolic level. 
21 Von Foerster would say it operates on the level of a second order cybernetics, on 
which the reference to reality is replaced by recursivity. This concept is expanded in 
von Foerster (1974: 27-46; also 1979: 5 - 8 ) . 
22 The semantics of central fusion have indisputably dominated the tradition of legal theory 
to such an extent that it has even been proposed to introduce the basic norm as an 
epistemological hypothesis. From the perspective of the sociology of knowledge, this 
type of internal semantics of the legal system demonstrates the difficulty of conceptually 
realizing the complete differentiation of the legal system. In terms of the history of ideas, 
all central fusion would appear to be secularizations of the idea of God. 
23 Perhaps a further elucidation is useful here. Of course, the judge is the addressee of 
the normative expectations of the legislator. However, this is a completely different 
problem. The judge is also the addressee of the normative expectations of the public, 
of the litigants, of his colleagues, etc. The fulfillment of the normative expectations 
of another does not mean subordination nor does it guarantee the quality of generating 
or regenerating of normativity in one's decisions. According to the theory proposed 
here; this can only occur by means of recursive 
reference 
reproduction 
of elements by 
means of elements. 

The Unity of the Legal System 
23 
Legal forms are valid because they are valid. They are formal precisely 
by virtue of the fact that they contain their justification within themselves. 
They serve as symbols of the circular self-reference of the system. The use 
of form should not be confused either with logical deduction or with 
conditional programming, because forms are tautologically valid, whereas 
deduction and conditioning are built precisely on asymmetries. Like the 
metaphor or the joke, the form functions only when it remains unques-
tioned. The use of form occurs when it is insisted that valid rules should 
be applied, that legally valid sentences should be carried out — because 
otherwise the legal order itself would be called into question. Forms are 
carried out in a ritualistic manner. Here references to the world are 
eliminated and replaced by references to the system itself — a typical 
characteristic of rituals.24 Forms are therefore all the more susceptible to 
every kind of symbolic breakdown — and one form of breakdown is that 
these forms are no longer believed in.25 
This is why no developed legal system can rely entirely on forms. Self-
reference is not only practised simply as self-reference. Its symbolization 
through forms is transformed into a simultaneous practice of self-reference 
and external reference. This does not mean that forms become superfluous 
but they can now be related to the fact that the connection between closure 
and openness must be guaranteed. This is ultimately why formalism in law 
is equated with conditioning and logical schematization. However, further 
analyses are required to make this clear. 
VI. 
Our provisional answer to the question of the unity of the legal system is: 
autopoietic reproduction of elements by elements on the basis of circular, 
recursive normativity. Like every good theory, of course this raises more 
questions than it answers. 
Our first task is to arrive at a more precise idea of how the continuous 
simultaneous processing of normative and cognitive aspects of meaning is 
achieved as a system. For this there are two different mechanisms which 
operate in conjunction with one another, namely conditioning and binary 
schematization. 
Conditioning is a quite general technique of forming systems without 
which no complex systems could develop at all (cf. Ashby, 1962: 109). For 
24 Cf. the widespread interpretation of ritual as a restricted code — for example in 
Wallace (I960, especially 233 ff.); Rappaport (1971b: 2 3 - 4 4 ; 1971a: 59-76); Bloch 
(1974: 55-81). 
25 This statement can also be reversed, which leads to the Romantic idea of form. 
Romanticism forces itself through doubt to form. 

24 
Niklas Luhmann 
if systems exceed a certain minimum size yet are to be kept mobile, logically 
possible connections of elements must be inhibited and at the same time 
kept available under certain conditions. In the legal system such condition-
ings are deployed with the additional, special function of combining closure 
and openness, normative and cognitive expectation. They thereby play an 
indispensable part in the differentiation of the system. Whether the condi-
tions which confer normative quality to a result or a relation are present is 
something which can and must be ascertained from a cognitive perspective. 
Paragraph 1 of the German Civil Code, for example, states that a person's 
legal capacity begins at birth. This condition has to be examined cognitively: 
that which is not born does not possess legal capacity. Any attempt to 
introduce a normative expectation here — for example that a person ought 
to be born — would throw the entire conceptual system on which legal 
decisions are based into confusion. 
This is why the structure of the legal system — insofar as it takes the 
form of decision-making programs — consists of conditional programs 
(Luhmann, 1985), which establish an "if a/then b" relation between the 
conditions (which have to be cognitively ascertained) and the conferment 
of norm quality. Although it is logically conceivable that validity could be 
made dependent on future events and therefore left uncertain in the present, 
such a conditioning of success is incompatible with the orientation function 
of expectation generalizations. Purposive programs as a means of transfer 
of norm quality are excluded — if not logically then by the function of law.26 
They would destabilize and particularize law to an intolerable extent.27 
Any purpose orientation of the state must always lay claim to political 
instruments, i.e., to the power to make collectively binding decisions.28 
26 The discussion of this issue is riddled with misunderstandings. In particular, a vital 
distinction is not always grasped. Of course, conditional programs can be built into 
purposive programs as sub-routines: one has to meet the requirements for obtaining 
a driving license before being allowed to drive. And these requirements are so selected 
as to ensure that only those capable of driving actually drive. Nonetheless, the fact 
that some people who are incapable of driving do actually drive does not make the 
law on driving licenses invalid; and a person's driving license does not become invalid 
because the holder is not in a position to buy a car. The non-achievement 
of a purpose 
has no legal 
consequences. 
27 With characteristic indecisiveness Unger (1976: 86) concedes that modern jurisprud-
ence has "increasingly accepted the notion that the meaning of a rule, and hence the 
scope of a right, must be determined by a decision about how best to achieve the 
purposes attributed to the rule. But all such purposive judgments are inherently 
particularistic and unstable; the most effective means to any given and varies from 
situation to situation and the purposes themselves are likely to be complex and 
shifting" (Unger, 1976: 86). See also the following discussion on the deformation of 
law by the welfare state (Unger, 1976: 194 ff.). 
28 This does not conflict with the rule (in constitutional law) that all administration is 
tied to law, but it obliges lawyers constantly to consider what minimum amount of 

The Unity of the Legal System 
25 
The legal system itself — and this applies equally to public and to private 
law — can react to the peremptory demand for consequence orientations 
only by an internal differentiation between doctrine or interpretation and 
validity. Interpretation can afford to risk the uncertainties of a glance at 
the future and can operate with extremely simple causal assumptions. But 
it must then in its results make clear, purpose-free statements of validity. 
This technique of juristic conditioning can be applied occasionally when-
ever problems requiring regulation arise. It becomes universalized and 
therefore compelled when the legal system is encoded through the binary 
schematism of legal/illegal. This codification leads to a doubling of norma-
tive expectation quality into a positive and a negative value. Then it can 
(and must) be determined in principle for all events and states about which 
communication occurs in the legal system, in what conditions they are to 
be treated as legal or as illegal. In this connection a technicization of this 
schematism develops, in the sense that the two code values are reversible 
by mere negation. This excludes the possibility of anything being simultane-
ously legal and illegal29 and also of law being interpreted as a weapon by 
parties with different chances of winning or of losing. For operative 
purposes, differentiation is oriented not simply towards the function of 
law but towards the antithesis between legal/illegal.30 The legal system 
must accordingly be understood as the unity of legality and of illegality, 
or more precisely as the control by this antithesis of its autopoiesis with 
the result that every operation of the system must be conditioned by the 
system itself. 
The legal/illegal codification cannot be understood if the function of 
law is regarded as being solely to resolve conflicts. On the contrary, the 
severity of the win or lose principle often makes the settlement of a dispute 
more difficult. Or else it merely forms the menacing background against 
which negotiations on an amicable agreement take place. In the allocation 
of action to the category of legal or illegal there is always an element of 
the reproduction of the legal system, a kind of "surplus value" which is 
conditional programming must be demanded as a condition of the legality of political-
administrative purposive action. Cf. Ohlinger (1982: 17—49). The United States 
also appears to be wrestling with the problem of increasing legal "enchaining" of 
administration and increasing resistance to this problem. 
29 The Greek tragedies illustrate that this maxim was not generally accepted in antiquity. 
Cf. Wolf (1950 to 1956). One may even assume that the development of law was one 
of the starting points for the development of the Sophistic technique of the forcing 
of antithetical decisions which in each case led to different consequences. Cf. Lloyd 
(1966, especially 111 ff.). It may also have led to the development of logic based on 
ontology. 
30 See Plato's Lysis, 215 E, for the metaphor of the love and desire of the antithesis for 
one another. 

26 
Niklas Luhmann 
skimmed off for the benefit of the system and which, it may be said, results 
from the quarrelsomeness of litigants. 
We cannot at this stage deal with the consequences which result when 
structural decisions about conditioning and binary schematization are intro-
duced. It must suffice here to point out that important groundwork has 
been done and points of contact have been established for detailed legal-
theoretical development. This has been achieved not by a leading idea of 
law such as justice or social order, which would only be more or less 
imperfectly realized in this way. The reasons lie in the conditions of the 
possibility of attaining closure and openness at the same time, of combining 
them and thus of bringing the specific area of functioning of law to a level 
of high, socially adequate complexity. Ultimately it is always a matter of 
reformulations of system unity — reformulations by which structural 
restrictions of correspondingly attainable complexity are accepted and built 
into the system. 
VII. 
The unity of a self-referential system can only be realized as one which 
determines, and is determined by, itself. Indeterminacy in that which 
belongs to a system always means incomplete differentiation, or in other 
words dependence on an overall social basis of operation which is not 
ordered as the difference between partial system and environment. 
Our reflections so far have outlined the problems which arise and have 
to be solved if a social sub-system in society attempts to attain a distinct 
unity. It must then itself combine closure and openness, i. e., reproduce its 
unity itself and constantly expose this process to the difference that exists 
between itself and the social environment. This may come about because 
the system fulfils a specific function which is not performed anywhere else 
in society. As a result it becomes possible for the system to treat everything 
else (however important this may be in itself for society) as environment. 
It is a matter of controversy whether a general evolutionary trend towards 
functional specification can be assumed and how such a trend could be 
explained.31 At any rate such a tendency, if it prevails, creates optimal 
conditions for autopoietic autonomy of social sub-systems because the sub-
systems relate everything which they use as unity to their function and at 
the same time can assume that there is no equivalent for this in their 
environment. By means of the functional relation concomitant with all 
operations, a self-referential closure can be realized which is not to be 
31 It is not unusual for this idea to appear in the construction of scales of ethnological 
development. Cf. Naroll (1956; 1970). 

The Unity of the Legal System 
27 
found in the use of communication as a basic operation alone. The sub-
system then copies as it were the autopoiesis of society — not on the 
general basis of recursive communication but by exclusive orientation to 
a function. 
The thesis introduced above that the legal system is differentiated as a 
normatively closed but cognitively open system is a first indicator for this 
functional orientation. But it is not in itself sufficient, since normative 
expectations also exist outside the law — for example in morals and 
religion, in the norms regulating the functional orientation of systems and 
their implications for other systems. The legal system can at best claim a 
specific use of normativity for itself. The theory of the self-referential 
closure of the system must therefore contain a theory of the function of 
law.32 
The function of law is not simply a purpose or a regulative idea. If it 
were a purpose it would be realizable in time and law would therefore end. 
If it were a regulative idea it would be posited as unrealizable from the 
outset, which would discredit law or at least raise the question of the real 
function of real law. Instead we interpret law in terms of a principle of 
structural selection.33 Law consists of the exploitation of conflict perspect-
ives for the formation and reproduction of congruently (temporally/object-
ively/socially) generalized behavioral expectations.34 The prospect of the 
disappointment of an expectation and thus, if one clings to the expectation, 
of a conflict, serves as a principle of selection by means of which generaliza-
tions can be tested. In the time dimension — and this indicates a certain 
predominance of temporal problems — generalization is normative, i. e., 
is dictated by the intention to cling to expectations despite disappointment 
and in the face of the facts. But not everything which is thus projected is 
socially testable (see — an evolutionary theory perspective — Luhmann, 
1970). The prospect of winning in the case of a conflict adds further 
restrictions. The permanent interaction of these factors — an interaction 
which is coordinated not by any "principle" but only by evolutionary 
means — creates a large number of congruently generalized behavioral 
32 This does not rule out an analytical separation of these questions; in fact it implies 
the need for such a distinction. In other words, one can accept the conception of the 
autopoietic system and at the same time define the function of law differently from 
this essay, and vice-versa. However, the compatibility of these theoretical parts must 
be considered in each proposed substitution. 
33 The ambivalence of the formulation is intentional. What is meant here is selection of 
the structure by the structure of the selection. Only this definition corresponds to the 
mode of operation of a self-referential system. 
34 Cf. also Luhmann (1985). This does not however bring out clearly enough the 
operative connection between the prospect of winning (if necessary, by means of 
physical violence) in the event of expectation. See also Luhmann (1981 a: 92—112). 

28 
Niklas Luhmann 
expectations which can then be systematized by juristic skill, by comparisons 
of cases, by concepts and by doctrine.35 The result becomes, and is experi-
enced as, law. 
VIII. 
This definition of the function of law clearly distances law from the 
intentions of welfare state control — a purpose for which it can, however, 
also be used.36 The political system characteristic of welfare states can enlist 
the service of law because law can control the outcome of conflict.37 It can 
create new subjects of law by creating new possibilities of conflict — for 
example by prohibiting the cultivation, trade and consumption of drugs — 
and hence it can cause law to come into being.38 The "natural" order of 
the genesis of law is reversed. It is not the norm projection which tests 
itself against its prospects in the event of conflict but conflict is, so to 
speak, conjured up out of nothingness in the expectation that orientation 
will form law from it.39 
Moreover the functional orientation towards conflict was also institution-
ally embedded. Insofar as legal generalizations developed on the basis of 
sentencing practice they occurred only when preceded by conflicts. As a 
result, legal concepts from the outset had a certain closeness to reality. It 
is well known that the establishment of law by judges has not died out 
and is perhaps becoming even more important. But at the same time there 
35 The juristic idea of the unity of the legal system discussed at the beginning of this 
article refers in particular to this. 
36 Even today, law is still widely interpreted as a form of "social engineering", i. e., as 
an instrument for realizing social intentions. Cf. Ziegert (1975). This is a very wide-
ranging survey and an attempt to establish an "expressive" dimension of law in 
opposition to the "social engineering" interpretation. However, this interpretation 
proves unsatisfactory as soon as one asks whether and to what extent the welfare 
state puts excessive strains on law. For the political system, this may be a question 
of the limits of causal efficiency. See Luhmann (1981b: 94 ff.). But ought not this 
question — from the standpoint of the unity and the particular function of the legal 
system — be posed differently? 
37 On the "common" use of physical force in the legal system and in the political 
system — a subject of major importance since the 18th century — see also Luhmann 
(1981 c: 154-72). 
38 See the critical study by Duster (1970). Unfortunately, the author confuses the issue 
in places with moralistic considerations. 
39 This perspective has obvious parallels with the questions which Habermas discusses 
in terms of the difference between rational systematics and life-world. See Habermas 
(1981). A detailed comparison is difficult to make because all the key ideas (communica-
tion, action, system) are differently defined and the expectations connected with a 
critique of modern society diverge. For an attempt at a synthesis, see Teubner (1982). 

The Unity of the Legal System 
29 
are also the legislative "mystery tours" (Esser) which do not emanate from 
conflicts which are to be anticipated or about to be fought out but which 
instead fix certain states through a political act of will — states which 
ideally are expected not to produce conflict but approval and obedience. 
It is problematic that such pre-decided conflicts lack the tension and the 
uncertainty which motivate the generalization of law. Subjects of conflict 
of this kind are arbitrarily specifiable but are ultimately interpreted merely 
as artefacts of politically regulated power towards binding decisions — and 
not as a tried and tested restriction of expectations. The problem has served 
as an impetus for forced "democratization" of politics. It has brought us 
the (unfortunately posed) question of the political legitimation of law-
making, a question which has given rise to a substantial body of literature. 
The theoretical approach proposed here seeks a fundamentally different 
solution. Only by interpreting the unity and the characteristic function of 
the legal system in the context of the functional differentiation of the legal 
system can one discern why and how law (similarly to money but in a 
quite different manner) is "exploited" in the political system in a manner 
quite alien to its function, without any consideration for its specific regener-
ation capacity. 
This discussion of the unity and function of the legal system provides 
an opportunity to examine a striking new development in the study of law, 
a completely new kind of critique of law which has recently been much 
debated at congresses and conferences as well as in literature. The critique 
of law is of course as old as differentiated forms of law (see above all Nörr, 
1970). The fact that no law can satisfy all wishes has always been vexing 
and has kept the search for remedies and redresses going. In the hands of 
people, lawyers and courts, law is obviously not what it should be. 
Following the invention of printing in the 16th century, criticism of the 
complexity of law — which could now so to speak be read by all and was 
therefore public — also came into its own. This discussion continued into 
the 18th century and revolved around the open question of whether redress 
was more likely to come from the authority of the legislator — which 
then, to be consistent, would have to forbid the quoting of the opinions 
of jurists in court — or from the systematizing logic of the dogmatism of 
law.40 This criticism remains embedded in a sceptical-realistic world view 
and therefore, like the legal system itself, is not fully differentiated. "Giacche 
liti, giudizi ed avvocati ci han da essere finche durera il mondo ne rimedio 
e facilmente da sperare a certi inevitabili difetti della giurisprudenza" 
(Muratori, 1958: 119). 
40 See for example Muratori (1742, quoted from the Milan edition, 1958: 111 f.), which 
proposes an option for reason and against authority. Here it does not even occur to 
the author to deny that legislation can be a means of clarifying and simplifying law, 
whereas today the precise opposite is true. 

30 
Niklas Luhmann 
Today a completely different kind of world view and a completely 
different kind of criticism of law are becoming prevalent, though they have 
not yet found a valid formulation. On the one hand, they activate human 
rights movements in the sphere of communicatively concentrated inter-
nationality, championing the cause of all structurally underprivileged people 
without any consideration of legal-technical feasibility. On the other hand, 
they complain about "too much of a good thing" — in the legal sphere, 
for example, about the "juridification of life", about excessive use of 
legistu<.η which is in itself positive, about rationality defects and the 
disastrous effects of affluence. Yet they are unable to identify a criterion 
or a limit at which the desirable is transformed into the detrimental. This 
criticism operates a double bind — rejecting what it is not yet willing to 
give up and at the same time making demands the legal-technical realization 
of which would terrify them. 
The discussion of "delegalization" — a concept originated in the United 
States — provides a good example of this.41 Delegalization is concerned 
partly with shifting specific aspects of law into other areas, for example 
replacing court decisions by the amicable persuasion of arbitration; and 
partly with the related prospect of excluding entire areas of life from the 
sphere of law. The appeal of this program resides not least in the fact that 
no distinction is made between alternatives to specific legal institutions 
and the law itself.42 However if one bears in mind the unity and function 
of the legal system, one is obliged to reflect on how delegalized alternatives 
propose to implement their schemes for the anticipation and avoidance of 
litigation, which brings us back to the question of law, a question merely 
"repressed". The question of law invariably forces its way back, unless it 
is argued that one must accept the arbitrariness of those in power43 or the 
moral pressures of well-meaning fellow citizens. 
A critique of law which merely objects to an excess of regulation and 
does not consider the conflict aspect of law poses the problem incorrectly. 
It criticizes the political use of law, the extent of such use, perhaps also 
the contents of such laws. But this still leaves open the question of whether 
and how the legal system itself as a closed, self-referential reproduction 
unit can exist side by side with a money economy and welfare state 
policies in modern conditions. If one does not differentiate between the 
corresponding system references, one will in some circumstances fail to 
recognize important development tendencies in law, such as the trends 
41 See the highly critical account by Abel (1980). 
42 The title of the last-mentioned work underlines that such a distinction can be conceived 
and formulated. 
43 Abel (1980: 407) rightly stresses that: "delegalization presupposes that the people or 
entities that interact outside formal legal institutions are roughly equal in political 
power, wealth and social status". 

The Unity of the Legal System 
31 
towards social engineering and the instrumentalization of law; nor will 
one be able to understand Max Weber's skepticism about the social-
eudaemonistic tendencies in law which were beginning to emerge in his 
time. 
However, it is equally false to regard conflict regulation as the sole 
function of law. It is indisputably the case that many conflicts have been 
shifted out of the sphere of law.44 From this perspective, law does in fact 
enter into competition with other, functionally equivalent possibilities. But 
the actual use of these alternatives means a renunciation of motives, 
occasions and situations for the establishment and reproduction of law. 
Conflicts are then no longer used to generalize expectations but are regarded 
as conflicts only in ad hoc fashion and are eliminated whenever possible. 
In order to advance beyond the present unsatisfactory discussion of 
subjects such as legalization, the plethora of laws, bureaucratization, the 
formulation and complexity of law, we must first recall the connection of 
a fully autopoietic constitution of social subsystems with the principle 
of functional social differentiation. Functional specification, whatever its 
evolutionary advantages and further potential may be, seems to be the ideal 
starting point for the full differentiation of subsystems, i.e., a principle for 
which there is no equivalent in the respective environments of the systems 
(including the intra-societal environment). The function system, although 
it uses and reproduces social communication and remains capable of connec-
tion with the environment, is, so to speak, free to constitute unity on its 
own account, to communicate closure and openness, to create the structures 
necessary for this purpose and to coordinate all this with its own function. 
In other words, we argue that an empirically ascertainable connection 
exists between the principle of differentiation of the social system and 
the form in which subsystems in society differentiate themselves as self-
referentially closed and as open to the environment. It is a question here 
of two sides of one and the same process of social differentiation, which 
is simply the making possible of a form of communication of closure and 
openness which is characteristic of subsystems. For the legal system this 
means the differentiation of a connection between normative closure and 
cognitive openness. Here that which serves as a contrafactual norm is, in 
the process of social evolution, increasingly pointed to the function of law. 
The critique of law is therefore essentially a critique of social differentiation. 
This leads to a large number of related questions requiring further 
analysis which can only be outlined here. Perhaps the most interesting is 
the question of whether an upper tolerance level for complexity exists 
beyond which the specific legal symbiosis of normative and cognitive 
44 Some motives working in this direction are discussed in Aubert (1983: 134 ff.), above 
all: avoidance of the all-or-nothing risk, saving of time and money, elimination of 
publicity, external control, possible loss of standing. 

32 
Niklas Luhmann 
orientations no longer functions. One indicator here is that the development 
of logic and of the empirical sciences in the past hundred years has raised 
doubts about the scientific character of jurisprudence. Closely related to this 
is the question of whether jurists can continue to base their understanding of 
the law and their interpretations on consequence orientation where it is 
possible to find out what the possibilities of prognosis are.45 It is equally 
important to ascertain the significance of similar treatment of similar cases 
and disparate treatment of disparate cases and of the legal doctrine which 
is designed to deal with these questions, when on the one hand legislation 
rigorously specifies and incessantly changes legal questions, and on the 
other hand the causal perspective of social engineering — because of 
differences between the relevant factors — makes it practically impossible 
to compare cases. The reversal of the conflict perspective discussed above 
(in part VI) must also be taken into consideration: if it is no longer a 
question of deciding what expectations (tested against what generalizations) 
can be maintained in the event of conflict, if instead conflicts decided in 
advance are created in order to append regulations to them which have 
legal validity, then it must be assumed that the response to this will be a 
profound change in the conception of law — although at present no 
empirical indicators are available for the registering of such change. 
The common denominator for all these different problems may lie in 
the fact that the evolution of the social system makes possible the establish-
ment of a highly improbable order, an order which is full of preconditions. 
The combination of normative closure and cognitive openness discussed 
above is one of these improbabilities. It is probable that such contradictory 
attitudes of expectation will ruin one another. Very specific conditionings 
are required in order to guarantee separability and compatibility, and given 
the rapid pace of social change these conditionings rapidly lose their 
credibility. Every reference to the validity of conditions of validity finally 
becomes suspect simply by the fact of being used as an argument. All 
that remains is the demand for continuous adjustment of law to social 
development while maintaining the regenerative capacity of normativity. 
Law which is adaptive, responsive and capable of learning must avoid the 
discrediting of its own normativity or else it will reduce itself to being an 
instrument of bureaucratic implementations of political power. 
What the new critique has taken up appears to be this immanent 
improbability, which emerges all the more clearly as political demands on 
45 The self-assurance with which this occurs is just as impressive as the argument that 
other possibilities — such as classical conceptual jurisprudence or obstinate thinking 
in categories of law regardless of consequences — have lost their plausibility. However, 
precisely this could be a symptom of a deep-seated crisis in law, especially if one 
accepts our argument that conditionality is a necessary structure for the connection 
of closure (normativity) and openness (cognitivity). All this could indicate that without 
consequence orientation nothing is possible — and also that with it nothing is possible! 

The Unity of the Legal System 
33 
law increase. Given the complexity of the facts, prognoses are difficult, as 
is any decision on the central issues themselves — for example, a decision 
for or against the instrumentalization of law for political purposes. How-
ever, the terms and the theoretical approaches by which the legal system 
describes itself remain a matter of crucial importance. And here advances 
and improvements can be made on the basis of interdisciplinary theoretical 
developments and an emergent sociological theory of society. 
Translated from the German by Paul Knight. 
Bibliography 
ABEL, RICHARD L. (1980) "Delegalization: A Critical Review of its Ideology, Manifesta-
tions, and Social Consequences", in E. Blankenburg, Η. Rottleuthner and E. Klauska 
(eds.), Alternative Rechtsformen und Alternativen ζum Recht (Alternative Legal Forms 
and Alternatives to Law), 6 Jahrbuch für Rechtsso^iologie und Rechtstheorie 27. 
ASHBY, WILLIAM ROSS ( 1 9 5 6 ) An Introduction to Cybernetics. London: Methuen. 
— (1962) "Principles of the Self-Organizing System", in Η. M. von Foerster and G. W. 
Zopf (eds.), Principles of Self-Organisation. 
New York: Pergamon Press. 
AUBERT, VILHELM ( 1 9 8 3 ) In Search of Law: Sociological Approaches to Law. Oxford: Martin 
Robertson. 
BLOCH, MAURICE ( 1 9 7 4 ) "Symbols, Song, Dance and Features of Articulation: Is Religion 
an Extreme Form of Traditional Authority?" 15 Europäisches Archiv für Soziologie 55. 
COING, HELMUT ( 1 9 5 6 ) Geschichte und Bedeutung des Systemgedankens in der Rechtswissenschaft 
(History and Meaning of the Idea of System in Jurisprudence). Frankfurt a. M.: 
Klostermann. 
DIAS, R. W. M. (1980) "Autopoiesis and the Judical Process", 11 Rechtstheorie 257. 
DUSTER, TROY (1970) The Legislation of Morality: Law, Drugs and Moral Judgement. New 
York: Free Press. 
ECKHOFF, 
TORSTEIN 
( 1 9 7 8 ) "Feedback in Legal Reasoning and Rule Systems", 
2 2 
Scandinavian Studies in Law 41. 
ECKHOFF, TORSTEIN and N I L S KRISTIAN SUNDBY ( 1 9 7 5 ) "The Notion of Basic Norms 
of Jurisprudence", 19 Scandinavian Studies in Law 123. 
ENGISCH, K A R L ( 1 9 3 5 ) Die Einheit der Rechtsordnung (The Unity of the Legal Order). 
Heidelberg: Carl Winter. 
FOERSTER, 
HEINZ VON (1973) "On Constructing Reality", in W. F. E. Preiser (ed.), 
Environmental Design Research, Vol. II. Stroudsberg: Hutchinson & Ross. 
— (1974) "Kybernetik einer Erkenntnistheorie" (Cybernetics of an Epistemology), in 
W. D. Keidel, W. Händler, and M. Spreng (eds.), Kybernetik und Bionik: 
Berichtswerk 
über den 5. Kongress der deutschen Gesellschaft für Kybernetik (Cybernetics and Bionics: 
report on the 5th Congress of the German Society of Cybernetics). München: Olden-
bourg. 
— (1979) "Cybernetics of Cybernetics", in K. Krippendorf (ed.), Communication and 
Control in Society. New York: Gordon and Breach. 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON and GEORGE W. ZOPF (eds.) (1962) Principles of Self-Organization. 
New York: Pergamon Press. 
FRIEDMAN, LAWRENCE M. (1975) The Legal System: A Social Science Perspective. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation. 

34 
Niklas Luhmann 
GRIMM, 
JACOB and WILHELM 
GRIMM 
( 1 9 4 2 ) Deutsches 
Wörterbuch, 
Part IV, Vol. 
10. 
Leipzig: Hirsel. 
HABERMAS, JÜRGEN ( 1 9 8 4 ) The Theory of Communicative 
Action (German original, 1 9 8 1 ) . 
Boston: Beacon Press. 
HALL, A. D. and R. E. FAGEN (1956) "Definition of System", 1 General Systems 18. 
HART, H . L. A. (1961) The Concept of Law. Oxford:' Clarendon. 
H E J L , PETER M. (1982 a) So^ialmssenschaft 
als Theorie selbstreferentieller 
Systeme 
(Social 
Science as the Theory of Self-Referential Systems). Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
— (1982 b) "Die theorie autopoietischer Systeme: Perspektiven für die soziologische 
Systemtheorie (The Theory of Autopoietic Systems: Perspectives for the Sociological 
System Theory). 13 Rechtstheorie 
45. 
HENRICH, DIETER (1976) "Die Grundstruktur der modernen Philosophie" (The Basic 
Structure of Modern Philosophy) in Η. Ebeling (ed.), Subjektivität 
und 
Selbsterhaltung: 
Beiträge 
%ur Diagnose der Moderne (Subjectivity and Self-Preservation: Essays on the 
Diagnosis of Modernity). Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
JANTSCH, ERICH ( 1 9 8 0 ) The Self Organising 
Universe: Scientific 
and Human Implications 
of 
the Emerging Paradigm of Evolution. Oxford: Pergamon. 
KRAWIETZ, WERNER ( 1 9 8 1 ) "Rechtssystem und Rationalität in der juristischen Dogmatik" 
(The Legal System and Rationality in Legal Doctrine), in A. Aarino, I. Niiniluoto, 
and J. Uusitalo (eds.), Methodologie 
und Erkenntnistheorie 
in der juristischen 
Argumentation 
(Methodology and Epistemology in Legal Argumentation). Rechtstheorie, 
Supp. 2. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
LIEBERT, ARTHUR (1920) Das Problem der Geltung (The Problem of Validity), 2nd. ed. 
Leipzig: F. Meiner. 
LLOYD, G . E . R. ( 1 9 6 6 ) Polarity and Analogy: 
Two Types of Argumentation 
in Early 
Greek 
Thought (Reprinted 1 9 7 1 ) . Cambridge: Norton. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1970) "Evolution des Rechts" (Evolution of Law), 1 Rechtstheorie 
3. 
— (1981 a) "Konflikt und Recht" in Ν. Luhmann (ed.) Ausdifferen^ierung 
des 
Rechts: 
Beiträge %ur Rechtsso^iologie 
und Rechtstheorie 
(The Differentiation of Law: Essays on 
the Sociology of Law and the Theory of Law). Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1981 b) Politische 
Theorie im Wohlfahrtsstaat 
(Political Theory in the Welfare State). 
München: Olzog. 
— (1981c) "Rechtszwang und politische Gewalt" (Legal Compulsion and Political 
Force), in N. Luhmann (ed.), Ausdifferen^terung 
des Rechts: Beiträge %ur 
Rechtsso^iologie 
und Rechtstheorie 
(The Differentiation of Law: Essays on the Sociology of Law and 
the Theory of Law). Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1982) "Autopoiesis, Handlung und kommunikative Verständigung" (Autopoiesis, 
Action and Communicative Understanding), 11 Zeitschrift für Soziologie 366. 
— (1983) "Das sind Preise" (The Nature of Prices), 34 Sociale Welt 153. 
— (1985) A Sociological 
Theory of Law. (German original, 1972). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO (1981) "Autopoiesis", in M . Zeleny (ed.) Autopoiesis: 
A Theory 
of Living Organisation. 
New York: North Holland. 
— (1982) Autopoiesis 
and Cognition 
— The Realisation 
of the Living. 
Boston/Dordrecht: 
Reidel. 
MOLES, ABRAHAM A. and ELISABETH ROHMER (1977)· Theorie des actes: vers une ecologie des 
actions. (The Theory of Acts: Towards an Ecology of Actions). Paris: Casterman. 
MURATORI, LUDOVICO ( 1 9 5 8 ) Dei difetti della giurisprudensa. 
Milano: Rizzoli. 
NAROLL, RAOUL ( 1 9 5 6 ) "A Preliminary Index of Social Development", 5 8 
American 
Anthropologist 
687. 

The Unity of the Legal System 
35 
NÖRR, DIETER ( 1 9 7 4 ) "Rechtskritik in der römischen Antike" (The Critique of Law in 
Roman Antiquity), Abhandlungen der Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Philosophi-
sche Historische 
Klasse, N. F. München: Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
ÖHLINGER, THEO ( 1 9 7 5 ) Der Stufenbau der Rechtsordnung: 
Rechtstheoretische 
und 
ideologische 
Aspekte (The Graduated Structure of Legal Order: Legal-Theoretical and Ideological 
Aspects). Wien: Manz. 
— (1982) "Das Gesetz als Instrument gesellschaftlicher Problemlösung und seine Alterna-
tiven: Skizzen zu einer Grundfrage der Gesetzgebungstheorie" (Law as an Instrument 
of Social Problem Solutions and Theory), in T. Ohlinger (ed.), Methodik der 
Gesetzge-
bung: Legistische 
Richtlinien in Theorie und Praxis (Methodology of Legislation: Legistic 
Guidelines in Theory and Practice). Wien/New York: Springer. 
0STERBERG, DAG (1976) Meta-sociological 
Essay. Pittsburgh: Duquesne. 
PARSONS, TALCOTT (1937) The Structure of Social Action. New York: McGraw Hill. 
PAWLOWSKI, HANS M A R T I N (1981) "Die Einheit der Rechtsnormen" (The Unity of Legal 
Norms) in Η. Pawlowski, Methodenlehre für Juristen: 
Theorie der Norm und des 
Gesetzes 
(Methodology for Lawyers: The Theory of the Norm and of Law). Heidelberg: 
Müller. 
RAPPAPORT, ROY A. (1971 a) "Rituals, Sanctity and Cybernetics", 73 American 
Anthropolo-
gist 59. 
— (1971 b) "The Sacred in Human Evolution", 2 Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics 
23. 
ROTH, GERHARD (1981) "Biological Systems Theory and the Problem of Reductionism", 
in G. Roth and H. Schwegler (eds.), Self-Organising 
Systems: 
An 
Interdisciplinary 
Appraoch. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
— (1982) "Conditions of Evolution and Adaptation in Organisms as Autopoietic Sys-
tems", in D. Mossakowski and G. Roth (eds.), Environmental 
Adaptation 
and Evolution. 
Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer. 
SCHLEIERMACHER, FRIEDRICH (1977) in Μ. Frank (ed.) Hermeneutik 
und Kritik. Frankfurt 
a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
TATJE, TERENCE A, and RAOUL NAROLL (1970) "Two Measures of Societal Complexity: 
An Empirical Cross-Cultural Comparison" in R. Naroll and R. Cohen (eds.), A 
Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology. 
Garden City: Natural History Press. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Substantive and Reflexive Elements in Modem Law", 
17 
Law and Society Review 239. 
UNGER, ROBERTO MANGABEIRA ( 1 9 7 6 ) Law in Modern Society: Towards a Criticism of Social 
Theory. New York: Free Press. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO J . ( 1 9 7 9 ) Principles of Biological Autonomy. New York: North Holland. 
— (1981) "Describing the Logic of the Living: The Adequacy and Limitations of the 
Idea of Autopoiesis" in Μ. Zeleny (ed.), Autopoiesis: 
A Theory of Living 
Organisation. 
New York: North Holland. 
WALLACE, ANTHONY F. C. (1966) Religion: An Anthropologic 
View. New York: Random 
House. 
WOLF, ERIK (1950 — 56) Griechisches Rechtsdenken (Greek Legal Thought), 3 vols. Frankfurt 
a. M.: Klostermann. 
YOVITS, MARSHALL C . and SCOTT CAMERON (eds.) (1960) Self-Organising 
Systems. Oxford: 
Pergamon. 
YOVITS, MARSHALL C., GEORGE T . JACOBI and GORDON D . GOLDSTEIN (eds.) ( 1 9 6 2 ) Self-
Organising 
Systems. Washington: Spartan Books. 
ZIEGERT, KLAUS ( 1 9 7 5 ) Zur Effektivität 
der Rechtssosjologie: 
Die Rekonstruktion 
der Ge-
sellschaft durch Recht (On the Effectiveness of the Sociology of Law: The Reconstruction 
of Society by Law). Stuttgart: Enke. 

The Law of Law 
F R A N 9 0 I S E W A L D 
Paris 
It is a fact that there is no (positive) law without a law of law; no law 
without a principle, an instance of reflexion, whereby the law thinks about 
itself. 
This reflexivity corresponds, firstly, to a logical need. The proof was 
given by Kelsen: a norm is legal only on condition that it derives from a 
norm that is itself legal (Kelsen, 1962: 255 cf.). The law presupposes itself; 
it necessarily precedes itself. The fact that the law has no origin assignable 
to a fact is a fact which characterizes the law as law. In consequence, any 
positive legal norm presupposes another one that confers its legality on it. 
The idea of a single legal norm has no meaning. Similarly, for Ferdinand 
de Saussure, the idea of an isolated signifier has no meaning (de Saussure, 
1955: 155). 
This idea of law's preceding itself expresses the transcendental nature of 
the law. Kelsen was not the first to enunciate it. Aristotle had already 
shown the need for it; and Jean-Jacques Rousseau, after invalidating the 
sociological thesis that would identify law with social constraint, explains 
in Book I of the Social Contract 
how it is impossible to derive a legal 
relationship from any fact whatever, in particular from the fact of power. 
The fiction of the social contract is, as Althusser has shown, caught up in 
the difficulty that what gives value to the act of entering into the contract 
depends on the contract itself (Althusser, 1967), and social contract and 
fundamental norm do nothing but describe the need for a law of law. They 
are two formulations of the same problem, that of the law's necessary 
precedence over itself. 
Social contract and fundamental norm refer back to two different imagin-
ary legal entities, two ways of conceiving of the question of principle. 
These images, which it is difficult to do without — Kant would have 
called this schematism of the understanding — can lead to error by inducing 
consideration of the validity of the thesis on the basis of the actual 
possibility of the image proposed: the validity of the social contract will 
be made to depend on its material existence; the fundamental norm is 
imagined as a single norm. A careful reading will seek to dig out the 

The Law of Law 
37 
rational core from the forms in which it is conceived. It is in fact not 
necessary for this principle of reflexiveness of law to be bound up with 
any particular legal act. It is a logical need, which many acts may meet. It 
is more of a principle of validation, or more exactly a principle of interpreta-
tion. "The experience of codified legal systems shows how the same legal 
text, the same article of a code, may through time, with transformations 
of "the Law", come to found two differing norms. The norm, then, is not 
the article of the code or the text of the law; it is not even their meaning, 
but something that depends on and refers back to the normative instance, 
namely the law of law. 
As we know, it was traditionally in the element of "natural law" that 
this reflection of law on itself took place. It is typical of present-day 
legal experience that the idea of natural law has become impossible or 
impracticable for us. The idea of natural law is something that we no 
longer understand; it has become alien to us. But this does not ipso facto 
imply that a legal order can live without a body for reflecting on itself. 
Our impossibility of formulating a natural law anew raises more problems 
than it solves. It confronts us with the need to formulate this element of 
law reflecting on itself outside the form of natural law. And all the time 
we know that if this function is not fulfilled, law will evaporate into a 
pure exercise in legality, in power or in constraint. 
Thus, law presents itself as having a twofold, divided structure. This 
structure defines the framework of any possible legal experience. Legal 
systems may vary and may differentiate in the course of history — and 
they have certainly not failed to do so — but these variations cannot affect 
the twofold, divided structure of the legal experience. Better, when one 
legal system or order succeeds to another, this presupposes not merely a 
difference in the norms and their content, in the architecture of the system, 
but also in the reflexive body that gives the new law its legal value. If 
norms change from one system to another, this cannot in the last analysis 
come from anything but what gives normative value to the norms of 
positive law. Thus, it is the contemporary experience of French law that 
it is not necessary to change the Code — specifically, the Civil Code — in 
order to change the law. Transformations in the normative instance are 
sufficient. Between the norm and its interpretation there is, then, a solid 
bond and a reciprocity: the one changes along with the other. Describing 
a real system cannot mean describing merely certain practices of positive 
law, but the bond that they form along with their interpreting body. 
This structure of the legal experience may no doubt be described in 
terms of autopoiesis or of self-referential system. But there is nothing 
necessary about that. If autopoiesis describes only this, it does no more 
than repeat in new words something that is very well known. It teaches 
us nothing, tells us nothing new. Autopoiesis theory can be of interest 
only in so far as it offers some special way of understanding the law's 

38 
Francois Ewald 
reflection on itself. Moreover, autopoiesis can only be a special case of 
something that ought to be described in a more general vocabulary, of 
which autopoiesis proposes only one particular modality. 
To describe the element of reflexivity of law, I propose to speak of a 
rule of judgement 
(Ewald, 1986 b). Legislation, doctrine and case law are all 
practices of legal judgement. Their articulation, distribution and mutual 
competence depend on the type of rationality that this legal judgement 
obeys. This type of rationality defines, for a particular legal order, the 
economy of its "juris-diction". The rule of judgement is not a rule laid 
down by a body, but is what regulates the judgement of all bodies; 
accordingly, not something that one applies, but something whereby one 
judges. It is one of the characteristics of the practice of legal judgement 
that the rule of judgement must constantly be made explicit. Statute, 
doctrine and case law derive from it and express it; but it can never be 
reduced to these. It is a sort of necessary ideal on the basis of which legal 
practices reflect the constraint that binds them, their unity and their 
systematicity. Constantly reformulated, it never ceases to depart from itself 
through the judgements that express it. 
The doctrine of autopoiesis is one way of formulating this problem of 
the rule of judgement, of the law of law. It is quite a problem whether 
this law is internal to the legal system associated with it, whose reflexive 
instance it is, or external to it. It would no doubt be truer to say that the 
rule of judgement is that whereby a legal system closed round its own 
order comes into contact with its exterior: what one in general calls the 
social. Either one thing or the other must be: either the doctrine of 
autopoiesis is the theory of law that does not claim to deal with it except 
from outside. It is then nothing but the application to law of the theory 
of autopoietic systems. In this case, like deontic logic or legal linguistics, 
it runs the risk of saying as much about law as a system as it fails to say 
about law as practice. In this case, it will have to abandon its pretension 
to be an adequate element of reflection of legal practices. The law spoken 
about in autopoiesis will then be an abstract law, a philosopher's or 
sociologist's law, a law with the characteristic of being all the more 
loquacious the more indifferent it is to the practitioner. In this case, I 
repeat, the doctrine of autopoiesis is less a theory of law than systems 
theory applied to law. There is liable to be as much relationship between 
the law it discusses and law as it is practised as there is between the dog 
as a barking animal and as a constellation in the heavens. As such, it does 
not interest me — or not any more than does systems theory. 
But if I have understood rightly, this position of externality is not tenable 
for the doctrine of autopoiesis. The observer forms part of the observation, 
and the observation, that which is objectivized about the object, depends 
on the place that the observed offers the observer. The doctrine of auto-
poiesis derives its competence from its particularity. From this point of 

The Law of Law 
39 
view, the position of autopoiesis with respect to law is similar to that 
which Kelsen's Pure Theory occupied. To be sure, the Pure Theory claimed 
to be a "science" of law external to its object. It nevertheless did have 
legislative value (and claims) with respect to the law. This is the approach 
from which I wish to appraise the theses of autopoiesis. 
I. Columbus' Egg 
Autopoiesis, first of all, is presented as a theory of law that is both post-
Kelsen and post-sociological. The theory of law in the 20th century has 
been characterized by the radical split between these two viewpoints, the 
external one (of the sociology of law) and the internal one (of the Pure 
Theory) each of them maintaining profoundly antagonistic relationships, 
each laying claim to exclusivity. The theory of law appeared to be more 
conservative, while sociology claimed to be critical. This division has 
become untenable: Kelsenian positivism does not make it possible to think, 
from a legal viewpoint, about the difference between legal systems; at the 
same time, and for the same reasons as those that made the shortcomings 
of positivism felt, the critical project that inspired sociology has largely 
lost its force. Who today would dare claim to wish the end of law? The 
dream today is of synthesis, of reconciliation of the two points of view, 
internal and external: of the construction of a theory that would be both 
a sociology of law, and the converse. 
Autopoiesis proposes one way of reconciling the two points of view 
which, by contrast with certain sociological attempts, does not seek to 
reconcile the irreconcilable: the transcendental (the legal) and the empirical 
(the sociology of legal practices). This desire for reconciliation implies in 
both formulations that the law is a social system, a differentiated social 
subsystem, reproducing itself autonomously, more specifically autopoieti-
cally. It is the notion of system, in fact of logic, that allows, without 
contradiction, the conception of the articulation of the law as a closed 
system and the social. It favors the transcendental over the empirical, 
though without any constant. Kant would be more at home in it than 
Gurvitch. 
Autopoiesis is indisputably the daughter of Kelsen's Pure Theory. Kel-
sen's reversal is familiar: whereas hitherto the philosophy of law sought 
outside positive law, and mostly as its foundation, for the principle of its 
legality and validity (the one entailing the other), Kelsen, in an inaugural 
gesture unheard of in legal tradition posited that the legality (and the 
validity) of the legal system could be based only on its own positiveness.1 
1 Though the premises might be found in Pascal's 
Pensees. 

40 
Francis Ewald 
Far from the positivity of a legal order having to be explained by any 
recourse whatever to a legitimating body, the very fact of the law's 
positivity was given explanatory value. The law was a foundation for law. 
Ipso facto, 
the project of giving a "foundation" to law lost its meaning. 
The law did not have to be explained, but analyzed. And a given legal 
system could accept no other instance of judgement than itself. It could 
be judged only by its own standard. For us, Kelsen's reversal marks the 
legal experience's entry into the age of modernity. It is the one we are still 
in. Autopoiesis itself finds the condition of its possibility in Kelsen's 
gesture. It follows him, and it does not break with him. 
One cannot stress enough how dramatic Kelsen's gesture could (and 
can) be. This is, by the way, what those theoreticians of law that claim to 
make it a "science" most lack: the awareness that the history of the law 
has the form of a drama, that it is intertwined with the dramas of the 
reason that mark the history of the West. The law, Kelsen posits, is founded 
on nothing other than its own positivity. The proposition had more than 
merely theoretical value. It was implicit in it that it was no longer possible 
to found law on anything external, whether a natural law, an ideal society, 
a notion of justice or a doctrine of the rights of man. Underlying Kelsen's 
thesis is a formidable crisis, the depth of which is adequately indicated by 
the Great War and the laceration of Europe. Kelsen's thesis fitted into the 
growing awareness that continuing to found law upon a doctrine of justice 
could only end by particularizing it and therefore destroying it. Justice, 
the Rights of Man, everything in which the possibility of agreement, the 
hope of universality, had been placed, was instead revealed as a factor of 
unending war. At the very moment when the doctrines of natural law, on 
which since Aristotle the possibility of law had been based, were revealing 
themselves as destructive of law through their very affirmation, Kelsen, 
through the positivist position, saved the Western experience of law. At 
the very moment when the isms — historicism, sociologism, in short the 
relativism of the human sciences — were walling up any doctrine of natural 
law in the particularism of its particularity, Kelsen showed that a law was 
nevertheless possible, on condition that it be forearmed against any attempt 
to found the law upon any natural law whatsoever. 
Autopoiesis is fundamentally following up Kelsen's gesture. To be sure, 
it rejects the hypothesis of the fundamental norm in favor of the idea of 
an interaction, of a correlation, of some solidarity among norms. But this 
is a secondary proposition by comparison with the reconfirmed thesis that 
law can have no other reference than itself. Certainly, from Kelsen to 
Luhmann the idea of system is not the same, but this is secondary in regard 
to the thesis of the transcendental nature of legality, and to the idea of 
the necessary self-reference. Kelsen's positivism gives law an existence 
indifferent to time, to history and to the conflict of values fought out 
there. Autopoiesis confirms law in its existence without taking on the now 

The Law of Law 
41 
condemned form of natural law. As an autopoietic system, the law is again 
sheltered from the storm, indifferent to time, able to reproduce itself 
indefinitely. All very suited for reassuring an epoch that still comes out in 
a cold sweat at the idea that it might have been able to take as a desirable 
goal the death of law. 
Autopoiesis thus fits into the tradition of sociological reflection upon 
law. At the end of the 19th century, at least in the continental countries, 
thinking about law was generally pursued as a critique of the old jusnatural-
ist positions. The law was henceforth to be social. Jurists had the dream 
that the human sciences, sociology in particular, could supply them with 
rules that would allow legal judgement to be always adequate to the 
norms that society continually secretes. Thanks to sociology, society could, 
predominantly through the mouth of judges, perpetually judge itself. The 
State would wither away into civil society, and civil society would dissolve 
into the social. But they had to cry off. The project was realizable only on 
condition that the human sciences became scientific. As we know, they 
will never achieve that. In particular, one must be aware that, even if they 
did become more scientific, they would still be incapable of supplying the 
desired rule of judgement. Firstly, of course, because knowledge of what 
is gives little indication as to duty. Yet legal judgement always has a goal: 
the rule of judgement expresses a policy of law that no science, even 
political science, can supply it with. But also because, in principle, the 
human sciences relativize everything they touch, themselves more than 
anything. Articulating the rule of judgement around the human sciences 
could lead only to depriving it of the necessary objectivity. In short, the 
project of sociology of law would itself lead to the ruin of law. 
That does not mean that the project should be given up. But instead of 
its being carried on chiefly by jurists, it should be by sociologists. There 
begins the era of sociological theories of law, the last epigones of the 
jusnaturalist doctrines. Except that society has replaced nature and at the 
same time positive intention has been transformed into a practice of 
denunciation. The jusnaturalist doctrines sought for the conditions on 
which the law could be just; the sociological doctrines repeat ad 
nauseam, 
in more or less radical forms, that the law is unjust, that its legitimacy is 
deceptive. That it is never there except to hide relationships of force and 
domination that underlie it. Like the jusnaturalist doctrines, the sociological 
and critical theories of law are underlain by the same desire for justice, for 
judging the positive law in the name of justice. 
While in recent times the critical passion seems to have deserted the 
sociologies of law, they remain firmly attached to the idea that the law is 
fundamentally social. There is a proposition there that is so obvious that 
one cannot see how to get round it. The idea is to find this foundation of 
law, which can no longer be sought for in philosophy, in some sociology. 
That is what gives sociology its competence: being responsible for supply-

42 
Francois Ewald 
ing the theory of law as a social phenomenon, it would at the same time 
be for it to state the truth of law. But it is constantly haunted by the 
Kelsenian cleavages and prohibitions: How could a sociology of law, 
despite everything, grasp law "from within"? How could sociology in some 
way divest itself of its own conditions of possibility? That seems today to 
be the great problem of the sociology of law. 
The sociology of law is in crisis. Autopoiesis is its chance, come to give 
it restored youth. Autopoiesis reconciles the internal and external points 
of view in the study of law, in more rigorous fashion than those types of 
discourse in which theory would consist in juxtaposing the discourse of 
legal doctrine's reflection of the transformations of law with the more 
ideological than sociological one carried on by social philosophers about 
social change.2 Luhmann's doctrine of the act of communication, his thesis 
of the closure of the legal order as a normative order and of its openness 
as a cognitive order, allow, without contradiction and without raising 
immediate logical and epistemological impossibilities, the conception of a 
way of thinking about the articulation of law and society. It would have 
to do, not with any social causality, any play of reflection, but with a 
cognitive strategy. Communication would take place, and would have to 
see itself, in terms of rationality, which would, as it were, be the medium, 
the interface, between law and society. This solution has the merit of 
respecting the viewpoint of the actors, of not reducing their will to an 
unconscious logic perceptible only by the scholar, and of not being reduc-
tive for law. 
Thus, autopoiesis may appear as a kind of Columbus' egg in the order 
of the theory of law. It would simultaneously allow one to transcend and 
to conserve the split between the pure theory and sociology; it would 
complement one by the other and ultimately reunite them. It would be the 
theory that was needed. All these virtues should at any rate assure it of 
immediate and lasting success. All the more so because, being bound up 
with the philosophy of autonomy and self-organization, it presents itself 
as a theory that at the same time allows reconciliation of the affirmation 
of the individual and his creative power with his belonging to a group 
whose solidarities make him what he is. 
II. Autopoiesis: A Theory of Social Law 
This is the pointer to the combination of circumstances that gives auto-
poiesis its chance, that defines the program it has to accomplish. For 
autopoiesis as yet exists only at the stage of program. One may very well 
2 Ost (1983) is typical of this type of discussion. 

The Law of Law 
43 
suspect it will always remain only at the program stage. Perhaps observation 
of legal systems will bring about an enrichment of the theory of autopoietic 
systems. But it may be suspected that, conversely, the theory of autopoietic 
systems may be of slight help in dealing with the issues raised by law at 
our own point in time. 
That there is no place for a meta-law, no more than, as Jacques Lacan 
says, there is any possibility of a meta-language, is a thesis that will no 
doubt be accepted by the autopoiesis school. The class of all classes is itself 
a class. What else does the hypothesis of self-reference state but that the 
knowledge of the object is never anything but the way in which the object 
itself reflects upon itself? There is no theory that does not have its place. 
And the thesis of autopoiesis is that any theory has to associate with its 
statements their conditions for being stated. In a word, in the very act of 
asserting its validity autopoiesis declares itself to be a particular theory. 
The doctrine of autopoiesis may be a particularly broad and general theory, 
capable of incorporating any other theory as particular; but that very fact 
designates it as particular. The consequence of this position is that the 
doctrine of autopoiesis cannot, if it is not to annihilate itself, count as a 
theory of law in general. Its validity does not depend on its being a truer 
theory than others (from its point of view true and false are not good 
criteria for distinguishing one theory from another), but merely more 
"profitable" at a particular point in time. The doctrine of autopoiesis can 
take its validity only from its performance in our own current legal 
position. It has no value in itself. It is in relation to the self-regulation of 
contemporary legal practice that it should be evaluated. 
I propose to designate our own legal position today as that of social law 
(Ewald, 1986 a). By "social law" I do not mean only the legal disciplines 
that deal with work and social security. Social law cannot be defined by 
the objects it deals with, but instead by what makes these objects capable 
of legal treatment. Social law designates a certain technique, a certain way 
of laying down law, articulated round a certain type of legal rationality, a 
type of juris-diction. If law exists only as system (and here it is of 
little moment whether it be an autopoietic system or not), this systemic 
character — which is in fact always particular, the way norms are produced, 
generated and articulated with each other — defines a type of jurisdiction. 
That is simultaneously the way of thinking about the question of the 
sources of law, the relationships between fact and law, and the question of 
the criterion of legality. The law is not bound up with any one type of 
jurisdiction. On the contrary, these may vary and be transformed, giving 
birth and reality to different legal systems. What is called in France "civil 
law" refers to a certain type of jurisdiction. A type of jurisdiction, a system 
of law, thus always has a reflexive character: it includes not only a certain 
normative content, a set of special rules depending on the criterion of 
legality peculiar to the legal system considered, a way of practicing legal 

44 
Frangois Ewald 
judgement, whether in the form of syllogistic deduction or in the more 
"flexible" forms such as a balance of interests, but also a body of doctrine 
through which the whole set of these practices are reflected and regulated, 
ensuring, in an expression of Maurice Hauriou's, their own "policing" 
(Hariou, 1926: 52). 
What is it that characterizes social law? Firstly, that it is no longer 
reflected in any natural law, in any reference whatever to nature. Nature 
has been succeeded by society. It is not certain that this is "better"; in any 
case, it is certainly no truer. The fact is that we have lost the possibility 
of referring to nature, whether Aristotle's ontological nature or Kant's 
human nature. Classical natural law found its condition of possibility in 
that which made possible a knowledge of nature as ontology and theology; 
modern natural law in that which made physics possible as science. Social 
law, for its part, appears in the same epistemological act as makes possible 
the human sciences. 
Along with nature, there also falls the reference to the universal. The 
society objectivized by sociology is characterized by it firstly by being 
divided into associated and opposed interests, with a multiplicity of special 
strategies arranged around the principle of the specificity of their own 
calculation. And man in the human sciences loses transcendental power 
and is reduced to the ineradicable particularity of his conditioning. The 
social space is henceforth constituted in such a manner as to accept nothing 
external to itself, and on the other hand to be animated by perpetual 
movement. Nothing can any longer claim identity for itself. Everything 
changes, unceasingly. The social bond can no longer have the form of an 
original contract, whose terms would be invariable; these terms can only 
be continually negotiated and renegotiated. Moreover, it is no longer 
necessary to make the assumption of a contract. Men are bound to them-
selves, through a network of solidarity on which they depend and from 
which they draw their identity. 
The consequence of this epistemological position is that it ruins the 
possibility of the universal. Values are only ever particular, and any value 
seeking to take on universality would ipso facto be denounced for seeking 
to dominate. The way in which the developing countries find themselves 
constrained, in order to assert their identity, to denounce the particularity 
of a principle so obvious for us as pacta sunt servanda exemplifies this issue. 
The present day is marked by the end of the way of articulating the 
universal and the particular which the theoreticians of modern natural law, 
from Grotius to Kant, were able to formulate: anyone today seeking to 
base a doctrine of the Rights of Man on a theory of natural law would 
ipso facto invalidate it. The present situation is marked by the fact that 
those values that might hitherto have seemed the most unequivocal have 
become problematic and are the object of division and conflict as to their 
interpretation. In short, what had right into the 19th century remained the 

The Law of Law 
45 
basis for the possibility of law — a doctrine of justice, of natural rights 
and duties — has in our present situation become the principle of its own 
destruction. 
With social law, the demand for justice has become a threat to the law. 
This is the irreducible problem any philosophy of law has today to face. 
It is one of the paradoxes of social law that the reference that it originally 
took contains its own destruction. Hence the need, assumed by Kelsen, to 
think about law without justice. Positivism is the theory of social law; the 
only theory that makes it possible as law. This has no doubt not been 
sufficiently stressed: the Pure Theory is the theory of law in the epoch of 
social law. 
The second characteristic of social law, of the jurisdiction of social law, 
is that it is a law that must find the conditions for its own possibility, for 
the objectivity of its rule of judgement, within itself. It cannot be within 
a doctrine of natural law, as we have just seen; nor in the legislator's will. 
Both because the latter, sociologically, always proclaims itself particular: it 
is never more than the will of a majority, the expression of a social group 
that has (for better or worse) secured a position of domination. Thus, 
the legislator's will, no longer subject to a transcendental reference and 
proclaiming itself to be a particular will, cannot yet be treated as legal 
unless it becomes bound by rules, by a law, specifically by a law of law, 
which must itself be social. Where then, in the new situation, is one to 
find the conditions for formulating a law capable of limiting the henceforth 
omnipotent will of the legislator? 
I pointed out just now how jurists had become aware of sociology's 
inability to supply them with the regulatory principle they were seeking. 
There have been other theoretical attempts: the Germans, perhaps already 
on the path of autopoiesis, advocated the self-limitation of the State. This 
solution clearly offered few guarantees, since only the State had the power 
to self-limit itself (cf. Duguit, 1924: 644). The search was then made from 
the angle of comparative law for the formulation of a "common law of 
humanity" (civilized humanity, implicitly) (cf. Saleilles, 1900). One can 
imagine the difficulty of the endeavor in the situation following the First 
World War, marked as we too well know by the formation of the totalitarian 
States. The solution could only be positivist, though it seems apparent that 
positivism states itself to be radically incapable of giving it. Did not Kelsen 
himself state that "any content can be legal" (Kelsen, 1962)? In these 
circumstances, one can understand how the formation of the jurisdiction 
of social law might have seemed threatening to law, encouraging impossible 
endeavors to reformulate a natural law, the premises of which were now 
being sought for in St. Thomas.3 
3 The first series of Archives de pbilosophie du droit et de sociologie juridique, from 1931 to 
the war, is ample evidence of this "return" to St. Thomas. 

46 
Francois Ewald 
It was for practice to find the solution that the theory had been unable 
to supply. It is particularly interesting in the autopoietic perspective: it is, 
namely, the practice of the general principles of law. At the international 
level, the practice was invented to make the Nuremberg Tribunal possible. 
What had to be judged were crimes against humanity, a charge formulated 
specially for the case, in breach of the right of man whereby "no one may 
be punished except according to a law established and formulated prior to 
the offense" (Article 8 of the "Declaration of the Rights of Man and 
Citizen", 26 August 1789). Accordingly, the accusation, till then unformu-
lated, had in some way to subsist in a latent state, consubstantial with the 
existence of humanity itself. The rule had not been invented for the needs 
of the case; it merely rendered explicit a "principle", more or less as Prince 
Charming awakens Snow White, who has been waiting only for him in 
order to be what she is. An operation of this kind inevitably rebounded 
upon the framework of domestic law. To maintain the legal tradition 
trampled underfoot during the war, lo and behold, there were discovered, 
even in the absence of texts and in the lacunae of law, principles in the 
name of which even the acts of the legislator could be condemned. The 
practice has since considerably developed, particularly with the setting up 
of Supreme Courts with the responsibility of verifying the constitutionality 
of the laws. In my vocabulary, the practice of general principles is character-
istic of the jurisdiction of social law; it is the way in which the law of law 
is formulated there. 
The general principles of law cannot be confused with the text of the 
Declarations of Rights. Firstly, because the first characteristic of principles 
is that they are not formulated in a text. The judge "discovers" them in 
the silence of the law — they are like the white space between the lines. 
But above all, it is because the principles do not refer to any natural law, 
since they do not rest on any philosophical doctrine. The general principles 
of law have no other support than the positive practices of law themselves. 
They are neither superior nor anterior to law. They are law itself, reflecting 
on itself on the basis of its own tradition. They are not timeless. They do 
not remain identical to themselves. Their power lies on the contrary in the 
flexibility of their identity, their stability, their mobility. The general 
principles of law are a way for the law to bind itself, to preserve its identity 
while being receptive to change. By the general principles of law, the 
positive law binds itself only to itself, to its own positivity. Thus, one 
discovers how there may in practice be, in the positivity of law itself, the 
possibility of a law of law. Thus, with the practice of the general principles 
of law, one enters the phase of critical positivism, of a positivism that finds 
within itself the conditions of its own internal critique. It is in the form 
of the general principles of law that the essential reflexivity of law is 
practiced in the epoch of social law. 

The Law of Law 
47 
I imagine that the proponents of autopoiesis will see in the general 
principles of law a remarkably autopoietic practice. Perhaps it is. But if it 
is, this also has the effect of particularizing the doctrine. For this practice 
of the general principles of law is absolutely not a practice of law itself, 
but only of the particular law that social law is. What in France is called 
"droit civil" (civil law) cannot have any kind of practice such as that of 
general principles. It characterizes only a certain type of jurisdiction and 
not all possible jurisdiction. 
III. The Tautological Condemnation 
Let us accept that autopoiesis finds its validity as a theory of social law. I 
wish in closing to consider two further points. Firstly, whether autopoiesis 
may be anything other than a theory of social law, whether it may be valid 
as a general theory of law; secondly, whether autopoiesis may be the venue 
that social law needs for its own regulation. Is autopoiesis capable of 
playing a role similar to the one the Pure Theory was able to play at its 
time with respect to the positive practices of law? In short, can autopoiesis 
be the mode of reflection of law upon itself that a critical positivism would 
be? 
The autopoiesis approach formulates, in new language, what Aristotle 
showed, very long ago, in his Politics. Our legal tradition begins with 
Aristotle, when he introduces the distinction between legal justice and 
particular justice (Villey, 1978: 55). That is to say when he distinguishes 
law and legality. Aristotle explains that while legal justice is bound up with 
respect for the law, particular justice is bound up with the principle of 
equality: a judgement is not legal, is not a just judgement, unless it treats 
equals as equals. The problem is as follows: if one starts from individuals — 
and one can only start from individuals, since it is the existence of a rule 
of justice alone that makes community possible — there is no possibility 
for men ever to agree on a rule, on a common measure, that would enable 
them to treat themselves from the viewpoint of equality. In fact, says 
Aristotle, "Everyone is a bad judge of himself', everyone tends to assert 
what distinguishes himself from others — a specific difference which is 
never relative except to one criterion — as being an overall superiority. 
Moreover, how could one judge oneself well in one's relationship to others 
as long as there existed no reference for this judgement, no rule recognized 
as objective (Aristotle, Politics, III 1280 a)? This is the problem of law: if 
one abandons the Platonic position that reciprocates and identifies right 
and law, law and legality, law and commandment, for an approach that 
seeks to generate the rule of law from individuals themselves, one is 
confronted with insurmountable difficulties. The rule of justice, the com-
mon measure, is possible only on condition of supposing itself itself. Its 

48 
Fran5ois Ewald 
supposed presence is necessary in order to get out of a solipsism which 
would otherwise be radical. 
Aristotle states that if there is no logical solution to the problem of the 
origin of law and of the objectivity of judgement by oneself of oneself 
and of others, this problem nevertheless is given a practical solution, 
demonstrated by the actual existence of communities (Aristotle, Nicomachean 
Ethics, Book V, Chapt. V). He gives the example of money. Nobody ever 
decided on the value of goods and of merchandise; the practice of com-
merce, however, the existence of money, are there to prove that the problem 
of the common measure does have a practical solution. In saying this, 
Aristotle is stating that the question of the origin or foundation of law has 
no meaning, no possible solution; law is always presupposed (if it exists); 
there is no law that does not precede itself. 
Thus, Aristotle defined what is and will remain the problem of law in 
the Western tradition: the problem of the objectivity of judgement by 
oneself of oneself, the problem of the common measure, the problem of 
just judgement. This position had two consequences. The first is that it 
posed the question of law as a critical question in relation to legality. Law 
is not on the side of power, of constraint, of commandment; it states no 
rule of conduct. That is part of legality. Law is, on the contrary, the 
question asked of legality, in some sense of any possible legality: on what 
conditions is a legality legal? On what condition can a legality, in a given 
historical situation, for a particular community, act as a common measure? 
Law does not, properly speaking, designate any normative content; it is 
the critical question asked of legality, the venue in which the question is 
raised of the objectivity of judgement, that is of a common measure. This 
Aristotelian position on law radically distinguishes it from morality, from 
the problems of good and evil, of what ought to be done or not; it makes 
a problem of logic, or better, a problem of transcendental logic. 
No doubt, the fact that in our legal experience we have acquired the 
habit of linking the problem of the objectivity of judgement with the 
question of sovereignty and the legislator's will as the general will has led 
to a confusion of law and legality, and to making the very existence of a 
legality into the sign of the existence of law. But this is at the cost of 
making it impossible to distinguish, for instance, between Western law and 
so-called socialist law. If the West is characterized by maintaining the 
question of law as a critical question asked of legality, socialist "law", 
which rejects the question, is in fact nothing but pure and simple legality, 
legality without law. In practice, while law and legality are confounded in 
the rule of law, law and legality answer two different questions which it 
is important to distinguish. If the problem of legality is: Here is what you 
must do, then the problem of law can be formulated: Here is how you 
will be judged. 

The Law of Law 
49 
In the second place, the Aristotelian position on law leads to concluding 
that the Law does not exist, because the conditions for the objectivity of 
judgement 
by oneself of oneself cannot remain identical to themselves 
throughout history. The particularity of legal systems and legal experiences 
refers back to a necessity of law itself. There is no meaning in trying to 
speak of law in general; it is a necessary consequence of the autopoiesis of 
law. Autopoiesis has no meaning as a theory of law unless it is speaking 
about a particular legal system. It has meaning only as a theory of social 
law. The autopoietic position necessarily leads it to limiting itself. 
I now come to my second question: Does autopoiesis supply an adequate 
theory of social law? Is it capable of being that element of reflection of 
law upon itself that will enable it to answer the question of the objectivity 
of judgement and thus might serve it as a guiding principle? Can autopoiesis 
act as a critique of the legality of social law? 
To the very extent that autopoiesis seeks to develop in the traditional 
form of a theory of law, it will render itself incapable of fulfilling that role. 
The situation of social law in fact prohibits the law of law from taking on 
the form of a theory. The problem that social law poses to the philosophy 
of law is to know how objectivity of judgement is possible that does not 
espouse a form of universality. It has in fact been seen that in the situation 
of social law any universal statement immediately proclaims itself as particu-
lar. An objectivity without universality? This may well seem a theoretical 
impossibility. And autopoiesis, which remains a theory, is constrained, 
faced with this problem, to seek the solution in a sort of exacerbated 
formalism, in a logic that can do nothing but apply itself to devoiding 
itself of all content. For it knows very well that any content would 
immediately invalidate it. On the one hand, autopoiesis finds in the situation 
of social law the conditions for its possibility and validity; but because it 
wants to be theory, it dissolves its particularity instead of laying claim to 
it, in an empty schematism which it sees itself constrained to indefinitely 
repeat. Because it wishes to take on the form of theory, autopoiesis is 
condemned to the indefinite circularity of a formulation that refers back 
to its own statement which itself refers back to its statement, as in the 
famous paradox of Epimenides the Cretan. It is unceasingly condemned to 
affirm A = A, because Α φ A. This may well remind one of certain images 
of the Hegelian consciousness, sustaining themselves indefinitely on the 
giddiness of their own idealism. 
How can one do anything else, one will ask? Must one abandon the idea 
that there is no law in a law of law, the thesis of the self-reflexivity of law? 
Certainly not, since it is constitutive of our legal experience. One should 
merely understand that in the epoch of social law, it cannot take the form 
of theory. Specifically, in the age of social law, the philosophy of law must 
conceive of itself and develop in a critical form, that is, a resolutely 
atheoretical one. 
Translated from the French by Iain Fraser. 

50 
Frangois Ewald 
Bibliography 
ALTHUSSER, LOUIS (1967) "Sur le 'Contrat Social'", Cahierspour 
ΐAnalyse. 
Paris: Travaux 
du Cercle d'epistemologie de l'Ecole Normale Superieure. 
DUGUIT, LEON (1924) Tratte de Droit Constitutionnel. 
Paris: De Boccard. 
E W A L D , FRANCOIS (1986 a) L!Etat-providence. 
Paris: Bernard Crasset. 
— (1986 b) "Pour un positivisme critique: Michel Foucault et la philosophic du droit", 
3 Droits: Revue fran^aise de theorie juridique 
137. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
HAURIOU, M A U R I C E (1926) Police juridique et fond du droit. Paris: Librairie du Recueil Sirey. 
KELSEN, HANS ( 1 9 6 7 ) Pure Theory of Law. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
O S T , FRANCOIS ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Juge-pacificateur, juge-arbitre, juge-entraineur: trois modeles de 
justice", Fonction de Juger et Pouvoir Judiciaire. 
Bruxelles: Presses Universitaires de la 
Faculte Saint-Louis. 
SALEILLES, RAYIMOND (1900) "Conception et objet de la science du droit compare", Congres 
International 
de droit compare, Paris. 
SAUSSURE, 
FERDINAND 
DE (1955) "La valeur linguistique" (Ch. IV, Part 1), Cours de 
Linguistique 
Generale. Paris: Payot. 
VILLEY, M I C H E L (1978) Philosophie 
du droit. Paris: Dalloz. 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY 
Paris 
"Validity is circularity" 
Niklas Luhmann 
I. Ideas and their Destiny 
My approach to the subject matter of this paper is one that could be 
subsumed under a genre that we might call the ecology of ideas. What is 
at issue is less the validity of ideas than the way in which they are born, 
circulate, take root in areas different from their place of origin and finally 
take on new, and sometimes unexpected, forms. 
The theory of autopoiesis is the work of two Chilean biologists trained 
in cybernetics: Humberto Maturana and Francisco Varela. It was exported 
into the milieu of German sociology where it appears that the graft enjoyed 
great success. Thanks to the combined efforts of researchers like Hejl, 
Luhmann, Teubner and others, a new sociological and legal paradigm was 
born which continues to develop in an impressive manner. 
The situation in France is quite different. It is clear that in France, the 
theory of autopoiesis is far from unknown. It has already given rise to 
numerous debates within the biological and philosophical communities and 
among specialists in cognitive science, artificial intelligence and in the social 
sciences (Dumouchel and Dupuy, 1983). The terrain is, in fact, so favorable 
that Varela, having decided to leave his own country, decided to settle in 
ours (and more precisely, in my center of research, the CREA). There has 
not, however, been, as in Germany, the construction of a complete sociolog-
ical theory which, though certainly inspired by the ideas of the Chilean 
school of neuroscience, is largely autonomous of them. Legal autopoieticists 
refer to the autopoietic systems of Luhmann. There is no Niklas Luhmann 
in France and when we mention the theory of autopoiesis, it is to the 
original model of Maturana and Varela that we are referring. At least three 
reasons seem to me to explain the differences between our two countries 
concerning the reception of these ideas: 
a) In France, there is a strong and long-standing distrust of any use of 
biological models in the social sciences (see for example Nerhot, infra). 

52 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
b) No doubt for contingent reasons, the theory of autopoiesis has pen-
etrated Germany through the ideas of Maturana and France through the 
ideas of Varela. Now, there are important differences between the respective 
approaches of these two founding fathers. Maturana's could be seen as 
being more radical and essentialist. For Varela, autopoiesis is more a point 
of view on an object than an intrinsic quality of it. Varela insists on the 
complementarity between autonomy as a point of view and the more 
traditional approach of control. I note in passing that Varela would never 
speak of an autopoietic social system. One condition necessary for auto-
poiesis (accepted long ago by Maturana) is the existence of a material, 
spatial-temporal boundary produced by the system itself. This does not 
mean that Varela refuses to extend the fundamental idea of operational 
closure to society. But, concerning these extensions of the biological notion, 
he prefers to speak of autonomous systems. This is the terminology that I will 
most often use. 
c) It seems to me that in France we are more sensitive than in Germany 
to the fact that the theory of autopoiesis is not something invented ex 
nihilo but that it is rooted in a history and, above all, that it is not isolated. 
The common trunk of cybernetics has given rise to at least another 
conception of the autonomy of the living being: the model of "self-
organization", founded on the principle of "order from noise". The basic 
idea goes back to von Foerster (von Foerster, 1960); it has since been taken 
up, transformed and developed in great depth by our colleague and friend, 
the Franco-Israeli biologist, Atlan (Atlan, 1979). In addition, there is 
another paradigm of auto-organization, born in the field of physical chemis-
try around the work of Prigogine and the Brussels school (Nicolis and 
Prigogine, 1977). The ensemble of these concepts, models and paradigms 
constitutes a complex and conflicting picture: we are aware of its diversity 
and its nuances which prevent our establishing too radical a vision of its 
identity. In particular, we have recently undertaken the project of retracing 
the history of these various schools of thought and of their intertwined 
trails. It became evident as we worked on this history that it is, in general, 
very little known (Cahier du CREA, 1985). 
Concerning the social sciences, I would like to say a word about what 
has been my attitude up to this point. Rather than seek to apply these ideas 
stemming from biology and the science of complex machines to human 
affairs, I asked myself if there weren't already implicit within theories on 
society (from political philosophy to the positive sciences of man and 
society such as economics, sociology and anthropology) models proper to 
each of these disciplines which embody the idea that in these domains it 
is necessary to think in terms of operational closure. These models exist; 
we have shown that. Hence it is interesting and fruitful to look at the way 
in which they have situated themselves in relation to competing models in 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
53 
the social sciences and to compare it with the debates that the concept of 
autopoiesis and the different models of self-organization have incurred in 
the "hard" sciences. These two types of debates could, in fact, be of mutual 
benefit and it is this vein that I would now like to pursue. To this point 
I have concentrated on two highly contrasting visions of society: theories 
on the crowd (Dupuy, 1983) and the idea of society as a "global market": 
here I refer to the tradition of the "invisible hand", to the "liberal" 
vision of society. In the course of this paper I will refer to two current 
representatives of this tradition: the "neo-liberals", Nozick and Hayek. I 
think that in a discussion such as ours it is impossible not to speak of 
Hayek, not only because he conceived of society and law in terms of a 
closed system but also because he has long been a fellow enthusiast of 
theories of self-organization. He was invited by von Foerster to one of 
the three famous 1960's conferences on "self-organizing systems" and he 
participated, along with Bartalanffy, Weiss and Waddington, in the Alpbach 
Symposium of 1969, organized by Koestler, on the theme: "Beyond Reduc-
tionism". Rosenblatt, in conceiving his famous "Perceptron", one of the 
first attempts to construct an "autonomous machine", recognized the 
influence of Hayek (Rosenblatt, 1962). His "spontaneous social orders" 
have become, in today's interdisciplinary conferences, the companion of 
the autopoietic systems of Maturana and Varela and of the "dissipative 
structures" of Prigogine. 
Before beginning an examination of the models of Nozick and Hayek 
and attempting a comparison with Luhmann's approach (i. e., the closure 
of normative systems), I would like to make several points about certain 
concepts that are fundamental to the theory of autonomous systems. 
1. The Relation to Cybernetics: 
It is important here to alleviate a misunderstanding. The different theories 
of self-organization are surely the descendants of cybernetics but this 
kinship does not preclude an antagonistic relationship. Not only do cy-
bernetic notions of control, information, program and even feedback not 
belong to the theory of autonomous systems, they actually run counter to 
notions instituted by this latter theory. This is why many of the criticisms 
that Arnaud and other French researchers leveled at the theory of society 
and law as autopoietic systems seem to me to be unfounded. If there is 
one temptation to avoid like a trap, it is not the "biocybernetic temptation". 
Cybernetics was born in 1943 with the independent publication of two 
founding articles: "Behavior, Purpose and Teleology" by Rosenblueth, 
Wiener and Bigelow and "A Logical Calculus of the Ideas Immanent in 
Nervous Activity" by McCulloch and Pitts. Between the two of them, 
these articles purported to succeed in reducing the principal functions of 
the mind: i. e., will, perception, thought, memory and even consciousness, 

54 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
to the operation of a mechanism, — supposedly in the form of a brain. 
This mechanism takes the form of a computational input-output machine, 
of which the archetype is the Universal Turing machine. All totalities will be 
treated by cyberneticians according to this same model, be they ecosystems, 
human societies, ant colonies, living organisms, neural networks or the 
famous cybernetic "animals", — rats, turtles, etc. Artificial 
totalities, then, 
in which the elements are anterior to the whole; nominal 
totalities which 
can only be completed by the organizing consciousness of a third party, in 
this case the cybernetician, as he perceives and conceives of them. 
Very early on, however, this cybernetic conception of totalities is attacked 
using arguments which presage current theories on autonomous systems. 
From the point of view of the history of ideas, it is deliciously ironic to 
see cybernetics being indicted in this way by a school of thought which 
will then be nourished by the contributions of its descendants. These 
criticisms stem from Gestalt psychologists, neurophysiologists of the "holis-
tic" school and especially by the embryologist, Paul Weiss, whose role in 
this story is fundamental. (The most heated moment in this controversy 
will be the Hixon Symposium in 1948.) Weiss demanded that one distin-
guish between "machines" and "systems", the latter being, of course, non-
artificial, non-nominal totalities. (They exist in nature and are not only 
intellectual constructions.) For all that, they are not substances. We thereby 
already have two of the characteristics that Deggau assigns to "the unity 
of the autopoietic system: "...it can be conceived neither as ontological in 
the sense of something 'given', nor as simply a scientific construction. It 
is neither an objective nor a subjective unity". The approach that Weiss 
advocated is not to be seen as reductionist nor as holistic. To the notion 
of processing information by an input-output machine, he opposes the 
autonomy 
of the system, already conceived of as informational closure. In 
place of reductionism, which provides itself with already constituted ele-
ments and deduces from them the properties of the whole and of holism, 
which does the inverse, he would have us substitute the idea that the whole 
and its elements mutually determine each other. This circular 
causality 
between hierarchic levels which characterizes autonomy in Varela's model 
is, therefore, already present, and it is against cybernetics that it expresses 
itself. It is the exact same property that Luhmann puts so much emphasis 
on in the portrait of what he calls "autopoiesis". ("Even elements, 
that is, 
last components [individuals] which are, at least for the system itself, 
undecomposable, are produced by the system itself") (Luhmann, 1985 a: 4). 
Another criticism, no less radical, directed at cybernetics will come from 
von Neumann (expressed for the first time also at the Hixon Symposium 
of 1948). To have shown that psychic functions are computable by a 
cybernetic automaton is a decisive result, he concedes, but it has no 
value unless one knows how to characterize the behavior in question, 
independently of the structure which is capable of producing it. However, 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
55 
von Neumann surmised that in the case of complex structures there is no 
simpler means of defining the behavior than to give oneself the structure. 
The complex automaton has no model simpler than itself. Therefore we 
see that this notion of complexity for which von Neumann correctly 
predicted a great future is intimately linked to that of self-reference. Today, 
the theory of algorithms (Martin-Löff, Chaitin, etc.) has taken up von 
Neumann's definition: any being is complex whose information is incom-
pressible: there is no program simpler than itself that would be capable of 
generating it. It is also through complexity that one defines the randomness 
of an object (but that should not surprise us if we remember that for 
Aristotle automaton signified chance). I note in passing that Luhmann 
and his colleagues assign to autopoietic systems the capacity for self-
simplification and self-description. This seems problematic to me. If one 
admits that an autonomous system is ipso facto complex, then there is no 
sub-system able to constitute a model of it or a satisfactory description of 
it. We will see the importance of this point in the theory of Hayek. 
2. The Closure/Openness Dialectic 
From the theory of autopoiesis Luhmann and his colleagues extract the 
profound and difficult idea that the legal system is both open and closed. 
I think that to put some order in the discussion of this question it is 
necessary to distinguish very carefully between three different interpreta-
tions of the dialectic between closure and openness: 
a) The simplest way to present the matter is to attribute closure and 
openness to different domains. As Luhmann reminds us, the Chilean school 
of autopoiesis, following Ashby, insists on the fact that living autopoietic 
systems are "...open to energy but closed to information and control." In 
the same way it may be said that "...the legal system is a normatively 
closed system and at the same time a cognitively open system"; or yet 
again that "...the economic system ... operates openly with respect to 
needs, products, services, etc. and it is closed with respect to payments." 
(Luhmann, 1985 b: 113-14). 
b) Let us concern ourselves only with what Varela calls operational closure 
of the autonomous system. That evidently does not imply that the system 
is cut-off or isolated from its environment. The "closure" is a form of 
opening to the environment by means of which the environment acts on 
the system not by directing information to it (as in the case of cybernetic 
input-output machines) but by means of the perturbations that it inflicts 
on the system's means of closure. This is done in such a way that the 
autonomous system knows its environment in knowing itself. It is this 
idea that Teubner applies to the legal system: "The legal system is forced 
by the uproar outside, by the 'noise' of the economic actors, to vary its 

56 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
internal 'order' until relative quiet returns. ... Self-referentially closed 
systems can attain effects of regulating others only through self-regulation" 
(Teubner, 1987). 
c) The most subtle form of dialectic between closure and openness and 
the most important in relation to the problem which has brought us 
together is that which I will call self-transcendence1, 
or, resorting to an 
analogy with quantum mechanics favored by the Chilean theorists on 
autopoiesis, the bootstrap: that is to say, the exteriorising 
of oneself in relation 
to oneself, the distancing of the self in relation to itself. 
I know that this idea seems to have been rejected by Luhmann (1985 a: 
12) and this is precisely what should be one of the central points of our 
discussion. Luhmann refers to an argument by Hofstadter, who asserts that 
it is impossible for a program to be capable of "...jumping out of itself': 
"No matter how a program twists and turns to get out of itself, it is still 
following the rules inherent in itself'; and he further states: "A computer 
program can modify itself but it cannot violate its own instructions — it 
can at best change some parts of itself by obeying its own instructions" 
(Hofstadter, 1979: 477-78). 
Now it is this argument that has played a crucial role in the history of 
cybernetics and in the birth of theories of self-organization. It is Ashby, in 
fact, who developed it in his famous 1962 article, "Principles of the Self-
Organizing System" and who concluded that: "...no system can correctly 
be said to be self-organizing" (Ashby, 1962). It is, therefore, against this 
argument that the two paradigms of self-organization (the Chilean school 
of autopoiesis and von Foerster and Atlan's principle of order from noise) 
have had to establish themselves. It is therefore odd to see it being evoked 
by researchers who believe in the autonomy of systems. 
Ashby's argument, taken up by Hofstadter, can also be stated like this: 
let us try to make sense of the expression: "A self-programming program." 
We can imagine a game of chess in which the rules depend on the 
configuration of the pieces. But there will always be fixed meta-rules which 
evade the program's capacity for self-reference and which will order the 
variation of the rules depending on the configurations of the pieces. We 
can try to overcome this obstacle by then making the meta-rules also 
depend on the configuration of the pieces but this will be a wasted effort 
as there will be meta-meta-rules which will resist the mastery of program 
over itself. "Pure autonomy" would then be a logical impossibility. We can 
find a trace of this argument in Lempert's otherwise fascinating paper: 
"Complete legal autonomy is, even in theory, unattainable. Law is a 
1 The phrase was used at the Alpbach Symposium "Beyond Reductionism" by Viktor 
Frankl and the idea was taken up by Hayek in reference to Goedel's theorem. 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
57 
normative system and its norms must, at least in the first instance, come 
from somewhere" (Lempert, infra).2 
Now, all of this is concerned specifically with the logic of programs, 
that is to say of artifacts, be they machines, games or formal logical systems. 
In all of these cases, even if there is a system, or, in other words, a 
circularity, the system is programmed, which means that its meaning does 
not belong to itself but is rather the effect of a will which is exterior and 
transcendant to it: the will of he who conceived of the program and who 
put it into effect. 
In the case of a natural (or social) system that has not been fabricated 
by anyone, Ashby's argument becomes invalid. This is what both Atlan 
and Varela, each in his own way, have shown. I will mention here only 
the recent work done by Varela on the existence of "reflexive" domains; 
or, to put it in the terms used earlier, domains for which the level and the 
meta-level are isomorphic to one another. (It is understood that if such 
domains exist, Ashby's argument immediately crumbles.) 
An autonomous system does not get its meaning from an exterior and 
transcendent "meta-level" and yet, given that, we cannot say that it has 
complete mastery of its own meaning. It is because this meaning can 
partially evade it that there can be "self-transcendence". There is no better 
way to clarify this than to return to von Neumann's argument of complex-
ity. In the case of a complex automaton, the complexity of the behavior 
of which it is capable is infinitely superior to that of the automaton itself. 
Although there is nothing in the functioning of the automaton which does 
not originate within itself, everything occurs as if the functioning were 
autonomous in relation to that which generated it.3 
This provides me with a transition into the work of Nozick and Hayek. 
Both are thinkers of the complexity of society before being thinkers of the 
autonomy of society. Belonging to the liberal tradition, the theoretical 
problem which they must face is that of the connection between two forms 
of autonomy, first of all, the autonomy of the individual released from all 
traditional forms of subordination to the sacred or to the State. Then there 
is the autonomy of the social level, which means not that men have mastery 
over society but exactly the opposite: that society evades them, seems to 
be endowed with its own life, foreign to the very men who composed it. 
The latter autonomy is, therefore, in relation to individuals, a heteronomy. 
The paradox is only too evident. 
2 In France, Debray built his Critique de la raison politique on the same logical argument: 
"The government of a collective entity by itself — 'of the people by the people' — 
would be a logically contradictory argument" (Debray, 1981: 264). 
3 The technical argument that von Neumann was thinking of to bolster his intuition 
was later made more precise by Goedel: from the fact of the undecidability of the 
halting problem for a Turing machine there is no simpler way to describe its behavior 
than to enumerate all its possible output (an infinity). 

58 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
Men create their own society, — that is the first autonomy; but they 
know neither what they are doing nor how they are doing it, and that is 
the second autonomy. Here, then, is the paradox, but we instantly note 
that this is the same paradox as that incurred in making an automaton, i. e., 
a being which depends only on itself as the instigator of its movement; or, 
the paradox of being the cause of a being which is the only cause of itself. 
We understand why Hayek was able to find an unexpected source of 
inspiration in theories of self-organization. In both cases it is the principle 
of complexity which resolves the paradox concerning the connection be-
tween the two autonomies. 
That said, the meaning of this insistence on the autonomy of the social 
level remains to be explained. The problem at hand that needs to be 
resolved is without a doubt the key problem of liberal democratic societies: 
how to arrange it so that sovereignty evades the control of men in order 
to preserve liberty. Even Rousseau, one of the kings of constructivism and 
therefore one of the principal enemies of Hayek, was aware of the gravity 
of the question. The ultimate political problem according to him is how 
to put law above men when it is men themselves who have made the law 
and they are aware of this. We recall that he compared this problem to the 
squaring of a circle. 
II. Nozick's Entitlement Theory 
For liberals, it is not only a political problem that the complexity of society 
is supposed to resolve, but also a problem of justice: how to ascribe rights 
with equity (and especially property rights) in the Great Society (Smith) 
or in the Open Society (Popper). 
What is the rapport between the idea of complexity, implying opacity 
and lack of visibility, and the idea of justice, which, on the contrary, one 
ordinarily associates with the transparency of rational debate? The following 
quotation from Hayek answers this question: 
It was the discovery that an order definable only by certain abstract characteristic 
would assist in the pursuit of a great multiplicity of different ends which persuaded 
people pursuing wholly different ends to agree on certain multi-purpose instruments 
which were likely to assist everybody. Such agreement became possible not only in 
spite of but also because of the fact that the particular results it would produce could 
not be foreseen. It is only because we cannot predict the actual result of the adoption 
of a particular rule, that we can assume it to increase everyone's chances equally. That 
it is thus ignorance of the future outcome which makes possible agreement on rules 
which serve as common means for a variety of purposes is recognized by the practice 
in many instances of deliberately making the outcome unpredictable in order to 
make agreement on the procedure possible: whenever we agree on drawing lots we 
deliberately substitute equal chances for the different parties for the certainty as to 
which of them will benefit from the outcome (Hayek, 1976: 4). 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
59 
This is exactly the same idea that Nozick expresses when he writes: "If all 
the people deciding knew the particular distribution that would be yielded 
by [a given principle of justice], they wouldn't agree to it" (Nozick, 1974: 
200). 
To continue, we must insist on one distinction that Rawls (1971: 85) 
takes from Barry (1965: ch. VI): that between pure procedural justice on 
the one hand and perfect and imperfect procedural justice on the other. In 
the latter case, we have at our disposal an independent criterion for what 
is a just state of affairs, "a criterion defined separately from and prior to 
the procedure which is to be followed." Perfect procedural justice obtains 
when it is possible to devise a procedure that is sure to give the just 
outcome. Example: the sharing of a cake. Let us suppose that we consider 
it fair that all get equal portions. Under certain rather evident hypotheses, 
there exists a perfect procedure: he who cuts the cake is he who serves 
himself last. Imperfect procedural justice obtains when there is no such 
procedure which leads infallibly to the sought-after result. Example: a 
criminal trial. We consider it fair that the guilty party be condemned and 
that the innocent be set free, and yet we know that it is impossible to 
avoid judicial errors. 
By way of contrast, in pure procedural justice there is no independent 
criterion which defines the justice of a state of affairs. Instead we define 
the fairness of the procedure and we agree that a state of affairs is just, 
whatever it may be, if: 
i. it is the result of a fair procedure 
ii. this procedure has actually been carried out. 
The importance of clause ii becomes clear if we consider gambling as 
an example. Say that we have agreed on the rules considered fair by all. 
The result, one can see, may turn out in any number of possible ways since 
it is the result of chance, and yet everyone will consider this result just. 
Nevertheless, we can see that it would be fraud to claim that a particular 
result which happens to work to our advantage is the correct one because 
it could have been reached by following a fair procedure. It is an indispensable 
condition that the procedure actually be carried out. 
Both Rawls and Nozick admit that in a complex society, the justice of 
institutions must be defined in terms of pure procedural justice. Nozick 
reproaches Rawls precisely with not respecting this principle which he 
nevertheless claims to take seriously and this because he remains a prisoner 
of the contractualist, and thereby constructivist, framework of his theory 
of justice. 
I will not go any further into the interesting debate between Rawls and 
Nozick. I will concern myself simply with the theory of rights of the latter, 
which he calls Entitlement Theory. This theory illustrates perfectly the 
links between the question of complexity (and of self-transcendence) and 

60 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
that other question which presently concerns us: the operational closure of 
normative systems. 
The merit of Nozick's theory is that it makes obvious the self-referential 
character of pure procedural justice: "Whatever arises from a just situation 
by just steps is itself just" (Nozick, 1914: 151). That is what in logic is 
called a recursive definition: justice defined by justice. It is still necessary to 
provide a criterion for defining these "just steps", what Nozick calls the 
"principle of justice in transfer". This criterion is the liberal criterion par 
excellence·, any transformation (or procedure) is just to which is accorded 
the agreement of all the concerned parties: voluntary exchange, voluntary 
gifts, etc. Here justice is identified with liberty. 
The circularity of this definition of entitlements can be represented in 
this way: 
This circle must, however, be open at its origin: it is certainly necessary 
to define justice at the point of departure. This is what Nozick calls the 
"principle of justice in acquisition." I will not spend too much time on 
this point (Nozick is here elaborating one of Locke's arguments) because 
it is in the nature of complex processes to erase the weight of origins in 
the mists of time. Does the fairness of the division of land in America 
today depend on the original violence which marked the occupation of the 
territory, the expropriation and the extermination of the Indians? I shall 
come back to this point when I compare Hayek and Luhmann. (Nozick 
also has a principle of rectification which deals with cases of past injustices.) 
Can we then characterize those social states which will finally be consid-
ered just? In other words, can we characterize the class of end states which 
result from processes of this type? No, Nozick tells us and it is this no 
that allows him to reject all currently accepted principles of justice (begin-
ning with those of Rawls!) 
Let us first consider all those "end state principles" which look only at 
distribution at a given moment (e. g., those which define justice by equality 
or by the maximization of the share of those who are the worst off, etc.) 
The Entitlement Theory states that the fairness of a social state cannot be 
appreciated unless one knows how this social state came about; it therefore 
recognizes only "historical principles". For example, "the fact that a thief s 
victim voluntarily could have presented him with gifts does not entitle the 
thief to his ill-gotten gains. Justice in holdings is historical; it depends 
upon what actually has happened" (Nozick, 1974: 151 — 52). 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
61 
Most principles of justice are certainly historical but they are also 
"patterned", in that they bring together just distribution with certain 
characteristics of individuals. For example: "To each according to his 
[merit, labor, usefulness to society, etc.]" or: "From each according to his 
[means, etc.]." However, Entitlement Theory is not compatible with any 
pattern. (This is another way of explaining its relationship with complexity, 
i. e., with the impossibility of reducing it to a simple form.) This can be 
easily established. Let us suppose that one has an affinity for a particular 
pattern and let Ε be a state of affairs that satisfies this condition. Within 
E, people choose freely concerning the usage of their holdings. They 
accept, for example, in large majority to pay a high price to see the 
performance of a baseball star or a singer: the new distribution of resources 
will have to be considered just since it arises from a just situation by just 
steps. But it is clear that this new distribution will not continue to respect 
the pattern that one has set as a criterion of justice. It is inevitable that 
"liberty upsets patterns" (Nozick, 1974: 160 — 64). 
It is, therefore, not possible to characterize the social states that would 
be considered as just. The history which leads to them is incompressible. 
(In mathematics and in physics one would say that the process is not 
integrable in a state function.) I mentioned earlier that in our day random-
ness has been defined in just this way: by the incompressibility of the 
information. We must, therefore, recognize that gambling, which serves as 
a privileged example to illustrate the concept of pure procedural justice, 
is, in fact, the only model, as in this case justice is reduced to drawing 
lots. The political necessity of this result is understandable in a de-sacralized 
society. Lacking the exteriority of religion, there remains only one possibil-
ity for exteriority: the arbitrariness of chance, and one form of exteriority 
is necessary if one hopes to keep sovereignty out of the reach of men. 
To make the connection with theoretical developments on autonomy, I 
would now like to show that this exteriority of complexity (or of chance) 
takes the form not of transcendence but of self-transcendence. 
To this end, it 
suffices to take seriously the parallel which Nozick established between the 
justice-preserving transformations in his Entitlement Theory and the truth-
preserving transformations in a formal system in logic ("Any conclusion 
deduced via repeated applications of truth-preserving rules of inference 
from only true premises is itself true"). Unfortunately, Nozick himself 
doesn't believe strongly enough in the value of his analogy. In fact, he 
immediately adds: "That a conclusion could have been deduced by truth-
preserving means from premises that are true suffices to show its truth. 
That from a just situation a situation could have arisen via justice-preserving 
means does not suffice to show its justice" (Nozick, 1974: 151) and this is 
because pure procedural justice requires that the transformation actually 
take place. 

62 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
This is true, but the difference is not so great if one poses the question 
in slightly different terms. Nozick is wrong, as is Hayek, in underestimating 
the possibilities of deductive reason (Hayek: "The 'radical doubt' which 
made [Descartes] refuse to accept anything as true which could not be 
logically derived from explicit premises that were 'clear and distinct', and 
therefore beyond possible doubt, deprived of validity all those rules of 
conduct which could not be justified in this manner") (Hayek, 1973: 10). 
A Descartes coming after Gödel and Turing would know this. Let there 
be a formal system, i.e., a set of premises considered to be true and of 
truth-preserving rules of inference. Let there be any given sentence. We 
then enquire whether it is possible to prove this sentence in the formal 
system under consideration. 
Although everything here is given and functions as a mechanism, the 
answer to this question is not generally decidable. More precisely, it is only 
semi-decidable. If the proposition is, in fact, provable, one will find it out 
sooner or later by mechanically unfolding the ensemble of provable sen-
tences (or theorems); if it is not, one may never find this out by mechanical 
means. In other words, it is necessary to have actually followed a path 
leading from the premises to the given sentence in order to be able to be 
sure that it is provable. We are then not far from the case of pure procedural 
justice. 
This result is prodigious. (In technical terms: The set of values taken 
by a recursive function is not, in general, recursive. Its complexity therefore 
transcends that of the function which engendered it. I might mention again 
that "recursive" can be understood as: that of which the definition is self-
referentially closed.) It means that, in general, a (Turing) machine is not 
really up to the level of its own output; the complexity of the output goes 
beyond that of the machine. This is just the case of self-transcendence such 
as we defined it using von Neumann's criticism of cybernetics. 
One can easily imagine that Nozick's theory will lead into a justification 
of laissez-faire. Law in this theory appears as an emergent effect produced 
by the mechanisms of the unfettered free market. 
Many criticisms could be directed at Nozick's system. I will concentrate 
on just one here because it illustrates not that Nozick overuses the theme 
of complexity but that, on the contrary, he doesn't follow his logic to its 
end. 
Simplicity can engender complexity; that is one of Nozick's principle 
messages ("Though the resulting set of holdings will be unpatterned, it 
will not be incomprehensible, for it can be seen as arising from the 
operation of a small number of principles: the principle of acquisition of 
holdings and the principle of transfer of holdings. The process whereby 
the set of holdings is generated will be intelligible, though the set of 
holdings itself that results from this process will be unpatterned") (Nozick, 
1974: 157 — 58). Each step is decidable and yet the global result isn't. 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
63 
Nozick doesn't for a moment think that this paradoxical reversal could 
just as easily occur when the question concerns liberty. Each step is a free 
and voluntary transfer between the few agents concerned. How and with 
what justification could the third parties oppose such an arrangement when 
it doesn't even concern them? Nozick acknowledges implicitly, as if it were 
self-evident, that this common sense remark could be applied with no 
problem to the entire process. In doing so he also falls into simplism. 
Let us take the following example4: three agents, A, Β and C each 
possess a certain amount of the same two goods. Their "satisfaction index" 
is the product of the quantities of the two goods they possess. The 
breakdown of goods in the initial stage is as follows: 
Initial Stage 
A: (0,2) 
B: (1,1) 
C: (1,1) 
Satisfaction 
O
i
l 
We then go on to an intermediate stage: 
Intermediate Stage 
A: (1/4, 1/2) 
B: (3/4, 5/2) 
C: (1,1) 
Satisfaction 
1/8 
15/8 
1 
The modification was accomplished through an exchange between A and 
Β in which Β gave up 1 /4 of the first commodity in exchange for 3/2 of 
the second. This exchange was to the advantage of both parties and did 
not adversely affect the third party, C. 
We now move on to the the final stage: 
Final Stage 
A: (1/4, 1/2) 
B: (1,2) 
C: (3/4, 3/2) 
Satisfaction 
1/8 
2 
9/8 
This second modification occurred through an exchange between Β and 
C in which Β gave up 1/2 of the second commodity in exchange for 1/4 
of the first. This exchange was to the benefit of both parties and did not 
in any way affect the third party, A. 
If the initial stage is just (according to the principle of justice in 
acquisition) then the final stage must be as well according to Nozick's 
theory: the three agents are entitled to possess the corresponding quantities. 
One can show that the final state possesses the following property: starting 
from this point, there is no exchange which makes someone better off 
without making someone else worse off; all possibilities for mutually 
advantageous exchanges have been exhausted. We can call this a "stable 
allocation". All paths which constitute possible histories according to 
Nozick end up in such stable allocations. 
Now then, I believe there is one criterion which allows us to state that 
in the example just considered the end result is unjust. And this criterion 
is perfectly within the spirit of Nozick's principle of justice in transfer, a 
4 I am borrowing here from Malinvaud (1975: 162—63). 

64 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
principle which leads him to assimilate justice and liberty. In accepting B's 
offer of exchange which leads from the initial stage to the intermediate 
stage, A carries out an operation in apparent freedom, which is to his own 
benefit. In fact, one can see that in so doing he gives up his freedom. In 
reality, this exchange denies him henceforth the possibility of carrying out 
an exchange with C, an exchange which would have been much more to 
his (and to C's) advantage. If A and C had joined their resources in the 
initial stage they might, in fact, have been able to end up with the following 
allocation of goods: 
The existence of this possibility establishes that, in theory, the "coalition" 
formed by A and C should veto the realization of the final stage. It is then 
said that the final state does not belong to the "core" of the economy. 
(The core is composed of all the possible states which are vetoed by no 
coalition.) One can legitimately consider, within the very spirit of Nozick's 
philosophy, that any state that does not belong to the core is unjust, 
because it has globally reduced the liberty of certain agents while the opposite 
seems to be true. It is a fundamental result of game theory applied to 
economics that if there are many agents the core of the economy is much 
smaller than the set of all stable allocations. 
To sum up: Although they are recursive, i. e., self-referentially closed, 
the processes imagined by Nozick to justify the emergence of rights are 
not productive of a sufficient complexity. They do not prevent the existence 
of at least one criterion, if not of justice at least of injustice, on the level 
of end states. 
III. Law and Legislation: Comparing Hayek and Luhmann 
In the biological theory of autopoiesis, it is very important not to mistake 
one level for another in treating a set of elements as an autonomous system, 
i. e., as operationally closed, when they are not and are, in fact, only a 
component of a true autonomous system. For the theoreticians of the 
Chilean School, this is exactly the trap that molecular biology has fallen 
into when it treats the genome as a program. This cybernetic metaphor is 
unacceptable because the first of the autopoietic systems in the make-up 
of the levels of a living system is the cell in its entirety. At first view, this 
is exactly the same criticism that any of Hayek's disciples would direct at 
Luhmann's theory. Treating the legal system as an autopoietic system would 
be the same error as believing in the operational closure of the genome 
(we know very well that if the genome is a "program" it needs its own 
output in order to be run!) but here we must look a bit closer. 
A: 
Satisfaction 
(1/4, 1) 
1/4 
C: (3/4, 2) 
3/2 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
65 
In Hayek we find the same ideas of complexity and of the "bootstrap" 
(self-transcendence) as in Nozick but expanded into an ambitious global 
theory of society and law. The social order is guided by reference points 
which issue from it but which are nonetheless "exterior" to the individuals 
composing this social order, in the sense that not only do individuals lack 
the means of controlling them, they are often totally unaware of their 
existence. 
These reference points take the form of institutions and rules which 
result from habit, tradition and culture. They allow us to benefit from 
knowledge that we don't possess. This knowledge is constituted by rules 
and it cannot be controlled by anyone. These rules which we don't know 
allow us to adapt to facts that we know no better because they are too 
complex. The "knowledge" at question here is evidently at the opposite 
pole of that for which Descartes set the forms ("ideas that are clear and 
distinct," etc.). It is unexplicit, unconscious, embodied in the mind and 
not produced by it: "The mind does not so much make rules as consist 
of 
rules of action" (Hayek, 1973: 18). "We can make use of so much experience, 
not because we possess that experience, but because without our knowing 
it, it has become incorporated in the schemata of thought which guide us" 
(1973: 30—31). Just think of the way in which children learn the syntax 
of their language. Rules, though unconscious, are known, to the degree 
that they can be recognized. 
A few words on the principal categories of Hayek: the social order is 
"spontaneous"; according to Adam Ferguson it is the "result of human 
action but not of human design". We must distinguish between two kinds 
of laws: abstract rules, or rules of just conduct, which favor the emergence 
of the spontaneous order and which constitute the nomos, and laws which 
have been made, or "set", or "posited" by authority (statute), — what he 
calls thesis. 
The important point in what concerns us is the link with the problem 
of normative closure and self-transcendence. For Hayek, it is the social 
order in its entirety (kosmos) and in the fullness of time which makes up 
the most "elementary" (if we can use that word) autopoietic system. The 
accumulated knowledge which it incorporates and which is embodied in 
the rules of just conduct {nomos) is not transcendent in relation to individ-
uals: Hayek rejects the traditional conception of natural law being a 
transcendent and eternal law, issuing from the Gods and yet his theoretical 
system is not a historicism which would lead him to identify "is" with 
"ought". The hermeneutic work on tradition provides the means with 
which to criticize certain elements of it. At first this seems paradoxical but 
the paradox is precisely that of self-transcendence: 
It may at first seem puzzling that something that is the product of tradition should 
be capable of both being the object and the standard of criticism...but the basis of 
criticism of any one product of tradition must always be other products of tradition 

66 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
which we either cannot or do not want to question... Thus we can always examine 
a part of the whole only in terms of that whole which we cannot entirely reconstruct 
and the greater part of which we must accept unexamined" (Hayek, 1973: 25, Vol. 2). 
What is the place of thesis in this hosmos? Even as he rejects the idea of a 
transcendent natural law, Hayek equally and forcefully rejects legal positiv-
ism which identifies justice with the law. Now, this double refusal, which 
marks Hayek's theoretical system as being highly original, is something 
which he shares with Luhmann. It does seem to me, however, that the 
reasons for which one and the other reject Kelsen's doctrine are very 
different. In Luhmann's case it is because the will of a legislator cannot 
possibly be the foundation for law when law can locate its foundation only 
within itself. In Hayek's case, it is because he feels that to believe that 
spontaneous social order is the result of someone's will is to fall into a 
primitive anthropomorphism which assumes that all regularity must neces-
sarily proceed from an intention. 
It appears that Luhmann retains from legal positivism the idea that the 
justice of the law is not to be sought beyond the legal system. For Hayek, 
the justice of thesis is to be found in nomos because, historically and logically, 
nomos precedes thesis·. "Law is older than legislation." This means that the 
universe of thesis, i. e., the legal system, is in no way normatively closed. 
It is, from this point of view, totally subordinated to nomos, to the rule of 
opinion". 
The authority of the legislator always rests...on something which must be clearly 
distinguished from an act of will on a particular matter in hand, and can therefore 
also be limited by the source from which it derives its authority. This source is a 
prevailing 
opinion that the legislator is authorized only to prescribe what is right, where 
this opinion refers not to the particular content of the rule but to the general attributes 
which any rule of just conduct must possess...all power rests on, and is limited by, 
opinion... (Hayek, 1973: 92, Vol. 1). 
The law is only that which makes explicit the just order, spontaneously 
created: it is its creative fomulation. It is something discovered and not 
made. The fundamental error of legal positivism, according to Hayek, is 
to conclude from the fact that the norm becomes valid only through its 
enactment by political authority that the content of the norm is created by 
that authority. Obviously we note that Luhmann too could be implicated 
under this criticism. 
The task of judges and legislators is, however, fundamental in the 
thought of Hayek and in this sense constitutes a system which is relatively 
closed on the functional level but not on the normative level. The problem 
for a judge is to formulate a rule which already exists: he makes explicit 
what is implicit and, if he has to innovate in regard to the letter of the 
law, he always does so in order to recapture the spirit of the spontaneous, 
just order. It may sometimes happen that he is obliged to contradict an 
earlier formulation in order to be better in tune with the general pattern. 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
67 
This on-going search for a coherent formulation of the justice embodied 
in the spontaneous order cannot, however, be carried out completely 
deductively within the formal universe of norms only. 
The system must open itself to the facts: 
A new norm that logically may seem to be wholly consistent with the already 
recognized ones may yet prove to be in conflict with them if in some set of 
circumstances it allows actions which will clash with others permitted by the existing 
norms. This is the reason why the Cartesian or 'geometric' treatment of law as a pure 
'science of norms', where all rules of law are deduced from explicit premises, is so 
misleading... Norms cannot be judged according to whether they fit with other norms in isolation 
from facts, because whether the actions which they permit are mutually compatible or 
not depends on facts (Hayek, 1973: 106, Vol. 1). 
This is a new #blow to the idea of the "closed and internally validated 
nature of legal norms." (Luhmann) 
Of course, from the previous discussion one cannot conclude that Hayek 
is right and Luhmann wrong. I repeat that I am not interested here in the 
validity of ideas but rather in the strange state of affairs whereby from a 
common formal and epistemological trunk, two theoretical systems as 
different as those of Hayek and Luhmann were able to develop. 
In conclusion, I shall try to interpret the disturbing and insistent claim 
of Luhmann and his disciples that "only the legal system can grant its 
elements legal-normative quality. Normativity has no 'purpose' which lies 
outside itself" (Ladeur, infra). One first interpretation is that proposed by 
Lempert (infra). He is the first to show that it is untenable. If the autonomy 
of the law means that "it must be independent of society's other mechanisms 
of social control" (power, status, ethics, etc.) then it is evident that such 
an autonomy is unattainable. At any rate it is an ideal, according to 
Lempert, while autonomy, as Luhmann uses the term, is a necessary 
property. 
"The importation of extralegal values into the legal system is not 
recognized in Luhmann's theory as a potential threat to autonomy", Lem-
pert tells us. In fact, Luhmann's view of the autonomization of law seems 
to have all the properties of the sacred. In a religious society the sacred 
has just this property of transubstantiation: everything that it touches is 
thereafter part of its domain. Its capacity for autonomy is infinite. But we, 
the external observers of the society, see that this autonomy is illusory: 
society believes itself a product of the sacred but it is the other way around. 
What is autonomous (autopoietic) is society in its entirety (there is a circular 
causality between the individual level and the collective level) not the 
collective level embodied in the sacred (Dürkheim), as if it were cut off 
from individuals. But we also know that it is an attribute of the sacred 
that it be seen as autonomous by individuals. This is an illusion, of course, 
but it is part of its nature. 
This interpretation makes Luhmann the advocate of a sacralizing concep-
tion of society and of law and, by the same token, makes Hayek a modern 

68 
Jean-Pierre Dupuy 
demystifier who unveils the fact that the legal system and all normative 
systems, in general, are not autonomous. I do not believe that this interpre-
tation is any more acceptable (even if Luhmann writes: "Law is then valid 
by virtue of decisions which make it valid. The legal system itself is obliged 
to believe in this ground of its validity" (Luhmann, 1985 c: 8).) 
I shall propose the following interpretation which reverses the preceding 
terms in that it makes of Hayek an "ancient" and puts Luhmann at the 
height of modernity. 
In a totally desacralized society which knows that its order does not rest 
on any extra-social foundation such as God, Nature, or History, and which 
sees at the same time the arbitrary nature and the irreducible groundlessness 
of law and the necessity for law, the only solution to the "squaring of the 
circle" that the political problem represents is to posit that law is self-
legitimizing and self-founding. We encounter the same paradoxical form 
as in the sacred but this time we face it straight on, in clear light. This is the 
apex of modernity. By comparison, Hayek is an ancient. In his evolutionary 
schema, the best abstract rules will sooner or later be selected. His neo-
Darwinism (which is furthermore incompatible with the theory of auto-
poiesis) provides him with a standard, a fixed point, which allows him to 
escape from the vertigo of Grundlosigkeit. 
The question of origin is crucial here. In the beginning, there are facts 
and opinions. To be the law, law must wrench itself from facts because the 
mixture of fact and law cannot be tolerated (Rousseau). It must cut itself 
off from opinions because conflict of opinion makes for civil war (Hobbes). 
Hence, Luhmann: "As law moves away from its origin it must posit itself 
as origin" (Luhmann, 1985 c: 13). 
Let it be the example of the diabolica probatio which brings us back to 
the logical problem posed by Nozick.5 The rights of an owner over his 
real estate are valid only insofar as he acquired it by legally accepted means 
and the previous owner also had a valid right to it. This is a recursive 
schema, one that goes far back to the dawn of time: the proof of a right 
to property is then "diabolical". This recursive principle is a rational 
foundation of property rights but if that were all there were the situation 
would be undecidable. One must, then, decide. (From the latin, decidere: to 
cut off your enemy's head). One can only ever decide in a state of 
undecidability. Therefore, in an arbitrary manner, one decides that three 
generations are enough. The problem of the absolute beginning is thus 
done away with; at the origin of law, there is law. The autonomy of the 
legal system is, finally, undecidably decided. 
Translated from the French by Iain Fraser. 
5 Here I am following Ellul's excellent essay (1975: 191-205). 

On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems 
69 
Bibliography 
ASHBY, WILLIAM ROSS ( 1 9 6 2 ) "Principles of the Self-Organizing System" in Η . M . von 
Foerster and G. W. Zopf (eds.), Principles of Self-Organisation. 
New York: Pergamon 
Press. 
ATLAN, HENRI ( 1 9 7 9 ) Entre le cristal et la fumee. Paris: Seuil. 
BARRY, BRIAN (1965) Political Argument. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Cahier du CREA (1985) "Histoires de Cybernetique", no. 7 and "Genealogies de l'auto-
organisation", no. 8. Paris: Ecole Polytechnique. 
Colloque de Cerisy (1983) L''Auto-organisation, P. Dumouchel and J. P. Dupuy (eds.) Paris: 
Seuil. 
DEBRAY, REGIS (1981) Critique de la raison politique. Paris: Gallimard. 
DUPUY, JEAN-PIERRE (1983) "De l'economie consideree comme theorie de la foule", 7 
Stanford French Review 245. 
ELLUL, JACQUES (1975) "Alienation et temporalite dans le droit" in E. Castelli (ed.), 
Temporalite et alienation. Paris: Aubier Montaigne. 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON (1960) "On Self-Organizing Systems and their Environments" in 
M. C. Yovits and S. Cameron (eds.), Self-Organising 
Systems. Oxford: Pergamon. 
HAYEK, FRIEDRICH ALBERT ( 1 9 7 3 ) Law, Legislation and Liberty, Vol. 1: Rules and Order. 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
— (1976) Law, Legislation and Liberty, Vol. 2: The Mirage of Social Justice. 
London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
HOFSTADTER, DOUGLAS (1979) Goedel, Escher, Bach. New York: Basic Books. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1985 a) "The Autopoiesis of Social Systems". Paper presented at the 
Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University Institute, Firenze 
(December 12-15). 
— (1985 b) "The Self-reproduction of the Law and its Limits" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 c) "The Sociological Observation of the Theory and Practice of Law". Paper 
presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University 
Institute, Firenze (December 12—15). 
MALINVAUD, EDMOND (1975) Le(ons de theorie microeconomique, 3rd ed. Paris: Dunod. 
NICOLIS, G. and I. PRIGOGINE (1977) Self-Organisation 
in Nonequilibrium Systems. New 
York: John Wiley and Sons. 
NOZICK, ROBERT (1974) Anarchy, State and Utopia. New York: Basic Books. 
RAWLS, JOHN ( 1 9 7 1 ) A Theory of Justice. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
ROSENBLATT, FRANK ( 1 9 6 2 ) Principles of Neurodynamics. Perceptrons and the Theory of Brain 
Mechanisms. Washington: Spartan Books. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER (1987) "Social Order from Legislative Noise?" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
ZELENY, MILAN (ed.) (1980) Autopoiesis, Dissipative Structures and Spontaneous Social Order. 
Boulder: Westview Press. 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
FRANgois OST 
Bruxelles 
Introduction 
Radical theories generally arouse contrasting reactions. The discovery of 
the galaxie auto is no exception to this rule. The observer hesitates between 
fascination (Livet, 1983: 165 ff.) and consternation (Gutsatz, 1983: 29 ff.). 
Sometimes one has the feeling of being present at some new Copernican 
revolution: not just the discovery of a new scientific continent, but a 
radically new illumination of our previous knowledge, the emergence of a 
genuinely post-Cartesian episteme 
which substitutes positive operational 
concepts for the categories of object, subject and linear causality heretofore 
affected solely by the "suspicion" of modernity. Other times, instead, the 
predominant feeling is irritation at what may seem like a magic trick: the 
ideas of the "self-programming program", of "linkage through closure", 
of "co-evolution of autopoietic systems", once the first impression of 
strangeness they arouse is dissipated, lead one to think that "there must 
be a catch to it", some secret mechanism activated by the demiurge that 
presents them — which ultimately tells us more about their authors' 
ingenuity than about the nature of the phenomena studied. 
This ambivalent reaction is aggravated still further by reflexes bound up 
with the academic compartmentalization of disciplines. What is one to think 
of concepts ("selection", "information", "communication", "organization", 
"autonomy", etc.) forged in the field of the social sciences, then borrowed 
by biologists to explain the living world, at the cost of reformulating them 
in the language of cybernetics, only to be at length reintroduced into the 
social sciences? Ought one to welcome the abolition of the narrow bound-
aries of academic fields and announce the arrival of a transdisciplinary 
science, or ought one to denounce the ideological hocus-pocus consisting 
in legitimating attempts at social domination using theories lent the prestige 
of science by their bio-cybernetic trappings? 
Is it then once again to be the conflict of science and conscience, the 
old humanism that hesitates between celebration of the technico-scientific 
logos that manifests the increasing sovereignty of theoretical reason and 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
71 
secular protest in the name of the practical reason that is the bearer of a 
freedom — and therefore of a history — that no system can ever contain? 
But what if, instead, as one's forebodings sometimes suggest, this phantas-
magorical hypostasis of the "system" conceals some shameful theology, so 
that the scientific position ought to be more on the side of those who cling 
to the indeterminable, the random, the irreducibly plural? 
As for ourselves, having been induced to take part in this discussion — 
at least as far as the explanatory power of the autopoietic paradigm in law 
is concerned — we shall endeavor for as long as possible to maintain the 
ambivalence described. Guarding ourselves, then, from either dogmatism 
or a priori skepticism, we shall enquire into the fruitfulness of the auto-
poietic theory, which today lays claim to being the new paradigm for the 
social sciences. In doing so, we shall divide what we have to say into four 
stages. 
A first section will succinctly present the autopoietic paradigm as formu-
lated, in biology, by Maturana and Varela. A second section will look at 
Luhmann's attempt to transpose these ideas into the field of law. In this 
connection we shall recall some theses of Kelsen, who seems to us to be 
a thinker of the autonomy, if not the autopoiesis, of the legal system well 
before the bio-cybernetic formulation of these concepts. 
We shall then devote a third part to the critical discussion of the self-
referential model. We shall take our objections both from cybernetic theory 
(Ashby), biology (Atlan) and philosophy (Castoriadis). We shall then be in 
a position to discuss, in a fourth section, a substitute paradigm, that of the 
game. This seems to us to have the advantage of retaining many of the 
ideas of the autopoietic theory (autonomy of the game, internal regulation, 
etc.) while balancing them through taking account of the player, whose 
strategies, though obviously not purely subjective and random, cannot for 
all that be reduced to implementation of a pre-established program. It is 
this intermediate space between the objectivity of a self-regulated system 
and the subjectivity of the player's action — the space of the game, the 
locus of transformation of the project into system and the system into 
history, the change from disorder to order and from order to disorder — 
that seems to us to be simultaneously constitutive of the social and capable 
of being better illuminated by the game model than by that of autopoiesis. 
I. The Paradigm of Autopoiesis 
It is no doubt premature to accept the existence of one paradigm of 
autopoiesis. From various quarters, in fact, theories on the organization of 
life have been worked out; but the relationship between these concepts 
applied certainly does not yet authorize us to speak of a single paradigm. 
We shall, therefore, to simplify, content ourself with bringing out the ideas 

72 
Frangois Ost 
of Maturana and Varela, particularly since it is to these that Luhmann 
principally refers. 
The approach to life proposed by Maturana and Varela is deliberately 
mechanistic: living systems, like the cell or the brain, are to be understood 
as machines explained by their internal organization (Maturana and Varela, 
1980: 75; Varela, 1979: 4). Any idea of force, intention, teleonomy, adaptive 
transformation or, generally, any principle that cannot be found in the 
physical universe has to do with an animist perspective, with an artefact 
of language that tells us nothing about the organization of life (Maturana 
and Varela, 1980: 85). Living systems, like machines, are goalless systems. 
But while in the case of an allopoietic machine, such as a car, the product 
of its operation is different from itself; in contrast the product of the 
operation of an autopoietic machine is nothing other than itself (Maturana 
and Varela, 1980: 89). The cell can thus be defined by its self-generation, 
on the model of an artificial machine constructing itself. 
An autopoietic system can then be defined as a machine organized as a 
network of processes for producing components which, by their continual 
interactions and transformations, unceasingly regenerate the network of 
processes for producing components and thereby give the machine a 
definite spatial unity (Maturana and Varela, 1980: 89; Varela, 1979: 17). 
The autopoietic machine, then, is a network of tangled or "looped" 
processes that ensures constant regeneration and specific unity in space. 
Autopoiesis is both the necessary and the sufficient condition for defining 
life. Several consequences follow from this definition. 
First of all, an autopoietic machine is autonomous. This autonomy must 
be understood as the capacity to subordinate all change to the maintenance 
of self-organization. Autonomy here links up with homeostasis: not inertia 
or stasis, like that of a crystal for instance, but the constantly re-established 
equilibrium of a network of processes in interaction. It will then be noted 
that the autopoietic system has an individuality: to the extent that it keeps 
its identity constant through a process of continual adjustment, this identity 
is in some sense self-produced and owes nothing to any intervention by 
an outside observer. An autopoietic machine itself defines its boundaries 
by determining what is and what is not itself. 
Finally, the conclusion will be reached that an autopoietic system has no 
inputs or outputs. Certainly, it may undergo exogenous shocks, independent 
events or "perturbations"; but these, far from acting as information that 
would contribute to programming the system, arouse internal compensating 
reactions, so that the homeostatic equilibrium characterizing the system is 
kept invariable. As long as it controls its processes of transformation by 
subordinating the amount of change to the maintenance of its organization, 
the system will preserve its dynamic unity; it will remain autopoietic 
(Maturana and Varela, 1980: 80). 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
73 
This last feature is no doubt the most significant one. It entails, according 
to Varela, a radical paradigm shift. Whereas classical scientific thought 
holds to a paradigm of "linkage through inputs" (the outside determines 
the changes in the system), what is being proposed here is a paradigm of 
"linkage through closure": it is the internal coherence of the system that 
determines its development. While in the first case it is the environment 
that supplies the fixed points that enable the evolution of the system to be 
understood, in the second model its evolution is determined by its self-
organization, while the points of contact between the system and its 
environment are reduced to mere "perturbations". 
The major concept in this new perspective becomes that of operational 
closure. An autopoietic system is an operationally closed system within 
which dynamic coherence engenders a wider or narrower variety of eigen-
behavior. Thus, the "history" of a species should not be understood as 
optimization of its adaptation to the environment (which would presuppose 
a logic of "linkage through inputs"), but instead as the diversification or 
complexification of forms of eigenbehavior authorized by the coherence 
and operational closure of the system, which thus manages to maintain its 
identity through its transformations (Varela, 1983: 149 — 53). 
Autopoietic systems, then, are not isolated: they define themselves against 
the background of an environment that is a source of exogenous shocks, 
and they can enter into relationships with other autopoietic entities. Varela 
speaks in this case of "structural coupling". Here again it is not a case of 
autarchy nor of outside programming; quite simply, each autopoietic system 
entering into a relation of structural coupling is, with respect to the others, 
a source of compensable perturbations. If these perturbations exceed the 
margin of variation tolerable by the system in order to keep its identity, 
there would be disintegration of one or more of the copresent autopoietic 
systems (Varela, 1979: 32-3; 50ff.). 
Having thus briefly presented the major outlines of the autopoietic 
paradigm, one may now ask to what extent Maturana and Varela encourage 
the transfer of this model to the explanation of social organization. The 
least one can say is that the answer to this question is doubtful. In their 
jointly written work, Maturana and Varela say that they have not reached 
a common position on this point and therefore decide to postpone the 
discussion (Maturana and Varela, 1980: 118). Varela is however more 
explicit in his own book. For him, the concept of autopoiesis is not capable 
of being imported into the area of social phenomena. It is ill-advised, he 
writes, to use the concept to describe, for instance, an animal society: the 
distinctive features of its unity are not of a topological order, and the 
social interactions taking place in it cannot be understood in terms of 
"production" of components. The same is true of human systems: treating 
them as autopoietic proceeds from a confusion with the idea of autonomy. 

74 
Frangois Ost 
For Varela, then, social systems are capable of being explained in terms of 
autonomy and not of autopoiesis. Autonomy does presuppose operational 
closure: there is the circular connection (looping) of organizational pro-
cesses, which reflects an intrinsic coherence, a self-organization, but that 
does not mean one can speak of self-generation of components of the 
system (Varela, 1979: 54 ff.). 
No one, however, controls the fate of the concepts he puts in circulation. 
(Could there be in this indeterminacy of the march of ideas a form of 
autopoiesis?) We must, then, look at how the autopoietic model is trans-
posed into the social field, specifically into law. 
II. The Transposition into Law of the Autopoiesis Paradigm 
1. Luhmann and Teubner 
The idea of analyzing social phenomena and universes of discourse in terms 
of autonomy or increasing autonomization constitutes an endeavor which 
is neither new nor illegitimate. Thus, for instance, it was using concepts 
of self-organization and self-finalization that Ladriere described the evolu-
tion of the scientific logos and of the technological world that accompanies 
it. The scientific method, a highly pondered and self-controlled specification 
of the rational method, tends to engender an autonomous reality subject 
to its own law, which is a law of growth. Thus, "within contemporary 
societies, science tends, under the action of its own internal operations, to 
constitute itself as a vast system, itself formed of interacting subsystems, 
evolving towards increasingly complex and increasingly integrated forms, 
which are at the same time increasingly autonomous" (Lädiere, 1977: 51). 
Though not able to free itself totally from outside circumstances, scientific 
discourse is today capable of submitting them to critical assessment so as 
to arrive by successive equilibration at almost complete self-control. As 
for the technological superstructure, it too is inhabited by a self-organizing 
and self-finalizing movement: "one might say," maintains Ladriere, "that 
it is commanded by an immanent teleology of which it is itself the source" 
(1977: 70). 
Luhmann and Teubner's endeavor is, however, more ambitious: it is the 
law itself, as a universe of discourse and an institutional field, that might 
be described in categories no longer simply of autonomy and self-organiza-
tion, but of autopoiesis. 
How can the theory of autopoiesis be conserved while stripping it of its 
biological connotations? This is the first question raised by Luhmann 
(1985 a: 2). The answer lies in bringing out the minimum constitutive 
element of the system — a sort of legal atom. In this case it is communica-
tions (Luhmann, supra: 16 — 17). More specifically, Teubner takes the 
legal act as the basic element of systematics in law (Teubner, infra: 221). 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
75 
Accordingly, a legal system may be called autopoietic to the extent that 
the self-reference characterizing it affects not only its structures and organi-
zation but the basic elements themselves. This, according to Luhmann, 
constitutes the fundamental paradigm shift (Luhmann, 1985 b: 112). It will 
be noted from the start that the transposition is effected at a radical level: 
that of the autopoiesis of the basic constituent elements of the system and 
not merely that of autonomy. This move, however, seems to be repudiated 
by Varela himself. Luhmann is quite formal on this point: the law, like any 
other operational, well differentiated social subsystem, presupposes itself 
and reproduces itself: both its unity and its organization, its constituent 
elements and its boundaries, result, by"complexity reduction", from intrinsi-
cally systemic performances; they proceed neither from nature nor from 
any condition coming from the environment. Consequently, there is no 
law other than positive law (whether legislative, case law or contractual) 
(Luhmann, 1985 b: 112). 
An autopoietic system is, then, above all a closed system. In law, this 
closure is normative. Only legal norms can decide on the pertinence or 
relevance to the legal system of any element whatever. After centuries of 
discussion, it is today admitted that neither nature nor morals nor religion 
have this power to create law. Only the legal system, through its autopoietic 
functioning, is capable of conferring the quality of legality on the elements 
that it determines. Thus, an infinite and non-intentional process is brought 
about, of reproduction of legal elements by themselves (Luhmann, 1985 b: 
113; supra: 20). 
But the advance of the autopoietic paradigm consists in going beyond the 
classical opposition between openness and closure which previously affected 
systems theory. An autopoietic system, defined as functionally (normatively 
in the case of law) closed, is also a system open to the environment, a source 
of information for it. The normative closure is thus parallelled by cognitive 
openness. A legal system can be programmed in such a way as to render itself 
deliberately dependent on the evolution of outside circumstances; a change 
in the program itself under pressure from the environment is likewise possible 
(Luhmann, 1985 b: 113; supra: 20—21), as long as the system does not in this 
search for optimum adaptation lose control over its transformations. On this 
point, Luhmann admits that there is a difference between him and Varela, 
who, as will be recalled, rejected the idea of adaptation of the system to the 
environment (Luhmann, 1985 b: 122). 
In combining closure and openness in this way, the legal system cannot 
lay claim to complete self-determination. Thus, no legal system can wish to 
determine in advance the content of any legal decision. It suffices that the act 
of legal decision-making be normatively referred to a need to perpetuate the 
self-production of the legal system — it may, moreover, incorporate all out-
side information necessary to make it more functional. It will be noted in this 
set of ideas that the majority of legal norms are conceived of as programs 

76 
Francois Ost 
aimed at the normative treatment of information from outside ("if such and 
such a fact has occurred, then such and such a normative consequence shall 
be applied") (Luhmann, 1985 a: 28; 1985 b: 116 f£). 
By now it will be clear: in order to ensure its autopoietic development, 
it is enough for the legal system to control a binary logic — the logic of 
permission and prohibition, of legal and illegal. Because they manipulate 
this code of identities and differences, legal systems may well open up to 
the outside without losing their identity, since the reality so produced — 
and imposed, let us say — is in fact "nothing but the correlate of a self-
referential mode of operation which reproduces itself according to this 
code" (Luhmann, supra: 16). 
The idea likewise emerges that no transcendence imbues legal systems; 
if it is true that these systems function like cybernetic machines, using a 
code of differences, there is then no need for a hierarchy of norms, a 
regulating principle or a fundamental norm. The autopoietic process is 
perfectly symmetrical, circular and continuous (Luhmann speaks in this 
connection of "creatio continua")·. each element receives its normative quality 
from another element which it in turn determines, without it being possible 
to discern in this self-referential circuit any priority or primacy whatsoever 
(Luhmann, supra: 20 — 22). 
Let us add one last remark of an epistomological nature, which moreover 
follows directly from the theses presented: the analysis of autopoietic 
systems proceeds from a form of "self observation"; it involves an internal 
analysis (Luhmann, 1985 b: 125). 
Teubner for his part puts forward some complementary theses. For him, 
legal systems become progressively autopoietic when, at the end of a 
process of autonomization, they finish up by producing their own elements, 
the legal acts which in turn reproduce the system of production (Teubner, 
infra: 221 — 223). The evolution traced out in this way is interesting, but 
it may be wondered to what extent it is compatible with the analyses of 
the authors of the autopoiesis paradigm. Varela at any rate asserts that the 
establishment of an autopoietic system is not gradual: a system either is 
autopoietic or is not (Varela, 1979: 27). 
It is nevertheless the case that, for Teubner, a system may be called 
autopoietic when the three characteristic functions of the process of evolu-
tion (variation — selection — conservation) are "internalized", regulated 
by mechanisms intrinsic to the system and no longer commanded from 
outside. Whereas heretofore social norms determined the possibilities of 
variation of legal norms, selection among the latter was brought about by 
phenomena of social approval and recognition, and conservation of norms 
adopted was assured by the dominant ideologies and myths in the society, 
today these three functions respond to internal regulation: at most, they 
are "modulated" by pressure from the environment. Thus, a normative 
change will be brought about only if it is structurally determined and 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
77 
legally relevant; selection is henceforth effected in conformity with internal, 
self-produced expectations, while the function of retention is a matter of 
legal doctrine (Teubner, infra: 230 — 235). 
Nevertheless, contrary to what might be suggested by these initial 
analyses, the stress here too is placed on the openness of autopoietic 
systems. These in fact enter into a relation of "co-evolution" with other 
systems organized on the basis of similar principles. Thus, they may 
mutually influence each other — at least in an indirect, mediated way. It 
will, for instance, be noted that the expectations formulated within the 
framework of a subsystem end up by adapting themselves in the long term 
to those prevailing in another subsystem: does the liberal anthropology 
underlying the category of legal subject not fit in with the market image 
dominating the field of political economy (Teubner, infra: 234—235)? 
There would doubtless be much to be said in connection with these 
analyses, carried out, like those of Luhmann, from an exclusively "internal" 
viewpoint. Thus, it is hard to see how the idea of internal regulation of 
the evolution of the system and that of co-evolution can be brought 
together. Is it the ultra classical idea of "relative autonomy" of various 
social bodies? Or is it, as we tend to think, a more radical analysis that is 
being put forward? But how then can one, without playing with words, 
combine closure and openness? 
Before venturing on a few critical considerations, we must recall certain 
theses of Kelsen, who seems to us in many respects a precursor of the 
ideas today being discussed under the heading of autopoiesis. 
2. Kelsen: A Precursor? 
Far be it from us to imagine that Kelsen anticipated present biological 
theories and their transposition into the field of law, which he would 
undoubtedly have condemned as "syncretism of methods" (Kelsen, 1967: 
2). We shall content outselves with maintaining that Kelsen's conception 
of legal systematics is at many points very close to the view today being 
developed by way of autopoiesis. 
The basic element of the legal phenomenon and of the science which 
studies it is, for Kelsen, the human act, involving on the one hand a 
material aspect perceptible to the senses, and on the other a meaning which 
is called, specifically, legal. While the meaning given to the act by its author 
is subjective, its objective meaning is conferred on it by the law: it is the 
meaning that the act has in law, according to the law. More exactly: it is 
legal norms, acting as interpretive schemes, that impress on certain human 
acts their nature as legal acts or illegal acts. But, Kelsen adds, "it will be 
noted that these norms are themselves created by legal acts, and that in 
turn these acts receive their legal meaning from other norms" (Kelsen, 1967: 
3 — 5). It therefore seems clear that the legal phenomenon is constituted by 

78 
Francois Ost 
entities with a special meaning — a normative meaning of a legal nature — 
and that the latter is produced by system-forming norms, which themselves 
result from lawmaking acts. 
There thus begins a dynamic, uninterrupted process of creation of law 
by itself. The following proposition from the Pure Theory of Law is famous: 
"the law itself regulates its own creation" (Kelsen, 1967: 299), ... a process 
"in which the law, so to speak, unceasingly creates itself' (1967: 318). This 
self-creation of law, albeit uninterrupted, is not thereby circular — no 
doubt a point of difference with the analyses in the autopoietic systems. 
For Kelsen, legal norms are not on the same level, but form "a building 
of several superposed stories" (1967: 299), a pyramid which, as we know, 
culminates in the supposed fundamental norm. At each stage of construc-
tion, the higher norm determines and founds the validity of the lower 
norm, just as a higher authority empowers a lower one. The order presiding 
over the implementation of the legal system is thus strictly linear and 
hierarchicalized, necessarily ending with the fundamental norm empowering 
the supreme authority to create law. 
This fundamental norm confers on the legal system both the principle 
differentiating it from whatever is not it, its principle of unity and the 
foundation of its validity. It is solely because it has been created in 
accordance with a higher norm, and ultimately in conformity with the 
fundamental norm, that any legal norm whatever may be regarded both as 
valid and as belonging to this system. Conversely, the unity and validity 
of a plurality of diverse norms derives exclusively from the fact that they 
proceed from a single fundamental norm (Kelsen, 1967: 256). 
Subject only to the "transcendent" and thus partly extra systemic nature 
of the fundamental norm, it will be agreed that the Pure Theory of Law is 
not far at all from the theories of self-organization — did Kelsen not take 
upon himself as his methodological principle to "bring together everything 
that is law into a system, that is, grasp it from one single viewpoint as 
constituting a whole closed upon itself' (1967: 430)? 
But if legal systems are autonomous, that does not necessarily mean they 
are autarchical or tautological. The higher norm never forms more than a 
framework open to various possibilities, all equally regular, among which 
it is for the implementing body to choose, according to an act of will 
inspired by extra-legal considerations (Kelsen, 1967: 460). 
This partial indeterminacy, which ensures the dynamism of the legal 
order, does not however entail loss of control by the law over itself. The 
legal system, according to Kelsen, has neither lacunae ("everything not 
legally forbidden is legally permitted") (1967: 326), nor antinomies ("a 
norm contrary to the norms is a contradiction in terms; such a norm would 
not be valid ... would not be a legal norm at all") (1967: 355). 
It will also be noted that the normative interpretation for which the 
fundamental norm is the basis extends to every element contributing to 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
79 
legal production. Thus, a collectivity founded by a legal order cannot be 
distinguished from that order itself (in relatively centralized legal orders 
that collectivity takes the form of the State; but there is a rigorous identity 
between State and law) (Kelsen, 1967: 379); likewise, any individual — 
even a mere private person — who performs a legal act is operating as an 
organ of the legal system, and the act he performs, a contract or will for 
example, can be understood as an act of the State, an act attributable to 
the unity of the legal order (Kelsen, 1967: 200; 373). Even an illegal act 
ought not to be rejected from the area of law; to the extent that it allows 
application of a sanction, it belongs instead to the law, as its condition and 
not as its negation (Kelsen, 1967: 152 — 6). 
Kelsen does not fail to draw the conclusion from this panlegalism — 
which once again results from the fact that the viewpoint adopted is strictly 
"internal" to the object studied: "the law is like King Midas. Whatever he 
touched was immediately changed into gold; likewise, everything the law 
has to do with becomes law" (1967: 369). Or again: "in the eyes of the 
theory of positive law, only law can be a source of law" (1967: 313). 
Each of the points raised by Kelsen is clearly capable of discussion. At 
this point in our reflections, we shall content ourselves with a single 
observation. Kelsen, it is often forgotten, explicitly pursued throughout 
his work a single design: to elaborate a science of law which would 
"advance the development from the seeds already present in 19th century 
positivist legal science" (Ost and Lenoble, 1980: 467 — 546; Ost and van de 
Kerchove, 1985 a: 285 — 324). In other words, Kelsen consistently drew the 
conclusions that emerge from the postulates of legal dogmatics. In so doing, 
he doubtless contributed more towards rationalizing jurists' discourse than 
to advancing a genuine science of law that explains its object (Kelsen, 
1967: viii). In a sense, Kelsen is thereby expressing the truth of law: let us 
understand the truth of the dogmas, beliefs and myths shared by jurists, 
and especially their ideals of logicality, their desire for unity, clarity and 
security; but in another sense, the Pure Theory of Law disguises this truth 
by presenting it in a rationalized, "purged" form that conceals both its 
ethical extensions and its societal implications. But if, as we think, the 
relationship of thought is very clear between Kelsen and present-day bio-
cybernetic jurists, perhaps this is an effect of the same kind as is at play in 
the transposition to law of the autopoietic paradigm. But before discussing 
this point, we must now, in a third section, put forward some objections 
to the autopoietic paradigm, so as to bring out the limits of its descriptive 
power and its explanatory fertility. 
III. Critical Discussion of the Autopoietic Paradigm 
A first critical observation that may be formulated in connection with the 
most radical theories of self-reference concerns the limit of formalisms. 

80 
Frangois Ost 
Just as Goedel's proof showed that no mathematical language can manage 
to be totally looped in upon itself, an essential incompleteness which 
necessarily presupposes a more enveloping meta-language, likewise the 
cyberneticist W. R. Ashby, one of the first thinkers of self-organization, 
managed to prove that absolute autonomy was a logical impossibility 
(Ashby, 1962; Dupuy, 1982: 226). 
Taken literally, reflexive expressions such as "self-programming pro-
gram" or "self-organizing organization" in fact prove to be contradictory. 
To be sure, autonomy can be pushed rather far, and systems conceived that 
have the capacity to change not only the information they process but even 
their own operating rules. But the capability to change their organizing 
principles can only be partial: the rules determining these changes are 
themselves determined, so that the program's control over itself is only 
partial. Certainly, the program is not immutable, and its rules of change 
may well be changed in turn, but taking account of these phenomena 
presupposes a sort of "jump", or qualitative leap to a more complex, more 
comprehensive level of organization. In other words, the only changes that 
affect the organization itself — and not only the various states of the 
system which are nothing but the phases of a constant program — have 
to be produced from outside the system. 
It is so, for instance, with the game of chess with "self-modifying" rules 
that Hofstadter imagines. It is a particularly subtle game, since the players 
have agreed that for each configuration of pieces on the chess board there 
will be a set of rules valid for the next move. Thus, the rules govern the 
moves, and the moves determine the rules. But as Dupuy, who gives the 
example, rightly emphasizes, "...this confusion of levels of organization is 
permissible and conceivable only because there exists a meta-level which 
itself escapes the recursive loop": this inviolable meta-level is precisely that 
of the meta-rules that assign a set of rules to each configuration of pieces 
(Dupuy, 1982: 244). And if one thought of complicating the game still 
further by associating the meta-rules themselves with configurations of the 
pieces, one could not thereby escape the limit given by Ashby's theorem. 
However comprehensive the loop set up may be, one would end up with 
an unflllable gap, which designates the untouched meta-level: in this case, 
that of the creative designers who have set up this very special chess game. 
Accordingly, the theory of self-organization finds itself facing an essential 
question: how can self-organized systems claim to change themselves 
without losing their identity, since they respond totally neither to internal 
programming, as Ashby has shown, nor to external programming, which 
would take away any relevance from the very idea of self-organization 
(Dumouchel and Dupuy, 1983: 97)? 
It would seem that with this question the model of self-organization has 
embarked on a new, decisive path. This path is that of the "relative 
self-organization" explored by Atlan, "...accepting that the change in 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
81 
organization may be brought about under the influence, not of a meta-law 
that would guide the change in constant fashion, foreseen in advance, but 
under that of random perturbations" (Atlan, 1983: 122). The paradigm of 
"organizational closure" (Varela) is replaced by that of "organizational 
chance" or of "order through noise". As Atlan recalls, in a discussion 
setting him against Maturana: "Changes in organization can come only 
from outside. There cannot therefore be any self-organization in the strict 
sense" (Atlan, 1974: 181). But what must be well understood is that, on 
the one hand, the environment does not act as a central regulator, and on 
the other, the message received by the system does not necessarily have a 
destructive effect on it. We must therefore manage to conceive of a form 
of non-deliberate cooperation by outside chance in the organization of the 
system, or conversely, a form of autonomy within dependence. 
How can chance contribute to creating complexity (the more sophisti-
cated organization of the system, assuring it of increased and active perform-
ance) instead of being only a factor of disorganization? To answer this 
question, which is in no way gratuitous, since it is directed at the process 
illustrated by the phenomena of evolution of species, one must no doubt 
again consider the structure of living systems. These are, Atlan explains, 
located somewhere "between the rigidity of metal and the decomposition 
of smoke" — hence the title of his magnificent work Entre le cristal et le 
fumee (Atlan, 1979: 5). Living organizations balance two types of property: 
repetition, regularity and redundancy on the one hand; variety, improbabil-
ity, complexity on the other (Atlan, 1979: 5). Thus, living automata achieve 
a form of compromise between determinism and indeterminism, as if a 
certain quantity of indeterminacy were necessary to the system, beyond a 
certain degree of complexity, to enable it to adapt to a certain level of 
noise, a result which Atlan very meaningfully relates to a theorem of von 
Neumann's games theory (Atlan, 1979: 41). 
Accordingly, sufficiently indeterminate systems have a capacity to trans-
form noise, random external perturbations, into an organizing factor which 
generates increased complexity. In other words, instead of speaking of a 
"self-programming program", one must analyze the logical nature of sys-
tems "where what acts as a program changes unceasingly, in a manner not 
pre-established, under the influence of random factors of the environment" 
(Atlan, 1979: 56). 
Atlan takes one further step in analyzing such systems by putting forward 
the idea that if such an effect of "order from noise" is actually possible, it 
is no doubt because what appears as noise, chance or perturbation to the 
outside observer is in some way intelligible to or decodable by the system. 
It is nothing less than the category of "meaning" that is thereby introduced 
into the analysis. If in fact we agree in this context to define meaning as 
the effect exercised by a piece of information on the organization of the 
system, it cannot be denied that information supplied by the environment 

82 
Francois Ost 
has meaning for the system to the extent that it determines a change in its 
structure, for instance in the form of an adapted response. Accordingly, 
what appeared to the observer as destruction of information at an elemen-
tary level can be seen as creation of information at a comprehensive level. 
But in this case, the point of view will have been changed, and the system's 
own key of intelligibility adopted. Nevertheless, since we do not possess 
this key, we are reduced to speaking of "order through noise", whereas 
from the system's viewpoint what is happening is translation and processing 
of intelligible information (Atlan, 1979: 87). 
This new conception of self-organization, henceforth understood as 
"relative" and presupposing only partially self-regulated systems, implies — 
a point of supreme importance, we feel — a new epistemological viewpoint. 
Whereas Varela and Maturana's paradigm of "organizational closure" pre-
supposed, as Luhmann also admits, an exclusively internal viewpoint of 
self-observation, the paradigm of "organizational chance" implies the decen-
tralization of the analysis. Henceforth the point is — and how could it be 
otherwise — to occupy the viewpoint of the outside observer, an observer 
who, in his study of systems, takes account of the closure on themselves 
of systems in respect of their meaning and their purposes (Atlan, 1979: 
90). In this way, we feel, one can escape the solipsism of a purely internal 
viewpoint, without thereby neglecting the self-production of meaning that 
characterizes the systems studied. 
To summarize: the demonstration by such authors as Ashby and Dupuy 
of the logical limits to the model of self-organization on the one hand, and 
the development with Atlan, on the other, of a theory of "relative self-
organization" pre-supposing systems whose function combines regulation 
and indeterminacy, certainly facilitate the attempt to apply the self-referen-
tial paradigm to social organizations. Before going on in our fourth and 
last section to that exercise, as far as legal systems are concerned, we must 
still deal with one author, Castoriadis, who, in thinking about the autonomy 
of the social on the basis of categories of self-organization, suggests a 
radical reversal of perspectives. 
For Castoriadis, in fact, the autonomous society is the one that frees 
itself from a heteronomous relationship to its institutions and shows 
itself capable of rejecting its own system of established meanings. Human 
societies have for this author always been "autonomous in Yarela's sense"; 
i. e., subject to their institutions and their laws. No doubt this fact was 
hidden by all sorts of representations that located the origin of the institu-
tion in extra-social authorities: the gods, nature, the ancestors, reason or 
whatever. But the effect of this strategy was to tighten still further the 
closure of discourse and of institutions, sheltered thereby from all discus-
sion. Such societies are therefore systems of "strong heteronomy" (auton-
omy in Varela's sense): their informational, cognitive and organizational 
closure is almost total. 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
83 
However, on two occasions in the course of history, in ancient Greece 
and in modern Europe, "autonomous" societies have appeared, that is, 
ones capable of breaking the closure that characterizes living things, to 
give themselves laws and institutions which are truly "different". Such 
societies can be called "self-instituting": by altering their acquired systems 
of interpretation, they take the risk of looking for norms and forms of 
organization that no a priori 
programme determines. Castoriadis sees in the 
emergence of such societies no less than an ontological creation: the 
appearance of a form which explicitly alters itself as form (Castoriadis, 
1983: 421 ff.). This form is, of course, that of democracy, the only mode 
of government that takes the risk of self-destruction — have we not seen, 
instead, that autopoietic systems strengthened their "closure" with the 
intention of escaping entropy? 
There, then, is the reversal of perspective: with Castoriadis, autonomy 
is henceforth openness and no longer closure, the possibility of radical 
change of program and no longer the complete accomplishment of the 
program. It is true that Varela and Castoriadis are doubtless not speaking 
of the same thing: Varela studies life without making pronouncements about 
social matters, while Castoriadis stresses that autonomy, as he conceives it, 
appears only with humanity (1983: 438). That does not take away the fact 
that we are here faced with two totally incompatible conceptions of 
autonomy: on the one hand, closure of the program, on the other, the 
continuing invention of meanings. 
Ultimately, however, the two theses seem to us equally unacceptable, at 
least to the extent that they claim to give an account of the actual functioning 
of human societies. We have already indicated this in various ways in connec-
tion with the paradigm of autopoiesis. Regarding the thesis of the self-institu-
tion of the social, we shall say that while human societies in fact seem to us 
to be characterized by their capacity to influence themselves, it is nevertheless 
the case that in reality this capability is very largely conditioned and reduced 
by a whole set of constraints. Just as man is at the same time free and deter-
mined, societies — even in ancient Greece and modern Europe — are both 
regulated and regulating. If we really wish to take account of this and not 
dream of Utopian models, we have to develop concepts that enable us to 
think simultaneously of constraint, regularity, reproduction and freedom, in-
ventiveness, openness. Atlan has supplied some concepts of this type for the 
analysis of living systems; we think that the game model can provide the neces-
sary instruments for analyzing societal systems. 
IV. Between Order and Disorder, The Game Model 
1. Antecedents 
The perception of social mechanisms in terms of a game is not a new idea. 
Indeed, the substitution of the game analogy for models, whether biological 

84 
Francis Ost 
or cybernetic, seems fairly current in contemporary debate. We shall content 
ourselves with mentioning three examples. 
In economics, it is well known how the new industrial economy makes 
frequent use of schemes of thought borrowed from biology. The dominat-
ing idea here is of evolutionary type: the evolution of productive structures 
and of market forms should in fact be understood as effective adaptation 
to "natural" conditions through a selective process related to those of 
biological evolution. Against this representation, Jacquemin proposes 
another interpretation of these transformations: they are to be analyzed as 
phases of "a complex game 
of power where the industrial configurations 
that emerge are largely the result of deliberate strategies" (Jacquemin, 1985: 
cover page). The various determinisms conveyed by sociobiology and 
bioeconomics are opposed in these analyses by the categories of strategy, 
decision and regulation — which inevitably brings the political and legal 
dimensions back into economic debate. Not that the actor's decision is 
sovereign, capable by itself of changing a given environment; but the fact 
that the player is partly "played" by the game he is taking part in does not 
mean that his action is to be regarded as negligible. Only such an approach 
is, according to Jacquemin, capable of avoiding the homogenization of 
behavior and the levelling of expectations; in the game model, the differen-
ces that generate a plurality of forms of sociability are on the contrary 
given value (Jacquemin, 1985: 186). 
It is also because it deprives human behavior of the political and strategic 
dimension that Crozier and Friedberg reject the cybernetic model of organi-
zations presented by, for instance, Luhmann (Crozier and Friedberg, 1977). 
For these authors, such models are subservient to a central regulator in an 
environment whose fluidity is postulated, whereas collective action is 
largely unpredictable and not reducible to any direct command mechanism 
(1977: 24; 211). We shall return below to their analyses, based on the 
category of the game. 
Finally, still closer to our theme, Febbrajo, after analyzing the systems 
approaches of Habermas, Teubner and Luhmann, states that he prefers to 
these the model of the game, which both retains a good number of the 
features intrinsic to systems analysis and enriches it with a number of 
dimensions foreign to it (Febbrajo, 1984: 30). Thus, the game, just like 
the system, presupposes an interaction between multiple components, the 
meaning of which is very largely produced internally; it is separated from 
an environment that sometimes influences it and sometimes is indifferent 
to it, and it implies a continuous process of adjustment of the action of 
players seeking to increase the complexity of their behavior (increased 
response capacity) while correspondingly diminishing that of their partners. 
But the advantage of the games concept over that of system is that it leaves 
open the possibility of a plurality of interpretations of social phenomena 
(according to whether the attribution of meaning is done by the players, 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
85 
the referee, the public or whatever), which in particular reduces the risk 
of levelling the whole set of social institutions (political, legal or economic) 
down to one single rationality (Febbrajo, 1984: 32). 
While, then, the endeavor does not lack predecessors, a particular concept 
of game must be agreed on before it can be used as an instrument for 
analyzing legal phenomena. 
2. A Concept of Game 
Among the various features generally associated with the idea of game, 
there are two that appear essential and might suffice to determine a general 
concept of game: regularity on the one hand and indeterminacy on the 
other (Huizinga, 1951: 15-83; Caillois, 1958: 31-44). It may in fact be 
maintained that each game combines in a variable but irreducible proportion 
an element of regulation, of convention, of repetition on the one hand and 
an element of chance, inventiveness and imagination on the other. It may 
by the way be noted that very many forms of game may in turn be classified 
on a scale, with one of the poles being extreme regulation and the other 
that of extreme arbitrariness. 
Terminology itself sometimes reflects this situation: thus, while French 
has only one word — jeu — to cover the variety of game activities, English 
has both the term "play" and the term "game". Play refers to the free, 
spontaneous playing, imitative and dizzying, in which usual references are 
abolished and the intoxication of loss of identity relished; game instead 
refers to social, regulated play, involving chance and competition, in which 
institutionalized roles are established and the safety of a conventional 
universe is sought.1 On the one hand is uncontrolled imagination, turbu-
lence, free improvisation, the Dionysiac universe of the "tohu-bohu soci-
eties" — what Caillois, in his language, called paTdia\ on the other, the 
deliberate, strictly regulated creation of an artificial world based on the strict 
integration of a plurality of roles, the Apollonian universe of "accounting 
societies" — what Caillois called ludus.2 Ultimately, however, the two 
opposite dimensions of convention and sponteneity, of determinacy and 
indeterminacy, meet by hook or by crook in every game, considered by 
itself. However regulated it may be, the game would no longer be a game 
if it did not have a proportion of uncertainty, risk and arbitrariness that 
no pre-established rule can totally control. Conversely, the most Dionysiac 
tumult — such as the well-known reversal in carnival of conventions and 
usages — would end up in madness and meaninglessness if not contained 
by some implicit principles, if only the limits of time and place. Thus, the 
1 On this distinction, cf. the entry "Jeu", in Volume 9 of Encyclopaedia 
Universalis (1971: 
436). 
2 Cited in the entry (ibid.) "Jeu" (1971: 437). 

86 
Francis Ost 
specific feature of the game does seem to be a variable, special, constantly 
renewed combination of rule and creation, of program and chance. 
To be sure, the various games thinkers have sometimes favored one of 
these dimensions of the game over the other. Thus, such an author as 
Derrida, inspired by a very old philosophical tradition which comes in 
particular through Nietzsche, conceives the game as "a sort of non-place 
in which substitutions of signs are played out infinitely" (Derrida, 1967: 
411). This conception affirms the ontological primacy of the game as 
something radical and infinite that ought finally to dispel the metaphysical 
dream of a "centered structure", of a "full, game-free presence", that would 
mean the origin and the end of the game (Derrida, 1967: 410). Thus the 
absence of the transcendental signified frees an indefinite movement of 
substitution of signs, which can however manage to develop only in the 
finished framework, the closure, of a determined field (Derrida, 1967: 423), 
whereby one recovers the determinacy of the game as dialectic of limit and 
absence of limit. 
Other authors, for example Ricoeur and Gadamer, insist instead on the 
regulatory pole as characterizing the game. "It is the rules and provisions 
laying down how the field set aside for the game is to be filled which" — 
writes Gadamer — "constitute the essence of the game ... The field on 
which the game takes place is, so to speak, measured from the inside by 
the game itself, and is determined much more by the order that the 
movement of play determines than by what it bumps up against, namely 
the boundaries of the free field that delimit the movement externally" 
(Gadamer, 1960: 33). By insisting in this way on the primacy of the rules 
of the game, what Gadamer highlights is the operation of self-production 
by the game itself of its meaning and its purposes. One might in this 
connection speak of the neutrality of the game, which is much less the 
product of the players' activity than the carrying out of its own movement 
which, like a dance movement, involves the players in a performance that 
gives itself its own purpose (Ricoeur, 1972: 216). 
This is what Gadamer calls the "median sense" of the game, a neutral 
sense which is apparent in such expressions as "Spieldes Lichts", "Wortspiel", 
"etwas spielt sich ab", "etwas ist im Spiele" (Gadamer, 1960: 99). Ehrmann 
for his part considers that the game should be defined as broadly as 
possible, and that the full meaning of game is reflected in expressions such 
as "ilj α du jeu", "fa joue" (Ehrmann, 1969: 456). It can be seen from this 
that the game has no subject; that the player is just as much the played as 
the player — he is, as one says, "caught up in the game" — as actor of 
the game, he may just as well be its stake and the plaything (Ehrmann, 
1969: 455). Hence the real subject of the game is, ultimately, the game 
itself (Gadamer, 1976: 32).3 
3 Ehrmann, for his part, writes: "...the game has no subject. Or, if you wish, the real 
subject of the game is chance: cosmic chance, biological chance. The game is expressed 
by chaos and the possibility of organizing it" (Ehrmann, 1969: 456). 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
87 
From this whole a series of characteristics of the game emerges: the 
closure of game activity vis-a-vis the world of ordinary activities, with the 
game being its own goal for itself; the repetition or incessant resumption 
of the motive of the game (as in a refrain), the toing and froing of 
movement determined by the rules of the game; and finally, the distinction, 
through these same rules, between an inside and an outside, between the 
field of the game and the area out of bounds. 
But the insistence on the objectivity or neutrality of the game should 
not lead one to forget the player. The interest of the concept of game lies 
precisely in its transcendence of the categories of subject and object, even 
if we are constrained to express ourselves using these representations. The 
game is neither the effect of anonymous programming nor the product of 
a sovereign will. As a space of creativity, it measures the effect of the 
subject's intentionality, largely unpredictable, on the rigidity of the conven-
tion; as a regulated field, it reflects the bending of the will to the influence 
of a largely uncontrollable collective structure. 
This adjustment of the actor's project to the norms of the game field is, 
for Bourdieu, the effect of a special variety of practical sense: the "sense 
of the game", sense of placement, strategy, which, through a series of 
appropriate anticipations, of choices which "are no less systematic for not 
being deliberate", allows the player to extract the maximum benefit from 
a particular structure of game (Bourdieu, 1980: 111). The idea seems to us 
to be extremely important, since it shows that the practice of the game 
can be reduced neither to respect for the rules nor to pure and simple 
indeterminacy. Beyond the rules there is not the void, but precisely a "game 
space" measured and exploited by the sense of the game as a practical 
intuition of the meaning produced by the game itself. The central element 
in this sense of the game is no doubt the pursuing — not necessarily 
consciously, however — of the goals of the game and its stakes, what 
Bourdieu calls the "belief' or "practical faith which is as it were the 
entrance fee tacitly imposed by all the fields" (1980: 113). Searle also insists 
on this point: playing chess is not merely conforming to the rules defining 
possible moves — a reproduced chess game might take place, for instance 
in the context of a religious ceremony; it is also and primarily acting in 
accordance with the (generally implicit) rules defining the "object of the 
game" (Searle, 1972: 73). 
We have certainly not come to the end of assessing the fertility of this 
concept of game for analyzing the various manifestations of human activity. 
One might in particular, following Crozier and Friedberg, use it to give an 
account of the functioning of organized groups. "The game, the essential 
instrument of organized action" — these authors write — "reconciles freedom 
and constraint. The player remains free, but if he is to win must adopt a 
rational strategy depending on the nature of the game, and respect its rules" 
(Crozier and Friedberg, 1977: 97). This instrument of analysis has for these 

88 
Francis Ost 
authors the advantage of allowing one to go beyond both the strategic per-
spective restricted to the actor's individual viewpoint, and the systems per-
spective limited to the determinism of the system (1977: 103). In the game, 
"the rules condition the actors' strategy, but are in return also conditioned by 
it" (1977: 212). The game is not fixed, because on the one hand it is rare for 
there to be only one possible strategy corresponding to each phase of the 
game, and on the other, it is always possible — though it may amount to a 
"dangerous game" — to play against it (1977: 212). In certain cases, it may be 
that these minority strategies pay off, and one will then see a more or less 
thorough transformation of the game itself under the various "role behaviors" 
that it articulates (1977: 103). 
The point is not, therefore, to exalt the player's freedom, since his room 
for maneuver is often restricted. The player is in no case a sovereign actor 
capable of negotiating as he wishes the terms of his participation; his 
rationality is most often limited and his freedom restricted. It is true, 
however, that in the social game certain actors have more power than 
others; that is, increased control over the uncertainties that characterize the 
game. But here again, power is not to be understood as an attribute of a 
type external to the game; it is more a relative property internal to a given 
game structure, lying in a certain distribution of ability to control relevant 
sources of uncertainty intrinsic to the game (Crozier and Friedberg, 1977: 
25). The same is again true of sanctions which may, where appropriate, be 
inflicted on deviant behavior. Their implementation has certainly less to 
do with the exercise of hierarchical authority than with "criss-cross control", 
diffuse, multi-dimensional control that constrains the players inasmuch as 
they are inserted in a structural network of exchange relationships (Crozier 
and Friedberg, 1977: 248). 
Has analysis of the concept of game taken us away from self-organization? 
Yes, no doubt, if it is conceived of as autopoiesis or mechanical accomplish-
ment of a program perturbed only by exogenous "shocks"; not if it is 
conceived of as "relative self-organization" or the execution of the program, 
which remains partly indeterminate and changes in response to outside 
information which, though it may appear as noise and disorder to an 
outside observer, is translated into meaning and more complex order for 
the organization itself. As life evolves "between crystal and smoke", the 
game unfolds between order and disorder. 
Now we are finally in a position to ask the question: in what sense can 
one speak of the game of law? 
3. The Game of Law 
The game model is capable of all sorts of applications in law. One might, 
for instance, think of the liberal legal system — let us say the rule of law — 
in game terms, and on this basis evaluate the transformations it undergoes 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
89 
in the context of the post-liberal interventionist system of the Welfare State 
(Arnaud, 1973; Ost, 1984 a). One might use the etymology of the word 
persona (theatrical mask, role) to study the concept of legal personality from 
the viewpoint of a theatrical "play", of a "role" to be performed on the 
legal "stage". Again, one might study the "game" of legal language which, 
while it may respond to systemic factors of consumption, nevertheless has 
an "open texture" that no a priori rule can totally reduce (Ost and van de 
Kerchove, 1982: 395 ff.). 
Here, however, we wish to confine ourselves to the essential: the intelligi-
bility and the validity of legal phenomena. Our hypothesis is that the 
replies that may be given to the questions, "What is meaning in law?" and 
"What is authority in law?", can be formulated in the game model. Having 
brought out these two issues, we shall seek to give an account of the 
epistemological viewpoint that application of the game paradigm seems to 
us to imply. 
The oscillation that recurrently marks interpretive theories, between a 
concern for fidelity to the legislator's will ("school of exegesis") and that 
for adaptation to the social needs of the moment ("Freirecht school") 
bears witness in its way to the dialectical tension characterizing the legal 
interpretation of the laws. This activity seems in fact both to respond to 
rules and to involve at least a minimum of latitude and of inventiveness. 
Some of these rules are known: the judge cannot give a decision through 
general rules; the judge must decide even in cases where the law is 
insufficient or obscure; he must give reasons for his decision; he must take 
the letter of the law into account, without being bound by it if that would 
seem to contradict the legislator's intention. Beyond these rules which form 
as it were the framework for the very act of interpreting, the legal tradition 
offers the judge innumerable arguments or maxims that are like a keyboard 
that he then uses as best he can to produce the "sounds" authorized by 
the special features of the case before him. 
But this assignment of meaning can in no case be reduced to the 
mechanical application of rules; the uncertainty affecting both the legal 
formula (characterized by its ambiguity or "open texture") and the legisla-
tor's intention (sometimes absent, sometimes contradictory, often obscure) 
could not possibly be removed by mere recourse to pre-established maxims. 
It will inevitably be necessary to apply meta-rules or preferential directives 
guiding the interpreter's choice among various methods of interpretation. 
But recourse to these meta-rules is in no way automatic and programmed, 
so that a genuine choice is opened up for the interpreter. The legal system, 
like the living one of which Atlan speaks, thus has a large dose of 
indeterminacy. This is no doubt necessary to enable it to adapt to the 
surrounding noise (the randomness of the case). 
Those authors who affirm — against the classical dogma that sustains 
the illusion of legal security given by the law's singleness and clarity of 

90 
Frangois Ost 
meaning — this irreducible indeterminacy generally conclude that interpre-
tation is otherwise a matter of political and ethical choice. Thus it is the 
case with Kelsen, for whom "the law to be applied is a mere framework, 
within which there are several possibilities of application" (Kelsen, 1962: 
457). It is far from being the case, though, in the reality of legal practice, 
that all interpretations theoretically compatible with the framework formed 
by the higher norm to be applied are of the same value, having regard to 
what is "at stake" in the operation of interpretation. The fact is that, in 
the conduct of the game, the players are not free to adopt any type of 
behavior whatsoever, as long as they respect the letter of the game. It is 
even known that the literal understanding or observance of the "letter" of 
the regulation or subjective law may constitute a very effective way of no 
longer "playing the game", for instance in working to rule {greve de %e/e) 
or the abuse of rights. 
It is therefore important — after picking out the explicit rules and 
measuring the area for maneuver that structure the play of the interpreta-
tion — to locate the implicit rules, the goals and the stakes. If these implicit 
rules are not brought to light, one can never understand how certain 
interpretations are rejected by the legal system as unassimilatable noise, 
and others instead taken as generators of information capable of bringing 
about a reorganization of the previous equilibrium. Our thesis in this 
connection is that the judge must endeavor to choose among the various 
possible meanings of the norm to be interpreted the one that is of such a 
nature as to confirm "the legislator's rationality" — in other words, the 
legal strategy aims at guaranteeing and reinforcing the coherence of the 
legal order, understood both as logical congruence and ideological harmony. 
The interpretation of the case in the light of the law is, then, outstandingly 
a process aimed at ensuring the homeostatic character of the legal order, 
which is bound ceaselessly to change itself without thereby denying itself. 
Dworkin has recently given a very stimulating formulation of this 
postulate of the legislator's rationality that binds the interpreting judge. 
For Dworkin, judges are in a position comparable to that of a group of 
writers who are compelled to write a novel as a chain. Each one, except 
for the first one, has to add a chapter of his own to the story, while of 
course respecting a certain continuity of style and content. The rule — 
which Dworkin very opportunely terms "rule of the game" — consists, 
then, in respecting the "principle of unity" that should lead each writer 
not only to make his output like that of his predecessors but even to 
anticipate that of his successors, so as to advance the story in a direction 
which is both compatible with its previous stages and able to lead to a 
credible conclusion. Moreover, each writer will be concerned to mark the 
story and style with his personal stamp — which, at the legal level, is 
reflected in the need to interpret the law not only in conformity with the 
whole set of sources in force, but also in the light of the ethical and 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
91 
political principles that the judge feels ought to apply (Dworkin, 1985: 
51 ff.). 
The metaphor of the "chain novel" shows very well that if the interpreta-
tion of the laws is in very large part a matter of interpretation of the law 
by itself, self-production of meaning, this undoubtedly has more to do 
with intrinsic performances by the legal order itself (clarity of the text, 
coherence and completeness of construction, relevance of its explicit rules 
of interpretation) than with the strategic capacities of its actors, who know 
how to take advantage of its manifold sources of uncertainty in order to 
reproduce a game which they strengthen through their very participation. 
To put it yet another way: the legal production of meaning results less 
from a unilateral intentional awareness — that of the legislator who binds 
the judge or that of the judge interpreting the law as he sees fit — than 
from an uninterrupted, multi-directional collective process of circulation 
of meaning: "meaning of the game", "spirit of the system", not as the will 
of some sort of hypostatized legal order, but as a "practical faith" (Bourdieu, 
1980) shared by the players. But just as it is not up to the legal system to 
find within itself the resources capable of mobilizing and maintaining this 
coherence nor of definitively fixing its intensity and object, the system 
proves to be radically dependent on its environment, even if it draws its 
force and its specificity, again like the game, only from its autonomy. 
We should be led to similar conclusions by a consideration of the 
question of the validity of legal norms. Here again, theory seems continually 
to hesitate between a dogmatic attitude laying down exclusive, non-gradual 
a priori criteria of validity and a skeptical attitude holding to an a posteriori 
finding of what rules are actually respected by the authorities and/or the 
social organism. But it does seem that the actual processes of validation 
are rather remote from either of these poles, which should authorize us to 
give an account of them in terms of the game model. 
In our legal systems, impregnated as they are with legal positivist 
philosophy, the validity of rules is assessed by reference to formal criteria — 
of competence, procedure and sometimes of basis — which are set by the 
legal order itself, generally through its higher norms of constitutional rank, 
or even super-constitutional in such an author as Kelsen. Validity is thus 
understood in exclusively formal fashion as whether a norm belongs to a 
given legal system. This is a "pedigree test", as Dworkin writes, done vis-
a-vis some "master rule" which is held to crown the legal edifice (Dworkin, 
1977: 17). The process of validation is both unilateral (it takes account 
only of the formal validity of the rule: its enactment pursuant to intra-
systemic criteria), absolute (it leads to unambiguous results: a rule will be 
declared absolutely valid or totally null) and hierarchicalized (the validity 
is always assessed in terms of foundation, which necessarily presupposes 
going back from the lower norm to the higher norm). But it does seem 
that if one wishes to give an account of legal practice, the judgement of 

92 
Fran5ois Ost 
legal validity has to be taken as plural (based on formal criteria, but also 
empirical and axiological ones), relative (capable of having very variable 
intensities and thus effects) and circular (not only produced from above or 
from below, but resulting from a continuous interaction of the whole set 
of legal actors). 
Light has been thrown on all this by the Anglo-Saxon discussion of 
"hard cases". It seems in fact that in these hard cases judges do not hesitate 
to apply solutions not necessarily deriving from a rule belonging officially 
to the system, a rule qualified by the formal test of pedigree — what 
Perelman called "rules in uniform" (Perelman, 1971: 316). Alerted precisely 
by some lacuna or inequity of the official system, judges prefer in these 
cases to give binding force to "guerilla rules"; to what are today called, 
following Dworkin, "principles" operating on the edges of the law and 
sometimes even against it. What lesson is to be drawn from these paradig-
matic cases, if at least it is to be admitted that what is at work there in 
exemplary fashion is also operating, no doubt to a less extreme degree, in 
simple cases? 
It will be deduced that the validity judgment, more or less explicitly 
according to whether they oppose formal criteria or not, incorporates 
empirical considerations (is the norm whose application is being contem-
plated effective or is it falling out of use? Even if it is still in force, is it 
appropriate to apply it hie et nunc?) and axiological considerations (is the 
norm whose application is being considered legitimate? Is it in conformity 
with prevailing ethical and political principles?) (Ost, 1984b: Iff.). In the 
reply they give to these questions judges are guided by principles termed 
by Raz "discretionary rules", rules which guide magistrates' choices without 
absolutely determining them (Raz, 1979: 96). Thus, legal systems would 
culminate not in a single rule of recognition, but in a variety of rules, some 
of them imposing upon judges imperative criteria of validity (rules of 
recognition), others guiding their search for the reasonable solution in 
delicate cases (discretionary rules). Hart, for his part, is far from conferring 
absolute rigidity on the rule of recognition; this, let us not forget, "exists 
as a fact" to the extent that it is "accepted" as a rule of recognition, at the 
end of an "effective practice which lies in the manner whereby the courts 
identify what ought to be considered as being law" (Hart, 1961: 136). The 
rule of recognition is thus capable of variation in time and remains subject 
to interpretation (1976: 181 ff.) which can be reduced neither to "blind and 
arbitrary choice" nor to "mechanical deduction" (1976: 244). 
However, while it is plural (and to that extent even gradual), the process 
of validation is also circular. Contrary to Kelsen's picture of the pyramid 
where the top validates or empowers lower levels (an image not entirely 
without religious connotations) (Kelsen, 1967: 366), and against the model 
of the American realists according to whom the bottom validates the top 
(only the norm actually applied can be regarded as valid), what has to be 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
93 
asserted is the interactional nature of the validity judgment. Hart had 
already adumbrated this idea by decentralizing the process of validation. 
This would then no longer consist exclusively in empowerment by a higher 
body, but would depend also on the recognition of that body by authorities 
located on a lower hierarchical level. Kelsen took this reality into account 
only in the extreme case of successful revolution: only in this case did he 
admit the existence of a process of validation which was both plural 
(founded upon a practice and judgement of legitimacy in opposition to 
formal legality) and recursive (the behavior of the lower body, including 
the people, bringing about modification of the behavior of the higher body 
and the norms produced) so that the change in material conditions involves 
a change in the fundamental norm itself (Kelsen, 1967: 366). But is this 
not an admission that the fundamental norm always, even in periods of 
stabilization of the system, reflects the relationships of force and judgements 
of legitimacy? And is it not then allowable to generalize Hart's model and 
maintain that the higher norm's claim to apply must, in order to be 
validated, i. e., to produce its legal effects, be the object of recognition by 
the lower body that is to apply it?4 
The multiplicity of criteria presiding over the judgment of validity, and 
the plurality of bodies that conjoin to recognize the binding force of legal 
rules, are adequate evidence of the breadth of the validation process, within 
the framework outlined by the formal validity criteria set by the legal 
orders in force, and sometimes even beyond them. It need not, though, be 
concluded — no more than in the case of interpretation of the law — that 
the approach is indeterminate and the results equivalent. Here again it is 
important to pick out the implicit rules of the game which, at a heuristic 
level which is all the more effective for being almost unconscious, guide 
the bodies responsible for assessing the binding scope of legal norms. We 
think in this connection that, just as the operation of interpretation was 
polarized by the representation of the "rational legislator", the recognition 
of validity is polarized by the image of the "sovereign legislator" — by 
which is meant the necessarily valid character (and therefore bindingness) 
that ought to attach to rules whose origin can be derived from the 
omnipotence of the sovereign; as if their State origin naturally conferred 
on them (an almost unbreakable presumption of legal dogmatics) a patent 
of legitimacy and an assurance of effectiveness (Ost and van de Kerchove, 
1985 b: 227 ff.). 
4 This conclusion appears to be true of any type of norm whatever. Thus, it has been 
shown that the progressive recognition of the binding force of a caselaw rule depended 
not only on its ratification by the higher jurisdiction, but also on its systematic 
application by lower ones, bringing about, in this case, unification "from below" (in 
this sense, see van de Kerchove, 1985). 

94 
Frangois Ost 
The conception of validity that we have just brought out is related at 
many points to the theory of self-organization. Its circular character brings 
out the idea of "tangled hierarchy" whereby the upper commands the 
lower, though in some way being commanded by it; its plural nature brings 
out the idea of complexity whereby the system keeps itself functioning 
only by incorporating meaning in increasingly comprehensive, multiple 
levels of organization. 
But here again it seems to us unacceptable to speak of self-production of 
validity, as if the legal system itself was generating the authority that ensures 
the binding force of its rules. Kelsen is no doubt the author that went furthest 
in this search for the self-foundation of law; but in thus seeking to guarantee 
law from any metaphysical or ideological contamination, he succeeded only 
in introducing metaphysics and ideology into the law itself. 
As with the question of interpretation, it is necessary to take account of 
the actor, his imaginary investments, his judgements of legitimacy and his 
practical behavior. Even if the law confers on them an irreducibly specific 
form, it cannot pretend to determine either their source or their intensity, 
or even their object. From this pont of view again, the autonomy of law 
appears as "autonomy under dependence". 
Finally, a word to indicate the epistemological perspective underlying 
the game paradigm. We have maintained that the autopoietic theory 
supposed the adoption of an internal viewpoint, that of self-observation, 
as if the system were speaking about itself. We think instead that adopting 
the game paradigm means agreeing to bring about the decentralization of 
the outside observer looking from the outside on his object of study. But, 
and here the game perspective comes close to the autopoietic perspective, 
this objectivization or "epistemological break" does not mean rejecting the 
internal viewpoint or meaning produced by the system studied: quite the 
contrary, the outside viewpoint that is to be occupied here sees itself as 
"respectful" — or more exactly "aware" — of the internal viewpoint. It 
is, then, what one might call a "moderate external viewpoint" (Ost and van 
de Kerchove, 1984); other authors talk about the "hermeneutic viewpoint" 
(MacCormick, 1981: 34ff.; Villa, 1984: 264ff.). It seems that only this 
position can allow account to be taken of the intrinsic logic of human 
meaning systems resulting from a self-interpretation, though without adopt-
ing their solipsist language.5 The game could then be just as much that of 
the subject and the object, of the observer and the system. 
Translated from the French by Iain Fraser. 
5 Cf. Livet: "The tendency would be to believe that the closure model...will enable the 
observer's modes of access to an object to be founded upon the organization of the 
object observed (its self-referential logic); and thus to graft the awareness we have of 
the object on the awareness it has of itself. This is no doubt only an illusion, 
fascinating though it be" (1983: 167). 

Between Order and Disorder: The Game of Law 
95 
Bibliography 
ARNAUD, ANDRE-JEAN ( 1 9 7 3 ) Essai danalyse 
structurale 
du code civilfran^ais. 
La regle du jeu 
dans la paix bougeoise. Paris: L. G. D, J. 
ASHBY, WILLIAM R. ( 1 9 6 2 ) "Principles of the Self-Organizing System", in Η . M . von 
Foerster and G. W. Zopf (eds.), Principles 
of Self-Organisation. 
New York: Pergamon 
Press. 
A T L A N , HENRI (1974) "Discussion", L·unite de Fhomme. 2. Le cerveau humain. Paris: Seuil. 
— (1979) Entre le cristal et la fumee. 
Paris: Seuil. 
— (1983) "L'emergence du nouveau et du sens", in P. Dumouchel and J.-P. Dupuy 
(eds.), JJ auto-organisation. 
De la physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
BOURDIEU, PIERRE (1980) Le sens pratique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
CAILLOIS, ROGER (1958) Les jeux et les bommes. Paris: Seuil. 
CASTORIADIS, CORNELIUS (1983) "La logique des magmas et la question de l'autonomie", 
in P. Dumouchel et J.-P. Dupuy (eds.), L'auto-organisation. 
De la physique au 
politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
CROZIER, M I C H E L and E R H A R D FRIEDBERG ( 1 9 7 7 ) Lacteur 
et le systeme. Les contraintes 
de 
I'action collective. 
Paris: Seuil. 
DERRIDA, JACQUES (1967) "La structure, le signe et le jeu dans le discours des sciences 
humaines", in J. Derrida (ed.), l'ecriture 
et la difference. 
Paris: Seuil. 
DUMOUCHEL, PIERRE AND JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY ( 1 9 8 3 ) L! auto-organisation. 
De la physique 
au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
DUPUY, JEAN-PIERRE ( 1 9 8 2 ) Ordres et desordres. 
Enquetes sur m nouveau paradigme. 
Paris: 
Seuil. 
DWORKIN, RONALD (1977) Taking Rights Seriously. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press. 
— (1985) "La chaine du droit", 1 Droit et societe 51. 
EHRMANN, JACQUES ( 1 9 6 9 ) "L'homme en jeu", Critique 
4 5 6 . 
FEBBRAJO, ALBERTO ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Leggitimazione e teoria dei sistemi", 1 Sociologia 
del 
diritto 
3 0 . 
GADAMER, HANS-GEORG ( 1 9 6 0 ) Wahrheit und Methode. Tübingen: Mohr. 
GUTSATZ, M I C H E L (1983) "Les dangers de Tauto'", in P. Dumouchel and J.-P. Dupuy 
(eds.), Uauto-organisation. 
De la physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
H A R T , H . L . Α . ( 1 9 6 1 ) The Concept of Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
HUIZINGA, JOHAN ( 1 9 3 8 ) Homo ludens. Haarlem: Tieenk Willink. 
JACQUEMIN, 
ALEX (1985) Selection 
et pouvotr 
dans la nouvelle economie 
industrielle. 
Paris/ 
Louvain-la-Neuve: Economica—Cabay. 
KELSEN, 
HANS 
( 1 9 6 7 ) Pure 
Theory of Law (cited from the French translation by C. 
Eisenmann) ( 1 9 6 2 ) Berkeley: University of California Press. 
KERCHOVE, M I C H E L VAN DE (1985) "Jurisprudence et rationalite juridique", Archive 
de 
Philosophie 
du droit. 
LADRIERE, JEAN ( 1 9 7 7 ) Les enjeux de la rationalite. 
Paris: Aubier—Montaigne—Unesco. 
LIVET, 
PIERRE (1983) "La fascination de l'auto-organisation", in P. Dumouchel and 
J.-P. Dupuy (eds.), Lauto-organisation. 
De la physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
LUHMANN, 
NIKLAS 
( 1 9 8 5 a) "The Autopoiesis of Social Systems". Presented at the 
Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, Department of Law, European 
University Institute, Firenze (December 12 — 15). 
— (1985 b) "The Self-Reproduction of Law and its Limits", in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas 
of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
M A C CORMICK, N E I L (1981) H. L. A. Hart. Jurists. 
Profiles 
in Legal Theory. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press. 

96 
Francois Ost 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO and FRANCISCO VARELA ( 1 9 8 0 ) Autopoiesis and Cognition. Boston/ 
Dordrecht: Reidel. 
O S T , FRANCOIS (1984 a) "Entre jeu et providence, le juge des relations economiques", in 
A. Jacquemin and B. Remiche (eds.), Les magistratures economiques et la crise. Bruxelles: 
CRISP. 
— (1984 b) "Considerations sur la validite des normes et systemes juridiques". 99 Journal 
des Tribunaux 1. 
O S T , FRAN501S and JACQUES LENOBLE (1980) Droit, my the et raison. Essai sur la derive 
mytho-logique de la rationalitejuridique. 
Bruxelles: Publications des Facultes universitaires 
Saint-Louis. 
O S T , FRANCOIS and M I C H E L VAN DE KERCHOVE ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Le jeu de l'interpretation en 
droit. Contribution ä l'etude de la cloture du langage juridique", 27 Archives de 
philosophie du droit 395. 
— (1984) "Towards an Interdisciplinary Theory of Law", in A. Peczenik (ed.), Theory 
of Legal Science. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic. 
— (1985 a) "La reference a Dieu dans la theorie pure du droit de Hans Kelsen", Qu'est-
ce que Dieu? Bruxelles: Publications des Facultes universitaires Saint-Louis. 
— (1985 b) "Rationalite et souverainete du legislateur, paradigmes de la rationalite 
juridique?" LXII Rivista internationale di filosofia del diritto 227. 
PERELMAN, CHA'I'M (1971) "A propos de la regle de droit. Reflexions de methode", in C . 
Perelman (ed.), La regle de droit. Bruxelles: Bruylant. 
R A Z , JOSEPH ( 1 9 7 9 ) The Authority of Law. Oxford: 
RICOEUR, PAUL (1972) Cours sur I'hermeneutique. Louvain: Ciaco. 
SEARLE, J . B . ( 1 9 7 2 ) Les actes de langage. Essai de philosophie du langage. Paris: Hermann. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO (1979) Principles of Biological Autonomy. New York: North Holland. 
— (1983) "L'auto-organisation: de l'apparence au mecanisme", in P. Dumouchel and 
J.-P. Dupuy (eds.), Lauto-organisation. 
De la physique au politique. Paris: Seuil. 
VILLA, VITTORIO ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Legal Science between Natural and Human Sciences", 3 Legal 
Studies 264. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
HUBERT ROTTLEUTHNER 
Berlin 
When concepts, models, approaches, perspectives, paradigms or theories 
of one discipline are taken over in other areas of knowledge and transferred 
to other disciplines, the original source may be termed a leading discipline. 
In the history of science there have been times when some disciplines 
seemed especially favored in their capacity to supply others from their 
stock. In the 19th century, for instance, biology would have to be counted 
among the candidates for the leading discipline, especially after Darwin. 
At least as we may see it today, such concepts as development, evolution, 
struggle, life and organism found broad transdisciplinary distribution, 
originating in biological contexts. 
From the point of view of sociology of knowledge (and therefore also 
history of science) the process of transferring elements of knowledge from 
one objectively delimited area to another is an instructive phenomenon, 
which also involves some methodological subtleties. When are borrowings 
from one discipline made by another? What internal problems are to be over-
come by introducing external elements? What advance in knowledge is hoped 
for, and what subsidiary problems result? How exactly does the transfer mech-
anism function? In what circumstances does it become apparent that there 
has merely been a chasing of pretty pictures, a following of fashion? 
I should like to start by briefly explaining the sense in which I use the terms 
metaphor and scientific metaphorism to characterize this transfer process. I 
shall then explore the use of biological metaphors in legal thought in the 19th 
century, using as examples the terms "organism" and "development". It will 
be necessary to clarify what is at all "biological" about these concepts. 
Finally, I should like to draw some conclusions from the 19th century 
debate for attempts at a revival of biological concepts in more recent legal 
theories. 
Metaphor 
In line with the Greek etymology, by metaphor I shall mean in the 
following a transfer, particularly of concepts. In German the term usually 

98 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
denotes an expression involving an image. This is not the sense I wish to 
use, even though pictorial elements are ubiquitous in transfers from biology, 
for instance, in the well-known comparisons of the state — or the church — 
to the individual person, with head, body and individual organs. Concepts 
of germination, flowering, growth, withering of flowers, trees, etc., or 
individual cells, belong here, as do the well-worn analogies between the 
stages of life (ontogenesis) and changes and cycles of state forms, ages of 
the world, or phylogenesis1. 
Since ancient times the attitude towards metaphors (even in the non-
pictorial sense) seems always to have been ambivalent. On the one hand, 
the unsuitable, inadequate aspect of every transfer is warned against, but 
on the other the fertility and originality of metaphors are praised: they 
allow description of a well-known object in another light, the description 
of something as something else (e. g., state as an organism). Skepticism is 
always appropriate; a number of stages of it can be characterized: 
(1) What field or what discipline does the expression come from? 
(2) What questions was it introduced there to solve; in what theoretical 
context and with what consequences? 
(3) What characteristic meaning and what intension does it have in its area 
of origin? 
(4) To what set of other objects (extension) of other disciplines is the term 
transferred; to solve what problems, and in what theoretical context? 
(5) What original characteristics of meaning remain conserved, which 
change, and which become irrelevant? 
(6) In the new field, the new theoretical context, does the metaphor 
facilitate the solution of major problems, or is it merely a new fa^on 
de 
parier? 
I. Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought in the 19th Century2 
1. Biological Metaphors 
In speaking of biological metaphors, I am presupposing that there is a 
delimited area of origin, the discipline of biology, from which a transfer to 
1 Interesting shifts in perspective arise here from the fact that, for instance, the moderns 
can regard the ancients either as the "old" or as the "youth of the world". 
2 The following part chiefly concerns aspects of conceptual history. I shall confine 
myself to the German, particularly the German language, development. Because of the 
connotations of meanings peculiar to each language, transfer to similar concepts and 
their developments in meaning in other countries is no doubt hardly possible. Only 
a few examples from Britain (here a whole monograph might be written on Spencer) 
and France are adduced. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
99 
other spheres takes place. The candidates mentioned above — development, 
evolution, struggle, life, organism — are not meant to represent a range 
of general concepts which are given different uses in the various disciplines, 
but are those that have acquired their specific meaning in the original area, 
in the leading discipline, biology, and have thus been transferred to other 
areas. What, then, is originally biological about these concepts? 
In the history of the disciplines, the first irritating point is that the term 
"biology" appears for the first time only around 1800 — specifically, in 
C. F. Burdach (1777 — 1847) Propädeutik %um Studium der gesammten 
Heilkunst. 
Ein Leitfaden akademischer 
Vorlesungen. Under biology, he brings together 
morphology, physiology and psychology. The term is then found in 1802, 
in both G. R. Treviranus and J. B. Lamarck. It apparently was taken over 
from the latter by Auguste Comte (1839), as a term for a science that 
studies the relationships between organism and environment (Ballauf, 1971; 
see also Lepenies, 1976: 29). The idea of a "developmental history of 
nature" (Kant 1790) was alien to it until the 19th century. What we bring 
together today under biology was treated in Comte's time and the period 
before 1800 as part of natural history (Historia Naturalis). Its procedure 
was to collect and describe, and it covered roughly zoology, geology, 
meteorology, hydrography and botany3 as well as mineralogy, physical 
geography, paleontology, comparative morphology, and biogeography. Not 
only natural history but also parts of natural philosophy comprised what 
we now know as biology4. At the end of the 18th century, to be sure, a 
growing interdependence of the various disciplines can be noted, but a 
clear demarcation of biology from geology (the paleontological study of 
fossils), study of the earth and countries (biogeography) or medicine 
(anatomy, morphology, embryology) had not yet taken place. One can 
agree with W. Lefevre (1984) that the formation of biology as an independ-
ent discipline became possible only with Darwin's theory of descent — the 
theory that integrated all the subdisciplines. The mere study of orders in 
natural history was fused into a theoretical (which in the 19th century means 
historical) science. Simultaneously with Darwin's theory of evolution, an 
antivitalist, mechanistic physiology was differentiated out (cf. Mendelsohn, 
1974 and see also his earlier survey, 1964). 
This tricky situation, which from the start makes it hard to speak of 
biological metaphors (without running the danger of slipping over into areas 
of medicine, geology, etc.), can be clarified by an examination of the two 
concepts whose use in 19th century legal thought I should like to go into 
in more detail: the concepts of organism and development. 
3 These at least are the subjects on which Charles Darwin heard natural history lectures 
under Robert Jameson in Edinburgh; cf. Querner, 1973: 11. 
4 On this Emanuel Radl, 1905 is still worth reading; with his excursus on Aristotle, 
pp. 14 ff. 

100 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
2. Organism 
Comparisons of state, society, church or other collectives with the individ-
ual, his body and his physical and spiritual attributes are age-old5. It would, 
however, be only at the price of blindness to the history of concepts that 
one could treat these as "organic" conceptions. It is only much later that 
the terms "organic" and "organism" appear within the spheres of meaning 
in which we understand these terms today: the oppositions organic/inor-
ganic and organic/mechanical were established only towards the end of the 
18th century. Thus, for instance, van Krieken (1873), in his historical 
description of organic theories of the state, draws a distinction between an 
unconsciously organic period and a consciously organic one (the latter 
since Fichte and Schelling, with the explicit use of the terms; previously 
there was only the metaphor of the body politic). Until the early 18th 
century the old instrumental conception of organ (= organori) still prevailed. 
The body with its organs was understood more as a machine (on models 
of circuits, pumps and levers). The term "organism" probably first appears 
in G. E. Stahl (Theoria medica vera 1708) in a medical context, in place of 
the older terms corpus organicum or organized body (cf. Dohrn-van Rossum, 
1978: 559; Ballauf, 1984: col. 1331). 
By 1800 the use of the term "organism" seems to be established, but not 
only in areas that we would later assign to the fields of biology. The definitions 
given by Kant to natural products as "organized beings" (Kant, 1790: § 65) 
were generally extended beyond the spectrum of plant, animal and human 
being, to refer to spiritual and moral organisms in which the parts are alterna-
tely cause and effect, operate through their relation to the whole, and the 
whole is an end in itself. It is not the reference to the biological sphere, but 
the formal categories of part and whole, cause and effect, means and end that 
allow the ubiquitous use of the concept of organism — from the definition 
of the state as "objective organism of freedom" (Schelling, 1803: 547) up to 
the mechanistic metaphors of, for instance, Saint-Simon, who called society 
"une veritable machine organisee"6. 
As regards use of the metaphor of organism in the 19th century, one 
must be careful to ask how far references to natural objects understood 
biologically are in fact being made7. It cannot be taken as a matter of 
course that the term "organism" always implies a biological metaphor. 
5 Plato, The Republic (cited from Stephanus edition) 434 d, 441c—d; Aristotle, 
Politics 
I, 2 (1253 a), III, 11 (1281b). - Cf. also Dohrn-van Rossum, 1978: 522 ff. on the 
corpus-tradition. 
6 Saint-Simon, Oeuvres, Vol. XXXIX, reprinted Aalen, 1964: 174, cited from Meyer, 
1969: 130. 
7 The constitutive role of the metaphor of the organism in the formation of sociology in 
the 19th century is beyond my scope. Comte's static/dynamic distinction (analogous 
to that between anatomy and physiology) probably sprang from biological soil (cf. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
101 
3. Development 
The same is true of the concept of development. We link it with biology 
because theories of the development of life, especially Darwin's theory of 
evolution, seem to us to form its core. The German word Entwicklung (or 
Entwickelung) first appears, as a literal translation of evolutio in 1645 in Philip 
von Zesen (cf. Wieland, 1975, and for the sequel, also Zimmermann, 1953; 
Weyand, 1972), with the meaning of the unfolding of something (a knot, 
a role of manuscript, a package). Beginning in the early 18th century the 
term was also applied to mental phenomena: ideas, concepts, thoughts, 
etc., which are developed (more or less in the sense of explicated). It spread 
first of all in poetics, and only then into areas which we would today 
regard as biology and medicine. In the context of embryology, it was used 
both by proponents of preformation theory and by supporters of epigenesis. 
Ontogenesis is portrayed as the development of characteristics already laid 
down in the germ, whether pre-formed or requiring the mediation of a 
formative drive (nisus formativus, 
C. F. Wolf, Theoria generations, 
1759). On 
the assumption of the constancy of species, this could only mean eternal 
recurrence. In the last third of the 18th century the term is also applied to 
the political and social area. Images from the organic world of animals and 
plants, as well as comparisons with the stages of life, were frequently used 
to clarify historical developments. In this way, the two terms that interest 
us were finally combined in the topos of organic development. Here it is again 
of importance for our context that at least by the time of Hegel the concept 
of development had become detached from the (pre-)biological debate. 
My summary is therefore rather sobering: neither organism nor develop-
ment can be regarded as originally biological concepts. This is not only 
because of the lack of integration of the biological disciplines around 1800, 
but also simply because of the fact that both concepts already appeared in 
Meyer, 1969: 134). It is uncertain whether this is also true for Spencer's basic law of 
differentiation and integration: "Spencer spoke of reciprocity (Wechselwirkung) as he 
showed that biology borrowed the concept of division of labor from sociology in 
order to return it in an enriched form. Reciprocity signifies the transfer of a concept 
from one scientific discipline to another and then back into the original discipline." 
(Lepenies, 1976: 172; for what Spencer said cf. Spencer, 1873/1961: 305: "The services 
of the two sciences are, indeed, reciprocal.") — The point, however, would be to 
work out more specifically those characteristics taken over from the biological area 
and any new ones that might have been added. Without that, a critique of the 
metaphor of the organism which asserts that organic systems are of essentially higher 
structural invariance than social systems, with the former integrated through life and 
the latter through meaning, is simplistic. Such a critique ignores the fact that the 
metaphor was also used to encompass the rationality and meaningfulness of life, 
including social life. Cf. Luhmann, 1971 a: 11; 1971 b: 92 ff.; 1971 c: 372; also Canguil-
hem, 1981; Hirst, 1973; Lepenies 1976: 169 ff.; and as long ago as 1905, Gumplowicz: 
393 ff. 

102 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
quite a few other areas too. The use of both terms in legal thought does 
not therefore support the conclusion that a biological metaphor is being 
used. To show this, one would have to find out whether individual authors 
really had a biological area of origin in mind. I regard such proof as 
possible only in the rarest of cases. It seems rather that the terms organism 
and development were "on every lip", ubiquitously used, without thought 
for any "origin". 
However — and despite this sobering fact, this thesis can allow us to 
soar again 
both concepts apparently went through a biologization in 
the second half of the 19th century: on the one hand as a result of Darwin's 
theory of evolution, which in the decades following 1860 dominated 
thinking about development through the principles of divergence and 
variation, selection based on the struggle for existence, and reproductive 
isolation (prevention of backcrossing); on the other, through advances in 
microbiology. At this latter level, the attempt was made to find the 
particular mechanisms of variation and inheritance, which Darwin's theory 
had only asserted at a macro-level. From microbiology arose a view of the 
structure of the organism, in the specific sense of an association of cells.% 
To the extent that the reference is made to these findings and concepts in 
other disciplines, for instance in legal science, which interests us, one may 
very well speak of the use of biological metaphors. 
4. "Organism" and "Organic" in 19th Century Legal Thought 
Thus, if I nevertheless seek below to sketch the use of the concepts of 
organism and development in legal thought throughout the whole 19th 
century, this can only be with the goal of picking out the process of 
biologization of the metaphors. I shall confine myself here to a few 
prominent authors who must again stand as representatives of the major 
trend9. 
"Organic" is a favorite word of the historical school, applied to all 
possible types of phenomena and contexts, including developments. In 
Savigny it is clear that no comparison between the legal and biological 
spheres is meant thereby; instead, language, its formation and its continual 
elaboration, provide the pattern for the emergence and development of 
law. "This organic connection of law with the being and character of the 
people is also preserved through time, and is in that too to be compared 
8 The cell was discovered by Theodor Schwann, 1839. For Comte, tissue formed the 
basic unit in the anatomy of living creatures, and not the cell (cf. Canguilhem, 1981: 
215). 
9 Details, particularly on organic thinking in political theory (Bluntschli, C. Frantz, 
Gerber, Α. Müller, et al.) can be found in the oft-quoted monograph of A. Th. van 
Krieken 1873, with which I shall deal in more detail below. Cf. also E. Kaufmann, 
1908; Mannheim, 1953; Krüger, 1966: 147 ff.; Böckenförde, 1978: 586 ff. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
103 
to language" (Savigny, 1814: 77). The law allegedly develops, unfolds itself 
organically "from inner force and necessity, independently of chance and 
individual will"10. 
In the first editions of his work on the Spirit of Roman Law (1852; 2nd 
ed., 1869), Jhering still shares Savigny's critical attitude to the shaping 
power of legislation. Silently transferring Schelling's definition of the state 
as "objective organism of human freedom" to the law (Jhering, 1852: 25), 
he defines the latter further: 
[t]here is no external aggregate of arbitrary definitions ... that owes its origin to the 
thinking of the legislator, but like the language of a people, an internally complete 
product of history, ... Human intention and calculation admittedly has its part in 
forming it; but it finds more than it creates ... The pressure of life has driven law 
and its institutions ahead, and maintains it in persistent external reality. The form 
impressed on it by the mentality of the people and its whole way of life is what every 
legislative thought and will finds before it, and cannot tamper with, without itself 
becoming a disgrace. (Jhering, 1852: 26) 
To be sure, he clearly sees the references to nature in the characterization 
of law as an organism: "in using this picture, we are ascribing to law the 
characteristics of a natural product, that is, unity in diversity, individuality, 
growth from inside outwards, etc." (1852: 26). But then, employing the 
distinction between anatomy (observation of structure) and physiology 
(observation of function), he moves increasingly into a medical metaphor, 
denoting the legal institutions as the "skeleton of the law" (1852: 36), or 
speaking of the heart, blood, arteries or pulse of the legal organism (1852: 
44). 
A closer, extremely laborious reading of Jhering's major works will 
show that his organism metaphors are used inconsistently11. Jhering is in 
fact the top metaphorician in 19th century legal thinking. He takes his 
comparisons from every possible discipline. To be sure, his multi-discipli-
nary metaphors feed on organism analogies too; but at the same time, a 
rich catch is taken from the fields of medicine, chemistry, linguistics, 
mechanics, geometry, aesthetics, architecture, gardening, etc. Against the 
background of this burgeoning metaphorism, his use of the terms organic/ 
organism looks rather arbitrary. 
Jhering later — ironically enough — said farewell to organic thinking, 
in later editions of the Spirit 
of Roman 
Law (specifically, from the 1875, 
3rd ed. onwards). 
To cover up the lack of this knowledge (and frequently of any clear thinking at all!) 
there is, to be sure, no readier term than 'organic' — the vaguer the concept, the 
more 'organic' the thing (Jhering, 1875: 351). 
10 Savigny, 1840: 16; there too the comparison with language in respect to its "constant 
organic development" again appears; on this see also Coing, 1973. 
11 Without great help from Christian Tombrink, I should no doubt have been hopelessly 
entangled in Jhering's web of metaphors. 

104 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
Here he refers to van Krieken's monograph: "what cannot be defined is 
regarded as organic". ("Was man nicht definieren kann, das sieht man als 
organisch an.") 
Van Krieken's work (1873) has central importance in my strategy of 
argumentation; it is in fact an attempt to take the treatment of the state as 
organism seriously as a scientific, biological metaphor. 
In the original (!) technical [in the sense of terminus technicus, H. R.] application to 
scientific areas, the concept linked with the term organism covered everything that 
was equipped with organs of sense perception, or was otherwise alive — animals and 
plants — which were strictly distinguished from a third 'kingdom', that of the 
inanimate or inorganic bodies (van Krieken, 1873: 125). 
He understands the concept of organism no longer in terms of the formal 
categories of whole and part, but according to the model of the cell (1873: 
124 ff.) with its characteristics of nourishment, movement and multiplica-
tion12. One might also think that this strict biologization of the organic 
metaphor had simultaneously brought about the end of its usefulness (as 
in Jhering). The irony of the development of the organism metaphor, 
however, lies precisely in the fact that — after van Krieken and in explicit 
debate with him — an author appears who wishes to use this metaphor in 
complete seriousness·. Otto Gierke (1841 — 1921; from 1911, Otto von Gierke). 
In an early work (Gierke, 1874), published only one year after the appear-
ance of van Krieken's work, Gierke discussed his argument. I wish to go 
into this argument and Gierke's later elaboration of the organism metaphor 
in rather more detail, because Gierke was aware of the methodological 
traps of a conceptual transfer and carried out the individual steps in it in 
a fairly precise fashion. 
Gierke first of all rejects the restriction to a scientific concept of the 
organism. What was primarily involved was a "general human conception 
of the natural being" (Gierke, 1874: 71). The specifically scientific concept 
was insignificant (1874: 73). In our context, this is already a central point: 
Gierke understands organism not as a concept metaphorized from one 
particular discipline into another, but as a more or less trans-disciplinary 
concept — though one that was initially related — extensionally — to a 
12 On contemporary cell theories cf. Radl, 1909, Vol. 2: 63 ff., 378 ff. Historically, 
perhaps, two trends in the definition of the organism can be distinguished: on the 
one hand the formal one, linked with Kant's definition of natural products as 
"organized beings", through the categories of whole/part, end (in itself)/means, cause/ 
effect (or interaction), and the more substantive definitions of characteristics like 
irritability, sensitivity (A. v. Haller), contractivity, irritability, sensitivity (J. C. Blumen-
bach), sensitivity, irritability, reproductivity (Schelling, Hegel, F. Kielmeyer), growth, 
self-multiplication, self-shaping, heredity, self-regulation (W. Roux), up to A. Port-
mann's internality and self-representation in appearance, of which metabolism, preser-
vation, regulation, multiplication and development are subordinate parts. On this, cf. 
Ballauf, 1984; Lefevre, 1984: 182. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
105 
particular area of reality ("natural living being"). Intensionally, however, 
one was in no way bound to the meaning involved in a particular discipline. 
The concept of organism had in the meantime become a terminus 
technicus 
in legal theory and legal doctrine which still bore the traces of its "pictorial 
origin", though these should not be a source of irritation. After all, this 
was true also of such terms as body, corporation or organization. There 
were superordinate, common characteristics of an organism applicable both 
to the individual human being and to the state. Expressed in terms of 
theory of meaning, partial identity of intension with difference of extension 
is thus being asserted13. It would, however, be inappropriate to draw 
conclusions from known characteristics of the individual human organism 
to unknown characteristics of the state. 
Following this restriction to a number of common characteristics, the 
conclusion is no longer difficult. The organism is to be understood not 
only as a natural product; in speaking of social formations in this way, one 
does so in the sense of a higher spiritual organism. 
In a longish passage which I reproduce below, Gierke sets out the stages, 
starting from a specific constitutional approach, which suggested the use 
of the concept of organism. It becomes clear that the common features of 
meaning are reduced to the model of whole and part. 
Deeper reflection on the nature of the state led to the idea that the state was a 
compound unit, the specific life of which did not coincide with the life of any of its 
parts. This idea provided a new and special perspective on all political relationships 
which had not yet been distinguished from other legal relationships. An invisible 
mode of being that did not coincide with any person nor any set of persons had to 
be conceived of as a real being and introduced into the law as a subject; the individual 
person, relationships with the state, had to be thought of, not as otherwise a whole 
complete in itself, but as part of a whole, particular parts or sub-complexes of the 
whole had to be thought of as vehicles of various activities of life in each of which 
nevertheless the unity of the whole effectively showed itself; the task of public law 
had to be understood, in contrast to private law which mediates between coordinated 
individuals, as that of giving rules for the internal life of a compound unit, for the 
relationships between a whole and its parts. ... Those characteristics of natural beings 
that relate to the existence of a living unit as distinct from the sum of its parts and 
to the activation of this unit through differentiated sub-complexes were picked out 
and applied to the formation and elaboration of the concept of 'organism', abstracted 
from any particular living being. The concept of 'organism' in this sense was then 
applied also to the state, of which all those characteristics were true in the same way 
(Gierke, 1874: 71 f.). 
With the specification of the legal and pragmatic problems, the concept of 
organism suddenly becomes distinct. In Gierke the point is first of all to 
13 This is nothing unusual. A trivial re-write would be that what plucked chickens and 
men have in common is that they are featherless bipeds (with the well-known 
consequence). 

106 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
grasp the essence, the reality, of human communities and associations (such 
as state, church, municipality, cooperative) (on this cf. especially Gierke, 
1902). Specifically arguing against the "atomistic and mechanistic" construc-
tion of the legal person and that of the state as a legal person, against the 
fiction of these as a mere locus of ascription, Gierke asserted the specific 
reality of associations as social organisms. He distinguishes between the 
individual organism of the individual person, which was the element for 
the private-law view and could not be analyzed into component parts, and 
the compound total or collective organism, the internal structure of which 
was of interest from the viewpoint of "social law". (The concept of social 
law is introduced by Gierke via that of the social organism, as its object 
area). 
Gierke is clear about the problems of a comparison between natural and 
social organisms: 
Properly understood, the comparison says nothing more than that in the social body 
we recognise a living unit of a whole made up of parts, as otherwise observed only 
in natural living beings. We do not forget that the internal structure of a whole whose 
parts are people must have characteristics for which nature offers no examples; that 
here there is a mental connection, produced and shaped, activated and dissolved, 
through psychically motivated action; that here the realm of natural science ends and 
the realm of the science of mind begins. But we regard the social whole, like the 
individual organism, as a living thing, and assign the community, like the individual 
being, to the generic term of living being. The pictorial features accompanying and 
going beyond this arise partly from the need for clarity and partly from linguistic 
compulsion. All advances in thought have come about through the use of images. 
Even our most abstract concepts are born of images. In science too we ought to 
make use of images, as long as we remain aware of that and do not take the image 
for the thing. However, as long as we have available to denote the thing itself only 
terms whose shaping as images is not yet complete, we must endeavour to separate 
the conceptual content from the pictorial admixture (Gierke, 1902: 18 f.). 
Nevertheless, a comparison always remains a mere aid to knowledge. It can clarify, 
but not explain. If it is used to draw conclusions from the correspondence of some 
characteristics to otherwise unperceivable correspondence of the things compared in 
other characteristics, then it becomes a source of error. The organic theory has not 
kept itself free of such excesses. Among them is the anthropomorphic representation 
of the state (1902: 16). 
From this conception of the organism, i. e., above all from the consideration 
of the legal person in its internal structure (internal relationship) and its 
relation to other (legal) persons, quite specific practical consequences are 
alleged to arise (on this cf. Gierke, 1895), in respect to: 
— the systematic building up of the legal order (e. g., the separation of 
private law from "social" law ( = constitutional law), associational law; 
or in general, norms for the internal life of the community); 
— individual legal concepts; 
— decision of particular questions (constitution; membership; foundation 
as a collective act, not as contract; incorporation/disincorporation; 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
107 
organization; organ (representation); competences; procedures; legal 
capacity; accountability of the legal person). 
The example of Gierke shows that the metaphor of organism was losing 
the arbitrariness it had in legal thinking in the first half of the 19th century, 
to the extent that it can be adduced to describe a specifically legal problem 
or phenomenon: primarily the internal structure of legal persons, but also 
collective labor relationships. It also appears, however, that the metaphor 
is no longer enough for the constructive solution of the problems. For 
instance, to decide whether and how the accountability of a legal person 
is to be construed, the metaphor has no longer any part to play. Here other 
preferences seem to enter in, which use the concept of organism only for 
the sake of appearances. (I shall go further into this below). 
5. Legal Development in the 19th Century — Biological Metaphor? 
In this context the point is not to summarize theories of legal development 
in the 19th century — the century of its flowering and ripening, to use 
another couple of metaphors (cf. Stein, 1980; Rottleuthner, 1986 a; 1986 b). 
It is instead much more to the point to follow the traces of biological or 
at least natural models in evolutionary thinking about law in the first half 
of the 19th century and clarify to what extent a "biologizing" influence 
came from Darwin's theory of evolution. 
Despite Hegel's use of many pictorial images to clarify processes of 
development or unfolding (germ, bud, flower, etc.), there can hardly be 
an author who has so decisively denied natural determinacy in human 
history, the history of reason. The historical world is gradually permeated 
by the objective reason of the world spirit; the historical process constitutes 
an "advance in the consciousness of freedom" — and the law is for Hegel 
the outstanding indicator of the stage of freedom reached, which must also 
always be reflected in consciousness. Starting from Hegel, an interesting 
line in theories of legal development can be followed through the 19th 
century, linking the efforts at a universal history of law. The term appears in 
Hegel's pupil Eduard Gans (1824), who sought to systematize written 
material available from high cultures, in his case on the law of inheritance. 
Subsequently, the information base for a theory of the development of law 
shifts more and more into ethnographical reports on preliterate societies, 
the so-called natural peoples14. This certainly brings an element of nature 
into consideration; but at the same time, the traditional expression "natural 
14 This shift has recently been repeated by U. Wesel (1985). Like the earlier critique of 
the historical school of law, with its limitation to Roman and German sources, he 
warns that the current history of law neglects or entirely ignores the "early forms" 
of law in preliterate, non-European societies, which have for some time been dealt 
with in ethnology and cultural anthropology, entirely cut off from legal history. 

108 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
history" shifts in meaning: this set of disciplines, previously merely system-
atizing and descriptive, is dynamicized (cf. Lepenies, 1976). History is no 
longer a narrative, a report, but a developmental process linking up nature 
and society with each other. The now prevailing perception of the "natural 
historical method" clearly adopts a monistic program: to trace the same 
developmental regularities in both nature and society. 
Particular honor in the effort to construct a universal history of law, in 
addition to Bastian (1860), Hildebrand (1894), Leist (1892), Waitz (1859 ff.) 
et al., goes especially to the Bremen judge Albert Hermann Post, who was 
extremely productive (cf. Post, 1867; 1872; 1876; 1878; 1880/81; 1884; 
1891). He aimed at making jurisprudence scientific through application of 
the comparative method and by linking it up with the natural sciences. 
The comparative sciences (for him linguistics, comparative religion and 
ethnology) are seen by him as natural sciences "which discover natural 
laws in the history of peoples" (Post, 1872: 2). The bases of his world view 
nevertheless shift over time from Kant, via Schopenhauer, a mechanistic 
philosophy, and Darwinism to the world soul15. 
The universal history of law finds its culmination in the Hegelian Josef 
Kohler (Kohler, 1915), who, to be sure, seems to return to a type of 
rational monism. 
Even if we can find aspects of nature in the post-Hegelian tradition of 
a universal history of law — stress on natural peoples, scientific monism, 
dynamicization of natural history — an explicit reference to biology is 
nevertheless absent. The explanation for its absence may lie in the fact that 
another discipline of natural history had become the vehicle of the idea of 
development, though today we hardly associate it with it: geology, especially 
in its paleontological and stratigraphical branches. Geology was at any rate 
the discipline that broke the narrow biblical time scale (of around 6000 
years) and first opened a broad time dimension for developmental pro-
cesses16. It is hardly surprising then that H. S. Maine's classic book, Ancient 
Law, which appeared in 1861, i.e., two years after Darwin's Origin, has 
a geological metaphor at its centre (linked up with a peculiar idea of 
preformation): 
15 On this cf. Neukamp, 1895: 77 ff. Ernst Neukamp, like Post, was a legal practitioner; 
Judge of an Amtsgericht (trial court) in Göttingen. It would be interesting to pursue 
the question of what areas of interests, apart from dogma, were followed up by legal 
practitioners at which times. There seems to be great sensitivity to contemporary 
theoretical trends: methodological efforts in the case of the lawyers (and advocates of 
free law) Ernst Fuchs and Ludwig Bendix up to the sociological excursuses of 
Rasehorn, Wassermann, Bender, et al. 
16 This is true in particular of the proponents of actualism (Hutton, von Hoff, Lyell), 
who assume continuous changes in the history of the earth in accordance with natural 
laws that continue to apply; but also, though less so, for proponents of catastrophe 
theories (Werner, Cuvier). Cf. Beringer, 1954. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
109 
If by any means we can determine the early forms of jural conceptions, they will be 
invaluable to us. These rudimentary ideas are to the jurist what the primary crusts of 
the earth are to the geologist. They contain, potentially, all the forms in which law 
has subsequently exhibited itself (Maine, 1861: 2). 
Our top metaphorician, Jhering, of course also uses this kind of geological 
metaphor, even as late as 1877 in his Der Zweck im Recht·. 
It is the task of science, in relation to the formation of the earth's crust as to the 
history of formation of law, to reconstruct the actual processes (Jhering, 1877: 344; 
cf. his earlier statement, 1865: 4—5). 
The influence of geology on Charles Darwin, communicated especially 
through Charles Lyell (geologist and lawyer) is well known17. 
Let us, however, turn to the impetus given to developmental thinking 
in the 19th century by Darwin's own theory of evolution. In the legal area 
it seems above all to have been the metaphor of struggle which was brushed 
up through this, though it was of course much older. It no doubt inspired 
the title of Jhering's well-known work (Der Kampf urn's Recht, 1872), or 
at least helped it to gain very wide distribution (cf. Wieacker, 1973 a/b; 
Pleister, 1982: 358 ff.). It seems to have penetrated even into the ramifica-
tions of dogmatics. Rainer Schröder (1984: 340 ff.) has shown that through 
the honorific interpretation of the concept of struggle the Supreme Court 
of the Reich declared admissible in economic and commercial conflict 
means otherwise inadmissible in civil law. 
From the point of view of metaphor, it is an interesting fact that the 
discovery of the struggle for existence as the mechanism of natural selection 
came from Darwin's reading of Malthus' An Essay on the Principle 
of 
Population (1798) — at least according to Darwin's report on his Malthus 
experience of October 1838 (Darwin 1876: 100—01). The later return 
transfer of natural selection to the social sphere thus constituted a meta-
metaphor18. 
Terms associated with development theory, like evolution, struggle, 
natural selection, survival of the fittest (Spencer, 1873/1961), and the 
biological, reductive category of race, were used extremely loosely towards 
the end of the 19th century even in legal and constitutional theory, by 
17 Darwin's ship library also contained, at the beginning of his journey round the world 
(December 1831) the first volume of Charles Lyell's Principles of Geology (London, 
1830). He obtained the second volume in October, 1832, when he was on the east 
coast of South America; cf. Darwin 1876/1959: 70, 167. Cf. also, however, his skeptical 
remarks on geology in respect to the "gaps in its records" in Darwin, 1859/1980, 
p. 536, and also p. 137. 
18 This corresponds to Spencer's "reciprocal service" (cf. n. 7, supra). — The expression 
"selection sociale" first appears in Paul Broca, 1874; "le Darwinisme sociale" in Emile 
Gautier 1880; in German (Sovyaldarwintsmus) not until 1906, in S. R. Steinmetz, a 
friend of Alfred Ploetz (cf. Seidler and Nagel, 1973). 

110 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
comparison with biological scientific debate19. In his political theory of 
race, for instance, the Austrian L. Gumplowicz (1875, 1883) uses the term 
"racial conflict" not in a narrower anthropological or biological sense, but 
to denote all forms of struggle among social units, whether internationally 
or within a state such as the Dual Monarchy. The professor of German 
law in Lausanne, Ludwig Kuhlenbeck (1905), was even clearer with his 
thesis that race and blood were the decisive factors in the development of 
peoples (1905: 115). In his application of "biological principles" to state 
and society, there emerges an ugly mixture of racism, cultural elitism and 
anti-socialism. Against the influx of inferior race elements, which for him 
at the time meant against "polonization", he suggested restricted legal 
status for those not "of the people" (1905: 124-25; 204-05). The extremely 
verbose Karl Joseph Seitz, in his three-volume work Biologie des geschichtlich 
positiven 
Rechtes im Kulturleben 
der Gegenwart 
(1906 —1910)20, apparently 
associates development only with biology, which, however, he dilutes — 
so deeply has it sunk as a leading discipline — to the "conscious study of 
life", and he sees this all within a Christian framework. 
This loose treatment of biological metaphors — like the use of the 
concepts of organism and development in the pre-biological phase of the 
first half of the 19th century — might be explained by the political 
ambitions of the various authors. Among the activist Social Darwinists 
there are authors who do not transfer the theory of descent fatalistically 
back to society as a theory of decadence (the decline of humanity through 
increasing race mixture), but instead advocate social selection and "race 
hygiene", and oppose measures of social policy for the weak as dangerous 
softness. It seems clear to me that such people were seeking to disguise 
their political objectives in reputable biological terms (cf. Mann, 1973; 
Marten, 1983). I should like to conclude these historical observations by 
exploring in greater detail the political significance of my two central 
concepts — organism and development — with their semantic satellites. 
6. The Political Ambivalence of the Concepts of Development and 
Organism 
The concepts of organism and development are linked by their ambivalent 
and therefore broad political applicability. Development can easily be linked 
with dynamism and progress, with directions and goals of development, 
19 If they can at all be clearly delimited, in view of the spreading of the theory of descent 
as a world view by Ernst Haeckel et al. 
20 Vol. 1 had the subtitle: "Also on the question of the reconciliation of the struggles 
of our two great political parties of right and left, led astray by the assumptions of 
the a priori false post-classical legal schools, in private, public, religious and social 
areas". 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
111 
which recall the ideals of perfectibility of the 18th century. But "develop-
ment" was also linked — specifically in the historical school — with the 
aspect of objectivity, a context which was remote from the deliberate, goal-
directed action of men. The forces or regularities of development act 
inevitably. History cannot be made. This is the strategy employed against 
the social contract theories of the 18th century. To be sure — and this 
complicates application to a higher level — neither version can unambigu-
ously be assigned to political camps (right/left, conservative/progressive, 
bourgeois/socialist, etc.). After all, Marx's theory also stresses the "objective 
laws" of historical development, their natural character. The proletariat 
and its vanguard have at most better insight into the necessities (and the 
good fortune that the laws of history are on their side). On the other hand, 
it is precisely the racist-oriented Social Darwinists that regard control of 
the development of population and therefore of society as possible through 
measures of race hygiene. The survival of the fittest, the struggle for 
existence, can be controlled not only through the abolition of social policy 
measures which keep the weak and unfit alive, but also through deliberate 
selection (ranging from psychological tests to immigration quotas to bans 
on marriage and programs of sterilization and ultimately of extermination). 
There is a similar ambivalence about the organism metaphor in political 
contexts (cf. Böckenförde, 1978: 592 ff.; 602 ff.; 610). On the one hand, it 
can be used against interventions by the sovereign state; there is no 
sovereign that is external to the whole. The comprehensive view makes all 
into parts dependent on each other. The whole lives only in its parts, and 
can persist only through their balanced, organic relationship. On the other 
hand, there were always endeavors to designate individual parts as top or 
center as against other political, subordinate parts (how could the sovereign 
monarch otherwise be integrated as an "organ"?), or quite simply (for 
instance in Gierke, 1902) the priority of the whole over the individual 
parts was asserted — whatever "the whole" embodied. 
In the organism there is on the one hand a promise of the self-organiza-
tion of all parts into a living whole21, but at the same time the whole 
represents an organic, natural context, the mystification of a totality free 
of all contradiction. This ambivalence is also shared by the counter-
metaphor of the machine. It awakens the association of feasibility, of the 
21 "In the organic body, every part continually preserves the whole, and is, through 
preserving it, thereby itself preserved; the citizen acts likewise towards the state ... if 
every part of every citizen only preserves himself in the position prescribed for him 
by the whole, then precisely thereby he preserves his part of the whole; and precisely 
by the fact that the whole preserves every part in this position, it returns to itself, 
and preserves itself" (Fichte, 1796: 209). 

112 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
deliberately constructed22; but at the same time the image stands for the 
objective set of compulsions, in the machinery of which the individual 
reason is degraded into a cog23. 
II. A Recent Case: Autopoiesis in Law 
From the viewpoint of political applicability, recent attempts at using 
biological concepts and findings in the legal area can be classified quite 
simply: as an attempt at using scientific metaphors to bolster endeavors at 
breaking down or pushing back government regulation, which are them-
selves based on a critique of the (alleged) increasing legalization and 
shortcomings in legislative control. This may be true both of the borrow-
ings from ethology and of those from sociobiology, which itself uses 
genetic metaphors24, as well as for the variants of autopoiesis that interest 
us here. The motto "from planning to evolution" (Luhmann, 1985 a) shows 
this clearly. Of course, merely to consider the social problematic that set 
them in motion would not do justice to the methodological efforts and 
personal objectives of the authors. I think, though, that one can accept a 
little injustice in order to cull the first fruits of the historical discussion in 
22 And also of the destructible! According to Marx/Engels/Lenin the "government 
machine is to be smashed"; according to other passages, the state may also, like an 
organism, "wither away". — Apart from any concern for 19th century metaphors, it 
has been asserted recently that "Neither state nor law are instruments or machines 
which were invented by one or another ruling class, but rather both arose organically 
out of the relations of production". (Cerroni 1962: 12—13) The "withering away" of 
state and law, however, could also be expressed in the metaphor of a machine: "One 
wheel after another in the machine of such a state constitution would come to a stop 
and be removed, because the one it was to mesh with is beginning to set itself moving 
by itself". According to Fichte, 1793: 102, that was how the final goal, the freedom 
of all, could be achieved. 
23 In the present connection, an older critique of juridification should also be cited in 
detail: the state is a "machine with one single spring, which passes on the motion to 
an infinite set of cogs; the highest power of the state is supposed to be the origin of 
all institutions that the existence of a society involves, and to regulate, order, supervise 
and lead them ... In the whole of the state every bite, from the ground that produces 
it, (should) be brought to the mouth in a sequence that is studied, calculated, justified 
and commanded by state and law and government". Thus spoke the fairly young 
Hegel (1802: 481). His counter-concept is that of life: "As multiplicity, an infinite 
multiplicity, of organizations, individuals; as unity, a single organized separate and 
united whole" (1800: 420). Later, as is well known, Hegel advocated legislation, even 
against Savigny. In the Code Civil, the world spirit had in legal form reached a new 
stage of progress in the awareness of freedom. 
24 Cf. Rottleuthner, 1985; genetic metaphors are used in socio-biology to the extent that 
its cost/benefit calculus is projected into the genetic equipment, from which it then 
whispers back to the researcher. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
113 
Part 1 for the present-day debate. The program "From planning to evolu-
tion", "Evolution instead of guidance", is in fact strikingly similar to the 
efforts of the young Hegel (cf. fn. 23) and then of Savigny and other 
representatives of the historical school of law, with their critique of the 
old regime and their advocacy of the "inner forces of organic development". 
The use of organic and evolutionary metaphors against the legislator is 
then repeated in the second half of the 19th century, particularly in Herbert 
Spencer's critique of contemporary social legislation. I suspect that similar 
arguments were used in the period after the First World War, too, against 
the new thrust of intervention, but I have been unable to go into further 
detail in this context. 
1. Lessons from History 
What can be derived for our present discussion from these historical 
findings is a fervent request to the autopoiesis thinkers: 
(1) At least to attempt to give dates and places in talking about historical 
developments, "new" forms of social organization and regulation or the 
peculiarities of "present" circumstances (where is the point of development 
at which "the legal system reaches autopoietic closure" (Teubner, infra: 
232)?25 This has the simple advantage that others too can understand and 
evaluate what is in each case being claimed. We are all autopoietic creatures 
for a certain period, but the closure of our intellectual system need not make 
us into autistic creatures, talking at cross purposes with no comprehension. 
(2) Once the claim of newness of the social phenomena has been clarified 
this would also make more plausible the discussion of the newness of the 
theoretical treatment. Otherwise things are made too easy for those who, 
with historial flair, could show that everything was there already anyway. 
What, then, is the gain in knowledge, in the face of presumably new 
problems, from introducing the concept of autopoiesis into legal thinking, 
by comparison, for instance, with that of organism? 
A related lesson from the historical part above, connects the political 
implications of these theories to their substantive aspect. I have learned 
from Otto Gierke that the advantage of metaphorical use of terms lies in 
25 Teubner and Willke (1984) is full of unspecified temporal assertions; if any dating is 
done, it is astonishing: "In the economy, a considerable degree of complexity was 
developed even early in the 19th century" (1984: 11). "With the positivization of law, 
the time horizon (at latest since the world economic crisis and the Keynesian revolu-
tion) ... was shifted into a future that is in principle open and manipulable" (1984: 
10). — One could also hold that the legal system became autopoietic at the moment 
when it separated from other social subsystems, as it did perhaps from religion and 
morality already in archaic times. 

114 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
the extent to which they can be applied to the solution of specific problems. 
Gierke at any rate assumed that he had through the concept of organism 
opened up better understanding of the legal person, of the state, of 
associations, etc., with their inner structure. What then are the specific 
problems that the concept of an autopoietic system can help illuminate? I 
can see four areas: 
(1) The interpretation of the legal system as an autopoietic system might 
explicate a concept of law which would enable hitherto disparate elements 
of legal theory to be integrated or seen in another light, thereby leading 
to fruitful questioning. 
(2) Besides this more conceptual field, autopoiesis seems to be adduced 
particularly for explaining the use of law to give direction to social 
change; for explaining the limits of social control by legal measures and 
for specifying the requirements for the knowledge required for control. 
(3) The concept of autopoiesis can be applied in the context of evolutionary 
theory. The old discussion of social and legal change can be reinterpreted. 
(4) Finally, there are efforts — similar to Gierke's — towards a reformula-
tion of fundamental legal concepts such as the state, association, enter-
prise, market, contract, obligation, etc. (cf. Teubner, 1985). In what 
follows I will not pursue this aspect. 
2. The Legal System as An Autopoietic System 
An autopoietic system is defined as a system that produces and reproduces 
its own elements through their interaction (Varela/Maturana/Uribe, 1974: 
187); a system with autopoietic organization is in turn defined as "a unity 
defined by a network for producing components which: 
1) take part recursively in the same network for producing components 
that also produces these components, and; 
2) establish the production network as a unit in the space in which the 
components are located" (Maturana, 1982: 158; also in Zeleny (ed.), 
1981: 21), 
or: 
A unity realized through a closed organization of production processes 
such that: 
(a) the same organization of processes is generated through the interac-
tion of their own products (components); and 
(b) a topological boundary emerges as a result of the same constitutive 
processes (Zeleny, 1981: 6). 
The stress is on organizational closure and on the recursive, self-referen-
tial process of self-reproduction. Mention is also made of "basic circularity" 
(Maturana, 1982). 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
115 
To explain the metaphorical usage in the legal area a few methodological 
explanations need to be inserted: the definitions of an autopoietic system 
are couched very formally, in the sense that the area of origin is no 
longer recognizable (on the origins in the problem of colour perception, 
interpretation of the nervous system and retinal organization, cf. Maturana, 
1982: 88 ff.), and in such a way that the concept could without further ado 
be used transdisciplinarily. The originally constitutive elements of meaning 
referring to the nervous system and the individual cell are rejected. Auto-
poiesis becomes a "universal human notion". There is, here, from the 
methodological point of view, a repetition even among the biological 
inventors of autopoieisis of what had taken place between van Krieken 
and Gierke. While van Krieken had referred to the specifically biological 
meaning of "organism", Gierke deliberately detached the concept from this 
context (though still relating it to "natural beings", while our biologists 
of autopoiesis do not seem to be entirely agreed whether they should 
confine themselves to living systems). 
However, the fact that the concept of autopoiesis was already formalized 
by its inventors does not by itself make it possible to see in it a continuation 
of the old organic analogy. The early divesting of its biological connotations 
may even have contributed to its extension26. The painful drawback is only 
that in new areas of application the meaning of the individual components 
of the concept must be re-established — without, for instance, establishing 
links to the cell model. Scientific specialization has gone so far that the 
wealth of knowledge on the structure and function of a cell can no longer 
meaningfully be transferred into other areas of knowledge (before the 
explosion of microbiology van Krieken was still able to speak simply of 
nutrition, movement and multiplication; see p. 104 above). Metaphors can 
no longer be formed except at an entirely abstract level, with the conse-
quence that every transfer into another discipline requires entirely new 
meanings to be established. 
It is then proper to ask what advantage is supposed to distinguish 
the metaphor of autopoiesis in comparison with (non-biological) formal 
concepts of organism which work with the relationship of whole and part 
(and not with those of cell theory of around 1850). Luhmann (1984: 27) 
asserts that the paradigm of whole and part would have to accommodate 
inexplicable properties, notably properties of a hierarchical summit27. 
26 Presumably this spread will be restricted to the area of scholarship; the choice of 
words is hardly appropriate for use in everyday language. (What was that about an 
auto?) After all, such expressions as system and life world trip much more readily off 
the tongue, and sound so wonderfully Manichaean. 
27 The sentence repeatedly used for this, "the whole is more than the sum of its parts", 
is in many cases meaningless, because it is inapplicable where the relationship of the 
parts is not additive. However, the relations in an "organic whole" are not additive 
(or at least not those of theoretical interest) (cf. Schlick, 1938; Nagel, 1952). 

116 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
Against this, he stresses the anti-hierarchical view of the concept of auto-
poiesis. I think, however, that I have shown in the historical part that 
problems with the organic concept of part and whole arise only when it 
is transferred 
to hierarchical phenomena, particularly in constitutional law: 
sovereign, monarch (cf. Böckenförde, 1978: 599 ff.). What is true of the 
constitutional, hierarchical metaphor 
is not true of the formal concept of 
organism, as Kant, for instance, developed it for "organized beings".28 
Kant's definitions allow it to be shown where the conceptual advance 
of autopoiesis might lie. The left-hand column shows Kant's conceptual 
definitions of an organized being (Kant, 1790: § 65), and the right hand 
one replaces the central terms by ones that at least sound autopoietic. 
Organised 
being 
The parts are (in accordance with their 
being and form) possible only through 
their relationship to the whole. 
The parts are linked into the unity of 
the whole by being mutually alternately 
cause and effect of their forms. 
All of the parts, in accordance with their 
form and as connections, produce them-
selves mutually thereby creating a whole 
from its own causality. 
Autopoietic 
systems 
The elements are generated by the system 
in a network of production and structural 
reproduction. 
The unity of the system is brought about 
through a network in which the compo-
nents take part recursively in the network 
of production and structural reproduc-
tion. 
The elements produce themselves — in 
their structure and in their organiza-
tion — in their own interaction; the sys-
tem is self-organized. 
28 The replacement of the body metaphor (of head and limbs) by the formal metaphor 
of the organism (of whole and parts) has dehierarchizing implications (cf. Böckenförde 
1978: 581—82). One should consider Savigny's contemporary plea for particularistic, 
"participatory" forms of organization: "In every organized being, therefore also in 
states, good health requires that both the whole and every part be in balance, requires 
that each receives his due. It is a common phenomenon that a citizen, a town, or a 
province neglects the state to which it belongs, and everyone recognizes this situation 
as unnatural and pathological. But, nevertheless, active love for the whole can arise 
purely out of active participation in particular relationships, and only he who soundly 
manages his own house will be an admirable citizen. Therefore, it is a mistake to 
believe that the commonwealth would become livelier through the destruction of all 
individual relationships. If a proper self-esteem could be engendered in every rank of 
society, in every town, even in every village, so would this heightened and multiplied 
liveliness also give new strength to the whole. Therefore, when one speaks of the 
influence of the civil law on patriotic sentiment, one should not be too quick to 
conclude that the particularistic laws of specific provinces and towns are disadvanta-
geous. In this respect the civil law deserves praise, insofar as it stirs or is capable of 
stirring the feelings and consciousness of the people: It deserves reproof, if it is 
something strange arising out of arbitrariness, lacking participation of the people. 
This will more often and more likely be the case in particularistic laws of specific 
regions, although certainly not every local law will be truly consistent with popular 
sentiment. Indeed, no state of the civil law will be more suitable for this political 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
117 
"Only then and thereby can such a product (i. e., an organized and self-
organized being) be determinated as a natural end." According to Kant, a 
product of nature is "closed" insofar as it contains "in itself and its potential 
a relationship to ends." (Kant, 1790: § 65) 
Difficulties might perhaps arise for autopoiesis supporters from the 
translations of the causal terms (cause, effect, causality). Since on all the 
evidence they do not give the concept of causality much value, especially 
that of "linear causality", it should be stressed that Kant is speaking of 
mutual causation and of an "intrinsic causality". 
The distinction between linear causality and circular/recursive causality 
is given particular emphasis by the autopoieticists, who readily appeal to 
von Foerster (1984). He introduces the concept of causality in the context 
of the discussion of "trivial machines", characterized by a deterministic 
connection between input and output (where input apparently is understood 
as a sufficient condition). He then briefly explains the theory of recursive 
functions, without reintroducing the concept of causality in that connection. 
The mark of a recursive function is that the same operation is continually 
utilized in a given situation. Today one can perform this version of 
Nietzsche's "eternal recurrence", for example, by repeatedly pressing the 
square root button on a pocket calculator. This image of monotonous 
stupidity probably is the appropriate metaphor for historicity as it is 
understood by autopoiesis.29 
My comparison above shows that the central terms cannot be entirely 
uninterpretable signs: otherwise such a "translation" would not be possible. 
The interesting characteristics are, however, so diluted that in every applica-
tion, whether in the biological or legal area, a specification must first take 
place. What happens, then, when a theoretician climbs down from the thin 
air of autopoiesis to the soil of law? It sounds more or less like this. 
The legal system consists, as do its elements, of legal acts (or legal 
communications). The "basic circularity" of the legal system too, the 
circular process of self-referential elements, can be seen in the recursive 
production of legal acts — by legal acts. "No legally relevant event can 
derive its normativity from the environment of the system. In this respect, 
it remains dependent on the self-generating connection of legal elements 
and on the limits of this connection" (Luhmann, supra: 20). The self-
referential closure of the legal system is produced in a circular relationship 
goal than that which used to exist generally in Germany: a great variety and particular-
ity in the parts, but a common legal basis for the whole, which continuously reminded 
every German tribe of its indissoluble unity." (Savigny 1814: 42 —43). 
29 In the context of causal analysis, as carried on in empirical research (e. g. path analysis) 
»««recursive models are employed, to denote the case of mutual influencing of variables. 
When the autopoiesis literature speaks of recursive processes, it is presumably precisely 
those nonrecursive models of causal analysis that are meant. What a tower of Babel! 

118 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
between legal decisions and normative rules (Luhmann, supra: 21—22; 
Teubner, 1984 a: 295 — 96). This basic circularity of law is held to be the 
foundation of legal autonomy, of law as an autopoietic system. 
This suggests some questions inspired by legal theory: Can legal acts be 
the only basic elements of a legal system? If there is a basic circularity 
between legal decisions and normative rules, it would seem that the 
elements of a legal system must be both legal acts and legal rules. For legal 
rules are in themselves not legal acts. Only their adoption, formulation, 
application, violation, implementation, etc. are legal acts. 
The definition of a legal act as any communication that alters the legal 
situation is misleading.30 Luhmann defines the "elementary unit" of a legal 
system as that which alters the legal situation, but elsewhere as that which 
gives rise to legal consequences (Luhmann, supra: 16 ff.). Kelsen already 
had said with respect to this: 
The Pure Theory of Law defines the concept of the legal act as follows: A legal act 
is an act by means of which a legal norm is issued (figuratively speaking, "created") 
or applied. Moreover, the Pure Theory claims that an act is a law-creating or law-
applying act only if it corresponds to the norms that govern the creation and 
application of the law within the legal system, that is, only if the act in question is 
based on the legal system. That the law governs its own creation and application is 
a characteristic of the normative order as a dynamic system (Kelsen, 1952: 200). 
In saying this, Kelsen gives a different formulation to that which Luhmann 
and Teubner denominate as the "self-referential closure of the legal system." 
Legal norms can only come into valid existence on the ground of other 
valid legal norms. There is no creatio ex nihilo. There also cannot be a naked 
transfer of moral conceptions or political goals into legal norms. Rather, 
there are procedural and jurisdictional legal norms that regulate the coming 
into existence of valid legal norms. 
Of course, this method of closed validation cannot be used by Kelsen — 
nor by the autopoieticists — to describe the origin of a "primal constitu-
tion". As is well known, in order to solve this problem and to reach an 
end in the hierarchy of norms, Kelsen hypothetically introduced a basic 
norm, which says that adopted, effective norms should be followed (Kelsen, 
1960: 219). The basic norm, alleged to be the ultimate ground of validity, lays 
down adoption and effectiveness as conditions of validity — as (hypothetical) 
preconditions for the bindingness of the (adopted and effective) norms. 
Luhmann asserts that by breaking off the justification of validity Kelsen 
was seeking to avoid circularity; but that validity is circular (Luhmann, 
1985 a: 115): "Decisions are legally valid only on the basis of normative 
rules because normative rules are valid only when implemented by deci-
30 Teubner (infra: *15*); here acts are also described as "self-descriptions of communica-
tions". There may well be an act of describing, but acts are not (self-) descriptions. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
119 
sions."31 But this is true only, Kelsen might reply, if we presuppose a 
norm that declares efficient implementation to be a condition of validity. 
(Admittedly, this does not solve the well-known problem of whether a 
legal norm is valid after it has been duly enacted but before its first 
application.) 
Hart's distinction between primary and secondary rules is perhaps more 
suitable for describing the self-organization of law. According to Hart, a 
complete legal system exists only if (when?) there are not only primary 
rules which — as duty-imposing rules — are indistinguishable from moral 
norms, but also further rules that lay down what is to be regarded as a 
valid legal norm, how legal changes are validly to be brought about and 
who is competent in what procedure to apply the valid legal norms, and 
with what powers. 
What gain in knowledge does autopoietic terminology bring by contrast? 
I think that instead a vague concept of production or constitution (obfus-
cated as in Marx's exegesis of the early '70s) is used to cover up situations 
which have in the meantime been somewhat illuminated in legal theoretical 
debate. What, for instance, is to be understood by "produce" in a statement 
such as: "positivity of law means that exclusively the internal reference 
context constantly produces new norms" (Teubner and Willke, 1984: 20)? 
Perhaps another aspect ought to be understood by the self-constitution 
of the legal system. In legal theory some norms are assigned a constitutive 
role (as distinct from a regulatory one). Particular social circumstances are 
brought into being only through the application and observance of legal 
norms. A legal person, a board of directors, the President of the United 
States, are formations that could arise only on the basis of norms. They 
are not natural formations with whose existence legal consequences might 
be bound up, which trigger off legal consequences; instead they exist — 
as "institutional facts" — only if legally specified conditions are met. 
Legal norms may be constitutive in a further sense: Not only for acts, 
circumstances, position etc., but for particular descriptions 
of action. The 
description of an action as a particular act (including legal act), for instance, 
the fact that the killing of another can be described as murder, is something 
of which legal norms are also constitutive. The legal norm does not 
constitute or produce the act itself (John Smith stays dead), but without 
it the specifically legal nature of the description of the act would not be 
possible. 
The fact that a particular act becomes legally relevant in the environment 
of the legal system is itself a decision within the legal system: namely to 
31 In a comparable German version it is as follows: "Gesetze gelten als Normen nur, 
weil vorgesehen ist (?), daß sie in Entscheidungen angewandt werden, so wie diese 
Entscheidungen Situationen nur normieren können, weil dies in Gesetzen vorgesehen 
ist." (Luhmann, 1983: 140). 

120 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
assimilate the description of the act to the statutory definition in a norm. 
By contrast with normative closure, Luhmann sees in this an aspect of 
cognitive openness of the legal system: through programming it is making 
itself dependent on facts in the environment (Luhmann, supra: 20). In 
Kelsen's terminology, one might speak here of a "cognitively open" condi-
tion of validity, as distinct from a (normative) ground of validity. 
Why should all these various aspects be denoted by the term "self-
production of the legal system"? 
According to Luhmann (e.g., supra: 15 — 16, 25 — 26) the fundamental 
distinction (coding) of a legal system is the dichotomy between legal and 
illegal (Recht/Unrecht). The closure and unity of the legal system is 
constituted by it. But if a system must be provided with a yes-no code, 
why shouldn't the legal system be based on the distinction between legal 
and non-legal, while "wrong" would be considered part of the "legal"? 
The question about the unity (closure) of the legal system is connected to 
the question of the ultimate unit (element) of the legal system, since there 
are not only acts of norm-observance and of norm-application, whose 
negation consists in violating a legal norm ("wrong"), but also acts which 
do not give rise to any legal consequence — for one thing, there are acts 
that are legally irrelevant, but there are others, of particular interest, that 
signify an unsuccessful effort to create "institutional facts". The incorrect 
official form has been filled out, a person who is under age has signed the 
contract, at the ceremony the "yes" refuses to be uttered. Such failures of 
constitutive legal acts are legally relevant but manifest no wrong. Thus, 
several distinctions can be offered: right — wrong, legally relevant — 
legally irrelevant, successful legal acts (behavior which gives rise to legal 
consequences) — unsuccessful legal acts. Which distinction is basic, which 
derivative? Or do they all stand in a basic-circular relationship? 
3. Control Problems of An Autopoietic Legal System 
If the legal system, the political system and the various other social systems 
(economy, family, education etc.) all constitute autopoietic systems for 
themselves, how can they then be brought into relationship with each other? 
Specifically, as regards the traditional themes of political programming of 
legal processes for directing, controlling or influencing social processes: 
— How is this procedure described in autopoietic frames of reference? 
— How is the efficiency of the legal system explained? 
— How is its inefficiency explained? 
— What suggestions are made to explain the regulatory capacities of the 
legal system (if deregulatory abstention is not preferred from the outset, 
which is not however the case for all autopoieticists)? 
The closure of an autopoietic system is not to be understood in the 
sense of autistic encapsulation. Different autopoietic systems can come into 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
121 
relationship with each other — but not "directly" or "immediately". The 
law cannot control social processes "directly", on the model of "linear 
causality" (Teubner, 1984 a: 298; 1984 b: 130), nor do such social systems 
react "directly" to legal programs. Instead, legal norms and decisions are 
supposed to be adopted in reference to a model of social reality as internal-
ized in the legal system: an internal representation (Teubner, 1984 a: 297). 
The autopoietic systems addressed might well be affected by and amendable 
by regulation, "but only within the limits of their reproductive organiza-
tion. Any external regulatory influence leading to a new internal introduc-
tion of the elements but not maintaining this self-reproducing organization 
is either irrelevant to the system or leads to its destabilization, going as far 
as the disintegration of the regulated system" (Teubner, 1984 b: 127) or to 
the social or political overloading of the legal system (to make the "regula-
tory trilemma" complete). The talk is then no longer of direct influence, 
control, regulation, etc.; but such terms are used as the "initiation" of 
mutual self-regulatory processes (Teubner, 1984 b: 128), modulation, im-
pingement, etc. 
The question is what has been gained by comparison with traditional 
effectiveness and implementation research, which after all also stresses the 
independence of the regulated area, under the theme of restrictive condi-
tions or of specific implementation structure? I at any rate see no difficulty 
in reformulating the "regulatory trilemma" without reference to autopoiesis 
and even making the analysis more sophisticated. 
Most of the theoretical interest about control by the autopoiesis support-
ers undoubtedly concerns shortcomings 
of control; as noted above, this 
interest feeds on the critique of the tension between an insufficiency of 
regulation and regulatory inefficiency. The stress is on the various condi-
tions for the self-organization of the various systems (political system, legal 
system, other social systems). The fact that these specific conditions are 
not adequately met explains the control shortcomings. 
I see the advantage of an autopoietic approach in its indication that the 
various areas differ through their differing structure and organization, 
which have to be suitably affected by a regulation. I have doubts, however, 
whether the autopoiesis concepts can say anything more detailed about the 
specific limits of controllability, about the specific structure and organiza-
tion of the various autopoietic systems — apart from the platitude that the 
"limits of their particular self-regulation" (Teubner, 1984 b: 128) are to be 
observed. "A regulation is successful only to the extent that it maintains 
the self-producing internal interaction of the elements in the regulating 
systems of law and politics and is at the same time compatible with self-
producing internal interactions in the regulated social system" (Teubner, 
1984 b: 128). This does not supply any criterion or define any boundary, 
but merely brings together general characteristics supposed to be relevant 
in decisions, explanations and prognoses. What is to be understood by 

122 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
these specifically in a case of application can no longer be said in the 
context of the autopoiesis concept. We are of course stimulated to such 
questions as: what is the difference in the type of "self-producing internal 
interaction" in the education system on the one hand and in the economic 
system on the other? But what do we have to know in order to be able 
to answer such a question? What is achieved if the systems-theoretical 
conceptualization is supplemented with the term "self-producing"? 
Things are similar with Gierke: the concept of organism seemed to him 
to be capable of defining the essence of associations and of the legal person. 
But it no longer answers such specific questions as standing to bring suit 
in court or the criminal accountability of a legal person. 
4. The Evolution of the Autopoietic Legal System 
However, things are not (yet) so specific with "autopoiesis". The classical 
themes of theoretical legal sociology are awaiting: besides the concept of 
law and the question of social change through law, there remains the 
question of the social conditions of legal change, of development of law. 
Just as in the autopoietic view from the legal system towards the system 
to be regulated one cannot speak of causal effect, direct influence, or 
immediate control and determination, so conversely one cannot speak of 
any direct dependency of legal change on social change or reflection of the 
economic base in the legal superstructure, etc. Attention is instead shifted 
towards the mechanisms of change internal to the law. "External mechan-
isms can only have a "modulating" effect on legal developments while the 
evolutionary primacy passes over to internal structural determination" 
(Teubner, infra: 232). 
But what has been gained there by comparison with theories that stress 
the "relative autonomy" of law and of legal development and have worked 
out the "mediations" in detail? I fear rather that the vague concept of 
production (see p. 232 above) might encourage notions of a law that begets 
law. Against this, recourse might be had to the critique already directed 
against the historical school of law with its model of development of inner 
forces in legal development. (At least it still had the spirit of the people 
as a substrate category.) And what is one to think of the specific emergency 
and amendment of legal norms, i. e., legislation, being described as follows: 
On the level of concrete interactions, particularly in the political system, legal norms 
can adequately be explained as the result of processes of power and decision-making 
by various interests and interest groups. Concerning these findings, the question arises 
as to whether and how far these legal norms represent functional solutions to social 
problems. At the same time, important interactions between these modes of explanation 
can be assumed. In particular, an analysis should be made of how far social structures 
and functions affect and delimit political strategies (Teubner, infra: 227 — 228). 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
123 
This surely cannot be even the penultimate word of an autopoietic theory 
of legislation.32 
In other respects, as far as evolutionary mechanisms are concerned, 
recourse is had to the old biological metaphor of variation, selection and 
stabilization (retention) (mostly following Luhmann, 1972; cf. Teubner and 
Willke, 1984: 2 4 - 2 5 ; Teubner, infra: 228). The autopoietic turn then 
consists of the internalization of these mechanisms (also called evolutionary 
functions).33 Again the advantage of the autopoietic perspective lies in the 
fact that its vanishing point is located in the internal processes of the legal 
system, where everything is possible in the law. But how this internal 
functioning is to be analyzed cannot be discussed in any more detail merely 
by using its formal categories. For further specification, interestingly, those 
three concepts are transported from other, Darwinian dimensions of biology 
as developmental mechanisms, and then of course require their specific 
legal interpretation (though the link to legal historical research is still very 
remote). 
The concept of an autopoietic system, precisely because of its formal 
character, has the advantage of being able to bring many very different 
aspects together. However, its level of abstraction dodges the niveau of 
legal sociological and legal theoretical research in particular fields. From 
its broad perspective they are all squashed up together. But the concept 
will be helpful to the extent that it brings relationships to light — once it 
has gone beyond the labor required to clarify the self-produced conceptual 
difficulties of the theory of self-production. 
Translated from the German by Iain Fraser. 
Bibliography 
BALLAUFF, 
THEODOR (1971) "Biologie", Historisches 
Wörterbuch 
der Philosophie, 
Vol. 1, 
Basel: Schwabe & Co. 
— (1984) "Organismus", Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, 
Vol. 6. Basel: Schwabe & 
Co. 
32 Gunther Teubner informs me that this statement should be understood as a plan to 
bring together functional analysis and power-interest-analysis. — My earlier expecta-
tions in this direction have, to be sure, been weakened: Luhmann defines the function 
of law basically as the resolution of conflicts — including those carried out in court — 
and sees the use of the law by the political system in the sense of welfare state 
legislation as an aspect rather outside its functions, which tends to endanger the 
"generative capacity intrinsic to the law" (Luhmann, supra: 28 ff.). 
33 Teubner (infra: 229). The concept of stabilization (retention) here is not exactly made 
clear: it is sometimes used in the same sense as legal tradition (infra: 228), and then 
apparently more in the sense of references within the law to other decisions, norms, 
etc. (Teubner, infra: 229-231). 

124 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
BASTIAN, ADOLF (1860) Der Mensch in der Geschichte. 
Zur Begründung einer 
psychologischen 
Weltanschauung (3 vols, Reprint, 1968). Osnabrück: Biblio-Verlag. 
BERINGER, C A R L CHRISTOPH ( 1 9 5 4 ) Geschichte der Geologie und des geologischen 
Weltbildes. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
BÖCKENFÖRDE, ERNST-WOLFGANG (1978) "Organ, Organismus, Organisation, politischer 
Körper," Geschichtliche 
Grundbegriffe 
Vol. 4. Stuttgart: Klett. 
CANGUILHEM, GEORGES ( 1 9 8 1 ) "Auguste Comtes Philosophie der Biologie und ihr Einfluß 
im Frankreich des 19. Jahrhunderts", in W. Lepenies (ed.), Geschichte der 
Soziologie, 
Vol. 3. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
CERRONI, UMBERTO (1962) Marx ed il diritto moderne (cited from the German translation, 
1974). Frankfurt a. Μ.: Fischer. 
COING, HELMUT ( 1 9 7 3 ) "Bemerkungen zur Verwendung des Organismusbegriffs in der 
Rechtswissenschaft des 19. Jahrhunderts", in Mann (ed.), Biologismus im 19. fahr hundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
D A R W I N , CHARLES ( 1 8 5 9 ) On the Origin of Species by Means of Natural Selection, 
or the 
Preservation 
of Favoured Races in the Struggle for Life (cited from German edition, 1 9 8 0 ) . 
Leipzig: Reclam. 
— (1876) Recollections 
of the Development 
of my Mind and Character /Journal (Personal Diary 
1838 — 1881), (Darwin began to write these memoirs in 1876; cited from German 
edition, S. L. Sobol (ed.), Autobiographie, 
1959). Leipzig: Urania. 
DOHRN-VAN ROSSUM, G E R H A R D ( 1 9 7 8 ) "Organ, Organismus, Organisation, politischer 
Körper", Geschichtliche 
Grundbegriffe 
Vol. 4. Stuttgart: Klett. 
FICHTE, JOHANN GOTTLIEB ( 1 7 9 3 ) "Beiträge zur Berichtigung der Urtheile über die 
französische Revolution", in I. H . Fichte (ed.) ( 1 9 7 1 ) , / . G. Fichte's sämmtliche 
Werke. 
Vol. 6. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1796) "Grundlagen des Naturrechts nach Principien der Wissenschaftslehre" in I. H. 
Fichte (ed.),/. G. Fichte's sämmtliche 
Werke, Vol. 3 (1971). Berlin: de Gruyter. 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Principles of Self-Organization — in a Socio-Managerial 
Context", in Η. Ulrich/G. J. Β. Probst (eds.), Self-Organisation 
and Management of Social 
Systems. Berlin: Springer. 
GANS, EDUARD ( 1 8 2 4 ) Das Erbrecht in weltgeschichtlicher 
Entwicklung. 
Eine Abhandlung der 
Universalrechtsgeschichte 
( 4 vols., Berlin 1 8 2 4 — 1 8 3 5 ) (Reprint, 1 9 6 3 ) . Aalen: Scientia. 
GIERKE, OTTO VON ( 1 8 7 4 ) "Die Grundbegriffe des Staatsrechts und die neuesten Staats-
rechtstheorien", Zeitschrift 
für die Gesamte Staatswissenschaft 
(facsimile reprint 1915, 
Reprint 1 9 7 3 ) . Aalen: Scientia. 
— (1895) Deutsches 
Privatrecht 
(3 vols., 1895/1905/1917) (Reprint, 1936). München: 
Duncker & Humblot. 
— (1902) Das Wesen der menschlichen 
Verbände (Reprint 1965). Darmstadt: Wissenschaftl. 
Buchgesellschaft. 
GUMPLOWICZ, LUDWIG (1875) Rasse und Staat. Vienna: Manz. 
— (1883) Rassenkampf. 
Soziologische 
Untersuchungen. 
Innsbruck: Wagner. 
— (1905) Geschichte der Staatstheorien 
(Ausgewählte 
Werke, Vol. 1, Reprint 1973). Aalen: 
Scientia. 
HEGEL, GEORG WILHELM FRIEDRICH (1800) "Systemfragment von 1800", 
Theorie-Werk-
ausgabe, Vol. 1 (1971). Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1802) "Die Verfassung Deutschlands", Theorie-Werkausgabe, 
Vol. 1 (1971). Frankfurt 
a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
HILDEBRAND, R I C H A R D ( 1 8 9 4 ) Über das Problem einer Allgemeinen 
Entwicklungsgeschichte 
des 
Rechts und der Sitte. Graz. 
HIRST, PAUL Q. (1973) "Morphology and Pathology. Biological Analogies and Meta-
phors" in Durkheim's The Rules of Sociological 
Method", 
2 Economy and Society 1. 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
125 
J HERING, 
RUDOLPH (1852) Geist des römischen 
Rechts auf den verschiedenen 
Stufen 
seiner 
Entwicklung, 
Part 1 (cited from 3rd ed., 1875). Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel. 
— (1865) Geist des römischen Rechts auf den verschiedenen Stufen seiner Entwicklung, 
Part 3, 1. 
(cited from 2nd ed., 1871). Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel. 
— (1872) Der Kampf um's Recht (cited from 15th ed., 1903). Wien: Manz. 
— (1877) Der Zweck, im Recht Vol. 1. (cited from 4th ed., 1904). Leipzig: Breitkopf & 
Härtel. 
K A N T , IMMANUEL ( 1 7 9 0 ) , Kritik der Urteilskraft 
(cited from Κ . Vorländer, ed., 
1 9 6 3 ) . 
Hamburg: Meiner. 
KAUFMANN, E R I C H ( 1 9 0 8 ) Über den Begriff des Organismus in der Staatslehre des 19. Jahrhun-
derts. Heidelberg: Winter. 
KELSEN, HANS ( 1 9 5 2 ) "Was ist ein Rechtsakt?" 4 Österreichische 
Zeitschrift für 
öffentliches 
Recht 
2 6 3 (cited from the English translation, 1 9 8 4 ) . "What is a Legal Act?" 
2 9 
American Journal of Jurisprudence 
199. 
— (1960) Reine Rechtslehre, 
2nd. ed. Vienna: Deuticke. 
KOHLER, JOSEF (1915) "Rechtsphilosophie und Universalrechtsgeschichte", in F. v. Holt-
zendorff and J. Kohler (eds.), Enzyklopädie 
der Rechtswissenschaft, 
7th ed., Vol. 1. 
München: Duncker & Humblot. 
KRIEKEN, ALBERT T H . VAN ( 1 8 7 3 ) Über die sogenannte organische Staatstheorie. 
Ein 
Beitrag 
Zur Geschichte des Staatsbegriffs. 
Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot. 
KRÜGER, HERBERT (1966) Allgemeine 
Staatslehre, 
2nd ed. Stuttgart: Kohlhammer. 
KUHLENBECK, LUDWIG ( 1 9 0 5 ) Natürliche 
Grundlagen des Rechts und der Politik. Ein 
Beitrag 
%ur rechtsphilosophischen 
und kritischen 
Würdigung der sog. Deszendenztheorie. 
Eisenach: 
Thüring. Verl. Anst. 
LAMARCK, JEAN BABTISTE DE (1809), Philosophie zpologtque (German transl. by Η. Schmidt, 
1909). Leipzig: Kröner. 
LEFEVRE, WOLFGANG (1984) Die Entstehung 
der biologischen 
Evolutionstheorie. 
Frankfurt 
a. M.: Ullstein. 
LEIST, BURKHARD WILHELM (1892) Alt-arisches jus civile, (Vol. 2, 1896). Jena: G. Fischer. 
LEPENIES, W O L F ( 1 9 7 6 ) Das Ende der Naturgeschichte. 
München: Hanser. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1971a) "Moderne Systemtheorien als Form gesamtgesellschaftlicher 
Analyse", in J. Habermas and N. Luhmann (eds.), Theorie der Gesellschaft oder 
Sozialtech-
nologie. Frankfurt a, M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1971 b) "Sinn als Grundbegriff der Soziologie", in J. Habermas and N. Luhmann 
(eds.), Theorie der Gesellschaft 
oder Sozialtechnologie. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1971c) "Systemtheoretische Argumentationen", in J. Habermas and N. Luhmann 
(eds.), Theorie der Gesellschaft 
oder Sozialtechnologie. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1983) "Die Einheit des Rechtssystems", 14 Rechtstheorie 
129. 
— (1984) Soziale Systeme. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1985 a) "The Self-reproduction of the Law and its Limits" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 b) A Sociological 
Theory of Law (German original, 1972). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
MAINE, HENRY SUMNER ( 1 8 6 1 ) Ancient Law. Its Connection with the Early History of Society 
and its Relation 
to Modern Ideas, (cited from the 1959 edition). London: Oxford 
University Press. 
M A N N , GUNTER (ed.) (1973) Biologismus 
im 19. Jahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
— (1973) "Rassenhygiene — Sozialdarwinismus", in G. Mann (ed.) Biologismus 
im 19. 
Jahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
MANNHEIM, K A R L ( 1 9 5 3 ) "The History of the Concept of the State as an Organism" in 
P. Kecskemeti (ed.) Essays on Sociology and Social Psychology. 
London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul. 

126 
Hubert Rottleuthner 
M A R T E N , HEINZ-GEORG ( 1 9 8 3 ) So^ialbiologismus. 
Biologische 
Grundpositionen 
der 
politischen 
Ideengeschichte. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R. (1981) "Autopoiesis", in M . Zeleny (ed.) Autopoiesis: 
A Theory 
of Living Organisation. 
Amsterdam: North Holland. 
— (1982) Autopoiesis 
and Cognition: 
the Realisation 
of the Living (cited from the German 
Version). Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel. 
MENDELSOHN, EVERETT ( 1 9 6 4 ) "The Biological Sciences in the Nineteenth Century. Some 
Problems and Sources", in 3 History of Science 39. 
— (1974) "Revolution und Reduktion: die Soziologie methodologischer und philoso-
phischer Interessen in der Biologie des 19. Jahrhunderts", in P. Weingart (ed.), 
Wissenschaftsso^iologie, 
Vol. II. Frankfurt a. Μ.: Athenäum-Fischer. 
MEYER, A H L R I C H ( 1 9 6 9 ) "Mechanische und organische Metaphorik politischer Philoso-
phie", 13 Archiv für Begriffsgeschichte 
128. 
NAGEL, ERNEST (1961) "Wholes, Sums, and Organic Unities", in H. Feigl (ed.), Philosophi-
cal Studies, Vol. II (cited in E. Nagel, The Structure of Science). London: Routledge and 
Kegan Paul. 
NEUKAMP, ERNST ( 1 8 9 5 ) Einleitung in eine Entwicklungsgeschichte 
des Rechts. Berlin: Heymann. 
PLEISTER, WOLFGANG ( 1 9 8 2 ) Persönlichkeit, 
Wille und Freiheit im Werke Jherings. 
Ebelsbach: 
Gremer. 
POST, ALBERT HERMANN ( 1 8 6 7 ) Das Naturgesetz 
des Rechts. Einleitung in eine 
Philosophie 
des Rechts auf Grundlage der modernen empirischen 
Wissenschaft, 
Bremen: Gesenius. 
— (1872) Einleitung in eine Naturwissenschaft 
des Rechts, Oldenburg: Schulze. 
— (1876) Der Ursprung des Rechts. Prolegomena 
%u einer allgemeinen vergleichenden 
Rechtswis-
senschaft. Oldenburg: Schulze. 
— ( 1 8 7 8 ) Die Anfänge des Staats- und Rechtslebens. 
Ein Beitrag 
einer allgemeinen 
vergleichen-
den Staats- und Rechtsgeschichte. 
Oldenburg: Schulze. 
— (1880/1881) Bausteine für eine allgemeine 
Rechtswissenschaft, 
Vol. 1/Vol. 2. Oldenburg: 
Schulze. 
— ( 1 8 8 4 ) Die Grundlagen des Rechts und die Grund^üge seiner Entwicklungsgeschichte. 
Leitgedan-
ken für den Aufbau einer allgemeinen Rechtswissenschaft 
auf sociologischer 
Basis. Oldenburg: 
Schulze. 
— (1891) Uber die Aufgaben einer allgemeinen Rechtswissenschaft. 
Oldenburg: Schulze. 
QUERNER, HANS ( 1 9 7 3 ) "Darwin, sein Werk und der Darwinismus" in G . Mann (ed.), 
Biologismus 
im 19. fahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
R Ä D L , 
EMANUEL 
( 1 9 0 5 / 1 9 0 9 ) Geschichte 
der biologischen 
Theorien seit dem Ende des 17. 
fahrhunderts, 
Parts I/II. Leipzig: Engelmann. 
ROTTLEUTHNER, HUBERT (1985) "Biologie und Recht", 6 Zeitschrift 
für 
Rechtssoziologie 
104. 
— (1986 a) "Theories of Legal Evolution: Between Empiricism and Philosophy of 
History", Rechtstheorie, 
Beiheft 9, 217. 
— (1986 b) "Theorien der Rechtsentwicklung", in Κ. F. Röhl (ed.), Lexikon des Rechts 
-
Rechtssoziologie. 
Neuwied: Luchterhand. 
SAVIGNY, FRIEDRICH C A R L VON ( 1 8 1 4 ) Vom Beruf unserer Zeit für Gesetzgebung und Rechtswis-
senschaft. Heidelberg: Mohr und Zimmer. 
— (1840) System des heutigen römischen Rechts, Vol. 1. Leipzig: Veit. 
SCHELLING, FRIEDRICH WILHELM JOSEPH ( 1 8 0 3 ) Vorlesung über die Methode des akademischen 
Studiums, 
Schriften von 1 8 0 1 — 1 8 0 4 (Reprint, 
1 9 7 3 ) . Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche 
Buchgesellschaft. 
SCHLICK, MORITZ ( 1 9 3 8 ) "Über den Begriff der Ganzheit", Gesammelte Aufsätze. 
Vienna 
(Reprint, 1 9 6 9 ) . Hildesheim: Olms. 
SCHRÖDER, RAINER ( 1 9 8 4 ) Die Entwicklung 
des Kartellrechts 
und kollektiven 
Arbeitsrechts 
durch das Reichsgericht 
ζwischen 1880 and 1914 (Habilitation Thesis, Munich). 

Biological Metaphors in Legal Thought 
127 
SEIDLER, EDUARD and GÜNTER NAGEL ( 1 9 7 3 ) "Georges Vacher de Lapouge 
( 1 8 5 4 — 
1936) und der Sozialdarwinismus in Frankreich", in G. Mann (ed.) Biologismus im 19. 
Jahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
SEITZ, K A R L JOSEPH ( 1 9 0 6 ) Biologie 
des geschichtlich 
positiven 
Rechtes 
im Kulturleben 
der 
Gegenwart, 3 vols. 1906 — 1910. Leipzig: Deichert. 
SPENCER, HERBERT ( 1 8 7 3 ) The Study of Sociology (Reprint, 1 9 6 1 ) . Ann Arbor: University 
of Michigan Press. 
STAHL, GEORG ERNST ( 1 7 0 8 ) Theoria medica vera. Reprint Lipsiae: Voss, 1 8 3 1 — 3 3 . 
STEIN, PETER (1980) Legal Evolution. 
The Story of an Idea. Cambridge: University Press. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 8 4 a) "Autopoiesis in Law and Society: A Rejoinder to Blanken-
burg". 18 Law and Society Review 291. 
— (1984 b) "Das regulatorische Trilemma. Zur Diskussion um postinstrumentale Rechts-
modelle", 13 Quaderni Fiorentini 
109. 
— (1984 c) "Verrechtlichung — Begriffe, Merkmale, Grenzen, Auswege", in F. K. Kübler 
(ed.), Verrechtlichung von Wirtschaft, Arbeit und socialer Solidarität. 
Baden-Baden: Nomos. 
— (1985) "Unternehmensinteresse — das gesellschaftliche Interesse des Unternehmens 
an sich?" 149 Zeitschrift für das gesamte Handelsrecht 
und Wirtschaftsrecht 
470. 
TEUBNER, 
GUNTHER and 
HELMUT 
WILLKE 
( 1 9 8 4 ) "Kontext und Autonomie: Ge-
sellschaftliche Selbststeuerung durch reflexives Recht," 6 Zeitschrift für 
Rechtsso^iolog-
ie 4. 
TREVIRANUS, GOTTFRIED REINHOLD (1802) Biologie, oder Philosophie 
der lebenden Natur für 
Naturforscher 
und Är\te, Vol. 1. Göttingen: Röwer. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO, HUMBERTO MATURANA and R. B . URIBE (1974) "Autopoiesis: The 
Organization of Living Systems, its Characterization and a Model", 5 Biosystems 
187. 
WAITZ, THEODOR ( 1 8 5 9 - 7 2 ) Anthropologie 
der Naturvölker, 
(Parts 1 — 6 : 
1 8 5 9 — 1 8 7 2 ) . 
Leipzig: Fleischer. 
WESEL, U W E ( 1 9 8 5 ) Frühformen 
des Rechts in vorstaatlichen 
Gesellschaften. 
Frankfurt a. M . : 
Suhrkamp. 
WEYAND, K. (1972) "Entwicklung", Historisches 
Wörterbuch der Philosophie, 
Vol. 2. Basel: 
Schwabe & Co. 
WIEACKER, FRANZ ( 1 9 7 3 a) "Bemerkungen über Jhering und den Darwinismus", in G . 
Mann (ed.), Biologismus 
im 19. Jahrhundert. 
Stuttgart: Enke. 
— (1973 b) "Jhering und der Darwinismus", Festschrift für Karl LarenMunich: 
Beck. 
WIELAND, 
WOLFGANG (1975) "Entwicklung, Evolution", Geschichtliche 
Grundbegriffe, 
Vol. 2. Stuttgart: Klett. 
ZELENY, MILAN (1981) "What is Autopoiesis?", in M . Zeleny (ed.) Autopoiesis. 
A Theory 
of Living Organisation. 
New York: North Holland. 
— (1981) Autopoiesis. 
A Theory of Living Organisation. 
New York: North Holland. 
ZIMMERMANN, WALTER ( 1 9 5 3 ) Evolution. 
Geschichte ihrer Probleme 
und Erkenntnisse. 
Frei-
burg: Alber. 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal 
System 
HANS-GEORG DEGGAU 
Hannover 
Introduction 
If both society and its communicative subsystems are asserted to be auto-
poietic, two questions arise. What appearance does the autopoietic identity 
of the systems have, and how are their connections and their mutual 
relatedness to be defined? Since all social systems are supposed to consist 
of nothing other than communications, the autopoietic identity and the 
system connections must be derived from their communicative forms. If 
they are placed side by side as autonomous (in the sense of isolated) 
systems, then their connections can be arrived at only externally and ex 
post facto. 
Instead, I shall attempt in the first part to show how the autopoietic 
system-identity becomes accessible to definition only as something already 
defined — that is, one cannot begin in an indefinite manner from identity 
and difference — and what the initial communicative situation is. I shall 
set this out in more detail, in order on the basis of it to be able in the 
second part to look at whether and how the autopoietic final element is 
constituted as communication; for the elements of the communicative 
process must themselves produce the communicative "surplus" which 
specifies them as suitable for autopoietic communication. Some of these 
communicative elements will be looked at from that viewpoint. From this 
it will appear that the unity sought for cannot be found in the leading 
difference, the thematics or the possibilities of linkage, although these are 
conditions of autopoiesis. The latter is constituted only in the processes of 
self-description and in structures, through definite types of communicative 
linkage and system-specific, communicatively-generated contents. For the 
legal system this is conditionalized legal normativity. 
The relationship between the legal system and other communicative 
systems can thereby likewise be defined more closely, without any forcing: 
the legal system has possibilities of intervention because it is specialized in 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
129 
a structure that all the other systems also show. No system can exist without 
structures of expectation — and this is precisely what is congruently 
generalized by the legal system. The starting point for the analysis of 
system relationships is, then, to be sought in their communicative relations 
and differences. 
I. Aspects of the General Communication System as an Auto-
poietic System 
1. Identity and Basic Self-reference 
Autopoiesis refers to systems.1 Autopoietic systems are systems which 
reproduce themselves autopoietically. The "autopoietic process, which itself 
produces what makes it possible" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 223) defines the system 
as a unitary one. Its unity is neither the unity of the system, to be denoted 
through characteristics, nor that of its structures or elements. What makes 
its unity cannot be adequately understood ontologically in the sense of 
something given, or only as an academic construct, (Luhmann, 1984 a: 240; 
differently, Maturana, 1982: 264 — 65). It is neither an objective nor a 
subjective unity in the traditional sense (Luhmann, 1984 a: 240). Such 
correlations do not hold water in defining the unity of the system. Instead, 
the unity is defined by autopoiesis; that is, purely systemically, through the 
self-reference and circularity producible only by the system. These exist 
only in systemic processing itself and are describable only through it: they 
escape definition from outside. What functions as a unity, what is an 
element, what makes self-reference, follows only from the processing of 
the system itself. It is only from the relating of elements among themselves 
by the system that they acquire system character and the system acquires 
its unity. That means at the same time its closure, i.e. its autonomy, but 
not in the sense of autarchy or being in moral terms a law unto itself, but 
only as self-definition of its processing identity. 
The identity is, then, at this general level, determined exclusively by the 
system itself. This presupposes that the system exists already as a system, 
that it can determine itself; for were it undetermined, it could not determine 
itself as something more determined.2 This is the reason why recourse has 
1 The concept of system is applied below only to social systems. 
2 Such a determinatio 
is not definitio, 
which would posit something as something in 
contra-distinction to other. In it, it is not a defining synthesis in judgements that is 
taking place — although it might so seem (Maturana, 1982; Hejl, 1982) — since the 
identity of the system cannot be seen as self-aware positing of the system by itself, 
on Fichte's model. The identity-producing reproduction of the system is not an act 
of consciousness or will. If we speak of a system as active, we usually presuppose 
consciousness, will, intention, etc. The elements of subject, consciousness and justifica-

130 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
then to be had to considerations of evolutionary theory: for the description 
and explanation of the differentiated form of a system as system. 
The concept of differentiation refers to the process of continual re-
formation of differences. But differentiation as the formation of difference 
implies identity. All definition of identity, whether as observation or as 
process or otherwise, is possible only through difference. 
Both identity and difference must be referred to each other. Without 
such a linkage, no information can be derived either from the identity or 
from the difference. Difference is only conceivable through negation. 
Negation is only possible as negation of something. Difference and negation 
are relational concepts. Since identity does not exist without difference, 
identity itself must also be relational. 
This relation can be found only in relation to something.3 It is only as 
a relation of difference that it can supply information and be communicated. 
But the difference itself is not tangible or substantial. It is tied to the 
process. In order for the process to advance in time it cannot simply stop 
at the difference. As an aspect of the process which is itself to be understood 
as a processing of difference, the difference must be further processed. It 
is only through process that it constitutes meaning and provides the 
possibility of communications of linkage. This processing of difference 
presupposes identity and is constitutive of it. 
Differences do not exist in themselves. They are on the one hand possible 
only in relation to other differences and identities; on the other, they are 
due to the system, or observer, concerned. This in turn finds one of its 
conditions in the difference, without which it cannot be constituted. 
The question thus arises how the relationship between identity and 
difference can be defined concretely, that is, how does their relation appear, 
or more precisely, how does their difference appear? This relation between 
identity and difference is structured as a self-referential unity. 
The problem of mediation of identity and difference cannot be solved 
by putting pure identity at the beginning in order then to deduce all 
tion implied thereby (motives inter alia) are however not yet introduced at all initially. 
For the thesis is, even at the cost of an epistemological paradox, precisely to assert 
the autopoiesis of the system as a real process, independent of observation, which has 
no need of the aspects mentioned. The linguistic subjectivization of the system is to 
be understood as its material de-subjectivization. The autopoietic process is not simply 
a result of external observation, but should, according to Luhmann, be independent 
of this. 
3 If abstraction is made from the reference to something, then nothing is left but the 
identity and difference of the concepts of identity and difference, which are then, 
however, no longer distinguishable: absolute identity — absolute difference; for then 
identity must be identical with itself, because there is no longer any other possibility 
of identification. It must then, however, at the same time be identical with pure 
difference, which, as identical difference, no longer distinguishes itself from anything 
else. 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
131 
difference from it. Identity and difference must already be thought of as 
in reference to something. This is why Luhmann seeks to conceive of 
identity, and temporalize it from the outset as a differentiated unity, and 
thus already to incorporate the aspect of process in its constitution. He 
even asserts "the difference between identity and difference" as a "new 
guiding difference" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 26). This fundamental difference is 
understood self-referentially, whereby "unity can arise only through a 
relating operation" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 58). 
This "relating operation" is the basic operation of self-reference, which 
is conceivable only relationally. For the system elements, this is the "basal 
self-reference" (Luhmann, 1982: 369; 1984a: 600 f.).4 As pure self-reference 
it would lead no further, since therein the element refers to nothing else 
than itself. Instead, the element must as itself refer to something else, which 
it is not itself, but starting from which it can be grasped as itself. For this 
reason, "the unity of the element must be constituted as unity of identity and 
difference" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 370). 
The element is at the same time one for another. It incorporates this 
relation into itself. Its possibility is to be found in the reference structure, 
i. e., its meaningfulness. In reference, which is extremely selective, A cannot 
refer to A, but must refer to a non-A which itself in turn refers to A. 
The reference horizon is, as non-^4, therefore not the totality of all possible 
possibilities, but is system-specifically bound. A refers, not to everything 
else, but only to a possibility space set by the system itself, a selection set. 
The reference from A to non-^4 could otherwise not acquire the necessary 
self-referentiality, because a reference from non-^4 to A would be conceiv-
able only as infinite, opening up infinite selection spaces and no longer 
able to cope with linkage possibilities. 
The conditions of the autopoietic reproduction of systems have thereby 
been characterized in general terms; for communications which produce 
communications and are produced by them must, as elements of the 
communication process, show basic self-reference. Without this, which 
contains the continuation of the process in embryo, no new elements of 
the same type can proceed from those. It is only from this unity of the 
elements that the unity of the system proceeds — as on the other hand it 
is only this that engenders the unitariness of the elements. It is only this 
that testifies to the autopoiesis of the system and not only of the elements. I 
shall now clarify these general considerations further for the communication 
system of the whole of society. 
4 Here Luhmann distinguishes self-reference in relation to the elements as basic self-
reference — element/relation; in relation to the processes of the system as reflexivity — 
before/after; and in relation to the system itself as reflection — system/environment. 

132 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
2. Society as Communicative System 
For Luhmann, society is a system of communications, not of actions 
(Luhmann, 1984 a: 60 f.). Action is constituted only through and in the 
communication process (Luhmann, 1984 a: 191). The element of the com-
munication process is the individual communication. This consists in the 
interplay of information, communication and understanding, so that the 
communication must "be seen as a three-part selection process" (Luhmann, 
1984 a: 194). For information, a code of behavior is chosen in which 
information is communicated. Through understanding, a unity of the 
communication process then arises: Β informs A through a communication; 
A understands this and can also distinguish between the two aspects. 
It follows from this "that communication is possible only as a 
self-referential 
process" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 194). For communication can only continue if 
it refers to other communication. In this continuation, it reproduces itself 
precisely through the fact of further communication. This "further" is 
possible exclusively as a reference to communication. From communication, 
it is only communication that can arise, nothing else. The impulses to 
communication, their contents, may be arbitrary. But they are communi-
cable only in the form of the tripartite selection that the communications 
system makes available. Therein lies its closure, if you will: the closure of 
its identical form. 
Communication as "processing of selection" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 194) 
always contains a meaning-reference. The dimension of meaning lies in the 
fact that all three aspects of communication are selective and each refer to 
something else. Meaning as "form of a surplus of references to further 
possibilities" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 93) compels meaningful selection. Commu-
nication is highly selective, and refers to a multiple reference horizon. The 
reference character is inherent in every communicative act. Through its 
own selections, it anticipates those of the continuation of communication. 
It thus offers possibilities of linkage. 
The possibilities of linkage are conditions for the possibility of continu-
ing communication. It is only as long as they are guaranteed that communi-
cation can go further. "The unity of the individual communication is, 
considered dynamically, nothing more than the capacity for linkage" 
(Luhmann, 1984 a: 204). It is only its unity that makes the formation of 
further differences possible.5 The need, just shown, for severe restriction 
of the linkage possibilities formed as self-reference is, as extremely high 
condensation of meaning, indispensable in order to make linkages transpar-
ent and operational, i.e., practicable (cf. Luhmann, 1984a: 140). 
5 The theory of autopoietic systems can therefore be understood in this respect as a 
working out of the conditions of possibility of autopoietic reproduction, which can 
be reduced to "possibilities of linkage". Cf. Luhmann (1984 a: 590). 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
133 
One of the most important mechanisms of such reduction of social 
complexity lies in communicative self-observation and self-description, 
through which alone the concept of action becomes possible. Through it, 
the communicative system controls itself. The self-description is preceded 
by self-observation in which the system applied a difference to itself. 
Observation is understood by Luhmann, following Spencer Brown, as 
distinction and denotation (Luhmann, 1984 a: 230). If the difference be-
tween system and environment is brought about by the system itself, then 
a distinction is present. Observation then consists in the fact that "within 
this distinction ... the system is denoted as originator of the communica-
tion" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 230); and by the system itself. This self-observation 
then becomes "self-description, when it produces semantic artefacts to 
which further communications can refer and with which the unity of the 
system is denoted" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 618). 
For communication, therefore, the individuated set of linkage possibili-
ties is defined not only generally through self-reference, but also through 
the selection of such self-referential self-descriptions. It is therefore true of 
social systems that they "can carry out their self-reproduction only with 
the help of self-observations and self-descriptions" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 230). 
For self-description is an abbreviated expression of attributed communica-
tion. Communication cannot in every one of its acts repeat the whole 
communication itself — though this too would be an (extreme) form of 
self-reference. For its continuation it requires such abbreviations that only 
itself can produce, which it attributes to the determination of linkages. 
Since at the same time every communication represents a highly selected 
selection, it becomes still further sharpened through the attribution. 
It is only this that constitutes action. This can be seen daily, for instance 
in the assignment of guilt, which can always be assigned differently. 
Through it, a particular process is constituted communicatively, is con-
structed and selected from among other possible attributions. Speaking 
generally, this makes available and guarantees possibilities of linkage, while 
at the same time "any amount of complexity is restricted through self-
simplification, which structures" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 234). Such self-simplifi-
cations, defined in the general communications system as actions, can be 
found in all communications systems. They result from self-observations, 
from communications about communications; they are fixed shortenings 
of sets of linking actions and attributions. It is through this self-reference 
too that the element identifies itself as itself and not itself. And it is only 
this that provides the possibility of a guarantee of continuation of the 
communicative process. The concomitant self-reference is a general expres-
sion of this, in so far as this concomitant relation means, or guarantees, 
the unity of the system and the elements, making "self-observation into a 
necessary component of autopoietic reproduction" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 64). 

134 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
But this too only points to the fact that the autopoietic element of the 
communication system is the individual communicative act. As such, it is 
initially not distinct from other communicative acts. It is possible only on 
the basis of communication, and makes further communication possible. 
That is its meaning. We shall therefore proceed to investigate whether, or 
how far, the communicative acts of the subsystems specify autopoietic 
closure or if their newly constituted unity is to be sought in something 
else. 
II. The Communicative Subsystems 
1. The Need for Their Differentiation 
Society is the total communicative system, with which no further communi-
cation is possible, for this would itself form part of society. The social 
subsystems that have differentiated are also meaningfully structured com-
munication systems, distinguished for an observer also by their function. 
Nevertheless, it cannot be asserted that their autopoiesis is oriented deliber-
ately towards their function. Instead, this takes place through the difference, 
constituted by the system itself, of its unity and difference: "functional 
orientation is certainly not a requirement for self-referential reproduction" 
(Luhmann, 1984 a: 406). 
In order for autopoietic subsystems to be distinguished from other 
subsystems and thereby also from the society as a whole, they must develop 
a system-specific autopoiesis which as communicative autopoiesis coincides 
with that of the whole of society, but which differentiates itself in its 
specific formation of unity. For the "mere participation in the autopoiesis 
of society" is not enough to make the partial systems into autopoietic 
systems proper (Luhmann, supra: 19). 
For autopoiesis, then, differences must be formed, which underlie the 
communications of the individual systems as intrinsic to the system. They 
must be different from communicative acts of society as a whole. They 
therefore require additional qualities through which they are specified and 
distinguished but also through which the subsystem is closed as identical 
and is reproduced. These special communicative acts should be neither 
produced nor producible by other systems. Because of the communicative 
character of all social systems, each communicative act must be qualified 
as such. Other characteristics, ontic or otherwise, cannot play any part 
here. This is because the subsystems "consist only of communications" 
(Luhmann, 1984 b: 311). Their specific unity-forming element can therefore 
likewise only be of a communicative nature. Luhmann's thesis that they 
"do not close themselves as communicative, do not distinguish themselves 
as communication systems from their environment" (Luhmann, 1984 b: 
311) therefore seems problematic. To be sure, it is true that the subsystems 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
135 
need "an intrinsic principle of constitution of unity, applying only to them, 
for which there is no correspondence in their environment" (Luhmann, 
1984 b: 311). But it must then be clarified in detail how this special unity 
is related to the communication process of the system and how the system 
is in a position to produce entirely new unities, not communicatively 
distinguished, which provide the basis for autopoiesis. The positing and 
the possibility of such emergent unities — e. g. payment for the economic 
system (Luhmann, 1984 b) — does not replace the analysis of these connec-
tions. 
I shall therefore seek out the starting point for locating the specification 
which leads to the formation of the autopoietic system element and which 
can, in my view, be only of a communicative nature. On the basis of some 
characteristics of communicative autopoiesis (guiding difference, thematics, 
self-description, possibility of linkage, structure), I shall examine whether 
a kind of communicative "surplus" can be found in them, out of which 
the elements of unity can be formed. If this is not the case, it must be 
made clear under what conditions the elements sought for can otherwise 
emerge. 
2. Conditions of Differences of the Subsystems and Their Autopoiesis 
Social evolutionary theory gives no adequate answer to the question, 
because it does not explain the logical and systematic conditions of the 
identity of a system. The evolutionary aspect will therefore not be explored 
here; instead I shall seek to show how on the basis of a communicative 
total system, communicative subsystems can be distinguished and how the 
general conditions of their autopoiesis appear. 
I think that differentiation is possible in many different ways. Among 
these I have selected five possibilities. A fundamental one is the guiding 
difference, which gives all system communication its relevance. It is also 
decisive for the thematics that the system can take up. Linkage possibilities 
provide the guarantee for the transition from one element to the next. Self-
descriptions emerge, through which the system gives itself expression. For 
continuation of the system, the formation of structures which are to be 
seen as structures of expectations is necessary.6 
The autopoietic process is not accessible directly as a real process, but 
is only open to observation; the observer's distinctions will presumably be 
different from those of the system. Accordingly, the general characterization 
6 In my view these descriptions are enough, at least for the definition of the legal 
system. I suspect, however, that this is on the one hand characteristic of the legal 
system, but on the other not sufficient for other systems. For the legal system can 
define its content as expectations, which is not possible for the other systems, at any 
rate in the form of the legal system. 

136 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
below of a subsystem can only be given from the standpoint of the observer. 
To link up with Part I, I shall orient this description towards the basic 
concepts of identity and difference. 
What follows abstractly for the differentiated subsystems then becomes 
concrete directly in the legal system. The aspects of this differentiation will 
be studied to find what the ultimate communicative element of the legal 
system is and how it is constituted. In doing this I shall analyze the aspects 
studied for their contribution to the autopoietic constitution of the legal 
system. Here I place particular value on the description of the emergence 
of the unity element from the communicative contexts. 
(a) Guiding Difference 
Through its orientation towards its guiding difference, the system refers 
itself to an identical difference. This serves to set its own limits, i. e., its 
identity; for it is on this basis that it always also distinguishes what belongs 
to it and what does not. The system thereby organizes its horizons of 
meaning and selection. Affirmative reference to itself becomes possible for 
it, as does definition of the negation, internal or external to the system — 
that is, the exclusions, the demarcations from other things as non-identical, 
non-belonging. All operations of the system must be oriented towards this 
in order to be system operations, but this also sets up an infinitely broad 
operational space. 
The guiding difference is a communicative difference. It is selective, and 
increases the further selection possibilities of the communicative process. 
Through the reference of communication to it, the system can communica-
tively distinguish what belongs to it. By reference to it, it may also reject 
communications. 
The guiding difference, while it thus defines the substantive framework 
of possible system identity, and thus also its information-processing possi-
bilities, says nothing about how the system, through processing, sets the 
boundaries, and what mechanisms it uses to maintain its identity. 
If these are, however, asserted autopoietically as autonomous, as a core 
of the autopoietic reproduction and closure of the system, it follows that 
the guiding difference can contribute only slightly. The specific unity that 
has to constitute the system if autopoiesis is to be possible does not result 
from it. While it can orient the general communicative process, it cannot 
constitute any communicative elements differing from other communicative 
acts but which are producible only through elements of the same type. 
The fundamental communicative difference of the legal system is that 
between right and wrong, legal and illegal, possibly just and unjust. These 
mutually exclusive pairs of values guide legal communication. It is on their 
bases that the relevance or irrelevance of communications is decided. It is 
only with reference to them that something is assessed as belonging to the 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
137 
system or not belonging to it. Thus, the legal system can do nothing with 
physical or chemical differences as such. They may however become 
relevant if they become essential to the evaluation of a legal consequence 
(thus, whether something is legal or illegal). 
Through the guiding difference, the legal system obtains an initial legal 
definition. It roughly indicates what the system is concerned with, and for 
what problems and complexes it has competence. The aesthetic guiding 
difference has, for instance, a different content from the legal one. This 
makes a difference from other subsystems possible.7 Linking communica-
tions are thus controlled through the fact that every contribution must 
justify the extent to which it contributes anything to the evaluation of 
"legal or illegal". 
But the concretization of the guiding difference in the legal system does 
not yield very much for the constitution of legal autopoiesis. It must be 
borne in mind that the ultimate communicative elements sought for have 
to be correlated with the guiding difference: they must not only be 
compatible with it but must themselves retain or permit the distinction 
between "legal and illegal". 
(b) 
Thematics 
The "universalization of possible relevances" attained through the guiding 
difference (Luhmann, supra: 17) is concretized and generalized communica-
tively through the possible themes. The system can thus take up themes 
and treat them in its own way. 
As system themes they are, however, accessible to the system only under 
the conditions of the guiding difference. Thematization, or change of 
theme, is also only possible in this way. How and whether a theme is taken 
up depends on the system itself. Thematics in each case deals with certain 
differences which are correlated with the difference of other themes, es-
pecially the guiding difference. The correlations open to a system take on 
their value only through its identity and thereby the difference from other 
systems. 
In the varying correlations of differences through which the system 
classifies, compares and relates, it also forms the procedures and modes 
7 The legal system can thereby be meaningfully asserted as divided into two areas: the 
general legal system has as its object the communications which refer, in normative 
or non-normative fashion, to the guiding difference between legal and illegal, and 
process further selections. To that extent, even everyday conversations about legal 
themes belong here. Binding changes in expectations of behavior are not meant to 
be, and are not, set off by this. By contrast, the legal system in the narrower sense 
is the system that processes normativity and changes expectations of comportment 
through congruent generalization, and is oriented to the concept of legal action as 
attributed communication. It includes both major and minor changes, legislative acts 
or declarations of intent. 

138 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
which it uses to identify, grasp and describe itself. It is only the manipulation 
of differences (observation) that makes this possible; here the guiding 
difference is not sufficient, because it cannot grasp or express the complexity 
of the relationships, but merely represents a communicative principle 
of judgement. Through the manipulation of internal differences (self-
observation) the system must, for the possibility of continuing communica-
tion, develop fixed sets of links through which it distinguishes itself from 
other systems. This cannot however be achieved through thematics, yet 
thematics do determine the "accent" of the language, such that an observer 
can easily determine whether it is a lawyer, politician, artist or someone 
else who is talking. 
Thematics bring about further densification of the possibilities of com-
munication for the legal system as well. This does not mean that there is 
any conclusive canon of legal themes, but only that possible themes arise 
in the orientation around the guiding difference between legal and illegal. 
Thus, one can communicate legally about the guilt of an accused person 
or the justification of a dismissal, but not about sports results. These may 
take on legal significance only when reference to the guiding difference is 
made, for instance in the case of the prohibitions on drug use. 
In the context of the guiding difference, therefore, thematic restrictions 
serve only to break down insufficiently transparent complexes and to limit 
the system. Along with it, further differences are posited, which may be 
directed at other communications or at those of the system itself. Here 
too, however, no communicative surplus is visible that might lead to the 
constitution of autopoietic elements. The point in the thematizations is the 
structuring of the general communicative process as such, from which no 
sub-systemic autopoiesis can be developed. 
Thematic orientation and selection thus do not constitute communicative 
acts out of which autopoietic elements might crystallize. They do not give 
the communications any specific character: all of them have to be thematic 
because all communication already means thematic selection. 
(c) Linkage possibilities 
The systems consist of ephemeral, evanescent elements since the communi-
cative acts do not endure, as they are not arranged for exsitence over time. 
It is only if provision has been made for their successor or at least for a 
possibility of succession that the system can continue to exist. The possibil-
ity of self-continuation must exist at the moment of dissolution of an 
element; its possibilities of linkage must be maintained or realized. 
This happens because a communicative element is not something existing 
neutrally, only for itself, but understands itself in anticipation as selective 
and thereby as meaningful. It acquires its character as an element only in 
contexts of meaning, in regard to what selective possibilities there are. It 
defines itself by pointing beyond itself. 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
139 
It is in such references that its specifically communicative nature lies; 
the linkage possibilities that come under the above-mentioned conditions 
are at the same time possibilities of exclusion. They have specified them-
selves so far that in principle only similarly specified communications can 
follow from them. The understanding context of reference and meaning is 
made possible and is held up through the meaning structure of expectation. 
The linkage capacity of a communicative act can therefore be seen as the 
fundamental condition for the autopoietic process. But the linking up of 
a communication with other communications says nothing about its subsys-
tem specific character, since the point is precisely to establish the specificity 
of the element, which then must be capable of linkage vis-ä-vis other 
elements of the same type. What this specificity consists in, however, 
cannot be deduced from the general need for linkage capacity. 
Correspondingly, it is also true of the legal system that a legal communi-
cation can be followed by another communication only if it takes over the 
selections developed thus far. If it does not, it will bring the communication 
to date under a new guiding difference, thus leaving the legal system and 
possibly becoming incomprehensible. 
The linkage possibilities of the elements are, then, determined substan-
tively, through their selectivity and identity. The meaning which arises 
through and from differences here follows from the dense network of 
selections. That means, then, that only communications of law are com-
municable in the legal system, since only they offer possibilities of legal 
linkage. While this is a formulation of a general condition of legal auto-
poiesis, it does not follow from it how the element that is to meet this 
condition can be constituted. 
(d) 
Self-descriptions 
Observations are processes in which an identifiable distinction is drawn 
and described. If a system applies distinction and description to itself, it is 
a case of self-observation. In the communicative process this means that 
the information communicated refers to the communicative process itself. 
If such references take on a fixed semantic form, then it is a case of 
descriptions, or self-descriptions. Self-descriptions that have arisen freely 
in interaction systems must however develop further into structural pro-
visions that make linkage possible at any time with what has existed already, 
that is, the continuation of the communication. Large social subsystems 
cannot operate with only momentary self-descriptions. Instead, they must 
extend over time. 
Through self-descriptions, the system's reference to itself is expressed. 
They are therefore self-referential; for they refer to particular communica-
tive processes without which they would have no meaning — as, conversely, 
they reintroduce these into the system and give them meaning. 

140 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
The constituting and practice of communicative systems incorporate 
many of these self-descriptions operationally. 
They make possible a definite 
furtherance or continuation of the system. The unity of the self-descriptions 
as a communicative, semantically acquired body of self-observations always 
carries within it the anticipatory aspects of temporal synthesis. Such antici-
pations as identity selections and identity controls may take on normative 
character. Through them, the system may produce an identity norm, 
through an identical form of self-expectation. They can thus count as the 
system's conception of itself, whereby it measures itself and orients itself. 
It becomes the criterion of development and therefore also of the control 
of possible deviations. Through the self-descriptions, thus, differences are 
engendered, through which the system defines itself. To be sure, it is not 
the self-description, but can only be read off from it; but through the 
establishment of its own difference, the system also makes its identity 
accessible to itself, and makes its reformulation or transformation possible. 
The self-description of the systems seems to be a mechanism lying 
much closer to autopoiesis; for the self-descriptions can be produced and 
reproduced only communicatively, but meaningfully only through reference 
to an identical system. Along with the guiding difference and the thematiza-
tions, the self-descriptions, from their necessary orientation towards an 
identical system, thus take on a highly self-referential character. They 
presuppose identical networks and references within which they alone are 
meaningful. Their character of mutual reference shows their close systematic 
connection. 
But even this is not enough to produce the internal self-referential core 
of autopoiesis. It is incorrect to say that self-descriptions proceed only 
from self-descriptions and can produce only self-descriptions; for self-
descriptions also proceed from general communicative situations and acts. 
Certainly, what suggests itself is to study their role in autopoiesis. To that 
extent, it is true of the whole system of society that its communicative 
autopoiesis cannot manage to do without self-description.8 
This indicates mainly and primarily only the reference of the communica-
tion to past communication. It refers to it by denoting parts, individual 
acts or the whole of the communication that has taken place separately, 
and communicating about it. This orientation towards itself is essential: 
for control, for the possibility of continuation, for clearing up misunder-
standings, for correcting, for evaluating developments, for attribution 
(addressing), etc. 
Such references, which may have arisen interactionally and flow directly 
back into the communication, acquire consolidation that goes beyond the 
8 A particularly effective self-description of the system is the concept of action. It allows 
the summarizing of communicative structuring and at the same time assignment or 
attribution of major complexes. 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
141 
individual concrete reason for them and may take on significance for all 
communications in the system. They may then count as self-descriptions 
of the system because they keep on appearing as reference to self, and in 
them communicative positions oriented towards the guiding difference are 
formulated. 
In the legal system, with its thoroughly worked-out dogmatics, legal 
theory and legal philosophy, there are many self-descriptions which are 
independent of the particular individual communication (though of course 
reproducing themselves only through it), but usable in it. There is a range 
of linguistic artefacts available. It is through their connection and their use 
that the system defines itself. Only the legal system is in a position to 
change, modify, loosen or densify these self-descriptions and the legal 
structures (see below) connected with them. 
Self-descriptions structure the possible communications about law to a 
large extent. They define the possibilities of linkage. Their meaning as 
selection often consists precisely in the impossibility of particular connec-
tions. They prescribe, crudely or in detail, what is possible. It is only 
through reference to them that legal communication can be planned and, 
in certain circumstances, also be strategically carried out. 
A particularly usable and highly generalized self-description of the social 
system of society is represented by the concept of action. "Actions are 
constituted by processes of attribution. They arise from the attribution of 
selections ... to systems" (Luhmann, 1984a: 288). Action is thus to be 
understood not as "deed", but only as constituted through communication, 
as reference to communication, to communicative situations. To that extent, 
action is communicative. There is therefore an emergent social level of 
action, which is communicatively constituted. 
The concept of action makes it possible to find further differences in 
the communication network itself. Through the concept of communication 
as a threefold unity, differing material was already brought to unity: 
not only the selections, but also self and other as those involved. The 
communicative act allows their differences in reference to its unity to 
disappear. This does not however explain communication's possibility of 
continuation. The unity of the diverse must again be used to distinguish 
the diverse. This is brought about by the concept of action, since it assigns 
to self or other, as the communicators, particular selections. 
The concept of action is also a self-description of the legal system, but 
it acquires its specific definition only when the action is qualified as legal. 
Its reference to the identity of the system is however not enough if it is 
to be understood as autopoietic unity, unless it is still further qualified. 
For this, the action must be equipped with something that gives it further 
significance. This happens through the reflexive stressing of the basic self-
reference by applying the process of legal description of the world in its 
distinctions to itself. Whatever in the events of the world is denoted by 

142 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
the legal system as legal action or legal consequence can be once more 
applied to the denotative or descriptive process. In the self-description of 
the system, much is thus again treated as legal action or legal consequence. 
Through this, and through binding up with the conditions of law, an 
action becomes a legal action. The legal system not only denotes it in 
general as an action, but selects out certain actions. They are distinguished 
by appearing in the conditional form set by the legal system itself. This is 
a communicative form which has synthetic character, but is not specific as 
such for the legal system, since other systems use it too. 
But this simultaneously indicates the possibility of autopioetic reproduc-
tion. In the form of "if A then B", the first element is constituted as action 
or event, which can however also denote a cognitively recognizable legal 
position. The first elements in this relation are, then, elements that proceed 
from self-descriptions, qualified by their link with the following element 
as legal action or as legal event. As legal, they are characterized through 
their reference to the guiding difference of "right and wrong". 
If the legal consequence, however understood, is to be regarded as the 
apodosis part of the implication, then the autopoietic element sought for 
could, at least formally, possibly lie in the whole implication. For if the 
legal synthesis is the communicative quality through which communicative 
language is achieved (though this must be defined more precisely), then a 
communicative element would be constituted which could not be produced 
by other communicative contexts — and which would itself be possible 
only through linkage to communications of the same type. 
Apart from the specific legal character, to be sure, there should still be 
detailed study of who communicates where, when and how; for the 
emergence of these communicative elements is bound up with communica-
tive processes. The precondition is, therefore, again the breaking up of what 
has in the communicative act been brought to unity through attribution. 
Specifically: if A has been caused damage by Β, Β must compensate. This 
connection as such is of course of a legal nature, but its communication 
itself is not yet a legal autopoietic element. It can become this only if these 
implications are ranked in with other framework implications (when the 
judge has decided, the decision applies). These include procedures, trials, 
institutions, etc. 
But this depends precisely on what is to be understood as legal conse-
quence. If law is understood as congruently generalized expectation, then 
a legal consequence is a change in the position of expectations. If however 
the legal consequence can be formulated only with recourse to this, then 
it is to be looked at in the next section. 
Summarizing, it may therefore be said that it is through the legal self-
descriptions of the system — to which the legal concept of action is 
central — that communications refer to communications oriented towards 
"legal and illegal". Through their necessary self-reference, they restrict the 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
143 
possible communications much more than is done by the guiding difference 
or the thresholds of thematizations; for a kind of identical core is consti-
tuted, through the self-definition of the system as self-description. However, 
this is still not enough for autopoietic reproduction. 
An essential condition of the autopoietic closure of the communicative 
system is met only where there is a type of linkage which forms itself and 
excludes other linkages. The elements of the communicative process in 
which such syntheses take place must anticipate precisely such linkages in 
their self-reference. Additive, subtractive or logarithmic linkages are not 
possible in law. The type of linkage — though not yet typical of the legal 
system — is in principle that of implication. In it, certain communications 
are linked with others in the form of the "if-then". The protages of this 
implication are legal actions or legal events. The apodosis is the legal 
consequence. The autopoietic character of the legal implication lies then 
in the fact that it is only in linkage with such implications that other ones 
can be created; for only legal actions, legal events and legal consequences 
can be synthesised in it. Since this formal condition is however not yet 
enough, we shall now look at how the substantive conditions of the legal 
implication can be seen against the concept of structure of expectations. 
(e) Structures 
Structures conserve linkage possibilities. They are themselves selections 
oriented around identity, which make possible selections among the rela-
tions within them. They control the relationships between the elements of 
the system through time, by bridging the gap that has arisen from the 
ending of one element. 
This means that structure makes it possible for the system to maintain 
its existence and identity. The temporary bridging takes place through 
expectations. These guarantee the identity and identification possibility of 
the communicative elements of the social subsystem. For social structures 
are "nothing other ... than structures of expectation" (Luhmann, 1984a: 
397). 
It is only along them that the communicative process can move. Substan-
tively, they provide the guiding thread through time. Communication 
therefore acquires its identity essentially through the reference to expecta-
tions which are anticipatory ideas of how the communications will or 
ought to develop, i.e., it determines their possibilities of development. 
The disappointment of expectation makes everything classifiable that was 
not in line with the expectation. 
This generalization largely filters the possible successful communications. 
It thereby defines differences and negation. It is extremely intensified 
selection, which alone makes links possible. It also, therefore, provides the 
negation possibilities of the links themselves. This concreteness is necessary 

144 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
for the system. But it does not lie at the level of the distinction of "this 
or everything else". The totality formulae "A or not-A" or "A and not-
A" are, in their abstraction and simple juxtaposition of identity and 
negation, referred to everything possible, unusable. The limits of the system 
are defined precisely by the fact that the system itself controls its potential 
for negation. In the difference from other systems, through limit and 
difference, the system implies a high level of negation. The class of possible 
negations of the system is established by it itself "as the limitation of the 
quality and linkability of the elements" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 389). 
In general, then, structures are conditions without which autopoiesis 
cannot take place. They are to be met within all social systems, and 
therefore as such not specific to a system. The social structures formed 
through expectations can lead to the constitution of unities intrinsic to 
subsystems only if they are further condensed and become so highly 
selective that their potential for negation excludes everything except one 
single communicatively differentiated type of event. This is in my view 
the case with the legal system, where the expectation structures are so 
highly specialized and generalized that legal communications acquire a 
unitariness of their own. 
The analysis of further aspects such as conditioning or codification might 
clarify their role in the general communicative process. But they too 
provide no direct jumping-off point for the formation of subsystemic 
autopoiesis. What follows from this? 
The alternative that can be seen seems to be as follows: either the 
subsystems cannot differentiate themselves only through their communica-
tive processes, structures and elements; then their difference must lie in 
something else. If this something else is, however, not communication nor 
communicatively engendered, then it is rather hard to maintain the thesis 
that subsystems consist "only of communications". Or it can be shown 
that the elements that make the system's closure possible are after all 
communicatively generated; then the formation of their difference must 
be localizable and describable in the communicative process itself. The 
constitution of the ultimate communicative elements that engender auto-
poiesis and therefore identity and intersystemic differences is then a result 
of the communicative process itself. From it proceed emergent systems 
that show an autopoiesis of their own, that do not owe their specificity to 
their environment. 
The thesis to be worked out below and displayed in the case of the legal 
system is that the specific difference of the legal system proceeds from 
certain communicative operations that acquire their "content" from the 
system's structure. This content is the result of communicative handling of 
information and time, to the extent that expectations consist of anticipatory 
communications. The autopoiesis of the legal system is, then, the result of 
various aspects. Together, these form a context which could not maintain 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
145 
itself lastingly on a purely interactional level. It is only its institutionaliza-
tion and procedural consolidation that allow it to take on a form that goes 
beyond a system of interactions. For this, however, many kinds of structure 
are necessary. 
Among legal communications, individual ones can, in accordance with 
the system's self-description, be understood as legal actions. They are 
thereby distinguished by the system from other communications and differ-
entiated from them. Therein lie the communicative connections that make 
it possible to situate a legal communication, for instance, as a legal action 
in the legal system, and to deal with it as such. 
The self-reference of legal action is, like its system reference, only 
possible through time. Bridging structures whereby the linkage possibilities 
are concretely regulated and controlled make it possible for the legal system 
not to cease to exist with the cessation of the legal communication as legal 
action. They guarantee its possible continuation. For it is through structure 
that legal action as a past event is linked in time with its future, without 
this linkage depending on the duration of the event. On the contrary: it 
presupposes its end. It is in this linkage, however, that it shows its meaning. 
This legal meaning, the selection of legal action, is only possible on the 
basis of the legally meaningful situation of whoever sets the action going. 
The "action situation" is legally determined and defined. It is only legal 
structures that make it into what it is. The same is true of legal events. 
The legal consequence is the new position in regard to selection and 
expectation. 
As set out above, the system structures take the shape of expectations. 
For these are the general social form of the anticipatory synthesis in time 
through which the present is linked with the future, and thus through 
which the anticipation of action, its realization and its evaluation as a 
consequence become possible. Expectation anticipates in time what is 
expectable as possible. It refers to itself to the extent that the present is 
seen in the light of the expected, i. e., future, and the future in the light 
of the present. The end of the action, the termination of the event, is the 
condition for the possibility of linkage: the meaning of the action/event as 
simplified description in the meaning network of legal expectations makes 
the structure whereby there can be a passage from one event to the next. 
However, the law shows the peculiarity of becoming condensed along 
the expectation dimension. The distinction is drawn between cognitive and 
normative expectations (Luhmann, 1985). The difference is defined by their 
capacity to learn. Cognitive expectations are able to learn; normative 
expectations are not. The law numbers among the normative expectations 
since it retains the expectations even when they are disappointed. It sticks 
to them against the facts. By contrast, cognitive expectations change in the 
event of disappointment; they learn, they do not expect against the facts. 

146 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
It is only its normative character that makes the legal system possible as 
something autopoietic, since the connection between legal action and legal 
event is distinguished by its content as normative. The peculiarity of its 
communications as already worked out through the aspects discussed so 
far, takes on its definitive delimiting identity only through this. For while 
the descriptions thus far already permit the separation of the legal system 
from the social system, they were able to indicate only formally where the 
autopoietic reproduction was to be seen, and thus what reproduces itself 
specifically via the general reproduction. This surplus is characterized 
through conditionalized normativity. 
Without it, to be sure, the legal system can be separated from other 
systems and asserted as something specific. But these general differences 
are not enough to assert the possibility of autopoiesis instrinsic to the 
system. Rather, the specific difference must lie in something that cannot 
as such constitute itself by itself. For the legal system, we can denote this 
surplus as conditionalized 
legal normativity. 
For its character as legal normativ-
ity can be justified by no other system, nor given to its communications. 
Hence Luhmann's thesis: "The positivity of law is its autopoiesis" (supra: 
18) becomes understandable. Law can be produced or changed only through 
law, validity only through the valid. This constitutes its specifity. The 
closure lying therein — through which alone the closure of the system 
becomes possible — is defined by the connection of the legal action with 
the legal consequence: "it is nothing but legal communication that selects 
legal acts from the variety of social acts and events. One needs to extend 
this idea to legal procedure and legal doctrine. Both become self-referential 
when the legal discourse selects certain procedures and certain reality 
constructs as legal ones" (Teubner, infra: 224); mutatis mutandis, 
this is true 
of the legal event. The starting point is the expectations of comportment 
which are changed by the legal action or legal event as singled out, 
specialized legal communications — which is precisely what their specificity 
lies in.9 
The communicatively constituted difference of the autopoieticized legal 
system can then be summarized as follows: in the orientation around the 
guiding difference between "legal and illegal", this relationship forms 
mediated and linked self-descriptions of the system. These constitute a kind 
of self-referential core of the system. Since the latter then applies the basic 
distinctions of its description of the world (legal action/legal event — legal 
9 Other attempts at differentiation which point to force as the characteristic of the legal 
system, such as Luhmann, 1981: 138 ff., seem to be problematic; for it is not a further 
differential communicative element that is worked out, but an additional content that 
is asserted additively. Force must thus be justified as an act of the law, i. e., as action, 
i. e. as communication that is attributable to the legal system. Only then would it be 
adequate. 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
147 
consequence) to itself, through this communicative operation it emphasizes 
legal actions and legal consequences, gives them special significance. This 
becomes clear, however, only through the conditional form in which legal 
action and legal consequence are linked: the legal action becomes a condi-
tion of the legal consequence, and only through that becomes a legal 
action. This means that without legal actions/events there can be no legal 
consequences, and without legal consequences no legal actions/events. We 
thus have a legally organized type of linkage which makes it possible to 
relate legal communications of the same type to each other. Here the 
linkage of these communications of the same type through the traditional 
criteria of validity can be restricted severely to such ones (definition of the 
linkage capacity of a normative element by normativity). The emergence 
of (normative) legal consequences is then possible only in relation to and 
linkage with past normative communications. This, at least formally, meets 
one condition of autopoiesis. What gives the individual communications 
this rank, for instance the singling out of decisions, would have to be 
found from a precise analysis of the legal system. 
There is, however, still no exact description of what constitutes its "inner 
identity", namely the validity of particular communications. This lies in 
the expectation structure itself. Congruently generalized expectations which 
react with reluctance to learn from a case of disappointment are legally 
normative. To be grasped communicatively, this normativity requires a 
particular shape; not simply any formulation of expectations is legally 
normative. But since the objective type of linkage can be based only on 
linkages of the same type and these are all to be characterized substantively 
as normative, the constitution of the ultimate autopoietic element of the 
legal system is clear: only those communications which refer to other 
normative legal communications can be distinguished as autopoietic legal 
communications. The main link here is that the normative synthesis is itself 
normative, i. e., that there can be a progress only from validity to validity. 
This can no longer be established normatively externally, but is left up to 
the autopoietic process. 
III. Expectation Structure and "Priority" of the Legal System 
From all this there follows as a further thesis that the legal system has a 
certain "priority" over the other systems, to the extent that it densities a 
structure that can be encountered in all communication systems. For the 
peculiarity of the legal system lies in the fact that it has a particular type 
of expectation as its content: congruently generalized expectations. It 
therefore consists of the same stuff as the social structure as such, to the 
extent that it is expectation structure, and differentiates itself from the 
latter. Its specific difference lies in an area which essentially affects all 

148 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
subsystems: the difference of the legal system lies in the difference of its 
expectations. 
There follows, firstly, a certain structural closeness in subject of the legal 
system to the other social systems. Its own modelling of expectations 
concerns only their general character and is therefore potentially applicable 
in every system; for no system can entirely do without normative expecta-
tions. Even a system oriented towards the cognitive style of expectation 
expects in a normative fashion that there will be cognitive expectation, 
that is, that the cognitions acquired hitherto will continue to be applied. 
Expectations as temporal projections can be divided into cognitive and 
normative expectations (and corresponding combinations). Since further 
differentiations are not available, not more than a maximum of two subsys-
tems can be distinguished through this typology, to the extent that the 
specificity is seen in the relationship to the expectations. Accordingly, not 
every subsystem can be distinguished by a specific type of expectation. 
One of the two possible systems that can be distinguished only through 
expectation is the legal system, since it is a system of normative expectations. 
It regulates the generalized expectations in normative fashion; through its 
positivity it also regulates changes in such normative expectations. Its great 
closeness in subject to the expectations and the fact that it is to be 
understood as definition of the expectation structure, that it thus lays 
down what can or will be expected, that it actualizes extremely densified 
expectations, that it therefore congruently generalizes social expectations 
and thus creates normativity, distinguish it as a social subsystem and 
represent its characteristic feature. Its communications, to the extent that 
they belong to the internal legal circle, are therefore always aimed at 
normative expectation situations. Its peculiarity lies in a type of special 
expectations distinguished by the congruence of their objective, temporal 
and social generalization. This difference of the legal system testifies to its 
closeness to the other social systems. 
The structure of expectation that decks out an event with meaning and 
guarantees it possibilities of linkage applies to all social systems. Expecta-
tion means here not individual expectation, but system expectation, the 
expectation of the system in which it arises. To that extent, the legal system 
is distinguished by specialization in a structure that all social systems show. 
This is true also of systems that are in principle oriented towards a cognitive 
style of expectation; for exclusively cognitive expectations cannot be met 
with for the reason that they too always cognitively expect in normative 
fashion. 
If one therefore attempts to formulate the relationship of the legal system 
to the other social systems in this respect, it appears that the legal system 
can in principle be relevant for every other social system; it has only to 
structure expectations there, i. e. generalize them appropriately. The object 
of law is structures that all other systems also show. The converse is however 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
149 
not true.™ It is only this fact that makes the law's possibility of intervening in 
regulatory fashion in other systems plausible. At the same time, regulatory 
problems can be discerned here when, for instance, expectations are not 
generalizable or must be created anew by the legal system. 
From this there follows the specific relation of the legal system to the 
other systems: the legal system is assigned a priority in structuring expecta-
tions vis-a-vis the other systems. On the basis of its specific difference, it 
has at all times the possibility of determining the communicative processes 
of the other communication systems. Its power of modification of expecta-
tion, i. e., determination of departures from and comportment towards the 
expectations, allow it to "intervene". On the other hand, however, the 
legal system depends to an extent that needs closer definition on the 
provision of those social expectations that it takes, can take, or must take 
as an object. Without them it would not exist. 
The legal system is therefore a type of expectation-guiding system, which 
can structure others' expectations, its material. This cannot however be 
understood as an absolute regulatory claim of the legal system. It is 
therefore dependent only on a structural possibility whereby the legal 
system's relationship to other systems is characterized — which does not 
yet say anything about the possibility and reality of the realization of this 
possibility.11 
The legal system can, thus, take up or even produce expectations of 
other systems, i. e., incorporate "outside expectations" in legal shape into 
the autopoietic production and reproduction of expectations as legal action 
or consequence, that is, give other expectations legal quality. Communica-
tion and action in a system can thus become legal communication and legal 
action, as law. They are then distinguished as such by their normative 
character, without losing their character as communications of the other 
system. 
10 This thesis is pointed up here since certain final conclusions can be drawn from it. 
It is not however meant to say that there are no other correspondences between 
individual systems in other respects. All I am advocating is to seek common features, 
similarities or differences at the constitutional level of the systems themselves. This 
is true for instance of meaning, language etc. If differences are understood from this 
point of view, then possibilities of understanding can presumably be more easily 
established. 
11 This varies in differing respects. Since one cannot start from a zero point, but a 
certain measure of regulation has to be presupposed, the starting point for the object 
of regulation has to be regulatory intensity, regulatory level, regulatory extent. Social 
expectations often already incorporate the legally articulated expectations. Specifically, 
and not simply in the contra-position of autonomous systems, what has to be studied 
is where the centers of autopoietic reproduction lie, where the particular system 
closure is to be seen and how it is related to the internal expectation structures and 
those of the law. This seems to me also to be a starting point for an understanding 
of the implementation and control problem in general. 

150 
Hans-Georg Deggau 
From this, the following consequences can in my view be drawn. The 
thesis of the autonomy of the law and the other social subsystems is not 
questioned. Autopoietic reproduction takes place independently of whether 
the specific feature of the autopoiesis of a system is the closure of legal 
normativity or whether the principle is "payment for payment" (Luhmann, 
1984 b). In my view however, the legal system's relationship to the other 
systems is to be defined in a different way than for instance through 
equality or symmetry. Instead, there is a basic asymmetry in the relationship 
of the system structures. 
The legal system generalizes and specializes a structure, namely expecta-
tions, which is fundamental in all systems, since there is no system that 
could exist or reproduce itself without expectations, which is due to their 
temporal nature and that of their elements as ephemeral events. However, 
no converse relationship exists. The specificity of other systems does not consist 
in a special way of dealing with the expectations that underlie and structure 
the legal system. 
There follows a structural affinity of the legal system with the other 
systems because there is a structural identity: wherever expectations 
exist, they can be taken up by the legal system and modified, and 
defined in a generalized form. This points to the locus of the possible 
influence. System control through law takes place through the provision 
of generalizations of expectation, i. e., structural changes. Since, however, 
these do not define the systems solely and exclusively, for each system 
the internal relationship of the autopoietic closure to the structuring of 
expectation is to be clarified, before the possible starting point and 
point of application of the legal regulation can be adequately defined. 
Since this is not the case for the other systems, the structural aspect 
and the autopoiesis have to be correlated inside them. From this there 
follow the possible limits to regulation. 
On the other hand, however, the relationships of the other subsystems 
to the legal system have also to be analyzed. To the freedom of the 
legal system there corresponds its dependence on social expectations and 
on the political system. In other words, how are its dependencies in 
relationship to the other systems defined? What role do expectations 
play in this? The presumption is that the possible "regulatory 
contents" 
are to a certain extent provided by the situations to be regulated, which 
has to do with its formal character. This is not to be misunderstood 
to the effect that any content whatever in the legal system is already 
defined a priori. 
Since it can create new expectation situations, it is to 
a certain extent independent of them. Furthermore, it ought to be able 
to bring about pieces of social integration only if there already exists 
a social adequacy of the social system. It can, therefore, not produce 
social integration in its systematic conditions — even if these are 
understood only as indifference. Again, an analysis of the constitution 

The Communicative Autonomy of the Legal System 
151 
of the ultimate communicative autopoietic elements of the other systems 
would be important, because then the context in the communication 
space could in each case be determined specifically and in regard to the 
system communications. 
Translated from the German by Iain Fraser. 
Bibliography 
H E J L , PETER (1982) "Die Theorie autopoietischer Systeme: Perspektiven für die soziale 
Systemtheorie", 13 Recbtstheorie 
45. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Autopoiesis, Handlung und kommunikative Verständigung", 
11 Zeitschrift für Soziologie 366. 
— (1984 a) Sociale Systeme. Grundriss einer allgemeinen 
Theorie. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1984b) "Die Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft als autopoietisches System", 13 
Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie 308. 
— (1985) A Sociological 
Theory of Lam (German original, 1972). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R . (1982) Autopoiesis 
and Cognition. 
The Realisation 
of the Living 
(cited from the 2nd revised German edition, 1985). Dordrecht/Boston: Reidel. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
RICHARD LEMPERT 
Ann Arbor 
Visions of Legal Autonomy 
During the past decade the effort to understand the place of the legal 
system in society has, in England and America, given rise to a renewed 
interest in the possibility of legal autonomy (Thompson, 1975; Balbus, 
1973; 1977; Trubek, 1977). More recently, on the continent of Europe, 
especially in Germany, scholars have focused on an apparently radical form 
of autonomy — embodied in the idea of an autopoietic system — in an 
effort to understand how law functions (Luhmann, 1985 d; Teubner, 1984). 
These two approaches to understanding the legal system paint pictures that 
have much in common, but they are differently developed; they are sup-
ported by different types of arguments and they are advanced at different 
levels of abstraction. 
The Anglo-American approach grows out of the empirical untenability 
of a crudely instrumental Marxism which posits that law is the barely 
disguised instrument by which one class dominates another in all things. 
The clearly redistributive elements of the modern welfare state as well as 
empirical studies of the treatment of rioters (Balbus, 1973), the enforcement 
of Draconian, class-based legislation (Thompson, 1975), and even the law 
of slavery (Genovese, 1972; Tushnett, 1975) have shown that the generation 
and application of legal norms cannot be explained solely — and sometimes 
can hardly be explained at all — by the class positions of involved groups 
and parties. It appears, in particular, that the legal system's own norms of 
procedure and substance have important implications for the way the law 
in the first instance affects the distribution of wealth and power between 
parties. The rediscovery of Pashukanis (1980) and theories building on his 
work (see e. g., Balbus, 1977, Stone, 1985) have shown that Marxist theories 
of social organization are not necessarily threatened by legal norms that 
take no explicit account of the class positions of those whose behavior will 
fall within the ambit of the law or by the application of legal norms without 
regard to the social class or other socio-economic attributes of the parties. 
Indeed, some have suggested that legal autonomy in this sense or even, 
on occasion, special sensitivity to the interests of the less privileged may 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
153 
contribute to capitalist domination by giving a legitimacy to law which 
ultimately makes the masses easier to govern (Hay, 1975; Thompson, 1975; 
but see Hyde, 1983). 
The Continental interest in autopoiesis and its implications for legal 
autonomy grows, on the other hand, out of a larger concern with systems 
theory and what systems theory approaches imply for social systems. Its 
development, to date, is largely associated with the work of one man, 
Niklas Luhmann, but as the conference at which this paper was first 
presented attests, other Continental social theorists are becoming increas-
ingly attracted to it (see e.g., Teubner, 1984; infra). 
The vision of law as an autopoietic system is rooted, as I understand it, 
in the idea that society and its major subsystems may be profitably viewed 
as autopoietic systems, a perspective that is inspired by recent attempts to 
understand the integrity and functioning of biological systems. Autopoiesis 
implies a system which is completely closed in the sense that the constitutive 
elements of a system are all parts of it, and as such both reproduce and 
are reproduced by it. At the same time an autopoietic system is open to 
its environment in that the form in which the system reproduces itself 
takes account — in its own terms — of the behavior and activity that are 
ongoing in its environment. Put another way, environmental activity is 
not just or simply mediated by the system of interest (and in this respect 
autopoiesis is not just another open systems theory). Its implications are 
indirect as the system models the environment in its own terms (Teubner, 
1984), proceeding perhaps to reconstitute or even change itself on the basis 
of the systemic representation of environmental contingencies. Environ-
mental influences must be indirect because social meanings exist only within 
the context of social systems (Luhmann, 1985 b). In the case of law this 
involves — to use Luhmann's ambiguous and problematic language — a 
system which is at the same time normatively closed and cognitively open 
(Luhmann: 1985 d: 6, 7; 1985 c: 113; supra: 19 — 21; see also the discussion 
in this paper, infra: 178 — 182). An important implication is that the legal 
system takes cognizance of extra-legal activity only in its own terms — 
that is, only in terms of what is, according to law, legally relevant. 
Although the two visions of legal autonomy are not necessarily incompat-
ible, there are important differences between them. In part these differences 
reflect the fact that the Continental vision involves an abstraction (the legal 
system as a subsystem of social systems) of an abstraction (social systems 
as in some sense like biological systems), while the Anglo-American vision 
of legal autonomy is rooted in the failure of earlier theoretical visions to 
meet the test of reality.1 Thus, the Anglo-American vision is influenced by 
1 In addition to the crudely instrumentalist Marxist vision, there was the earlier 
formalistic vision which posited an autonomy so complete that legal action could be 
understood as a matter of common sense and logical analysis entirely on the law's 
own terms. This vision was destroyed forever when confronted with the common 
sense empiricism of the Realists. 

154 
Richard Lempert 
and tends to hew closely to empirical studies of the way in which legal 
power articulates with other sources of power in society. The Continental 
vision, on the other hand, tends to be abstract — developed by logic, 
analogy and a firm a priori theoretical commitment to a model rather than 
by examples or confrontation with empirical facts. To the extent that there 
is an empirical puzzle that motivates the Continental model, it is found 
largely in the widespread sense that there is a law-related crisis in the 
regulatory state and that current theories of law neither adequately capture 
the reasons for the crisis or (if there is no crisis) for the sense of crisis, 
nor provide any guidance for those who would better adapt the legal 
system to the demands the regulatory state places on it. 
A second difference between the Anglo-American and Continental per-
spectives on autonomy, which reflects the role that empirical studies have 
played in each, is that the Anglo-American approach seeks to abstract a 
theory of legal autonomy from the actual operations of the legal system in 
particular situations. This gives Anglo-American theories a somewhat static 
quality; so long as society is organized along essentially the same socio-
economic lines, the implications of autonomy for the legal system remain 
essentially the same. Autopoiesis in so far as it posits continual openness 
to the environment posits continual — albeit system dictated — responses 
to changes in environmental conditions, which means continual responses 
to changes in other subsystems of society and to changes in the encompass-
ing social system. Indeed, autopoietic systems exist only through their 
autopoiesis which implies constant reconstitution with concomitant "molec-
ular" changes. Thus, the Continental theory more than the American theory 
lends itself to the study of legal evolution or, more precisely, adaptation 
(Teubner, infra). 
A third difference is most curious. Although conflict theory, including 
modern Marxism, is generally regarded as the dominant response to func-
tionalist theories in sociology, a good deal of functionalism underlies the 
Anglo-American perspective on legal autonomy. This is, no doubt, in part 
because the theory has its genesis in the perceived failure of the conflict 
model — carried to an extreme — to explain legal behavior. Beyond this 
the idea of legal autonomy is tied to the ways law serves society. The 
predominant explanation of why something like the rule of law persists in 
modern capitalist societies — legitimacy — is functionalism in the service 
of a conflict perspective. 
The idea of autopoiesis on the other hand, although advanced by the 
leading modern functionalist, does not in itself suggest a functionalist 
justification for the autonomy the legal system enjoys. If the legal system 
is autopoietically organized it will enjoy the autonomy associated with 
autopoietic systems regardless of whether and what social functions it fills. 
It could hardly be otherwise. The legal system reconstitutes itself according 
to distinctly legal values rather than under the direct influence of the needs 
of some other system of society. Functionalism is brought in only by the 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
155 
back door, so to speak. The legal system, Luhmann hypothesizes in another 
of the more problematic aspects of his theory, fulfills a distinct function 
in society relating to the management of disputes (Luhmann, 1985 c: 120; 
supra: 27 —29).2 It is, according to Luhmann, only because the legal system 
fills this particular function and fills it uniquely that it is and can be 
autopoietically organized. 
Given the basic convergence of two different perspectives on an idea of 
legal autonomy, together with the different sources of inspiration for the 
two perspectives, and the differences in the way the two theories have been 
advanced, it should be of interest and one hopes it will be instructive to 
confront one perspective with another. What I propose to do in this paper 
is to construct a theory of legal autonomy rooted in the Anglo-American 
perspective (although not derived from a concern for an empirically tenable 
Marxism).31 shall then turn to Luhmann's work on autopoiesis to examine 
ways in which the idea of autopoiesis accords or conflicts with the theory 
I develop and to contrast the theoretical adequacy of the two perspectives.4 
Before doing this, however, we must confront one more issue, namely the 
theoretical status of Luhmann's attempt to extend the ideal of autopoiesis 
from the living systems the term was coined to describe to social systems. 
Theory or Metaphor 
Some authors (e. g., Teubner, infra) suggest that the idea of autopoiesis as 
applied to social systems is essentially a metaphor. If it is only this, there 
2 Luhmann is obliged to allow for the creation of disputes to generate norms in order 
to maintain the integrity of his functionalism. The effort, as I will argue (infra: 182— 
185) seems strained and unsatisfactory. 
3 The theory I construct draws heavily on portions of Chapters 12 and 13 in a book I 
have coauthored with Professor Joseph Sanders of the Houston Law School entitled, 
An Invitation to Law and Social Science (Lempert and Sanders, 1986). Although I may 
refer to this theory as the Anglo-American theory I do this for convenience and to 
indicate the origins of the work that immediately inspired it, rather than to claim a 
special status for it. The theory I offer is neither the Anglo-American theory nor 
necessarily a typical representative of the theoretical perspectives developed by Anglo-
American writers. It is, however, heavily influenced by the theoretical and empirical 
work of authors in the Anglo-American tradition, although tracing it to its roots it 
is the influence of a continental scholar, Max Weber, that predominates. The work of 
two liberal theorists, Nonet and Selznick (1978) also contributed in important ways 
to the development of this theory. 
4 Obviously, I cannot claim to be unbiased in this enterprise. My critique of the theory 
of autopoiesis is, however, not motivated by a desire to promote my own perspective, 
and I realize that the theoretical adequacy of the perspective I offer is neither 
established nor very much enhanced by questioning aspects of the theory of autopoiesis 
and suggesting that my theory compares favorably to it. It is, I assume, understandable 
if I leave to others the task of pointing out weaknesses in my preferred theoretical 
position. 

156 
Richard Lempert 
are important implications for the likely utility of the concept and for the 
criticisms that may be fairly made of it (Rottleuthner, infra). Metaphors 
are useful because they provide a novel way of seeing. One thing unlike 
another in many respects is seen in some important respect to be similar. 
Metaphors, however, are neither false nor true; they cannot be tested 
against reality or some indication of it, and simpler metaphors are not 
necessarily preferable to more elaborate characterizations. Ultimately meta-
phors can only be judged by whether they are helpful or unhelpful. While 
it is often the case that the ability of a metaphor to stimulate insights will 
diminish with the distance between the original (ordinary) and metaphorical 
uses of a term, this is not necessarily the case, for even obviously false 
metaphors may lead to a greater understanding of both the object described 
and the perceptions of the observer ("What light through yonder window 
breaks? It is the east, and Juliet is the sun"). Thus, if the idea of the 
autopoietic social (legal) system is only a metaphor, we can suspect it of 
misleading because of the obvious differences between social and biological 
systems,5 or we may value it for the insight it gives us into the workings 
of social systems or into the perceptions of such an acute observer of social 
systems as Niklas Luhmann. We cannot, however, treat the application of 
the concept to social systems as valid or invalid. We can only react 
subjectively to its utility and try to say why we do or do not find it helpful 
to think about social systems as autopoietic entities. 
I, however, read Luhmann as offering more than a metaphor. He offers 
a theory about how social systems work. He is, as I read his work, trying 
to persuade other social scientists that he has a generally useful, rather than 
an idiosyncratically stimulating, scheme for understanding the operation of 
actual legal systems and explaining problems they confront. This scheme 
or theory is, to be sure, born of the resemblance that Luhmann sees 
between social systems and biological systems that are, according to another 
theory, autopoietically organized. But as a social theory, Luhmann's auto-
poiesis is neither validated by that resemblance nor invalidated by the 
obvious differences between biological and social systems. Nor is the crucial 
question whether the idea of the autopoietic social system is subjectively 
enlightening. In evaluating theories and their likely utility, we confront 
different issues: we are concerned with whether a theory is empirically 
testable; we are concerned with how the theory, or the implication we 
draw from it, accords with our empirically-based perceptions of that which 
the theory purports to explain; and we are concerned with the position of 
the theory in relation to other theories. The theory should be consistent 
with other well-grounded theories, or it should, by explaining everything 
5 Luhmann notes that the concept of autopoiesis as originally developed in biology 
was not meant to be and cannot be applied to social systems (Luhmann, 1985 c: 122 
at note 26; 1985 a: 2). 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
157 
they do and more, supersede them. If the theory gives rise to the same 
expectations as a plausible alternative, we should apply the test of Ockham's 
razor; that is, when two theoretical explanations are equally consistent with 
the range of what can be observed, the simpler explanation is preferred. 
Thus, in evaluating the Continental vision of legal autonomy exemplified 
in Luhmann's elaboration on the concept of autopoiesis and in contrasting 
it with the (an) Anglo-American vision as represented by my views on the 
partial autonomy of law, the Continental vision is not necessarily made 
more plausible by the possibility or even the reality of autopoietic biological 
systems nor is it made less plausible by the differences between biological 
and social systems. What is crucial in considering each vision is how each 
lends itself to empirical testing (at least "in principle"), how each accords 
with reality in so far as we can determine it, and how each fares by the 
criterion of simplicity. To put this another way, insofar as the goal is to 
understand the workings of the legal system, I believe that theories of 
legal autonomy, whether Anglo-American or Continental, are part of the 
enterprise we call positivist social science. 
The Requisites of Legal Autonomy 
By an autonomous legal system I mean one which in the ideal case is 
independent of other sources of power and authority in social life. Legal 
action, be it a decision to prosecute, an award of damages, or the reappor-
tionment of a state legislature, is in an autonomous system influenced only 
by the pre-established rules of the legal system. These rules determine not 
only the consequences of social action, but also — for all legal purposes — 
its meaning, and it is from the assigned meaning that legal consequences 
follow (cf. Teubner 1983; 1984). 
If the law is to be autonomous in the sense of defining events in its own 
terms and detailing the consequences that follow, it must be independent of 
society's other mechanisms of social control. Although law is itself part of 
the governing apparatus of the state, its actions and conceptions must be 
uncontrolled by the political branches of government; that is, free from 
the influence of those branches that respond to and embody power relations 
in society. Although it must abstract cases from and return solutions to 
the larger society (Bohannan, 1965), it must be uninfluenced by the power 
and status differences that permeate social life. And although law is itself 
a normative system, it must remain impervious to the ethical codes of the 
surrounding society. 
If autonomy in these senses is to be realized, the legal system should be 
autonomous in one further sense. It must be self-legitimating, 
for to depend 
upon political, social or ethical forces for authority is to be vulnerable to 
the encroachment of such forces on decision making. A legal system is 

158 
Richard Lempert 
self-legitimating when its rules and rulings are accepted because they are 
legal, or to borrow Hart's (1961) helpful terms, a legal system is self-
legitimating when its primary rules and statements of them are accepted 
as binding because they are enacted in accordance with the system's 
secondary rules. Thus, in a self-legitimating legal system, a law will be 
recognized if it is duly enacted and the legal system itself determines what 
is meant by "duly". Similarly, a court ruling will be regarded as binding 
because it specifies the implications of a primary rule (i. e., a substantive 
law, like the law of theft) for the parties in accordance with appropriate 
secondary rule procedures (i. e., procedural rules, like the rules of evidence 
and the rules of procedural due process). 
Understood in these terms the autonomy of a legal system is, at best, a 
relative matter; that is, it can be at most partial. The legal system exists as 
part of the social system, and legal activity involves a constant interplay 
with other sectors of society. Empirically, it would be surprising if any 
legal system could fully resist the influences of popular ethics or political 
or social power. It would be similarly surprising if a legal system could 
maintain its legitimacy if its primary rules, however properly enacted, 
continually clashed with generally accepted ethical precepts or with the 
interests of those who enjoy political and social power. 
But the problem is more than empirical. Complete legal autonomy is, 
even in theory, unattainable. Law is a normative system and its norms 
must, at least in the first instance, come from somewhere.6 Furthermore, 
most legal systems have secondary rules describing procedures by which 
new laws can be made. These procedures usually allow for the orderly 
incorporation of extralegal values into the legal system. In the process the 
legal system is necessarily penetrated by interests external to it. 
Two aspects of the way law incorporates values are especially important. 
First, the values infused into law may be more or less specific. Thus, the 
law may seek to set the price of corn at the desired level of so many dollars 
per bushel or it may try to establish the conditions for a free market in 
corn on the theory that any price reached in a free market exchange is 
desirable. Second, except in periods of revolution or other massive social 
change, new laws — that is new instances of value infusion — are embedded 
in an encompassing legal culture. In the process, laws may be transformed 
so that their ultimate behavioral implications are not precisely as intended. 
6 Weber (1968), in describing rational legal authority, which is self-legitimating in the 
way I describe above, postulated a legal code that was gapless in the sense that one 
could derive logically from the code legal implications for any possible case that 
might arise under it. In this sense the legal system is fully self-contained. However, 
that code must have its roots in some external institution(s) and in this sense at least 
the legal system will be penetrated by the norms and power relations of the larger 
society. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
159 
The more autonomous the legal system, the greater the transformation is 
likely to be. In the extreme case a law, for example an ex post facto 
law, 
will have no legal effect because the legal culture will contain higher norms 
that nullify the attempt at value infusion. 
To say that law is autonomous in the partial sense that is empirically 
possible is to say that law is to some extent a product of itself and implies 
that legal power alone may influence social life. The claim of partial 
autonomy does not deny the possibility that law, insofar as it purports to 
regulate social life, may do nothing more than reinstitutionalize the norms 
and values of some other authority system (Bohannan, 1965). But it does 
mean that once reinstitutionalization has occurred, legal norms and values 
and the actions these entail are no longer fully reducible to the actions, 
norms and values of that other system and so may have an independent 
influence on social life. 
Law is influenced by the political, ethical or social order, but this does 
not mean that the law must be in essence a tool of the dominant class's 
immediate self-interest, the plaything of those in high office or the obedient 
servant of some moral majority. If it is important to recognize that law is 
only partially autonomous, it is also important to realize that partial 
autonomy can allow for considerable self-direction. 
Relative Autonomy 
If legal autonomy is necessarily only partial, there is no point in simply 
asking whether a legal system is autonomous or not. We must focus instead 
on relative autonomy, for the interesting questions are whether and why 
legal autonomy is more or less achieved.7 We may think of the relative 
autonomy of law as the degree to which the legal system looks to itself rather than 
to the standards of some external social, political or ethical system for guidance in 
making or applying law. The legal system can look to itself because it has a 
set of forms (e. g., plaintiff, defendant, battery, divorce, contract, liable, 
guilty, etc.) to which it can fit actors and actions. These forms cloak 
behavior with distinctively legal meanings that entail specific consequences. 
7 While complete legal autonomy may be impossible empirically, the complete absence 
of autonomy in the sense that the law's commands are reduced to those of some non-
legal political or ethical system is conceivable from the Anglo-American perspective. 
Arguably the polity has dictated all important legal activity in some totalitarian states 
at some times and the extra-legal norms of religion have apparently had a similar 
influence in Calvin's Geneva and Khomeni's Iran, to name just two instances. The 
autopoietic perspective would treat these instances as examples of the replacement of 
law by another autopoietically organized control system. See the discussion in this 
paper, infra: 174. 

160 
Richard Lempert 
Autonomy is infringed when a group or interest is able to influence the 
legal process so that its own standards or interests are embedded in forms 
the law recognizes or in the rules that link forms to consequences. Thus 
to understand why law is more or less autonomous, we must identify 
characteristics that distinguish legal systems that are substantially dominated 
by the interests and standards of external groups from those that are less 
so. 
Distinctions may be made along two dimensions. The first involves the 
extent to which a standard once embedded in law acquires meaning through 
the law's own canons of construction rather than by reference to the 
interests that gave it birth. Where the law's canons of construction domi-
nate, the law will be more autonomous of the external system than where 
they do not. For example, consider a law forbidding check forgery. Assume 
this law is designed to facilitate capitalist economic transactions. To this 
extent the law is penetrated by capitalist interests. At the same time the 
law appears to reflect a generally accepted ethical proposition about how 
people should and should not acquire property. Suppose Sam, a clever 
criminal, drains Jane's bank account not by forging her check but by 
fraudulently inducing her to write a genuine check in exchange for a 
promise to deliver goods that Sam neither owned nor intended to deliver. 
Sam is then charged with forgery under the statute. If the legal system 
looks either to the capitalist interests that secured the forgery statute or to 
the popular ethical code, it might convict because fraud of this sort both 
threatens the free exchange of checks and offends popular morality. But 
by certain legal canons of construction forgery is not the same as fraud, 
and by a further canon no one should be punished unless his behavior has 
been previously and specifically declared criminal. Since the legislature 
seeking to protect the security of checks overlooked the need to protect 
against fraud, if the law's canons of constructions control Sam will escape 
on a "technicality": the legislature neglected to define his crime. Legal 
systems that look to their own canons of construction to determine the 
meaning of law rather than to external morality or the interests that support 
the law are more autonomous than those that take the opposite approach.8 
The second dimension that allows us to distinguish more autonomous 
legal systems from less autonomous ones is the degree of generality in 
which laws are cast. The more general the form in which a law is cast, the 
less close will be the tie between the legal norm and the interests of a 
particular status group. Thus, a system that forbids anyone from forging 
8 I do not mean to suggest by this example that the law's canons of construction are 
rigid or that a foreordained logic inexorably controls. Llewelyn (1950) has shown 
that the common law's stock of canons is sufficiently diverse that it would allow 
considerable flexibility of interpretation even if there were a rule, which there is not, 
that in interpreting a statute a court must always cite some relevant canon. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
161 
a check is more autonomous than one which protects only capitalists from 
forgery.9 Put another way, a legal system characterized by general rules 
is likely to be more autonomous than one riddled with particularistic 
enactments. 
The first of these dimensions, the degree to which external interests 
influence legal construction, is more important in assessing the degree of 
autonomy that characterizes the law application process while the second, 
the degree of generality, relates more closely to law making. One important 
point they have in common is that the more autonomous law is along both 
of these dimensions the more legal concepts can be manipulated without 
apparent reference to the particular substantive concerns that led to the 
legal norm in the first instance. Laws, in other words, are distanced 
from narrow, externally grounded, substantive concerns both through the 
generality of their content and by internally defined rules of interpretation. 
The ideal of legal autonomy can be more closely achieved in the law 
application or judicial process10 than in the law creation or legislative 
process. The legislature sits at the intersection of the political and legal 
spheres. It may be captured by interests and organizations that have 
substantial social power, and it often responds to the entreaties of those 
who support private ethical systems. This does not mean that the concept 
of autonomy has no place in a discussion of legislation. I shall later discuss 
some senses in which we can speak of legislation as being more or less 
autonomous. But the bulk of what follows shall focus on the way laws are 
applied by courts. 
Judicial Formalism 
Autonomy in the law application process is characterized by and is to a 
large extent attributable to judicial formalism 
(cf. Nonet and Selznick, 1978: 
60 — 65). Judicial formalism is in turn characterized by three concerns: 
a concern for procedure, a concern for rules, and a concern for legal 
categories. 
9 This might be done not only in so many words, but also by protecting business 
checks from forgery but not the checks of individuals. If the possibility that such an 
undisguised class-based distinction will enter the law appears remote, consider the 
numerous societies that had laws broadly protecting masters from violence at the 
hands of their slaves but only narrowly or not at all protecting slaves from violence 
at the hands of their masters. 
10 Law application also involves nonjudicial agencies such as the police and prosecutors. 
The analysis of judicial autonomy might be extended to consider action in these 
spheres but for simplicity's sake we shall confine our textual attention to courts and 
administrative tribunals. 

162 
Richard Lempert 
1. A Concern for Procedure 
The elevation of procedural concerns above more immediately substantive 
ones is perhaps the distinguishing feature — and to some the most jarring 
feature — of a formal legal system. For example, in Dobbert v. Wainwright 
several courts, including the United States Supreme Court, refused to 
consider Dobbert's claim that he was about to be executed for behavior 
that under Florida law did not constitute a capital offense. Review was 
refused because ten years earlier in 1974, the accused's counsel had not 
objected at trial to a jury instruction that may have erroneously defined 
the accused's behavior as capital, and the matter was not raised on a first 
federal appeal.11 At the other extreme, likely murderers may go free because 
the rules of evidence preclude the admission of the most probative evidence 
against them. In between the extremes are more prosaic cases that arise 
every day in which outcomes are partly or entirely determined by a litigant's 
inability or failure to comply with one of the law's procedural rules. 
To say that in these cases the law elevates procedure above substance is 
accurate when one considers only the substantive merits of a claim, but 
from the perspective of the legal system it is somewhat misleading. There 
are usually good substantive reasons that justify the law's procedural rules 
and the influence they have. The rule that conditions the preservation of 
error on objections at trial is, for example, justified by the praiseworthy 
objective of promoting efficiency since if objections are made at trial, errors 
might be corrected there and costly retrials avoided. 
Thus, the fact that the law may insist on honoring its procedural rules 
when injustice apparently results should not be condemned as an elevation 
of form for its own sake over substance. Nevertheless, there is a problem 
here. Where judicial formalism prevails, the law's preference schedule 
appears to many as unduly self-regarding. 
The values that underlie legal 
procedures tend to "trump" the apparent demands of substantive justice 
without regard to the relative merits of the competing claims. In Dobbert, 
for example, we might think that preventing the execution of a man for 
behavior that the state never made punishable by death, is worth any slight, 
long run erosion in the rule requiring that objections be made at trial. 
It is only the court's privileged position with respect to the law that 
allows it to impose system-regarding legal values in settings where ethical 
or political considerations call strongly for different action. It is this ability 
to hew to distinctively legal values and the propensity of courts to do so 
that makes the law's procedural orientation an important component of 
11 Dobbert 
v. Wainwrigbt, 
cert, denied, 105 Sup. Ct. 34; 43 (1984), opinion of Marshall, 
J. dissenting. The case was also one in which the jury that convicted the defended 
recommended mercy by a 10—2 vote, but the judge, as is permitted under Florida 
law, ignored the recommendation and imposed a death sentence. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
163 
legal autonomy. Moreover, this component can have important conse-
quences when the law comes to be applied.12 As Thompson (1975), Balbus 
(1977), and others have shown, the formal requirement that those who 
proceed through law conform to pre-existing legal procedures has impor-
tant implications for the realization of the values that law or its administra-
tion aim at. 
2. A Concern for Rules 
The second aspect of judicial formalism is a concern for what legal rules 
require. A formalist judge treats the law as given. He does not in deciding 
cases try to promote some extra-legal value system, even one congruent 
with the law, but looks to the law as the source of all values. What the 
law requires must be done, and what the law does not forbid is allowed. 
Thus, a hungry child may be sentenced to death for picking pockets in 
search of the wherewithal to live, and one who steals money entrusted to 
him for investment may escape without any punishment if the law of theft 
at the time forbids only forcible takings. 
Being guided by exclusively legal norms does not mean that the formal 
judge looks only to the legislature for guidance. Depending on the system, 
legal norms may be drawn from such sources as constitutions, the rulings 
of administrative agencies, treaties, proclamations by high officials, and 
prior court decisions. Nor does the internal orientation mean that a court 
cannot declare a law invalid. Courts recognize hierarchies of law, and 
constitutional provisions can override legislation just as legislation can 
reverse non-constitutional judicial precedent. What distinguishes the for-
malist system with respect to both the sources of legal norms and the ways 
conflicts are resolved among them is that it is the legal system's rules that 
determine what is permissible. Thus, a formalist judge does not enforce 
administrative restrictions on pollution because he thinks they are desirable. 
Rather the rules are enforced because the legislature has delegated the 
authority to regulate by rule to an agency and the legislature has the legal 
12 In particular, attempts to use the law to achieve specific ends may be hampered by 
legal rules of procedure. The exclusionary rule, for example, has implications for how 
the war against narcotic drugs is fought. Advertisements found to be misleading by 
the Federal Trade Commission may be broadcast for years while advertisers exhaust 
their appeals. The right to jury trial has at one time or another helped injury victims 
secure adequate compensation from the giants of industry, restrained governmental 
efforts to censor or oppress those who disagreed with official policies, hampered 
efforts to enforce game laws in rural areas and allowed people who had violently 
resisted desegregation to escape punishment. As this potpourri of examples illustrates, 
procedural formalism may inhibit the law's ability to achieve a variety of political and 
legislative ends, for as measured by any external political or social standard there is 
no necessary consistency in how the law's allegiance to procedure will cut. 

164 
Richard Lempert 
(in this case constitutional) authority to do so. Similarly a formalist judge 
will strike down legislation he thinks desirable if it conflicts with the 
Constitution. Thus, a judge, citing the First Amendment, may strike down 
laws seeking to prevent the degradation of women through pornography 
although he subscribes to the ideological and empirical assumptions that 
motivated the legislation. 
Perhaps most surprisingly, treating pre-existing law as the source of all 
legal norms does not prevent the formalist judge from making law, if by 
making law we mean the elaboration of doctrine to fit specific behavior. 
The important point is that in making law the formalist judge looks not 
to some external ethical system or political interest but looks inward to 
the law and asks what, if anything, the body of law fairly and logically 
implies for the behavior that has come to the court's attention. This 
determination involves a close inspection of the language of the law and 
an effort to interpret that language in the light of the lawgiver's meaning. 
Taking rules as given enhances autonomy in the judicial or law applica-
tion process because it relegates all political and ethical considerations to 
another sphere, the sphere of the lawmaker (Nonet and Selznick, 1978: 
57 — 8). The concerns that motivate the lawmakers are taken into account 
only as an aid in interpreting language whose logical implications are not 
clear; so what may appear from one perspective as making new law is from 
another only the determination and logical application of what was meant 
by the old.13 
3. A Concern for Legal Categories 
The third element of formalism is the tendency to fit actions, actors, and, 
in particular, statutory language into legal forms. Thus, people and actions 
are in a formal legal system abstracted from their social settings and treated 
as members of predefined legal categories. Once this is done, applying law 
involves only the proper categorization of acts and actions and the logical 
manipulation of concepts internal to the legal system. 
A formalist judge interprets a statute in terms of the rights and duties 
it creates and then applies the statute by logically analyzing the implication 
of these rights and duties for the parties before the court. The specification 
of the statutorily created rights may consider the purposes of the statute, 
but once the rights have been specified the original purpose fades from 
view. The system is autonomous in that it no longer attends to the political 
and ethical concerns that spurred the legislation but operates only with 
legal concepts. If the legislature did not specify rights sufficient to achieve 
the goals it had in mind, a formalist jurisprudence will mean that the goal 
13 Attention to rules, like attention to procedure, may lead to substantive injustice and, 
for better or worse, interfere with attempts at regulation. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
165 
will not be achieved. This contrasts with a more substantively oriented 
jurisprudence that interprets rights on a case by case basis with an eye in 
each instance to the achievement of a legislative or constitutionally given 
end. 
The tendency of courts to fit actors into legal categories that obscure 
social differences and to treat substantive legislation not entirely in its own 
purposive terms but in terms of the rights and obligations that can be 
abstracted out of the legislation poses problems for those who attempt to 
use the law to attain substantive ends. Statutes as reinterpreted by courts 
often do both more and less than is intended. They do less because the 
purposes of the statute may be blunted or its scope narrowed when the 
focus is on the rights or obligations the statute clearly entails. Furthermore, 
when the differential opportunities that people have to invoke the law are 
not acknowledged many potential litigants may be denied that access to 
the legal process which is necessary if the substantive goals of the statute 
are to be realized. 
Formalism can allow legislation to do more than intended because the 
tendency to focus on formalistic abstractions may lead to a reading of the 
law that covers situations that were not within the intended scope of the 
Act or extends benefits to classes of litigants who were not intended 
beneficiaries of the law's protections. Thus, a law that provides that medical 
school applicants may not be discriminated against because of sex may 
have been intended to eliminate discrimination in medical school admissions 
in order to open up to women a profession once largely closed to them. 
However, if a court focuses on the sex-neutral term "applicant" and ignores 
the substantive end in view, the law might be used to strike down, at the 
instance of a male applicant, an affirmative action program that promises 
to increase substantially the proportion of physicians who are female. In 
such circumstances a court by extending rights in ways not contemplated 
by the legislature may undermine the very goals a law was intended to 
serve. 
The three aspects of formalism that we have just described all serve to 
distance the law as it applied from the interests of external ethical and 
political systems, even to some degree when those interests have captured 
the legislative process and embedded their preferences into law. For this 
reason judicial formalism goes a long way toward ensuring legal autonomy. 
Other Aspects of Autonomy 
While legal formalism as I have defined it is a central constituent of legal 
autonomy it is not the only one. If access to the law or the ability to use 
it effectively varies with political power or social status, these disparities 
will affect how the law is applied even if the court takes no official account 

166 
Richard Lempert 
of extra-legal status. For example, if filing fees and attorneys' costs are 
such that low income debtors cannot afford to defend themselves when 
sued, the judicial output will disproportionately reflect the interests of 
wealthy litigants. Legal rights belonging to the less well-off will not be 
recognized because they will not be effectively asserted. Also, if those legal 
norms the formalist court treats as given take extra-legal status into account, 
the judicial output will reflect this. While the formal application of a law 
designed to promote the ethics or interests of one group over another may 
leaven the substantive orientation of the law, the rights and duties that are 
abstracted from the law and enforced will consistently favor one set of 
interests over another. 
Thus, the autonomy of the legal system in action also depends on the 
degree to which all actors can invoke the law effectively, a matter we may 
call legal competence (Galanter, 1974), and on the quality of the laws that are 
invoked. 
1. Legal Competence 
If those who use or are subject to the law are of unequal legal competence, 
the judicial output over the run of cases will reflect this inequality. For 
legal competence to be equal, parties to a dispute must have equal access 
to legal remedies and must be equally capable of influencing judicial 
outcomes. If such equality exists, the court's decision should be determined 
entirely by the law as it applies to the facts of the case. Except insofar as 
the law takes into account the parties' extra-legal status, extra-legal sources 
of authority will have no effect on the decision. 
Thus, equal legal competence is the second crucial ingredient of legal 
autonomy. Formalism guarantees that the law will be applied by reference 
to legal norms and procedures. But without equal legal competence formal 
adjudication will yield outcomes that disproportionately favor the more 
powerful and better off and to this extent reinforce social disparities that 
the law does not recognize. The better off are advantaged both because 
they are better able to bring or avoid litigation and because once in court 
they are better able to muster the facts and legal arguments that aid courts 
in determining how the law should be applied. To the extent that the ideal 
of equal competence breaks down, the legal system will be less autonomous, 
for although the court may be blind to extra-legal power and status 
differences, its output will reflect such disparities. 
Success at law is clearly linked to success in social life (Galanter, 1974; 
1976). Those who are legally competent have usually succeeded in other 
areas as well. Yet even in an unequal society partial autonomy may endure. 
Law as it is applied in the United States, for example, tends to ameliorate 
rather than simply reproduce power discrepancies. Institutions like the 
contingent fee and legal rules like the right to appointed counsel in criminal 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
167 
cases together with legal formality tend to equalize the situation of parties 
who go to law. Nor are these efforts empty. Judges at and before trial 
routinely make rulings that disadvantage the more powerful litigant, juries 
regularly acquit defendants who have been prosecuted with all the financial 
and symbolic power the state can muster. Appointed counsel often work 
diligently for their clients, and some of the most important victories that 
poor people have won as a class have been engineered by lawyers on the 
state's payroll.14 
2. Normative Neutrality and Status Neutral Law 
At the plane of the ideal, we have identified two of the conditions that 
must be met if the legal system is to be autonomous and thereby resist the 
penetration of the social, political and ethical systems that surround it. 
First, the law must be applied in a formal, self-regarding way, which means 
that legal disputes are decided by reference to legal norms and categories 
in accordance with pre-existing legal procedures. Second, actors must be 
equally competent in their use of law. Without such equality the socially 
better off will disproportionately benefit from a formal law application 
process. 
Both formality and equal competence are at best only partially achieved 
in modern Western societies. Could they be fully achieved, the law would 
be autonomously applied. But even if they were fully achieved, the law as 
applied would not necessarily be autonomous of distributional patterns 
rooted in other social systems.15 For built into the very texture of the law 
are norms that redistribute values from one political or social group to 
another. Such laws not only reflect and attract influence attempts by 
extra-legal interests, but they also mean that the applied law will have 
substantively different implications for differently situated groups. The 
quality of applied law, although not necessarily the law application process, 
will be shaped by extra-legal rather than legally-defined statuses. Thus there 
14 Whether partial autonomy as it exists in the U. S. is a glass that is half full or half 
empty depends on one's attitude and where one looks. The death penalty for rape in 
the South, for example, was a practical matter largely reserved for black men who 
raped white women (Wolfgang and Reidel, 1973). The lack of effective legal counsel 
no doubt contributed to this. 
15 Here I may appear to be expanding my conception of what legal autonomy requires 
in the pure case. It is not just that the process of interpreting and applying law must 
be uninfluenced by extra-legal circumstances, but also that the law must not in the 
abstract or as applied make people differentially eligible for its rewards and 
punishments based on some prior (that is, having nothing to do with the behavior 
being evaluated) social status. Unless this condition is met, the law in its application 
will be inescapably bound up with the fate of extra-legal status groups and will tend 
in its application to be a tool in service of extralegal status interests. 

168 
Richard Lempert 
is a final ingredient to pure legal autonomy. The law both as written and 
applied must not make distinctions on the basis of differences in social 
status. We may call this normative neutrality in that legal norms do not 
systematically favor one status group or another in the contests for welfare 
and power that people engage in in other spheres. 
Focusing first on legal language we see that some law, including much 
of the common law, fits this description. It gives actors rights apart from 
their social or political status. Thus, anyone may own property and those 
who own property are generally free to use it or transfer it as they see fit. 
Anyone injured through the fault of another may recover in tort. And 
within broad limits anyone may enter into a contract with another that 
will be enforced in court. We may think of such law as status neutral law. 
Status neutral law, that is, law that on its face attaches no special benefits 
to social, political or ethical status, is essential if normative neutrality is to 
be achieved. Thus, one way normative neutrality can fail is that law may 
be overtly oriented to external political, ethical, or social considerations. 
But status neutral law, although lacking in such overt substantive orienta-
tions, will not yield a normatively neutral legal order if it is applied in a 
world where considerable inequality exists. 
Because status neutral law eschews the task of setting social directions 
and recognizes only the values of individualism, if a court applies such 
norms formalistically, the resulting outcomes will have an appearance of 
neutrality. Extra-legal distinctions will not have been imported into the 
law and will have no place in the legal analysis. Yet in an unequal society 
the formal analysis will tend to enforce power relationships that exist 
outside the law. Those who have substantial social power will be able to 
use the law to reaffirm the advantages they have over others in their day 
to day affairs. 
If all laws were "status neutral" in the sense I use the term; if people 
were equally well situated to take advantage of status neutral rules and 
entitlements; and if the other requisites of legal autonomy were met, the 
ideal of pure legal autonomy would be achieved. The legal system would 
proceed in a purely self-regarding way. The law application process would 
in accordance with its own procedures manipulate distinctively legal con-
cepts in the light of legal norms. A party's extra-legal status would have 
no implications for either his rights — since these would be equally 
accessible to all — or his treatment in court. Similar social action would 
everywhere have the same legal implications. Thus, in the ideal case legal 
autonomy and personal autonomy coincide. Freedom is at a maximum.16 
16 I mean this phrase descriptively and do not mean to imply that in these circumstances 
one would have the best of all possible worlds. Thus when I speak of the "ideal of 
pure legal autonomy" I am referring to an ideal type and mean to make no suggestion 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
169 
The Empirical Failure of Autonomy 
To sum up briefly, I have argued that the autonomous application of law 
depends on three factors: judicial formalism; equal legal competence, and 
normative neutrality. Only if they are simultaneously realized in an already 
equal society will the ideal of pure autonomy exist. If this is so, three 
conclusions follow. First, a purely autonomous system of law application 
in the strict sense I have used the term "autonomous" is in theory possible. 
Nothing about the nature of adjudicative institutions or the societies in 
which they exist suggest that in principle these conditions cannot be 
achieved. Second, these conditions are not achieved in any society. Hence, 
as an empirical matter, law as applied is at best partially autonomous. 
Third, again as an empirical matter, in some societies these conditions are 
to some extent achieved. The judiciary in many states does distance itself 
from pressures to respond to non-legal interests by its special concern for 
procedure, rules and legal categories; concerns that taken together make 
up formalism. Equal legal competence does not exist, but institutions like 
the right to appointed counsel, public interest law firms, and the contingent 
fee mean that for some individuals and groups removing contests to the 
legal sphere generally provides a more equal arena for struggle than that 
which may be found in other sectors of society. Finally, some legislation 
is status neutral in its implications and many societies are not so unequal 
as to ensure that status neutral law will in each instance advantage the 
socially more powerful party. Putting these factors together I conclude that 
the application of law in Western democracies is best characterized as a 
partially autonomous process. But the implications of autonomy in applica-
tion for the autonomy of the legal system as a whole cannot be determined 
until we consider the source of the norms that the system applies and how 
these relate to non-legal political, ethical and social interests. This draws 
our attention to the legislative process and the possibility of autonomy in 
law-making. 
The Possibility of Legislative Autonomy 
The legislature sits at the intersection between the political and legal spheres 
where it is open to the influence of wealth as well as to other sources of 
social and political power and to the vociferous entreaties of those who 
support private ethical systems. At the same time the legislature is a crucial 
legal actor, for it pours norms into the judicial and regulatory systems. It 
about whether the ideal is a goal worth achieving. My own tastes involve a communita-
rian element that might not be compatible with this "ideal" order. 

170 
Richard Lempert 
is fair to ask whether a legislature can ever share the partial autonomy we 
have thus far identified with law. If not, the autonomy of law is likely to 
be of little moment, for the stock of legal forms and concepts that regulate 
and sanction behavior will soon reflect the interests of powerful extra-legal 
status groups. My view is that as a conceptual matter a legal system that 
is open to legislation can never be fully autonomous because at its heart 
is an institution designed to translate extra-legal interests into law. It does 
not, however, follow that openness to legislation means that autonomy of 
application is of little moment. Legislatures I shall argue may be sufficiently 
distanced from specific extra-legal interests that their output need not 
directly translate some identifiable extralegal standard of behavior into law. 
Thus, as an empirical matter I believe that the partial autonomy we see in the 
legal systems of the capitalist democracies reflects meaningful independence 
from extralegal sources of authority. 
There are several reasons why some degree of legislative autonomy is 
possible. First, the structure of the legislature contributes to its ability to 
act autonomously. Interests groups can capture legislator/, but it is difficult 
to generate a coalition to capture the legisla/»re. Thus, the ready translation 
of the interests of social, political, or ethical groups in ways that substan-
tially threaten, rather than simply fail to promote, the interests of others 
is difficult to achieve. In some countries, like the United States, this 
difficulty is enhanced by constitutional requirements for super majorities 
when fundamental liberty interests or the independence of the courts is 
directly threatened, and by the veto power given to an executive. 
Second, there are distinctively legal norms about the form, content and 
procedure of legislation which legislatures routinely honor. Some norms 
such as the prohibition in the United States of ex post facto laws and bills 
of attainder are written into constitutions. Others such as the need to 
respect the separate jurisdictions of the judiciary and executive are implied 
by one. Still others such as the preference for legislation that fits in as far 
as possible with the body of existing law and the idea that legislation 
should be open to public comment are part of the legislative culture. 
Adherence to such cultural rules not only promotes autonomy in legislation, 
but is itself an important expression of it. 
Third, in the United States by long-standing practice and in other 
countries to differing degrees, the judiciary, the branch of government best 
insulated from the pressures that threaten autonomy, has authority to void 
specific legislative enactments. 
Finally, law as a body may be autonomous of specific external interests 
in a way that individual laws are not. While particular laws may reflect the 
influence of identifiable status groups, the body of laws may mix such a 
variety of concerns that the legal system can be identified with no particular 
external interests, except possibly at the highest level of generality, such as 
whites in a segregated society or the propertied in a class-stratified society. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
171 
Moreover, not all instances of externally oriented legislative behavior reflect 
the influence of some special interest group. Some norms — like much of 
the criminal law — are so generally accepted in society that the legislative 
reinstitutionalization of these norms is not problematic. While in one sense 
those laws are the antithesis of autonomy in that the ethical and legal are 
collapsed, when the collapsing is complete the law may be applied without 
reference to any specific external norms or interests. In a society where all 
laws and ethical propositions were of this type, we would have neither a 
legal system nor an ethical system but a legio-ethical system which could 
act autonomously of other interests in society. 
These features of the legislative process, and others that I have no doubt 
missed, mean that legislation is insulated to some extent from the pressures 
of particular extra-legal interests and is shaped to some extent by distinc-
tively legal concerns. They do not mean that legislatures are autonomous 
in the way courts are. As I have previously noted, even at the level of the 
ideal, there are fundamental differences. The formalist court, as I argued 
earlier, takes legal norms as given and in this sense can be entirely self-
regarding17 in disposing of cases. But a legislature must ordinarily look 
beyond existing sources of law in deciding what new legal norms will be. 
In doing so, it is almost always acting with a substantive end — as valued 
in some extralegal social, political or ethical order — in sight. This is so 
even if that end is, for example, a regime of contract law that takes no 
account of values other than the desirability of enforcing private agree-
ments. The creation of a status neutral legal order can itself be a substantive 
goal. Thus, legal autonomy is, as an empirical matter, partial in two senses. 
It is partial in that legal norms to some extent, but not completely, 
reinstitutionalize in the law norms and interests rooted in non-legal political, 
ethical and social spheres. It is also partial in that the application of legal 
norms reflects, to some extent, the social and political situation of the 
parties to a dispute and the influence of extralegal norms and interests on 
legal decision making. I shall now contrast this view of legal autonomy 
with the theory of autopoiesis. My goal in doing so is to shed light on the 
latter. 
Visions Compared 
At first blush, it may appear that my version of the Anglo-American view 
of autonomy and Luhmann's Continental view are completely incompatible. 
17 By "self-regarding" I mean that only the requirements of the law are attended to in 
deciding how a dispute should be resolved. The implications of extra-legal power and 
normative orders are not considered. 

172 
Richard Lempert 
Autopoietic systems are contrasted by Luhmann and others to earlier 
visions of open systems in a way that suggests a complete and radical 
autonomy. All meaning 
— that is anything meaningful — within an 
autopoietic system is a product of the system and not borrowed from the 
environment (Luhmann, 1985 a; 1985 b). Nevertheless, there are interesting 
points of congruence between the two approaches.18 
Points in Common 
For Luhmann the autonomy of the legal system only exists in the context 
of its autopoiesis (Luhmann, 1987), which requires that the reproduction 
of the elements of the system be guaranteed in a recursively closed fashion 
by the elements of the system. It is the system which through self-reference 
distinguishes itself from the environment and defines itself (Luhmann, 
1987). Since the elements of social systems and subsystems are found in 
patterns of communication (supra: 17) this perspective on autonomy implies 
as a core proposition that it is for the legal system to say what is legal 
(Luhmann, 1985 d: 7; 1985 c; 113; supra: 15; 1985 a: 5). 
While this perspective which makes legal autonomy an implication of 
the legal system's autopoiesis19 has a different focus than a conception 
18 I shall not try to summarize Luhmann's perspective; I shall simply plunge in, drawing 
on and criticizing Luhmann's argument where appropriate. I should note also, that 
in discussing Luhmann's work, I am limited to that material which has been translated 
into English. By and large this work is, as a body, interesting and coherent, but there 
are places where an argument in one paper appears inconsistent with an argument in 
another as well as places where the translated version was not easily understood. In 
addition, some language is ambiguous, a problem that is compounded by a dearth of 
examples. 
19 For this reason, except in "Some Problems with Reflexive Law" (Luhmann, 1987) 
which makes explicit the fact that in Luhmann's view autonomy is an implication of 
and can exist only in the context of autopoiesis, Luhmann rarely uses the term 
"autonomy" in his discussion of the legal system. It is, however, clear both in the 
reflexive law paper and in other work that autopoietically organized subsystems are 
from Luhmann's perspective autonomous, both in their communicative closure and 
in their relations to other systems. Indeed, Luhmann is at various points concerned 
with how law as an autonomous system can relate to other systems of society and 
the tensions posed by the fact that law must remain cognitively open in order to 
fulfill its distinctive social function (See, e.g., Luhmann, 1984: 7, 13; 1985c: 111 — 
15; supra: 17; 1985 a: 5, 12, 25). Thus, in discussing Luhmann's vision of the autonomy 
of legal systems and comparing it to my own I shall draw heavily on the features 
that Luhmann sees as essential if law is to persist as an autopoietically organized social 
subsystem, for these features are from his perspective essential to its autonomy. 
Ultimately I shall suggest that this perspective is misguided, for autopoiesis and 
autonomy should not be equated. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
173 
which sees an autonomous legal system as "one which in the ideal case is 
independent of other sources of power and authority in social life," there 
are in fact substantial similarities between the two. This is because self-
referential closure with respect to communications is in the Anglo-American 
view as I present it an important feature, and perhaps the most important 
feature, in distancing the legal system from other systems that might 
influence it. Thus, the factor that is most important in establishing or 
maintaining legal autonomy is judicial formalism which entails (1) a concern 
for procedure; (2) a concern for rules; and (3) a concern for legal categories. 
These three concerns all require that a legal system decides cases by 
reference to its own norms and values, thus requiring the kind of self-
referential closure that is at the heart of Luhmann's conception of 
autopoiesis and autonomy. Both models require that the legal system, 
if it is autonomous, determine for itself (i. e., by reference to legal 
norms) the relevance and implications of information presented to it 
(Luhmann, 1985 d: 7; 1985 c: 113-14; 1985 a: 5; supra: 17; 1987). The 
two views part company, however, with respect to the other ingredients 
that the Anglo-American view sees as important to the autonomy of 
applied law, equal legal competence and status neutral law, as well as 
in their characterizations of legislation. I shall probe the various points 
of divergence for what they imply for the theoretical adequacy of the 
autopoietic view of legal systems and for the theoretical utility of the 
different concepts of legal autonomy. 
The Views Diverge 
When legal autonomy is defined, as I define it, in terms of the (material) 
independence of applied law from other sources of power and authority in 
social life, attention is naturally drawn to the question of whether the 
language of the law is itself a repository of extra-legal values and to the 
question of whether a law which is purportedly blind to the extralegal 
characteristics of parties is in fact applied without regard to and uncondi-
tioned by such characteristics. For Luhmann, these questions regarding 
language and application are uninteresting and apparently — as a matter 
of definition — have nothing to do with the autonomy of the legal system. 
The importation of extralegal values into the legal system is not recognized 
in Luhmann's theory as a potential threat to autonomy, because neither of 
the two ways in which importation can occur creates problems in 
Luhmann's scheme. 
On the one hand extralegal values may be translated into legal language 
through ordinary legal processes, as when a court, responding to an 
extralegal vision of efficiency or justice decides that strict liability should 
replace the negligence liability standard in cases involving defective prod-

174 
Richard Lempert 
ucts. Since the legal system is determining for itself and putting in legal 
language a new rule, even if the rule is rooted in values that may be 
observed in environmental institutions, we have, in Luhmann's scheme, 
autopoiesis in action and the preservation of autonomy rather than a 
breakdown of boundaries due to the infiltration of extralegal values into 
law. So long as communications on the issue remain distinctively legal, 
close correlations between action in the legal sphere and actions in other 
spheres do not disturb autonomy. Indeed, such correlations are to be 
expected in a social world of autopoietic systems, for without such correla-
tions social life would not cohere. Thus, Luhmann writes: 
There may be political control of legislation, but only the law can change the law. 
Only within the legal system can the change of legal norms be perceived as change 
of the law (1985 c: 113). 
Not only does this imply that legislation need not be law, a topic I shall 
treat later, but it also suggests that if the legal system changes in response 
to legislation so that its norms reflect the same extralegal values that 
motivated the legislature, the law does not thereby become less autono-
mous. In Luhmann's scheme a response by the legal system to its environ-
ment does not disturb its autopoiesis so long as it is the legal system's 
own principles and observations that determine the response (Luhmann, 
1985 c: 114). The Anglo-American approach, as I describe it, sees the 
incorporation of extralegal values into law as a threat to autonomy even 
if the legal system's own rules call for such incorporation. 
On the other hand, political, economic or ethical values might be 
imposed on the law as when certain disputes are taken from courts and 
channelled to institutions that are expected to respond not to the implica-
tions of legal language but on the basis of widely shared political or ethical 
values or when courts are pressured to reach politically expedient or morally 
correct decisions rather than decisions justified by the close consideration 
of legal language. In these instances the inattention to or disregard of legal 
values means that case decisions do not reflect the outcome of those self-
referential communicative processes that are the hallmark of autopoiesis 
and autopoietic autonomy. Yet this situation which limits or destroys legal 
autonomy in the Anglo-American view also does not threaten the autonomy 
that Luhmann posits. Rather it shrinks the domain in which legal action 
occurs while expanding the domain in which the political, religious, eco-
nomic or other system operates (Luhmann, 1985 c: 121, supra: 31). Thus 
in Luhmann's scheme efforts to make law more politically instrumental do 
not aim at the transformation of law but rather seek to replace it by other 
systems (Luhmann, 1985 c: 123). Indeed, law as a system could be virtually 
eliminated in Luhmann's scheme without, until the point of elimination, 
losing its autopoietic organization or autonomy. Moreover, the institutional 
forms of law, e. g., courts, could persist in such a shrunken system even if 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
175 
much of their activity did not count as legal action, for it is not institutional 
arrangements that are crucial to Luhmann's conception of autonomy, 
but the self-referential quality of the communications that occurs within 
institutions. 
For similar reasons Luhmann's conception of autonomy is not threatened 
by a situation in which differences in party competence mean that the law 
as applied systematically favors some social groups at the expense of others. 
The fact that the wealthy do better than the poor when they invoke the 
law has no implications for autonomy as autopoiesis so long as the legal 
process treats the inputs that wealth allows parties to provide solely in 
terms of their systemically defined legal implications. The Anglo-American 
view recognizes that the ability to structure transactions in legal terms or 
to effectively present legally relevant information varies with social class 
and has the potential to transform neutral, self-referentially defined language 
into language that has systematic implications for the relative success of 
competing extralegally defined interests. 
Definitional Desiderata 
The divergence between the two conceptions of legal autonomy on these 
issues highlights two issues that must be confronted in deciding whether 
a conception of legal autonomy is sociologically useful. The first is at the 
level of definition: what do we want legal autonomy to mean? For Luhmann 
it appears to be simply another way of characterizing the self-contained 
closure of systems that maintain themselves through autopoiesis. He tells 
us that all operations within the legal system "are recursively conditioned 
and precisely this constitutes the unity and autonomy of the system" 
(Luhmann, 1987). This conception emphasizes the possibility of self-con-
tained communicative systems that are capable of understanding the world 
from a consistent system-defined perspective. Whether fully recursive social 
systems in fact exist is an empirical question, but clearly systems like the 
law impose distinctive (in the case of law, distinctively legal) meanings 
which can be made sense of and manipulated only by reference to other 
system-defined meanings (Luhmann, 1985 a: 5; see generally 1985 b). 
The Anglo-American perspective, on the other hand, treats legal auton-
omy as a phenomenon that involves more than simply establishing, in a 
recursive fashion, the terms for legal discussion. Its use of the concept of 
autonomy is motivated by its answer to the question of why the ability to 
set the terms for legal discussion matters. This ability matters because it 
means, at least potentially, that various extralegal values will not penetrate 
the law and make it a tool for the reproduction and extension of extralegal 
social, political and ethical arrangements. If legal language, at its core, 
systematically distinguishes between the interests and values of extralegally-

176 
Richard Lempert 
defined classes of actors or if procedures for triggering legal action result 
in such distinctions whatever the formal qualities of legal language, such 
reproduction will occur. The Anglo-American concept of legal autonomy 
allows us to distinguish such situations, from situations where law is less 
reflective of and less systematically affects the political and moral struggles 
that occur in the law's environment. Luhmann's conception of autonomy 
as autopoiesis does not. We must ask of each concept whether it promises 
to be useful in social scientific characterizations of and attempts to order 
the empirical world, and we should also be concerned with how each 
version accords with the ordinary meaning of the term "autonomy". 
My view is that the utility of the concept of autonomy is limited if as 
a matter of definition it is equated with autopoiesis or treated as a necessary 
correlate thereof. While the theoretical writing on autopoiesis, including 
some of Luhmann's, suggests this equation or at least the correlation, it is 
important to note that Luhmann's perspective does not require that auto-
poiesis and autonomy be conceptually linked.20 Autonomy can be meaning-
ful only to an external observer, who can simultaneously appreciate the 
integrity of self-contained communications systems and the ways in which 
communications within such systems are conditioned by environmental 
factors.21 Accepting Luhmann's perspective, we can say that the less condi-
tioned the meanings in one system by differences in another, the more 
autonomous the first system. This separates autopoiesis and autonomy and 
provides a definition of autonomy that takes account of the relations 
between systems and not just communicative closure. 
Theoretical Utility 
A more serious problem with equating autopoiesis and autonomy stems 
from another kind of implication which this equation has for the theoretical 
utility of the concept. Autopoiesis is, for Luhmann, an all or nothing 
condition. A system either maintains its autopoiesis and continues to exist 
as a distinct entity or it ceases to reproduce itself autopoietically and system 
boundaries disappear (Luhmann, 1985 a: 25 — 6). Legal autonomy in the 
Anglo-American tradition is a "more or less" thing. Not only does it make 
20 Luhmann acknowledges that in a system which is simultaneously open and closed 
like the legal system self-reference cannot amount to total self-determination or 
even total self-observation (Luhmann, supra: 21). A legal system's forms must take 
cognizance of the external world (Luhmann, supra: 23). 
21 Since autopoietic social subsystems are cognitively open to their environments, it is 
possible for meanings in such systems to be entirely self-defined yet reflective of and 
in this sense conditioned on how the system views itself in relation to its environment 
(cf. Teubner, 1984). 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
177 
sense to speak of partial autonomy, but it makes sense to describe some 
legal systems as more autonomous than others (compare Iran and Great 
Britain) and some kinds of law as more autonomous than others (compare 
contract law and welfare law). 
Social science advances through the investigation of variance. The social 
scientist seeks to explain perceived differences in social life, by looking at 
factors that concomitantly vary. Some factors, like gender, naturally have 
only two states, but others exhibit a range of variation. To constrain the 
latter to only two states is to ignore interesting complexities of social life, 
to impoverish both descriptive and explanatory theory and to pose special 
problems for the statistical analysis of quantitative data. Even if Luhmann 
is correct and autopoiesis is a natural dichotomy, it does not follow that 
legal autonomy should be so conceived. The cost of doing so is to suggest 
that legal systems are either autonomous or not autonomous and to define 
away a number of interesting questions about the mutual dependence and 
interpenetration of systems. This, of course, is precisely what autopoiesis 
is about; it suggests a radical integrity to systems which makes language 
like "mutual dependence" and "the interpenetration of systems" and the 
modes of thought they represent obsolete.22 But the radical integrity of 
autopoietic systems should not be seen as a species of autonomy in the 
Anglo-American sense of the term. 
If the theory of autopoiesis requires this equation, the costs of imposing 
the binary structure of autopoiesis on autonomy become a reason to doubt 
the theoretical utility of autopoiesis as a tool for understanding legal 
systems. Ultimately too many interesting questions are either ignored or 
reduced to matters of definition. For example, from the Anglo-American 
perspective the observation that law hews to system values (i.e., distinc-
tively legal values) because it is autonomous gives rise to a host of questions 
that might be sociologically explored. These questions, such as the question 
of how law maintains its distance from those environmental interests 
which would capture it, suggest yet more focused inquiries, such as an 
investigation into the structure of the legal profession and how this 
structure may serve to insulate legal action from extralegal political pres-
sures. Luhmann, on the other hand, suggests that whatever values the law 
22 Luhmann argues that there can be no communication of a society with its environment 
and that this implies that if a social system communicates with its environment, it is 
in effect reconstituting itself into a more encompassing system (Luhmann, supra: 
18—19). Thus, if Luhmann's scheme is consistent with any vision of partial autonomy, 
and I shall argue later that it is, it is not consistent with a scheme in which forces 
within and without the legal system speak the same language. An apparent implication 
of this is that institutions like the jury system, which allow judgments that reflect 
popular morality to be pronounced as legal judgments, would render decisions non-
legal in Luhmann's scheme whereas they only diminish the autonomy of the legal 
system in the Anglo-American view. 

178 
Richard Lempert 
hews to are system (distinctively legal) values in that they are the product 
of the autopoietic reproduction of legal norms which is the embodiment 
of the system's autonomy. Moreover, in autopoietic legal systems such laws 
will themselves be the product of legal action (Luhmann, 1985 c: 113). The 
scheme does not lend itself to understanding the reasons for the quality of 
any particular law or the relationships between legal norms and other 
sources of power and authority in social life.23 
Normative Closure and Cognitive Openness 
The theory of autopoiesis does, however, hold open a link between condi-
tions in the legal and other systems even though it does not suggest how 
the link is forged. Law as an autopoietic system, Luhmann tells us, is 
closed and open at the same time (Luhmann, 1985 d: 6 — 7; 1985 c: 113 — 
14; supra: 19—21). It is cognitively open to its environment in the sense 
that it can learn if reality turns out to be not as expected and it is 
normatively closed in the sense that legal norms will persist even if the 
expectations they entail are not met (Luhmann, supra: 19 — 20). 
This suggests that there may be substantially less distance than our use 
of language would imply between Luhmann's vision of a legal system 
characterized by that apparently radical version of autonomy called auto-
poiesis and my vision, in the Anglo-American tradition, of a legal system 
which both conceptually and empirically is at most partially autonomous. 
In one sense this supposition is correct. Luhmann's portrayal of the 
autopoietic legal system describes a system that is from an Anglo-American 
perspective only partially autonomous since it is open to the influence of 
external forces (Luhmann, 1985 c: 114; supra: 20—21). Far from being 
radically autonomous, autopoietic systems are open to the world in that 
their actions — even if carried on as self-reflective communications — vary 
with environmental activity. In another sense, however, substantial distance 
remains, for what is crucial to the Anglo-American view that legal auton-
omy is at best partial is the idea that law is open to normative influences from 
extralegal sources of power and authority. Luhmann's vision postulates a 
legal system that is closed in a normative sense. Without normative closure 
23 One might see many of the questions that I think a sociological theory of law should 
allow us to address as rearising when one turns to the question of how the legal 
system can maintain its autopoiesis/autonomy given that law is part of a more 
encompassing social system. This might be the case, but the start that Luhmann 
makes in responding to this question which has to do with a postulated unique 
function of law and the closed communication system this engenders, like the theory 
of autopoiesis itself, tends to answer questions by definition rather than to pose them 
in the form of refutable hypotheses open to empirical investigation. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
179 
the autopoiesis of law and its ability to fill what Luhmann sees as its 
distinctive function would cease. 
While it is true that a legal norm (i. e. a law) does not change simply 
because not everyone complies with it, if the idea of normative closure is 
to amount to anything important it must mean more than this. At a 
minimum one would think that the claim of normative closure means that 
law follows distinctly legal principles and does not embody the normative 
agenda of any particular political or social groups. One would also expect 
it to mean that law as applied restates its normative implications without 
regard to the social or political characteristics of those before it.24 Both 
propositions are, as an empirical matter, palpably false and are major reasons 
why: (1) actual legal systems are only partially autonomous; (2) it is 
instructive to view the degree of legal autonomy as a variable; and (3) the 
degree of legal autonomy is important for other qualities we value in social 
life. 
But how can Luhmann be so wrong about such a fundamental and easy 
to spot matter as the fact that legal systems are not normatively closed? 
He cannot, I am sure. I must misunderstand him, or — to say much the 
same thing — be using language in a very different way. 
But in what particular do I misunderstand Luhmann?25 Perhaps I mis-
understand the entire enterprise. Perhaps Luhmann simply means to be 
dealing with law in the abstract 
as a closed communication system. On this 
view, so long as the legal system responds to pressures on it by translating 
non-legal 
language 
into 
legal 
language, 
autopoiesis 
is 
maintained 
(Luhmann, supra: 18—19). This would suggest that if the political system 
sends a message to a court that X, a leading dissenter, must be gotten rid 
of, and the legal system labels X guilty, the system maintains its autopoiesis. 
24 It appears that Luhmann has a proposition like this in mind when he suggests that 
no legally relevant event can derive its normativity from the environment of the 
system (Luhmann, supra: 20). Perhaps Luhmann means something special by "derive 
its normativity" which makes the proposition true by definition. If not, the proposition 
appears to be contradicted by the use of legal standards such as "good faith," the 
relation between legal and cultural values embodied in malum in se crimes and the 
place given to juries or lay assessors in many systems of law. While it is true that the 
norms thereby derived are legal because the legal system treats them as such, it is 
also the case that they represent the penetration of extralegal values directly into the 
legal system, and it may also be the case that the legal system had no real choice 
about accepting the values in question. 
25 The suggestion that I must misunderstand Luhmann is neither a pretense nor intended 
as a rhetorical device. I am driven toward it by my reading of Luhmann's argument, 
my view of the place of law in society and my respect for Luhmann as a social 
theorist. No doubt the suggestions that follow are not the only ways in which I may 
have misread Luhmann, and I welcome suggestions which do not limit the utility or 
scope of his theory in the ways that the readings I sketch below, which are the most 
plausible readings in my view, do. 

180 
Richard Lempert 
This is a far cry from the Anglo-American view of autonomy, but it also 
seems distant from what Luhmann means by autopoiesis because the system 
in this example is not self-regarding except in the most limited definitional 
sense. Rather it is looking for guidance to another system. Indeed, Luhmann 
would probably go further than I and argue that not only was the legal 
system not autonomous, but also that what I have described is a political 
rather than a legal action (Luhmann, 1985 c: 122).26 
Alternatively Luhmann may be treating autopoiesis as I treat perfect 
autonomy, that is as an ideal type, which is not and cannot be achieved, 
but which aids our understanding of the law because it clarifies our thinking 
about an important, partially achieved aspect of actual legal systems. If so, 
it is unfair to confront Luhmann's portrait of normative closure with 
examples of how law appears normatively open and to suggest that this 
invalidates his view about the central distinguishing feature of law. 
Luhmann, however, does not present his view of law as one would present 
an ideal type. Indeed at various points in his writing, he suggests that if a 
legal system is to exist at all it can only exist as an ongoing process of 
autopoiesis (Luhmann, supra: 17 — 18). 
Finally, I may be wrong in suggesting that Luhmann cannot mean to 
confine the idea of normative closure simply to the proposition that when 
normative expectations are disappointed (i.e., laws are broken) they are 
not changed. But if this is what Luhmann means, what appeared to be a 
radical perspective on the autonomy of law and the concomitant closure 
of the legal system instead makes only the relatively trivial point that norms 
are not defined by instances of individual action but are the standards by 
which society both tries to influence action and later judges it. This, of 
course, is characteristic of any normative system, closed or open. Norms, 
as Luhmann recognizes, can only develop by reference to deviant behavior 
(Luhmann, supra: 25). If norms changed so as to accord with whatever 
behavior occurred, they would not be norms. 
If Luhmann seeks to make the broader statement that the legal system 
is normatively closed in the sense that its norms are not only maintained 
despite individual deviation but are also maintained despite aggregate 
deviation, then I think he is, as an empirical matter, mistaken. The claim 
that "everybody does it" may constitute an effective defense in law, and 
26 But see the preceding footnote. Perhaps if pressures on the legal system were more 
subtle so that the legal system was translating popular morality as observed in the 
system's environment into a set of expectations rather than simply a pronouncement 
in an individual case, Luhmann would see the new rule as law and see the need to 
translate the environmental norm into a legal system as the essence of normative 
closure. If Luhmann's view allows the legal system to be so permeable to extralegal 
norms and interests, he and I mean very different things by an autonomous legal 
system, and his vision disguises a potentially overwhelming impact of other systems 
on the substantive normative content of the law. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
181 
some legal standards, like the standard of the reasonable person in Anglo-
American tort law, are explicitly open to specification by reference to 
aggregate behavior.27 Moreover, what everybody does is often directly 
introduced into the law's structure as when the British common law grew 
to incorporate much of the law merchant or the drafters of the American 
Uniform Commercial Code looked to business practice to resolve difficult 
questions of legal policy. 
If Luhmann's conception of normative closure is more restrictive than 
its centrality in the autopoietic process would lead us to believe, its 
complement, the cognitive openness of law, must entail more than what 
one might otherwise have thought. Luhmann is, unfortunately, not very 
clear about what the cognitive openness of law entails. At some points, he 
suggests that this means that the legal system is capable of understanding 
the facts of cases and reaching decisions (i. e., normative judgments) given 
the facts it hears (Luhmann, 1985 d: 9; 1987). This suggestion is clearly 
correct. At a minimum law must be open in this way. 
What is less clear in Luhmann's scheme is whether cognitive openness 
extends to an appreciation of the political and social forces in the legal 
system's environment that may be manifested in the generation of legal 
norms that reflect external distributions of power. When, for example, Mr. 
Dooley said, "Th' supreme coort follows the iliction returns," (Dunne, 
1963: 52) was he describing the capstone of a system which was not 
autopoietic in Luhmann's sense of the term, or was he describing the 
capstone of an autopoietic system that was cognitively open in a way 
Luhmann's theory allows? If the narrow reading of "normative closure" 
that I suggest above is accurate, then the idea of cognitive openness has 
this latter expansive scope. The judicial consideration of election returns 
becomes part of the ongoing autopoietic process so long as the court 
specifies in legal language the legal implications of the political world it 
observes. 
If this is the proper reading of Luhmann, it means that there are 
few important differences between the Anglo-American theory of legal 
autonomy that I espouse and the role that autopoietic theory, in fact, allows 
environmental influences. Both approaches see "partial autonomy" in the 
sense I use this term as the most that is possible and both approaches posit 
a system that is continually vulnerable to the influence of external social 
and political forces. Finally, and most importantly, both approaches see in 
the language of the law and the system's ability to maintain the integrity 
27 Luhmann might call this an example of cognitive openness which his theory allows, 
and not an example of normative openness which is not permitted if the system is to 
maintain its autopoiesis. If so, and the claim is plausible in Luhmann's scheme, the 
example illustrates the limited scope of Luhmann's concept of normative closure and 
the fuzzy boundary between the normative and the cognitive. 

182 
Richard Lempert 
of that language the key to the degree of autonomy that is in fact achieved. 
The "radical integrity" of autopoietic systems is, however, not very radical. 
It allows for considerable encroachment by other systems. Indeed, it 
allows for the possibility that behavior in one system, including normative 
definitions,28 will change almost in lockstep with behavior in another. 
A Further Comparison 
If, however, there is this kind of rapprochement between these two views, 
there are, in my opinion, substantial reasons to prefer the Anglo-American 
perspective on autonomy to one which sees it as a feature of the autopoietic 
unity of systems.29 First, there are definitional advantages. Luhmann's 
28 Normative definitions would still have to be maintained when they are violated to 
satisfy Luhmann's condition, but if this is all the condition means, norms — legal 
norms for example — could be changed rapidly and routinely when environmental 
forces demand it. 
29 I have already suggested a number of theoretical and empirical difficulties with 
Luhmann's approach, on other interpretations of what he means. Luhmann in respond-
ing to this paper when it was presented implied an advantage to autopoietic theory 
when he asked whether my version of autonomy allows for increasing independence 
and dependence at the same time. I am not one who sees theoretical virtue in apparent 
paradoxes, so unless one could show empirically that actual legal systems had over 
time become simultaneously both more (or less) independent and dependent I would 
not be troubled if this condition were not met. However, for those who would be 
troubled if this apparently paradoxical condition could not be met, I should point 
out that the Anglo-American idea of autonomy allows it. To see how this is possible, 
first consider an example distant from law. Suppose a farmer devotes 50% of his land 
to his own subsistence and 50% to growing crops for a patron who is his only access 
to a market. From one perspective the farmer enjoys considerable independence. He 
can devote half his land to growing whatever he desires, and even if the patron were 
to buy nothing, he could probably — albeit barely — survive. But at the same time, 
he is quite dependent because a substantial portion of his well-being depends on his 
patron. Thus he will probably plant whatever crops the patron desires; he will use 
the seeds the patron provides; he will harvest according to the patron's schedule 
rather than his own, and if there were a drought he would probably irrigate the 
patron's land more generously than his own to preserve the patron's future custom. 
Now assume the farmer develops more outlets to market, and with the prospect of 
hundreds of buyers for his crops, he decides to devote 90% of his land to farming 
for others and only 10% to his own subsistence. Clearly, he is more dependent. 
Should no one purchase his crops, he will starve, for he does not grow enough to 
meet his needs. At the same time, he is far freer. With many potential buyers, he may 
choose what he will grow and how he will grow it, and he need not fear alienating 
specific buyers should he take better care of his substistence acreage than that on 
which he is growing crops for others. 
The Anglo-American perspective on legal autonomy allows for a similar phenomenon 
in the legal sphere. The legal system may have a large sphere in which it is largely 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
183 
autonomy (as autopoiesis) is under this last view of what cognitive openness 
allows, equivalent to "partial autonomy" in the scheme I advance. Thus, 
there is no place for "full autonomy" or autonomy as an ideal type in 
Luhmann's scheme, and theoretical discourse on this topic is concomitantly 
limited. 
Second, if the two modes of speaking amount to the same thing, 
Luhmann's approach introduces unnecessary theoretical baggage and so 
fails the test of Ockham's razor.30 We do not need to talk of autopoiesis 
and all that that entails nor do we need to worry about the correspondence 
of legal and social systems in order to understand and speak meaningfully 
of legal autonomy. Moreover, the Anglo-American view offers a better 
understanding of how forces in the legal system's environment affect and 
are restrained by communication within the legal system than that which 
one acquires from Luhmann's somewhat opaque injunction that legal 
systems are normatively closed and cognitively open. 
Finally, the Anglo-American view I advance deals more adequately with 
the place of legislation in the legal system. Legislation is, unabashedly, an 
institution that channels political judgments and the external forces they 
reflect into the legal system. This characteristic feature of legislation remains 
even though these external forces may be restrained and shaped both by 
norms that define the proper behavior of legislatures as legal institutions 
and by legal norms that affect the way courts interpret and apply legislative 
enactments. 
In Luhmann's scheme legislation has no clear role. It even appears at 
times that legislation — a central reality of modern legal systems — is 
self-regarding and unaffected by external interests, but vulnerability to direction from 
certain extralegal interests may make it highly responsive to them. Thus, in a 
dictatorship, substantial areas of private law may be left purely to the self-regarding 
principles of the law, but the system as a whole may be vulnerable to the dictator's 
(polity's) influence whenever it suits him. Or 40% of a legislature may be controlled 
by mining interests, yielding a body of law that is especially solicitious of mining 
although in areas unrelated to mining largely independent of extralegal social pressure. 
In another society, numerous influences may impinge on a legal system so that judges 
and legislatures respond to a large variety of extra-legal interests. Yet the very variety 
of interests and the countervailing power they bring to bear may mean that the legal 
system reflects distinctively legal values more than it does any identifiable external 
value set. Thus total but conflicting dependence may free legal decision makers to 
hew on the average more closely to distinctively legal values than they would, on the 
average, if the legal system had to be highly responsive to extra-legal pressures in 
certain areas but not at all responsive in others. 
30 Unless, of course, Luhmann's theory fits into a larger, coherent theoretical whole in 
a way the version I am arguing for does not. Note, however, that even if one accepts 
Luhmann's more general theory of the autopoiesis of social systems (1985 a; see also 
1985 b) as such a whole, the Anglo-American perspective on legal autonomy may be 
consistent with it. See note 18, supra, and the discussion that accompanies it. 

184 
Richard Lempert 
inconsistent with the autopoiesis which is the distinguishing feature of law 
as a subsystem of society (Luhmann, 1985 c: 122 — 25). For example, at one 
point Luhmann suggests that regulatory law, which is typically legislative 
or quasi-legislative rule making, exploits the law in a manner alien to its 
function and threatens to undermine its ability to regenerate itself 
(Luhmann, supra: 28). Indeed, when we contrast the role of legislation and 
judicial decisions in Luhmann's scheme there is an irony in characterizing 
Luhmann's vision as "Continental." His vision of autopoiesis appears quite 
close to the ordinary Anglo-American perspective on how common law 
courts produce and reproduce the law (Luhmann, 1985 c: 117; supra: 29; 
1987). 
We see this in Luhmann's view of the function of law. For Luhmann, a 
precise definition of the function of law is: "using the possibility of conflict 
for a generalization of expectations in temporal, social and substantive 
aspects" (Luhmann, 1985 c: 121 at note 24; see also Luhmann, infra: 17).31 
This view of law's function fits the judicial process better than the legislative 
one. Courts focus on actual conflict (realized possibilities). In the process 
of resolving conflicts presented to them, courts can and do reaffirm existing 
norms, overtly change norms, or contribute to bodies of precedent that 
carry with them the germs of new normative standards and so contribute 
to the ongoing self-referential reconstitution of the law that Luhmann calls 
autopoiesis. 
Legislation, on the other hand, need not focus on realized conflicts but 
deals only with possibilities. This becomes particularly problematic when 
possible conflicts would not exist but for the legislation. Thus some 
legislation can be fit into Luhmann's scheme only by suggesting that 
legislation may create a possibility of conflict for the apparent purpose of 
using the created conflict as the occasion for the generation of legal 
expectations. But since it is the generation of legal norms that creates the 
31 Luhmann (1985 c: 121 at note 24) also argues that a more general definition like 
"contributing" to the order of society would confer on anything the status of being 
a functional equivalent to law. This suggests to me that Luhmann's more restrictive 
functional definition results from reflecting not on how law serves society, but by 
searching for one unique way in which law serves society. This in turn appears mandated 
by Luhmann's view that autopoietic subsystems must by definition be fully distin-
guished from each other and can as a matter of logic be so distinguished only if each 
fills a unique function. One reason why I have difficulty with Luhmann's portrayal 
of law as an autopoietic system is that I don't subscribe to his underlying functionalist 
theory of society, especially insofar as it uniquely allocates social subsystems to 
functions. Indeed, it does not seem to me that the function Luhmann uniquely assigns 
to law — using the possibility of conflict to generate norms — is at all necessary to 
the ongoing functioning of a society. So long as conflicts are resolved, or can be 
forestalled, I do not see how it matters whether it was the possibility of conflict or 
some other feature of social life that led to the legal norm. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
1 8 5 
possibility of conflict (Luhmann, 1985 a: 28), the functional perspective 
makes little sense. Indeed, the matter may be more convoluted still, for at 
one point Luhmann suggests that what legislation does is not to create 
legal norms, but to conjure up conflict out of nothingness in the expectation 
that law will be formed out of the orientation that law takes to the conjured 
up conflict (Luhmann, supra: 27).32 I find this circularity unhelpful, and 
its functional basis somewhat mysterious. Any theory that forces us into 
such circles should be avoided if a plausible alternative is available. 
Moreover, even this view does not fully resolve the ambiguity of the place 
that legislation occupies in Luhmann's scheme. Luhmann tells us that it is 
difficult to see how legal doctrine can develop amid the turbulence of frequent 
legislative enactments, thus implying that much legislation is not law but 
something that threatens it (Luhmann, 1985 c: 125). Perhaps it threatens the 
ongoing autopoiesis of law as Luhmann sees it, but if the price of hewing to 
the autopoietic theory of law is that much legislation must be seen as some-
thing other than law or as external to the legal system, I think it is the theory 
of autopoiesis and not the notion that legislatures make law that should be 
discarded. Recognizing, as in the Anglo-American scheme, that the legislative 
process is not autonomous from non-legal sources of power and influence 
and that substantively oriented legislatures are a major force limiting legal 
autonomy is one way of making the link between legislative action and the 
legal system without thereby denying that law may still have a life of its own 
or that self-referential processes may continue to play an essential role in the 
application and generation of legal norms. 
Summary 
Lest I be misunderstood let me summarize what I see as the goals of this 
article and the conclusions that may be drawn from it. 
32 Luhmann also speaks of legislation as "predeciding" conflicts (Luhmann, supra: 28). 
This perspective I find more helpful, for it is easy to see the functional value of a 
system that appreciates the likelihood of conflicts it does not create and establishes 
rules for resolving them. It is difficult to make sense of an argument that suggests 
that conflicts — perhaps by granting rights that create a clash of interests that did 
not theretofore exist — are created so that they may be the occasion for generating 
norms that predecide them. It also appears that legislation cannot be distinguished 
from adjudication on the predeciding dimension. Modern theories of precedent 
recognize that in deciding legal issues appellate courts look forward as well as back 
and attempt to establish rules to govern future conflicts. Indeed, courts also conjure 
up conflicts as when in overturning legal restrictions on abortion the possibility of 
hitherto non-existent conflicts — like the conflict between parents and minor daughter 
over whether the daughter can get an abortion — arise to be resolved by the court 
at a later date. Generally speaking, conflicts like this are inescapable by products of 
changing law in the context of cases and are not conjured up to provide further 
occasion for making new law. 

186 
Richard Lempert 
1. My goal has been to elucidate, question and point up gaps in Luhmann's 
theory of the autopoietic social system as applied specifically to law. I have 
posed my version of the Anglo-American theory of legal autonomy not to 
convince readers that it is correct, but as a way of highlighting problematic 
aspects of Luhmann's theory.33 
2. My focus has been on the issue of legal autonomy. I have suggested 
that the theory of the autopoietic legal system is not satisfactory as a theory 
of legal autonomy. My argument for this conclusion should not be taken as 
a total criticism of Luhmann's theory of autopoietic social systems, either 
generally or as applied to the legal system. However, in the course of 
exploring the adequacy of Luhmann's theory as a theory of legal autonomy, 
more general and fundamental problems have been revealed. For example: 
a) There is considerable ambiguity and some inconsistency in the way the 
theory of autopoiesis and its application to the legal system is expounded 
by Luhmann and others. In particular the sense in which the legal system 
is "normatively closed and cognitively open" must be more fully and clearly 
specified. 
b) The theory of the autopoietic legal system best fits a system of common 
law legal reproduction in which courts draw on legal sources to make new 
law. If the theory is to encompass adequately the role of legislation and 
administrative regulations in modern legal systems considerable work must 
be done. A theory which does not treat legislation and administrative 
regulation as law cannot serve as a general theory of legal reproduction in 
modern society. 
c) The theory of the autopoietic legal system may appear to encompass 
more than it does. There is the possibility that the theory is to a large 
extent either true trivially or by definition and the concomitant possibility 
that while Luhmann is correct and the legal system does reproduce itself 
autopoietically this insight adds little to our understanding of the growth 
and implications of law. For example, if the legal system's sphere of 
normative closure is tiny and its sphere of cognitive openness is large, 
understanding legal change may require considerably more attention to 
conditions in the law's environment than it does to the mechanisms of 
reproduction. Similarly if a system cannot by definition encroach on another 
but can, in effect, colonize an activity that was once in the other's domain 
(Luhmann, 1985 c: 122), the sphere of autopoietic legal reproduction — as 
opposed, for example, to something which looks legal but has a major 
political component — may be a relatively small and insignificant compo-
33 I will not, however, object if anyone is so convinced. For a more detailed treatment, 
which also includes a discussion of what I call "pseudo formalism" see chapters 12 
and 13 of Lempert and Sanders (1986). 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
187 
nent of social life. Those who argue for the autopoiesis of law and for the 
theoretical utility of this perspective must define specifically the boundaries 
of the autopoietic reproduction of law in modern society and illustrate the 
range of problems the theory illuminates. 
I do not regard these three criticisms of the theory of law as an autopoietic 
system or other criticisms of the general theory that this paper makes or 
implies as necessarily unanswerable, and for this reason, I do not reject the 
theory out of hand. I do, however, think that answers are sorely needed 
and that the potential of the theory cannot be realized unless its proponents 
respond clearly and specifically 
to these and similar challenges. 
3. An autopoietic legal system in Luhmann's sense of the term is neither 
the same thing as nor does it imply a fully autonomous legal system, in 
my sense of the term. If Luhmann or others read the theory to require this 
equation or implication, their theory is, in this particular, wrong. I have 
shown by example that legal norms and legal behavior are influenced by 
actions in the economic, social and ethical spheres. Moreover, to equate 
autopoiesis and autonomy entails serious theoretical costs. Imposing the 
binary structure of autopoiesis on legal autonomy diminishes the value of 
the latter as an explanatory variable and its tractability as a state to be 
explained. 
4. I do not believe the preceding point is a telling criticism of Luhmann's 
use of the concept "autopoiesis" for I do not think he uses it to mean or 
entail what I call "legal autonomy". But if autopoiesis is not linked to 
autonomy by equation or implication, a theory which sees law as an 
autopoietically organized system is, if not mistaken, markedly incomplete. 
A concept like the Anglo-American concept of legal autonomy must be 
embedded in it, to allow discussion of a range of issues concerning relations 
between systems that are integral to understanding both the dynamics of 
legal change and the role of law in society. In particular, if the theory of 
autopoiesis is not disconfirmed by examples of legal norms that change in 
accord with extra-legal behavior, it must be able to accommodate the 
examples and should, ideally, offer us a mechanism which explains how 
extralegal norms and values come to influence legal norms and behavior 
and so in this sense render the legal system less than fully autonomous. 
This is particularly important for a general theory of legal systems since 
many of the most interesting questions in the contemporary sociology of 
law, including most questions about the role law can and does play in the 
modern regulatory state, depend on understanding the mechanisms which 
render law partially autonomous — that is both independent to some 
degree and open to extra-legal influences. The lead that Luhmann offers — 
the argument that law is normatively closed and cognitively open — is 
both of questionable validity and too general to be of much help. Its 

188 
Richard Lempert 
generality is obvious. Its validity is questionable because what often must 
be explained are normative changes in the law associated with extra-legal 
pressures. It appears that the only way that this fact may be accommodated 
within the theory is by reducing the concept of normative closure to the 
rather trivial observation that norms do not change simply because they 
are violated. With this interpretation the theory of autopoiesis allows legal 
norms to change in response to extra-legal social, economic, or ethical 
forces. This may be a correct portrait of what autopoiesis entails, but it is 
hardly the picture of system independence that the tenor of the argument 
for autopoiesis implies. 
Conclusion 
These observations are what I see as the heart of what we have learned 
from confronting Luhmann's idea of autopoiesis with an Anglo-American 
theory of legal autonomy. Treating the idea of autopoiesis not as a metaphor 
but as a theory, it appears to be either an erroneous, an inadequate or an 
unnecessarily complicated approach to understanding what we mean by 
legal autonomy. But the viability of autopoiesis as a theory of legal 
autonomy should not be taken as the measure of the theory, for it appears 
that Luhmann's theory is not intended to serve the theoretical functions 
that the Anglo-American concept of autonomy can fill. The confrontation 
of the two perspectives has, however, also suggested important gaps in the 
theory of autopoiesis and areas of considerable conceptual confusion. To 
state my reservations in their strongest form: I question the wisdom of 
elaborating an extensive, complex theory from a base which looks not to 
the empirical reality of legal or social systems, but to an arguable reality 
of biological systems; a reality that in its own terms is unlike that of social 
systems because crucial aspects of both the biological object and its observer 
do not and cannot characterize social systems (Luhmann, 1985 c: 122 at 
note 26; 1985 a: 2; cf. Rottleuthner, infra). 
At the same time, this comparison and critique necessarily slights much 
that is interesting in Luhmann. Whatever its theoretical adequacy, auto-
poiesis may nonetheless have substantial metaphorical value in that research-
ers may draw important, testable, theoretical insights from pondering the 
idea of the autopoietically organized legal system and its possible implica-
tions. The best example of the possible fruitfulness of autopoiesis as 
metaphor is Luhmann, for if he has not yet developed the idea of autopoiesis 
to the point where it offers us a satisfactory, empirically testable theory of 
law, he has offered us observations that are insightful, sometimes dazzlingly 
so. Luhmann's simple observation that the institution of property is "the 
only great delegalizer with a minimum of rules and maximum of effects" 
(Luhmann, 1985 c: 121) is I think correct and fruitful in its implications. 

The Autonomy of Law: Two Visions Compared 
189 
His discussion of legislation and the threats of complexity (Luhmann, 
1985 c: 123 — 25; supra: 31 — 33), his explanation of why legislation breeds 
more legislation (Luhmann, 1985 c: 124); his observation that, "[IJntact 
social systems are more reluctant to juridify their conflicts than fragmented 
systems" (Luhmann, 1987); and his discussion of conflict as a way of 
resolving difficulties of communications within systems (Luhmann, 1985 a: 
27) are similarly helpful and important.34 If I thought it was necessary to 
accept the theory of the autopoiesis of law or the equation of autopoiesis 
with autonomy in order to derive or ground such insights, I would feel 
compelled to rethink my critique. But I do not see Luhmann's most 
insightful conclusions as dependent on the reality of autopoiesis, and I 
believe we should be able to discover less complex, better grounded theory 
that is consistent with Luhmann's insights and more. Absent such theory, 
however, the best we may be able to do is to ask the Luhmann's among 
us to ponder the legal system and its problems from whatever perspective 
they find the most stimulating. In this lies the value of autopoiesis. 
I am grateful to Bruce Frier for his comments on an earlier version of this paper. 
Bibliography 
BALBUS, ISAAC ( 1 9 7 3 ) The Dialectics 
of Legal Repression: 
Black Rebels before 
American 
Criminal Courts. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 
— (1977) "Commodity Form and Legal Form: An Essay on the 'Relative Autonomy' 
of the Law", 11 Law & Society Review 571. 
BOHANNAN, PAUL (1965) "The Differing Realms of Law", 67 American Anthropologist 
33. 
DUNNE, FINLEY PETER ( 1 9 6 3 ) Mr. Dooley on the Choice of Law. Charlottesville: Mitchie. 
GALANTER, M A R C ( 1 9 7 4 ) "Why the 'Haves' Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits 
of Legal Change", 9 Law & Society Review 95. 
— (1976) "Delivering Legality: Some Proposals for the Direction of Research", 11 
Law <& Society Review 225. 
GENOVESE, EUGENE (1972) RollJordan 
Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York: Vintage. 
HART, H. L. A. (1961) The Concept of Law. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
HAY, DOUGLAS (1975) "Property, Authority and the Criminal Law", in D . Hay, P. 
Linebaugh, J. Rule, E. P. Thompson and C. Winslow (eds.), Albion's Fatal Tree: Crime 
and Society in Eighteenth Century England. New York: Pantheon Books. 
HYDE, ALAN ( 1 9 8 3 ) "The Concept of Legitimation in the Sociology of Law", Wisconsin 
Law Review 379. 
LEMPERT, RICHARD and JOSEPH SANDERS (1986) An Invitation to Law and Social 
Science. 
New York: Longman. 
LLEWELYN, K A R L ( 1 9 5 0 ) "Remarks on the Theory of Appellate Decision and the Rules 
of Canons about how Statutes are to be Construed", 3 Vanderbilt Law Review 395. 
34 In reading Luhmann's work in connection with this essay I was particularly impressed 
by his discussion of meaning (Luhmann, 1985 b). While this discussion provides a 
background for the papers on law (and much more), it does not address legal system 
issues directly and I have not focused on it in this paper. 

190 
Richard Lempert 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS ( 1 9 8 5 a) "The Autopoiesis of Social Systems". Paper presented at the 
Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Soicety, European University Institute, Firenze 
(December 
1 2 - 1 5 ) . 
— (1985 b) "The Self-Reproduction of the Law and its Limits", in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 c) "Meaning". Paper presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and 
Society, European University Institute, Firenze (December 12—15). 
— (1985 d) "The Sociological Observation of the Theory and Practice of Law". Paper 
presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University 
Institute, Firenze (December 12 — 15). 
— (1987) "Some Problems with Reflexive Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy 
as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
NONET, 
PHILIPPE and PHILIP 
SELZNICK 
( 1 9 7 8 ) Law and Society in Transition: 
Toward 
Responsive Law. New York: Harper & Row. 
PASHUKANIS, ERGINII B. ( 1 9 8 0 ) "The General Theory of Law and Marxism" in P. Beirne 
and R. Sharlet (eds.), Pashukanis: Selected Writings on Marxism and Law (original, 1 9 2 4 ) . 
London: Academic Press. 
STONE, A L A N (1985) "The Place of Law in the Marxian Structure-Superstructure Arche-
type", 19 Law & Society Review 291. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Substantive and Reflexive Elements in Modern Law, 
1 7 
Law <& Society Review 239. 
— (1984) "Autopoiesis in Law and Society: A Rejoinder to Blankenburg", 18 Law <& 
Society Review 291. 
THOMPSON, E. P. (1975) Whigs and Hunters: 
The Origin of the Black Act. New York: 
Pantheon Books. 
TRUBEK, DAVID ( 1 9 7 7 ) "Complexity and Contradiction in the Legal Order: Balbus and 
the Challenge of Critical Social Thought about Law", 12 Law & Society Review 529. 
TUSHNETT, M A R C ( 1 9 7 5 ) "American Law of Slavery, 1 8 1 0 — 1 8 6 0 : A Study in the Persist-
ence of Legal Autonomy", 10 Law & Society Review 119. 
WEBER, M A X (1968) Economy and Society. New York: Bedminister Press. 
WOLFGANG, M A R V I N E . and M A R C REIDEL ( 1 9 7 3 ) "Race, Judicial Discretion, and the 
Death Penalty", 407 Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 119. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
D A V I D NELKEN 
London 
"System theories are not con-
cerned with encouraging right ac-
tion but rather with the meaning-
based systems-building 
connec-
tions among actions." 
(Luhmann, 1982: 107) 
"Use of the concept of autonomy 
is motivated by [the] answer to 
the question of why the ability to 
set the terms for legal discussion 
matters." 
(Lempert, supra: 175) 
My aim in this paper is to place the theory of autopoiesis within the larger 
theoretical corpus the work of Niklas Luhmann in order to consider its 
potential contribution to a paradigm change in the sociology of law. This 
means that, unlike some other contributors, I shall not be attempting to 
develop or work with the theory as such; nor, on the other hand, do I try 
to refute it. I shall also have little to say about the controversial implications 
of the theory of autopoiesis for legal regulation or the design of new 
strategies for legal intervention, even though my initial interest in this 
work was certainly kindled by such issues (Nelken 1983; 1985). This is 
partly because this subject has already been well covered by other 
contributors, including an explicit discussion of the theory of autopoiesis 
as compared to the findings of Anglo-American studies on the implemen-
tation of law (Clune, 1987). But it also can suggest that reconsideration 
of Luhmann's larger theoretical approach may reveal other routes for 
observing and initiating contact between law and other sub-systems than 
are allowed for by those who draw policy conclusions from autopoietic 
theory alone. 
My interest lies instead in the theoretical problem of formulating the 
relationship between "law" and "society". My paper has most in common 
therefore with those contributors who have sought to pose questions for 
the theory of autopoiesis from perspectives informed by one or other 

192 
David Nelken 
position within Anglo-American sociology of law (e.g., Gordon 1985; 
Lempert, supra; Trubek, 1985). In particular I shall be following the lead 
given by Richard Lempert in the careful paper in which he compares and 
contrasts the theory of autopoiesis with what he takes to be the relevant 
features of a mainstream Anglo-American approach to the sociology of 
law (Lempert, supra). However, there are a number of significant differences 
between Lempert's assumptions and aims and those of this paper. My goal is 
to investigate and to clarify what is at stake in the theoretical disagreements 
between Lempert and Luhmann. 
Lempert devotes most of his effort to examining autopoiesis as a vision 
or version of legal autonomy, although he does at points (somewhat inconsist-
ently) concede that these two concepts may not have been intended to 
serve the same theoretical purpose. He concludes that the view of legal 
autonomy assumed or implied in the theory of autopoiesis (insofar as there 
is one) is less tenable than that of the Anglo-American perspective he 
advances.1 By contrast, I shall focus on the differences between the concepts 
so as to show why they are not to be equated and how they reflect 
different theoretical assumptions and practical concerns (as suggested by my 
introductory quotations). I shall develop my argument by drawing on 
Luhmann's writings on the theory of social systems in addition to the 
work he presented at the Autopoiesis Conference (to which Lempert's 
considerations were confined). On this basis I shall consider the feasibility 
of reconciling the notions of autonomy and autopoiesis within Luhmann's 
theory. Finally, I shall come to the main purpose of this paper which is to 
argue that the disagreement between Lempert and Luhmann rests on and 
can contribute to paradigm change in the sociology of law. With slight 
exaggeration, it may be said that while Lempert comes to praise the Anglo-
American framework for studying "law and society", I come to bury it.2 
Because of the difficulties of the subject my argument will necessarily be 
somewhat complex and tentative. In brief it runs as follows. 
I shall claim that autopoiesis is to be seen as a further development of 
what Lempert understands by legal autonomy. But though Luhmann's 
theory of autopoiesis therefore presupposes a considerable degree of auton-
omy, it does not, as Lempert suggests, assume that it can or must be 
absolute. But more than this, I shall argue that the current approach to 
understanding legal autonomy within the Anglo-American mainstream 
paradigm recommended by Lempert is itself theoretically unsatisfactory 
1 A number of other contributors have been persuaded by Lempert's arguments or else 
sympathized with his criticisms (see, for example, Dupuy, supra; Gordon, 1985; 
Trubek, 1985). 
2 In fairness it should be said that Lempert did not intend to deal with the wider issues 
raised here. But my argument, as will be seen, reflects the fact that his version of 
empirical sociology of law makes it too easy to sidestep these issues. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
193 
and needs to be replaced by the sort of framework used by Luhmann in 
his general sociology of law. It can be seen, therefore, that though I 
agree with Lempert that a comparison of autonomy and autopoiesis raises 
important questions, and I offer this paper partly as a response to his 
invitation to provide a more persuasive account of Luhmann's position 
than he can make, it is unlikely that he would approve of my argument. 
Whether or not I have correctly entered into Luhmann's thought must 
necessarily be a matter of some doubt, though I think the reconciliation 
worked out here is of interest in its own right. 
I. The Differences between Autonomy and Autopoiesis 
An understandable and predictable reaction to Luhmann's theory of auto-
poiesis from those working within Anglo-American empirical sociology of 
law is to question the credibility of any theory which appears to suggest 
that law is in some way hermetically sealed off from other aspects of 
society. Despite some equivocation3, criticism of this implication of 
Luhmann's proposal seems to be the main purpose of Lempert's sustained 
comparison of autonomy and autopoiesis. Nor is this a parochial or 
tangential problem. It is worth attending to this debate because a close 
examination of these conflicting approaches to legal autonomy does offer 
insight into some of the fundamental difficulties of the current framework 
of sociology of law and the need to reconceptualize theoretical strategies 
in understanding law in post-industrial societies. Without claiming either 
Lempert or Luhmann as ideal representatives of the Anglo-American or 
European traditions, it is possible to see Lempert as champion of the 
influential Anglo-American pragmatic empirical approach with Luhmann, 
on the other hand, working to develop and up-date classical European 
social theory. 
Lempert offers a number of telling observations and critical comments 
on the approach to autonomy he takes to be implied by Luhmann's theory, 
which he finds to be a priori, ambiguous, untestable and unnecessarily 
complicated. In particular he questions the idea that law's autopoiesis is 
secured through its "normative closure". This, he argues, is either empiri-
cally untrue or amounts to the trivial claim that only the law can change 
the law. Lempert argues that "norms must come from somewhere", and 
3 Lempert has added a number of "clarifications" to his original paper. In footnote 19, 
for example, he comments that "ultimately I suggest that ... autopoiesis and autonomy 
are not to be equated", and later, at p. 177, he argues that "autopoietic systems should 
not be seen as a species of autonomy in the Anglo-American sense of the term". But 
these riders and qualifications sit awkwardly with the rest of the paper which is 
devoted to examining the approach to autonomy implicit in the theory of autopoiesis. 

194 
David Nelken 
there are many examples of law incorporating or being changed by extra-
legal norms and values such as the doctrine of "good faith", jury decision-
making or legal capitulation to collective deviance. If the theory is saved 
by enlarging what is meant by "cognitive openness" to incorporate such 
matters, there seems no bite to the idea of normative closure. Likewise, if 
all that is meant is that legal ratification of extra-legal influences is always 
required, this would mean that legal endorsement of naked political manipu-
lation of the courts would be sufficient to include it within law's autopoiesis. 
Whereas Lempert is prepared to concede that Luhmann's theory has some 
application to judicial adjudication, he claims that it breaks down entirely 
in relation to legislation which he characterizes as standing "at the intersec-
tion of the legal and political spheres". The Anglo-American approach to 
autonomy, which sees it as a matter of degree, is recommended as a better 
starting point for empirical research, although Lempert insists that he is 
more concerned to expose the weaknesses of autopoiesis theory than to 
advocate the virtues of his rival conception. He concludes that "Treating 
the idea of autopoiesis not as a metaphor but as a theory, it appears to be 
either an erroneous, an inadequate, or an unnecessarily complicated ap-
proach to understanding what we mean by legal autonomy" (Lempert, 
supra: 188). 
How are these criticisms to be answered? The way forward begins 
from Lempert's admission that the ideas of autonomy and autopoiesis 
may not be equivalent and may have different theoretical purposes. 
There is justice in Lempert's argument that there needs to be more 
clarification of the implied relationship between these concepts, especially 
as discussions of autopoiesis often use the term autonomy quite loosely 
in association with or as a substitute for that of autopoiesis. But the 
best means of identifying the differences between these two is to locate 
them in the context of the wider theoretical and practical concerns 
which give them their point. This strategy will show that most of the 
questions which Lempert levels at autopoietic theory cannot and need 
not be answered in his terms. They are dealt with (if not always perhaps 
in ways with which Lempert would be happy) elsewhere in Luhmann's 
social systems theory. However, this will not of itself solve the whole 
problem. For, as Lempert claims, many of the empirical points he 
adduces are so patent that the question cannot be, "does Luhmann 
know of them", but rather, "what does he make of them", and how 
can they be reconciled with his claims about autopoiesis. If it is true, 
as we will see, that Luhmann is willing to talk about degrees of autonomy 
and that he does discuss the mutual interchange between legal and other 
sub-systems of society, it still needs to be explained how this is consistent 
with his own ideas about autopoietic systems. It is this issue which 
Lempert's probing places firmly on the theoretical agenda. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
195 
What are the main differences between autonomy and autopoiesis? One 
way to compare and contrast autonomy and autopoiesis is to see how they 
are defined. According to Lempert, autonomy is "the degree to which the 
legal system looks to itself rather than to the standards of some external 
social, political or ethical system for guidance in making and applying law" 
(Lempert, supra: 159). Autopoiesis, on the other hand, means that the legal 
system produces and delimits the operative unity of its elements (i. e., 
legally relevant events and decisions) through the operation of its elements 
and in this way lends unity to the system. (Luhmann, 1985e: 281—82). 
These different definitions go a long way to indicating the gulf between 
the two conceptions. But this is not sufficient to sort out all the theoretical 
difficulties here. Autonomy and autopoiesis are both used in a variety of 
senses which are only weakly captured by these definitions; moreover, they 
are each used to deal with a diversity of problems which cannot be deduced 
from the way they are defined. Moreover, the need of further exegesis of 
the unfamiliar notion of autopoiesis suggests that the compatibility of 
these ideas depends on the relationship between the different theoretical 
languages in which they are being communicated rather than on any surface 
similarities or dissimilarities. 
In an effort to introduce greater clarity, Tables 1 and 2 set out some of 
the different senses and theoretical projects in which the ideas of autonomy 
and autopoiesis are used (many of which are found in the Autopoiesis 
Conference papers themselves). The contrasts which I have drawn in 
Table 1 relate to the theoretical frameworks and characteristic meanings of 
each term. The focus of Table 2 is on the presumed sources of each 
phenomenon, and the associated policy concerns and the methods of 
investigation used to study them. Naturally, what is presented here is no 
more than a schematic outline of the way in which autonomy and auto-
poiesis figure as building blocks in their various respective theoretical 
projects, and my emphasis is on the differences between them rather than 
on the question of overlap (to which I shall return later). 
One obvious conclusion which emerges from this exercise is that each 
of these terms conveys a number of not necessarily coherent meanings 
(some of which may be assigned more to the core with others as the 
penumbra as suggested in Table 1). These variant meanings sometimes 
reflect different points and not only different ways of putting the point. 
They therefore include a number of possible inconsistencies which are of 
theoretical interest in their own right. For example, the Anglo-American 
approach to autonomy embraces inter alia the idea that law has short-run 
organizational and temporal independence, that it is functionally 
required to 
be independent of power holders (and in this sense, its "independence" is 
exactly what secures its usefulness to them), that its independence is 
founded on resistance to outside influence and control and that, conversely, 

196 
David Nelken 
Table 1. Autonomy and Autopoiesis: 
Theoretical Frameworks and 
Characteristic 
Meanings 
Legal 
Autonomy 
1. Theoretical 
a) Input-output paradigm of 
Framework 
system-environment 
relations between actions 
(including messages) 
b) The sub-system is open 
insofar as not closed 
c) Autonomy lies in extent of 
independence from external 
factors 
d) Autonomy is a matter of 
degree, ranging from 
autarchy to total 
dependence 
e) Therefore, more 
independence means less 
dependence 
f) Legal autonomy is 
something special 
a) Independence as freedom 
from outside control 
b) Non-correspondence to 
other social factors 
c) Not reproducing external 
power or value differences 
d) Neutrality 
e) Responsive to plurality of 
interests therefore not only 
responsive to some interests 
f) Cause and justification of 
legitimacy 
g) Short-run independencies in 
time (e. g., bureaucratic 
independence or historical 
lags) 
penumbra 
h) "relative autonomy" (in 
Marxist theories) 
i) 
Systems actions not 
predictable from outside 
j) 
Systems actions not 
predictable from inside 
2. 
Characteristic 
Meanings 
core 
Legal 
Autopoiesis 
a) Closure paradigm of 
recursive production of 
elements (and boundaries) 
through distinctive forms of 
communication of meaning 
and expectations 
b) The sub-system is open 
because closed 
c) Autopoiesis means 
operating a particular 
selective mechanism for 
responding to the 
environment 
d) Autopoiesis is an all or 
nothing category 
e) Therefore, it involves 
simultaneous increased 
independence of, and 
increased dependence, on the 
environment 
f) All sub-systems are auto-
poietic, in their own ways 
a) Independence as self-
dependence 
b) Reflexivity (circularity) 
c) Unity 
d) Identity 
e) Self-observation/awareness 
of own autonomy 
f) Operating according to its 
own code 
g) Positivity 
h) Legal point of view 
i) 
Performance of unique 
functions of sub-system 
j) 
Maintenance of functional 
differentiation 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
197 
Table 2. Autonomy and Autopoiesis: 
Their Sources, Associated Policy Concerns 
and Methods of Investigation 
1. Sources 
2. 
Associated 
Policy 
Concerns 
3. Methods of 
Investigation 
Legal 
Autonomy 
a) Derives from 
Institutional 
(e. g., organizational), 
Occupational 
(e. g., legal 
profession) and 
procedural 
(e. g., specialized rules and 
principles and intellectual 
methods) 
specialisation 
b) Derives also from functional 
requirement of legitimacy 
needs of powerholders/the 
"state" 
a) Ideal of separation of 
powers/rule of law 
b) Threats to separate identity 
of law 
c) Limits of law's ability to 
transcend political and 
economic interests 
Analysis of variance 
between legal and extra-
legal factors and law's 
independent effects 
Legal 
Autopoiesis 
a) Derives from Functional 
Differentiation 
of legal sub-
system operating according 
to its own code 
b) Autopoiesis is a fact about 
law as a distinctive 
"ontological epistemology" 
a) Problems and prospects for 
maintaining increasing 
evolutionary complexity 
and avoiding 
de-differentation 
b) Problems in legal modelling 
and regulation of other 
social spheres 
c) Internal limits on law's 
conditional programs 
Study of theoretical and 
empirical implications 
(including tendencies and 
tensions) as suggested by 
the theory. Theory must 
also be autopoietic. 
such independence is best facilitated by law being responsive 
to all comers 
and so not merely to some. 
Lempert's own version of the Anglo-American approach is not without 
its peculiar difficulties. For example he does not appear to integrate his 
conception of legal autonomy as the result of institutional, occupational and 
procedural specialization (legal formalism) with the theoretically distinctive 
attempt to derive autonomy from the functional requirements of legitimacy. 
His further, somewhat idiosyncratic, claim that legal autonomy depends on 
status and normative neutrality and on equal legal competence is also 
problematic. In essence, for law to be autonomous it must be able to resist 
the penetration of the social, political and ethical systems that surround it. 
But in addition, "the autonomy of the legal system ... also depends on the 
degree to which all actors can invoke the law effectively" (Lempert, supra: 

198 
David Nelken 
175, 166). Thus, it would seem, the state of the environment (the extent 
to which social equality already exists) conditions the autonomy of law 
even without needing to penetrate it. Lempert goes on to argue that perfect 
legal autonomy could only be achieved in an already equal society but he 
insists that the theoretical idea of perfect legal autonomy does make sense 
even if it is empirically impossible; "in the ideal case legal autonomy and 
personal autonomy coincide. Freedom is at a maximum" (Lempert, supra: 
168). In practice the idea of legal autonomy is a reality insofar as the effects 
of legal specialization and the pluralist competition of interest groups do 
create a "meaningful level" of independence for law. As a rider he adds 
that his preference would not in any case be for the "ideal-type" situation 
of complete but equal individualism but would include a built-in element 
of communality. But is all this a coherent vision? Lempert seems to be 
motivated by the understandable desire to reconcile the Gesellschaft concep-
tion of legal autonomy as neutrality, with an understandable refusal to see 
law as autonomous when it merely reproduces external differentials in 
power and values. But is this anything more than a heroic but ultimately 
doomed effort to straddle formalist and substantive notions of legal auton-
omy? It is not even clear that perfect autonomy in the substantive sense is 
in fact theoretically conceivable. What would the coincidence of legal 
autonomy and personal autonomy actually be like? Would there be a need 
for a perfectly autonomous legal system in an already equal society? Lempert 
notes in passing that where law reflects everyone's values it could be said 
that the separation between law and external values has collapsed; why is 
the same not true where law reflects everybody's interests? 
If there is some ambiguity and uncertainty about the meaning of legal 
autonomy, this also applies to the idea of legal autopoiesis. The nature and 
implications of autopoiesis are certainly given different interpretations by 
Luhmann, Teubner, Deggau and others. To take only one illustration from 
the work of Luhmann (but one which will turn out to be crucial in 
considering the relationship between autonomy and autopoiesis), why is 
there a connection between what Luhmann sees as the specific tasks of law 
in a functionally differentiated society and the elements whose reproduction 
constitutes and reconstitutes its autopoiesis? The question of functional 
differentiation surely is a matter of degree whatever may be true of 
autopoiesis. The safest assumption therefore is that such notions as reflexiv-
ity or self-observation tell us nothing about the substantive nature of such 
reflexivity. This could consist of something other than the requirements of 
"normative closure" and "cognitive openness" which Luhmann takes from 
his own systems theory. In fact Luhmann concedes that the notion of 
autopoiesis is, strictly speaking, applicable to any sociological theory pro-
vided that it is in some (unspecified) way "compatible" with it. It will be 
seen, however, that it is far from easy to disentangle his understanding of 
autopoiesis from his wider theory. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
199 
However, we are not yet ready to pursue these questions further. What-
ever the internal inconsistencies within the notions of autonomy and auto-
poiesis the main object of Tables 1 and 2 is to demonstrate the gulf between 
them. And although Lempert provides us with a searching examination of 
the differences between autonomy and autopoiesis, he never succeeds in 
finding the source of these differences. 
II. Wider Theories and Contrasting Concerns 
At the outset it is important to appreciate that what autonomy and 
autopoiesis have in common is that they both refer to self-determination. 
But 
each concept deals with different aspects of what this entails. The idea of 
autonomy focuses on self-direction as an alternative to direction by others. 
It presumes that independence is a relational category signifying non-depend-
ence on others. For example, one of the dictionary definitions of autonomy, 
drawn from the political context, is "limited self-government". What is to 
be noticed here is that this is the definition of autonomy itself — not of 
partial or relative autonomy. This approach to self-determination therefore 
fails to ask another question — or rather it assumes it away so that it 
becomes impossible to ask. This is what is further required in being "true 
to oneself' beyond being free of outside interference (and what is involved 
in the self-monitoring which sustains this process). 
If we are interested in studying legal autonomy we might well be satisfied 
with a framework which allows investigation of the relationship between 
legal and extra-legal factors and produces findings concerning their varia-
tion.4 In terms of the historical development of sociology of law the study 
of autonomy represents exactly the converse of the search for the extent to 
which law "corresponds" to other social phenomena, whether geographic, 
political, economic or whatever (see Nelken, 1986). 
The theory of autopoiesis, on the other hand, concentrates on under-
standing law's correspondence to itself. Hitherto, as Luhmann concedes, 
this was a question thought appropriate to legal rather than social theory. 
And indeed part of the difficulty in appraising autopoiesis is deciding 
whether it does make any sense to search for the nature of law's "identity" 
or "unity" from a sociological point of view. Autopoiesis theory (like all 
theory) does beg the question. On the other hand, whereas the theory of 
autonomy does seem to pre-empt any further inquiry into the nature of 
law's self-determination (independence is non-dependence) the converse is 
not the case. Those characteristics which make for law's reflexivity — 
4 There are some unexpected difficulties even in following through this project, for 
which, see Griffiths (1979). 

200 
David Nelken 
assuming they exist — do not necessarily explain its freedom from outside 
control. The question of the degree of such control can still be posed, even 
though, as Lempert successfully demonstrates, it is certainly not easy to 
reconcile the idea of determination by outside factors with reflexive self-
determination. (We will see later that though it is difficult, it is not 
impossible.) In any case, the appropriate framework for examining auto-
poiesis is as different as might be expected from that which can be used 
in investigating autonomy. It is matter of developing the paradoxical logic 
of reflexivity, on the basis of stipulated characterizations of law's elements 
and specificity, looking, on the model of the approach used by Talcott 
Parsons, for emergent tendencies and contradictory tensions. 
The reason for the different routes which these enquiries take derives 
from the theoretical traditions from which they arise. Lempert associates 
his approach with the reaction against "crude Marxist" attempts to reduce 
law to an economically determined phenomenon. In positive terms, his 
description of legal autonomy is said to be related to Weber's attempt to 
delineate the causes and conditions of "legal rationality". But it is instructive 
that Weber's interest was in the broader processes of the rationalization of 
Western life rather than simply the degree of law's autonomy: law took 
the form it did partly as a result, and aspect, of wider processes of social 
change. Again this suggests that autonomy presupposes dependence on 
other social processes. On the other hand, Luhmann's theorizing draws on 
Durkheim's theory of functional differentiation as well as on Weber but 
revises their arguments in the light of recent intellectual developments in 
the areas of systems theory, cybernetics, philosophy of science — and now 
the theory of autopoiesis. Since Luhmann criticizes the classical sociologists 
on which Lempert bases himself (Luhmann claiming that they have miscon-
ceived the nature of functional differentiation in late industrial societies), 
it is no surprise that their sociologies of law are different. 
These differences come to a head in their contrasting approaches to 
examining the relationship between system and environment in modern 
conditions. Lempert is satisfied to demarcate law from extra-legal factors 
in terms of law's activities and communications which are located in 
designated organizations and occupations. These are seen as performing a 
variety of functions, including the significant task of lending legitimacy to 
the political system, but we are not given any theoretical argument concern-
ing the necessary boundaries set by these functions. This would appear to 
be a matter of empirical mapping of the actual interactions between law 
and the environment. Lempert's approach to "relative autonomy" is thus 
not to be identified with Marxist efforts to explain the origins of the 
autonomy of law and "the state" (as in the "state derivation" debates 
discussed in Holloway and Picciotto, 1978 and Jessop, 1982). 
Luhmann also works with an institutional and functionalist definition 
of law. Yet there are significant divergences from Lempert's starting point. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
201 
His definition of law includes all actions oriented to law, not merely those 
of organizations and legal occupations. Although he defines law in terms 
of its stabilizing of congruent expectations, his approach to the functions 
of law also includes a host of tasks which it performs for other sub-systems. 
These include not merely the allegedly "unique" function of resolving 
disputes which Lempert sees emphasized in Luhmann's autopoiesis papers. 
In addition there are the jobs of handling politically contentious problems, 
preventing too close an interdependence between social sub-systems, and 
acting as an "externalities" device to "remind" other sub-systems such as 
politics and administration of the existence of an external environment 
(Luhmann, 1982; 1985 e; Poggi, 1985). 
In Luhmann's view a focus on legal institutions alone would not provide 
a good method of appreciating the full extent of law's functions or those 
of its functional equivalents. The real break initiated by Luhmann already 
in his Rechtsso^iologie (1972) was his rejection of what he called "the 
sociology of courts and lawyers" and its replacement by an enquiry into 
the "unity of law". And Luhmann argues that even now "the sociology of 
law is interested only in connections between legal and extra-legal variables 
and although it may talk of the unity of the legal system, it never clearly 
perceives this unity" (Luhmann, supra: 13). In pursuit of his new project 
Luhmann adopted developing ideas in systems theory and has now incor-
porated the theory of autopoiesis. The result of this "break" however 
means that it is uncertain what significance, if any, Luhmann still attaches 
to the approach and findings of the "sociology of courts and lawyers" 
which Lempert may be said to represent. Has his theory superseded them 
or are they answers to a different question? We will see that although this 
is the crucial issue at stake between Lempert and Luhmann, it has not yet 
been satisfactorily addressed. 
The choice to focus on different aspects of law's self-determination may 
be taken to reflect different concerns and "problematics". These derive 
from different practical and political debates which, at least in part, may 
even have shaped the development of each theoretical project. But it would 
be wrong to reduce the ideas of these authors to practical concerns (seeing 
autopoiesis, for example, as a rationalization of legal deregulation and 
autonomy as concerned with establishing the degree of law's independence 
as a force for social change and reform). Apart from anything else, the 
introductory quotations at the beginning of this article make it clear that 
each author has a different view of the point and potential of sociological 
theorizing. They have different theories of the relationship between the 
process of understanding and the problem of "encouraging right action". 
Nor need we assume that each author has drawn the correct practical 
conclusions from his theory (some of the implications concerning law's 
internal limitations which Luhmann derives from autopoiesis seem particu-
larly suspect). Yet some light can be thrown on the disagreement between 

202 
David Nelken 
Lempert and Luhmann by investigating the inner connection between each 
author's contrasting "concerns". Luhmann's main concern seems to be 
to understand and preserve law's contribution to evolving functional 
differentiation. He wants to know how it can provide legitimacy to the 
political sub-system, how it can maintain its own legitimacy even while 
being subject to constant revision; how, above all, it can help sustain the 
contingent and fragile mixture of complexity and simplifying techniques 
characteristic of modernity. His analysis of the conditions of such differen-
tiation means that the contributions of law are identified in 
post-instrumental-
ist terms. Lempert's interests lie in the instrumental capacities of law 
whereas Luhmann's ideas, if not a straightforward reaction to claims of a 
regulatory crisis, are clearly relevant to these debates. 
Each author's discussion of law in relation to other sub-systems of 
society reflects their concerns. For example, while both are clearly interested 
in the way that law and politics affect each other, Lempert is engaged by 
problems of how political influence can endanger law's autonomy, whereas 
Luhmann is worried by what happens to law when it usurps the function 
of politics. Lempert considers that law can best maintain its own legitimacy 
and that of power-holders by showing its independence from political input. 
He argues that its legitimacy is put in question if it is not "responsive" 
and merely reproduces rather than attempts to change external interests 
and values. On the other hand, for Luhmann, law's "responsiveness" lies 
in the way its processes are differentiated from other social sub-systems 
and "interrupt" their interdependency. The threats to its legitimacy have 
more to do with law's functions rather than with its "inputs". (This may 
explain why he does not deal with Lempert's question concerning legislation 
as an obvious example of political "input" into law.) In his view, the 
attempt to use law to compensate for power differentials in society, as 
Lempert advocates, would re-politicize it and risk its legitimacy which 
would then be tied to the success of its interventions. For Luhmann the 
function of law is to absorb and de-politicize those problems which the 
political process does not or cannot resolve, by using conditional programs 
whose consequences will not affect law's validity as such. 
It can be seen therefore that Luhmann takes for granted (rather than 
denies) the "threats" to autonomy discussed by Lempert and even the more 
fundamental attacks on the very possibility of legal autonomy characteristi-
cally levelled by the American Critical Legal Scholars movement. Law is 
exactly a method of de-politicizing social problems as these critics allege. 
There is no possibility of emancipating the content and overall goals of 
legal intervention from the requirements of politics. "Positive law is an 
unavoidably politically chosen 'state' law. Its destiny is bound up with that 
of the political system in society" (Luhmann, 1985 e: 187). But nor is it a 
statement of the obvious, as Lempert thinks, to argue that the law repro-
duces itself even when (or exactly when) doing the work of politics and 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
203 
yet not working as politics (cf. Luhmann 1982: 168). For Luhmann, law 
is the great concealer, hiding the fact of violence at the basis of social 
order, handling irreconcilable political and moral choices in a world without 
either consensus or absolutes, teaching people not to learn from their 
disappointed expectations and to respect law even while recognizing its 
contingency (Luhmann, 1985 a; 1985 b; 1985 c; 1985 d; supra; 1987). But all 
this can be achieved, according to Luhmann, only if law rests on and 
reproduces its way of seeing the world in terms of legality and illegality 
and suppresses all possibility of querying the foundation of this distinction 
(which in itself can be either legal, illegal or neither!). 
III. The Relationship between Autonomy and Autopoiesis 
We have seen so far that Luhmann's approach to the problem of legal 
autonomy is significantly different from that assumed by Lempert. What 
is more, autopoiesis theory does not represent the key to Luhmann's 
approach to this problem, which can only be appreciated by reviewing the 
larger corpus of his work. If this does not quite answer Lempert's criticism 
of autopoiesis as a theory of autonomy it has at least shown why this 
theory was not designed to answer the questions Lempert raises. But we 
must now move on to ask how the concepts of autonomy and autopoiesis 
relate to each other. My aim here is not to find a way of reconciling the 
approaches of Lempert and Luhmann. There is no reason to think an 
amalgamation of their views to be either possible or desirable, despite 
Lempert's suggestion that something like this theory of autonomy needs 
to be inserted into autopoiesis theory. What does need to be explained is 
how Luhmann himself deals with problems concerning autonomy, includ-
ing points raised by Lempert, in the course of developing his own theory. 
What is the relationship he envisages between these two ideas? Put dif-
ferently, how far has the adoption of autopoiesis theory led Luhmann to 
reject previous parts of his work? An answer to this question may also 
enable us to see how far others who have embraced the idea of autopoiesis 
have remained consistent with Luhmann's larger scheme. 
There is little doubt that Luhmann's earlier work in the sociology of 
law did not deny the importance of some of the questions about legal 
autonomy which interest Lempert. In reviewing what he describes as 
classical sociology of law, Luhmann commented: 
It is exactly the relative 
autonomy 
and the inherent laws of legal terminology, the 
question regarding the degree to which legislation can direct it, its functional specificity, 
its receptivity to social effects, its power when in the hands of certain groups ... all 
these would be interesting problematics of sociology (Luhman, 1985 e: 18 — 19, my 
emphasis). 

204 
David Nelken 
But he felt that contemporary empirical sociology of law (circa 1972) had 
not made much progress with these questions. Instead of formulating his 
problems in these terms, however, he chose to develop a theory of the 
positivity of modern law and the strengths and limits of its functioning in 
relation to other sub-systems. It is for this problem that Luhmann later 
recruited the theory of autopoiesis. This marked a new and important stage 
in his theory, and in some respects it does appear to alter or replace earlier 
discussions in his Rechtsso^iologie. This is especially true of the way law is 
said to "see" and affect its environment. For example, Luhmann would 
now probably want to reformulate the use made of Podgorecki's three-
step hypothesis of how legal messages permeate the social environment, 
so as to substitute the idea of autopoietic reproduction of meaning. Some of 
the theoretical language used to expound system-environment relationships 
would also no doubt now be changed, such as the following passage: 
The system becomes more sensitive to the environment ... the system sees itself 
confronted with an excess of possible causes of change between which it must choose. 
In other words, the system has to see environmental complexity as relevant and cope 
with improved selection techniques if it wants to circumvent crises. This consideration 
makes us suspect a connection between structural variability and complexity in the 
relations between system and environment (Luhmann, 1985e: 186). 
There also appear to be some inconsistencies between Luhmann's account 
of the hierarchalization of norm-structures in his earlier work and the 
emphasis on circularity within autopoietic theory. 
On the other hand there are good reasons to think that Luhmann is still 
committed to most, if not all, of his previous systems theory. This includes 
his approach to functional differentiation as the characteristic of modern 
society and the particular part law plays in the facilitation and reduction 
of complexity. Most important, for present purposes, there is also no sign 
of any rejection of the claims put forward in the chapters on positivity in 
the Rechts Soziologie or the lecture entitled "The Autonomy of Law" delivered 
in 1976 (see Luhmann, 1982). 
In a new conclusion in the recently translated second edition of his 
Recbtsso^io/ogie, Luhmann offers an important but tantalizingly brief account 
of the relevance of autopoiesis theory to his sociology of law. Here he 
presupposes that we are dealing with a legal system which has "relative 
autonomy" or "high autonomy" (Luhmann, 1985 e: 281, 286). These ideas 
of degree are similar to what Lempert describes as "meaningful independ-
ence", but they differ by stressing positivity as much as insulation from 
outside control. However the important point is that this degree of self-
determination and autonomy constitutes the background and basis of 
autopoiesis rather than serving as an equivalent concept. The idea of 
autopoiesis has other functions in Luhmann's systems theory. For it is put 
forward as a sociological answer to the problem of how law can see itself 
as a "unity". His description of the way autopoiesis works to reproduce 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
205 
the unity of the system is explained from the perspective of the legal 
system, without denying the possibility of describing relationships between 
law and other sub-systems in other terms than this. Autopoiesis theory is 
best seen therefore as a development, culmination and perhaps also a 
justification of Luhmann's systems-theory rather than as a deviation from 
it. This explains why and how Luhmann has altered the theory to fit in 
with his ideas, not only by applying it to social systems (which had been 
anticipated) but in reducing the significance of "the observer" and in other 
ways choosing between the now somewhat different formulations of the 
two founders of the biological basis of the theory. 
Some of the alleged inconsistencies between Luhmann's earlier and 
later propositions about the relationship between law and its environment 
(including those quoted before) may therefore be resolved if they are taken 
as directed at different problems within his theory. Luhmann even provides 
various clues as to how such reconciliation should be sought, stressing for 
example, that, 
This closure does not, however, mean ... complete determination by itself. Rather, 
closure consists in the fact that all operations always reproduce the system (Luhmann, 
supra: 15 and footnote 11). 
A reconstruction of the place of autopoiesis within Luhmann's systems 
theory would run as follows: Luhmann originally distinguished three forms 
of society/sub-system relations, in terms of tht functions 
that the sub-system 
served, its performance 
conceived as an input-output relation and the sub-
system's relation to itself as reflection 
and internal 
differentiation 
(Luhmann, 
1982: 264 ff.; cf. Murphy, 1984: 610). The differences between these three 
types of relationship, or three ways of conceiving the relationship between 
law and other sub-systems, help to explain the differences between auton-
omy and autopoiesis because autopoiesis theory comes in only as a replace-
ment or reformulation of the third kind of relationship. By contrast the 
considerations raised by Lempert can and should be dealt with in terms of 
what Luhmann calls performance. 
If Luhmann does not discuss these prob-
lems much it is because of his conscious effort to distance himself from 
empirical (often small-group) studies in the sociology of law. As Poggi 
puts it, Luhmann is primarily interested in law at the social rather than the 
organizational level (Poggi, 1985). 
The results of this reconstruction of Luhmann's ideas are presented in 
Figure 1. 
But have we now answered all Lempert's questions about the relationship 
between autonomy and autopoiesis? There still seems to be some uncer-
tainty about the way one affects the other. This is partly because the idea 
of autopoiesis, along with that of autonomy, tends to be defined in a 
variety of ways. As shown earlier (in Tables 1 and 2) autopoiesis refers, 
inter alia, to the "identity", "unity", "reflexivity" and "self-observation" of 

206 
David Nelken 
Figure 1. Relationship between the Legal System and the Environment in 
Luhmann's Social Systems Theory. 
Legal System — environment relationships 
functional 
differentiation 
• external 
differentiation/performance 
reduction 
in autonomy 
de- 
^ 
high autonomy/positivity 
differentiation 
• internal 
differentiation/reflection 
perfect 
autonomy 
(autopoietic system) 
higher complexity 
law. In consequence formulations of the specific conceptual interrelation-
ship of autonomy and autopoiesis are similarly various. We are told, in the 
Conference papers, that autopoiesis "explains the nature of law's autonomy" 
and that is a description of a state of affairs which arises "when law 
becomes aware of its own autonomy". Autopoiesis is seen, both as a 
historical "fact" and a different way of understanding and talking about 
law's reflexivity (thus constituting its status as an "ontological epistemol-
ogy"). Autonomy, for its part, is also a distinctive phenomenon and a 
different way of talking about it. This accounts for the way autopoiesis 
can be described by Teubner as "a more radical and precise definition of 
law's autonomy" and also as a "functionally higher level of autonomy" 
reached through the logical/historical progression from "social autonomy" 
to "legal autonomy" to "legal autopoiesis" (Teubner, 1985 b). As Figure 1 
indicates, autopoiesis therefore both presupposes a high degree of autonomy 
and represents a new phenomenon. 
What difference does this new phenomenon produce? In responding to 
Lempert's paper at the Conference, Luhmann explained that autopoiesis 
dealt with the situation where there was a simultaneous growth of both 
dependence and independence of the legal sub-system in relation to its 
environment. Thus the more closed (independent) the reflexivity of law 
the more it served its various functions in its dependent connections to 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
207 
other sub-systems. Another example taken from Luhmann's papers is the 
claim that as an autopoietic system, law no longer serves the function of 
resolving or pre-deciding conflicts (as Lempert still takes him to be argu-
ing), but instead uses the existence of disputes to reproduce its elements. 
This, according to Luhmann, helps explain and perhaps even justify empiri-
cal evidence of the extent to which adjudicative procedures sharpen and 
even exacerbate disputes rather than serve to mediate them. As this last 
example suggests, however, autopoietic theory tends to be used to provide 
novel interpretations of established findings about the legal system rather 
than to generate new methods of discovering its empirical connection with 
other sub-systems. It is this tendency which lies at the very basis of 
Lempert's critique of Luhmann's approach to theorizing. In order to 
evaluate this foundational issue it will be necessary to consider what is at 
stake in the challenge thrown down by Luhmann in urging us to abandon 
older-style empirical work on the "sociology of courts and lawyers". 
IV. Towards a New Paradigm in the Sociology of Law 
There can be little doubt that the Anglo-American approach to sociology 
of law which Lempert draws on in examining Luhmann's theory is itself 
going through a crisis. Such a conclusion does not seem unreasonable 
when a past editor of the Law & Society Review gives it as his opinion that 
"Social studies of law have reached a crucial point in their development. 
The original paradigm is exhausted" (Abel, 1980: 826), and the President 
of the Law & Society Association writes a justification of the most 
fundamental assumptions of empirical work in the field (Macaulay, 1984: 
149). Although it is hard to summarize the various and sometimes conflict-
ing critiques which have been levelled at the mainstream, many of these 
reflect increasing dissatisfaction with a search for ways in which law and 
society "affect" or "influence" each other and a redirection of energies 
towards internal connections between legal and social relations, and the 
way law is "imbricated" within social practices (See Nelken, 1985; 1986). 
Although the work of Luhmann has not yet played much part in these 
intellectual cross-currents, it would seem valuable to look to him for further 
guidance on how to move beyond the study of "law and society" or even 
"law in society". As already noted, as early as 1972, Luhmann saw himself 
as rejecting and transcending what he called the "sociology of courts and 
lawyers" in order to further develop the sociology of law as such. The 
editors of the recent English translation of the Rechtsso^iologie 
summarize 
this theoretical break in terms which reflect precisely on the disagreements 
between Lempert and Luhmann: 
The sociology of law is not, then, an examination of the influence of one set of factors 
on another but an inquiry into what is found to be a necessary inner connection 
between law and any kind of social life (King-Utz and Albrow, 1985: viii). 

208 
David Nelken 
Nor does it seem an exaggeration to use that over-worked term "paradigm 
change" to indicate the shift in theoretical language and problem focus 
that adopting Luhmann's perspective would entail. 
One could more or less talk of a change in paradigm, which replaces the concept of 
environmental openness with the concept of self-reference, which then in turn makes 
it possible to combine the openness and closedness of a system. The insights gained 
thereby also give new lift to a sociological theory of legal systems (Luhmann, 1985: 
xii). 
Other contributors at the Autopoiesis Conference also noted 
that 
Luhmann's work offers a way of replacing "misleading" or "unexpressive" 
ways of conceiving the law and society relationship (see Willke, 1987; 
Gordon, 1985: 2). 
However, the possibility of misunderstanding Luhmann's approach is 
also considerable, especially if attention is confined too closely to his work 
on autopoietic theory. Roger Cotterell, for example, recently noted that: 
critical legal scholarship, reflecting wider intellectual concerns, has done much to 
undermine the idea that we can relate two discrete entities, 'law' and 'society'. Law 
is best thought of as an aspect of society, or part of the means by which social 
relations are constituted; not as some independent phenomenon which acts on (or is 
acted upon by) another phenomenon we can call 'society'. Analytically separating 
legal systems and social systems seems unpromising as an organising strategy. On the 
other hand, as Luhmann's and Teubner's influential work has suggested, if we do try 
to identify, for purposes of analysis, a distinctively legal realm of social life it may 
well be that we should start from the assumption that such a realm does not interact 
extensively with or impact upon other social spheres. Perhaps what is most significant 
about legal discourse and legal systems is their isolation; their lack of relationships with 
other social systems (Cotterrell, 1986: 495). 
As the previous discussion of the relationship between autonomy and 
autopoiesis should have demonstrated, this may unwittingly over-emphasize 
Luhmann's closure paradigm to the neglect of his wider discussion of legal 
system and environment relations. But when this is taken into account, 
Luhmann's framework seems even more fertile as an inspiration to new 
enquiries in this field. 
On the other hand, we may also anticipate considerable resistance to the 
adoption of Luhmann's ideas from those still adhering to the mainstream. 
Lempert speaks for many when he argues that elements of Luhmann's 
theory appear to be not susceptible to disproof and objects that the concept 
of autopoiesis itself does not seem designed for heuristic testing (and 
accompanying examination of variance) in the manner of positivist social 
science. Like Macaulay, in his recent review and defense of mainstream 
work, the impression is given that European theorizing (especially of the 
alleged Teutonic variety) builds "theory on the back of definition" and is 
more interested in theory construction for its own sake than in painstaking 
middle-range empirical discoveries (Macaulay, 1984). There is much that 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
209 
could be said about these different traditions of sociology and social theory 
(see Nelken, 1984). Certainly if Luhmann's work is taken as a whole it can 
be defended both as prefering to incorporate existing empirical findings in 
the sociology of law and as generating suggestions for new work. But 
what I would prefer to argue here is the need to avoid presenting the 
choice as the stark one between continuing empirical work in the 
mainstream paradigm or the wholesale adoption of Luhmann's theory — 
autopoiesis and all. In my view Luhmann's work should rather be used as 
a stimulus to change the framework within which sociology of law is 
pursued. The problem with Anglo-American theorizing (and investigating 
the degree of law's autonomy from social influences provides a perfect 
example of this) is that it is less a theory than a place on a map. The best 
that can be said about the mainstream framework is that it is apparently 
hospitable to a variety of different theoretical approaches and methodolog-
ies. It makes it possible for the connection or lack of connection between 
law and society to be examined in the light of functional, structural, 
interactionist, conflict or even some Marxist theories and methodologies. 
But the apparent openness of the framework is also misleading insofar as 
it conceals the fact that it necessarily occupies a distinctive theoretical space. 
Figure 2 provides an intellectual map of the place of mainstream "law 
and society" work in relation to some illustrative alternative approaches. 
It shows that this work operates best at the intersection of two axes which 
demarcate the possible conceptual linkages between the ideas of "law", 
"society" and "sociology". The first deals with the relationship between 
law and society (conceived ontologically), the second axis that between 
sociology and law (conceived as epistemologies). Firstly, then, for 
mainstream empirical sociology of law to make sense it is forced to 
presuppose that "law" and "society" can be conceptualized as sufficiently 
similar phenomena for their relationship to be worth investigating. This 
is as opposed to the alternative possibilities that, on the one hand, law is 
too distinct from society or, on the other hand, too inextricably interdepen-
dent for it to be possible to pursue such enquiries. Secondly, the mainstream 
project is forced to presuppose that law can be a theoretical object for 
sociology — thus excluding at the one extreme those sociological theories 
which do not focus on "law" as one of their organizing concepts, and — 
at the other extreme — those approaches which view law as a rival 
competing discourse. It is of particular import here to contrast the 
mainstream approach (represented by Lempert) and the quite different 
perspective (with which Luhmann and Teubner are associated) which resists 
characterizing law as a mere passive object of the sociological gaze and 
treats it rather as a subject reproducing its own conceptions of itself (and 
of «society). 
The assumptions which lie behind the mainstream framework may not 
be indefensible; the point is rather that they are not in fact defended. And 

210 
David Nelken 
-s> 
£ : CTi 
u öc 5 
> Sj .0 
"ij ^^ rt 
.ü 
0 u . 
C 
Ο 
υ 
2
 
Μ 
Ο υ 
U Ο 
Χ 
Ο 
<Ί 
Κ 
<3 
ϊ «Ο 
<-ι 
κ 
<3 
.δ 
§ 
C 
Ο 
' 3 
υ 3 
-α 0 
Ο, 
0 
0 υ 
ΙΛ "0 
υ 0 
'Π 0 S 
υ 
Χ 
V) 
Η Ί3 
ώ 'EL 
« 
ω υ 
C 
ο 
Ο <-> 
» < 
V __ 
' ν« C3 
Ο 'ΰ 
_c 
0 
Η f 
u 3 
'§ Ε " 
U _ 
JS Μ 
Η Μ 
^ 1) 
-α 3 
Μ 
^ st 
Ο} 
EPISTEMOLOGICAL AXIS 
.ü 
Ό ο 
(Λ 
-σ • 
c 
- C 
ώ § 
C 
υ 
ε „ ~ 
6C tn ^ 
« 1> .. 
Μ ΐ »ΐ 
c Ο e 
υ υ 
c 
. 2 
- C 
c 
(Λ Λ — 
U 
(Λ ^ 
<υ « 3 C 
J2 3 « Ö 
" ο. υ ·£ 
* 
ε J» 
- 1 
> 
ο ο 
« 
c/5 u 
u ο · 
Ji .2 
ι- U 
ω ο 
CO cΛ 
"η G-
3 Ο 
U 
Λ 
ίϊ 
2 > 
[Λ ™ 
3 U 
» 
£ 
"u Χ 
oj υ 
£ <= 
Χι υ 
3 >-
Η Ο 
S 
« § 
-J 
Χ 
< 
< 
υ 
5 
Γ\ 
δ Η 
Ζ 
CN 
<υ 
Ui 
3 bß 
Ε 
a ί 
S $ 
v - s ε 'δ 
^ 
— ) 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
211 
that they are not uncontroversial is easily seen by considering some of the 
illustrative alternative positions which I have added to each of the axes 
which presently frame enquiry in this field. At the very least, mainstream 
work must justify the positions it takes. But the great merit of Luhmann's 
work in sociology of law is actually to collapse these axes into each other 
by showing how the extremes do in fact meet up (it is noteworthy, 
for example, that Kelsen can be seen as making both ontological and 
epistemological claims about the distinctiveness of law). What is more, 
Luhmann's approach is a positive one. It is not intended, as is so often 
the case, to demonstrate the impossibility of doing sociology of law but 
rather to create a theoretically justifiable starting-point 
for this field. If law, 
society and sociology are to be analytically distinguished for the purposes 
of developing sociology of law (and it is hard to see how this can be 
avoided) Luhmann offers us a model of how to justify this in theoretical 
terms rather than merely adopting pragmatic positions along the relevant 
axes. We can learn from the way he poses his theoretical questions even if 
we cannot always accept his answers. What Luhmann does is what all 
theorists in this field should do: he starts from the problem of how, where 
and why law, society and sociology actually become distinguished from each 
other. For Luhmann the differentiation of law and society is represented as 
the historical (evolutionary) outcome of the emergence of functionally 
differentiated societies. The "positivity" of law and its reproduction as an 
autopoietic system is then seen as a further historical stage of this evolution 
(although the theory is certainly presently unclear as to when this final 
stage was reached and how it is to be identified). It is this same attention 
to starting points which underlies Luhmann's (and Teubner's) attempts to 
offer a sociological explanation of law's reproduction in relation to the 
way one autopoietic system may understand another. 
The merit of Luhmann's framework can be assessed by examining it in 
relation to the recent critique of mainstream sociology of law coming from 
some members of the Critical Legal Studies Conference in the United States 
(see e. g., Gordon, 1984). It can be seen that Luhmann's approach provides 
a sociologically articulate anticipation of their attempt to deny the very 
possibility of the sociology of law. They focus on legal institutions and 
doctrine in an effort to show that law and politics cannot be distinguished. 
Luhmann's theory, however, includes an account of how and why these sub-
systems have different functions, and stresses exactly the "de-politici2ing" 
function of law. The Critical scholars reject the mainstream approach to 
investigating the relationship between "law" and "society" with the argu-
ment that law is in fact constitutive 
of society (see Figure 2). But Luhmann 
argues that this is going too far for, as Willke helpfully explains, this is to 
misunderstand functionally differentiated societies. Although law is indeed 
everywhere, it becomes both more and less relevant than in segmented or 
hierarchically organized societies. Though entering into all social action it 

212 
David Nelken 
does so as only one (separable) aspect of it. It follows that it is in truth 
possible to examine the relationship between law and other features of 
society (Willke, 1987). Interestingly enough Gordon himself does admit 
that Luhmann's work marks an advance on existing approaches in sociology 
of law. In his view, "Autopoiesis provides a more elaborate metaphor for 
the law-society relationship than the unexpressive, neo-Marxist notion of 
relative autonomy" (Gordon, 1985: 2).5 This is because in his opinion the 
latter idea is only a negative rather than a positive explanation of the nature 
of legal autonomy. By contrast to this, Lempert explained that this theory 
could be seen as a reaction against earlier Marxist theories of the economic 
determination of law (so that for him "relative autonomy" is used as a 
poor synonym for "partial autonomy"). In these terms, his Anglo-American 
perspective could therefore be seen as a doubly negative theory by compari-
son with Luhmann's starting point. 
Having argued for the value of Luhmann's framework and questions, 
why not go all the way and also accept his answers? Perhaps, as some 
contributors undoubtedly assume, the really interesting and important 
problems only arise in applying the theory and drawing out its practical 
and political implications. I cannot follow this route because I have too 
many reservations about Luhmann's claims concerning the actual relation-
ships between law and society and sociology, both where these derive from 
his general systems theory as well as from autopoiesis theory more narrowly. 
And it is precisely the practical implications which he (and others) derive 
from some of these hypothesized relationships which make me want to 
pause and re-examine their theoretical force. 
Let us consider first Luhmann's approach to the relationship between 
"law" and "society". It is hard to deny that this suffers from all the defects 
of the neo-Parsonian functionalist and evolutionary scheme in which it is 
embedded. Like Parsons, Luhmann is consciously engaged in a process of 
re-writing and synthesizing Durkheim's ideas about functional interdepend-
ence in modern society with Weber's theorems on social action, rationality 
and legitimacy. But Luhmann also introduces characteristically original 
elements into Parsonian theory. Just as systems theory was used to reformu-
late Weber's approach to the way organizations control themselves and 
their environment, so autopoiesis theory is invoked to revise the notion 
of internal functional differentiation derived from Dürkheim. Luhmann 
also breaks with Parsons' argument that law provides normative integration 
5 For a sophisticated recent attempt to use the idea of "relative autonomy" to provide 
a new starting point for sociology of law, see De Sousa Santos (1985). Although 
Marxist in conception, it has some similarity to Luhmann's approach perhaps because 
being influenced by Althusser it shares a common derivation from Parsons. But De 
Sousa Santos is explicitly concerned to integrate legal pluralism into this theory, which 
Luhmann in his Rechtsso^tologie 
was disposed to dismiss. 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
213 
for the social system (see Bredemeier, 1962), challenging the idea that such 
integration is necessary or possible. But his more complex (and not always 
clear) explanation of how the legal sub-system maintains congruent expecta-
tions in a society without a center is still recognizably Parsonian. 
The difficulties of this functionalist mode of explanation are familiar 
enough, and Luhmann tries to deal with some of them. He insists that it 
is always possible to find "functional equivalents", and indeed argues that 
sociological "enlightenment" lies in the discovery of functional equivalents. 
He even applies this insight to the debate over de-legalization and the 
increasing resort to lay forums and mediation, arguing that this does not 
necessarily indicate any reduction in the function of law itself even though 
the forums themselves may be changing. At other times, however, 
Luhmann's arguments about the way law must function do seem to assume 
that legal institutions themselves must keep to their functions without 
allowing for the possibility that these could and would be achieved regard-
less (see especially Luhmann, 1985 d). Nor is it obvious that the functions 
Luhmann attributes to the legal sub-system must actually be achieved. 
According to his theory it would often be sufficient if the impression was 
successfully given that they were being achieved. This applies especially to 
his arguments about the need for law to handle certain contentious problems 
on behalf of politics. Luhmann fails to take his own arguments to the 
conclusion that law needs only to conceal its "political" resolution of political 
choices, not actually behave non-politically. 
These weaknesses of functional explanation matter because Luhmann 
draws important practical and political conclusions from his analysis of 
law's functions, warning of the dangers of functional de-differentiation if 
law should come to resemble politics in its concern for attaining predictable 
consequences. Such apparently prescriptive theorizing may or may not be 
justifiable.6 But it is regrettable that his view of law's functions does lead 
him to dismiss the manifest evidence of law's efforts to achieve such 
"result-oriented" outcomes. As Lempert rightly notes, Luhmann's approach 
is hard to square with legislative initiatives. But even adjudicative decisions 
are shaped by "policy" considerations or "goal-reasoning" and debates over 
the justifications of specific types of decision-making such as sentencing 
do not make sense if it is assumed that they cannot be concerned with 
outcomes. Luhmann makes two points in reply. He argues that the "val-
idity" of these decisions is not called into question by their predictive 
inadequacy and that the level of consequentialist reasoning employed by 
the courts is often primitive. But this cannot dislodge the need to explain 
why courts make attempts at such reasoning (which may improve under 
the influence of external influences such as the "law and economics" 
6 See the attempt to defend Weber from accusations of similar charges in Brubaker 
(1984). 

214 
David Nelken 
movement). Luhmann's criticisms of law's departure from its functions 
echo arguments that are sometimes heard in American or German jurisprud-
ence and constitutional law theorizing. But it might be more sociologically 
profitable to show how and why legal institutions succeed in fusing such 
apparently incompatible functions as adjudication and regulation. It is not 
always easy to follow why Luhmann sees some tendencies as irreconcilable 
and at other times embraces them as evidence of the paradoxal requirements 
of modernity. For Luhmann "the critique of law is the critique of social 
differentiations", but this seems to owe more to his preference for delegated 
decision-making, conditional programs and the rest, than to any inherent 
requirements of modern development. And even he admits that his proposi-
tions would not apply to a centrally organized (socialist) state. 
There are also difficulties about understanding (let alone accepting) 
Luhmann's revisions of the way we should view the relationship between 
"law" and "sociology." As the previous discussion of consequentialist 
reasoning might have suggested, another way of thinking about law and 
consequential reasoning is in terms of the various overlapping and contrast-
ing discourses which interact with law and on which law relies (see e. g., 
Fitzpatrick, 1984; Garland, 1985; Nelken, 1987). But Luhmann's approach 
is quite different from that of Foucault even if it is just as sensitive in its 
own way to the reflexivity of knowledge and the contingent status of 
"truth" and "justice" (see Murphy, 1984). Autopoiesis theory carries impli-
cations for the very form and focus of theorizing (see e.g., Heller, infra 
and Hutter, 1987). Yet the standpoint from which Luhmann's sociology of 
law is written is still not clear. Luhmann insists that the social theory of 
law has an essential part to play in explaining to law the nature of its 
autopoiesis and its limits (see Luhmann, 1985, conclusion to second edi-
tion). But if "law" cannot work these matters out for itself, how is it able 
to understand when the explanation comes from outside? There are also 
other difficulties of interpretation. Luhmann claims that the nature of law's 
autopoiesis lies in its distinctive normative elements (which allow it to 
remain "cognitively open"). But it is at least as arguable that the boundaries 
of law's understanding are set by its idiosyncratic way of knowing and 
categorizing the social world (cf. Nelken, 1987). Thus law is not cognitively 
open. The distinction "legal/illegal", upon which Luhmann lays such stress, 
hardly serves to capture the full range of law's normative vocabulary of 
rights, duties, permissions, obligations and so on. Moreover, as Teubner 
has shown, it offers little insight into law as a proto-social science interested 
in understanding and regulating and not only evaluating the social world 
(Teubner, 1985 a). 
It is possible that some of these difficulties reflect the cultural divide 
between common law and civilian legal traditions and practices. But even 
if that is true it limits the wider applicability of Luhmann's approach. A 
more generous assessment of Luhmann's contribution would be that these 

Changing Paradigms in the Sociology of Law 
215 
problems arise because of the effort to provide a sociological understanding 
of law's self-understanding. In any event it is proper to end on a positive 
note. For it would certainly count as sufficient evidence of paradigm change 
if theoretical debates in the sociology of law were now to be conducted 
within Luhmann's framework and around Luhmann's questions even if his 
own formulations and answers were to be subjected to criticism and 
revision. 
This is a considerably extended version of the paper of the same title presented at the 
Colloquium on Autopoiesis in Law and Society held at the European University Institute, 
Firenze, December 12 — 15, 1985. It attempts to take into account the revisions which 
Richard Lempert incorporated into his paper, partly as a result of the questions raised 
in mine (Nelken, infra), and I am grateful to him for allowing me to see the revised 
version of his paper in preparing my own. 
Bibliography 
ABEL, R I C H A R D ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Re-directing Social Studies of Law", 1 4 Law & Society Review 
8 0 5 . 
BREDEMEIER, H A R R Y C. ( 1 9 6 2 ) "Law as an Integrative Mechanism" in W . M . Evan (ed.), 
Law and Sociology. New York: Free Press. 
BRUBAKER, ROGER S. ( 1 9 8 4 ) The Limits of Rationality. London: Allen and Unwin. 
CLUNE, WILLIAM H . ( 1 9 8 7 ) "Implementation as Autopoietic Interaction of Autopoietic 
Organizations" in G. Teubner (ed), State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: 
de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
COTTERRELL, ROGER (1986) Review of A. Podgorecki, C . Whelan and D . Khosla (eds.), 
Legal Systems and Social Systems in Public Law 495. 
D E SOUSA SANTOS, BOAVENTURA ( 1 9 8 5 ) "On Modes of Production of Law and Social 
Power", 13 International Journal of the Sociology of Law 299. 
DUPUY, JEAN-P. ( 1 9 8 7 ) "On the Supposed Closure of Normative Systems", in G. Teubner 
(ed.), State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
FITZPATRICK, PETER (1984) "Law and Societies", 2 2 Osgoode Hall Law Journal 115. 
GARLAND, DAVID (1985) Punishment and Welfare. London: Gower. 
GORDON, ROBERT (1984) "Critical Legal Histories", 36 Stanford Law Review 57. 
— ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Autopoiesis — Questions of a Fascinated Skeptic". Paper proposed for the 
Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University Institute, Firenze 
(December 
1 2 - 1 5 ) . 
GRIFFITHS, JOHN ( 1 9 7 9 ) "Is Law Important?" 5 4 New York Law Review 
3 3 9 . 
HELLER, TOM ( 1 9 8 7 ) "Accounting for Law", in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy as 
Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
HOLLOW AY, JOHN and SOL PICCIOTTO ( 1 9 7 8 ) State and Capital: A German Debate. London: 
Edward Arnold. 
HUTTER, M I C H A E L ( 1 9 8 7 ) "How the Economy Talks the Law into Co-Evolution: An 
Exercise in Autopoietic Theory", in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
JESSOP, BOB ( 1 9 8 2 ) The Capitalist State, Oxford: Martin Robertson. 
K I N G - U T Z , ELIZABETH and M A R T I N ALBROW (trans.) ( 1 9 8 5 ) Introduction to N . Luhmann, 
A Sociological Theory of Law. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

216 
David Nelken 
LÜHMANN, N I K L A S (1982) The Differentiation 
of Society. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
— (1985 a) "The Autopoiesis of Social Systems". Paper presented at the Conference on 
Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University Institute, Firenze (December 
12-15). 
— (1985 b) "Meaning". Paper presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and 
Society, European University Institute, Firenze (December 12—15). 
— (1985 c) "The Self-Reproduction of the Law and its Limits" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 d) "The Sociological Observation of the Theory and Practice of Law". Paper 
presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University 
Institute, Firenze (December 12—15). 
— (1985 e) A Sociological Theory of Law (German original, 1972). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
— (1987) "The Coding of the Legal System" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy 
as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
MACAULAY, STEWART ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Law and the Behavioral Sciences: Is There Any There?" 
6 Law and Policy 149. 
MURPHY, 
TIM (1984) "Modern Times: Niklas Luhmann on Law, Politics and Social 
Theory", 47 Modern Law Review 603. 
NELKEN, D A V I D ( 1 9 8 3 ) The Limits of the Legal Process: A Study of Landlords, Law, and 
Crime. London: Academic Press. 
— (1984) "Law in Action or Living Law? Back to the Beginning in Sociology of Law", 
4 Legal Studies 152. 
— (1985) "Legislation and its Constraints: A Case Study of the 1965 British Rent Act", 
in A. Podgorecki, C. Whelan and D. Khosla (eds.), Legal Systems and Social Systems. 
London: Croom Helm. 
— (1987) "Criminal Law and Criminal Justice: Some Notes on their Irrelation" in I. 
Dennis (ed.), Criminal Law and Justice. London: Sweet and Maxwell. 
— (1986) "Review Essay: Beyond the Study of Law and Society?" Amer. Bar Foundation 
Research Journal, Spring 328—338. 
POGGI, 
GIANFRANCO 
( 1 9 8 5 ) "Niklas Luhmann on the Welfare State and its Law", 
European University Institute Working Paper 8 5 / 1 5 7 . 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER (1985 a) "After Legal Instrumentalism? Strategic Models of Regula-
tory Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 b) "The Hypercycle in Law: Self-description, Self-constitution and Autopoiesis 
of the Legal System". Paper presented at the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and 
Society, European University Institute, Firenze (December 12—15). 
TRUBEK, DAVID ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Normative Openness and Closedness in American Civil Proce-
dure". Paper prepared for the Conference on Autopoiesis in Law and Society, Euro-
pean University Institute, Firenze (December 12 — 15). 
WILLKE, HELMUT (1987) "Societal Guidance through Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, 
Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
GUNTHER TEUBNER 
Bremen/Firenze 
I. Evolution versus Regulation? 
Recently, the most striking change of direction in politics, social science 
and law has been the tendency to replace the concept of regulation by that 
of evolution. It is not only within the "de-regulation" movement that 
concepts of active guidance of society (Etzioni, 1968) are being renounced 
as constructivist interventionism and are being replaced by evolutionist 
concepts (Hayek, 1973; 1976; 1979). The legalization/delegalization debate 
calls into question the regulatory effectiveness of politically instrumenta-
lized law and tends to favor autonomous processes of social evolution (see 
Voigt 1980, 1983, 1984). And one of the most fascinating theoretical 
innovations in systems theory — self-reference and autopoiesis — is con-
siderably involved in this change of direction. From the outset, critics of 
ideology, as shown by their critical enquiries concerning legal concepts 
inspired by systems theory, emphasized the political instrumentability of 
such concepts (Reich, 1984; Nocke, 1986; Bercusson, 1987; Nahamowitz, 
1987). And the protagonists themselves seem to confirm this. For instance, 
Varela and Luhmann have both stated that the paradigm change from the 
theory of open systems to the theory of autopoietic systems provokes a 
change of emphasis from design and control to autonomy and environmen-
tal sensibility, from allonomy, external law, input/output, definition from 
the outside, to autonomy, internal regulation, closure, definition from the 
inside — in short, from planning to evolution (Varela, 1981 a: 14; 1981 b: 
36; Luhmann, 1984 b: 27). 
I am disputing these practical consequences of a theory. According to 
my dissenting view, autopoiesis does not necessitate the replacement of 
regulation by evolution, but it does however necessitate a definite reformu-
lation of both concepts. I will develop this reformulation in three stages. 
Using an outline of the paradigmatic alterations which the concept of 
autopoiesis necessarily brings to conceptions of systems theory, I have first 
of all to clarify what evolutionary results must be reached so that the legal 
system is not only differentiated as an independent system, but so that it 

218 
Gunther Teubner 
also gains its autonomy in the sense of autopoietic self-reproduction. In 
other words, what does the concept of autopoiesis add to the theory of 
functional differentiation of the legal system? With regard to this point I 
intend to make use of the idea of the "hypercycle" (Eigen and Schuster, 
1979). For legal autopoiesis, it is not sufficient that the legal system 
constitute legal acts as emergent elements. Instead, the concept of legal 
autonomy needs to be gradualized. Autonomization of law means the 
cumulation of self-referential relations in various legal dimensions. Only 
after the cyclical self-constitution of all components of the legal system — 
elements, structures, processes, boundaries, etc. — can those components 
be linked up in a hypercycle. It is the constitution of such a hypercycle 
that produces autopoietic closure. As a result, the cycle of legal communica-
tion — legal structure — legal communication is set into motion and 
becomes independent from the general societal cycle of communication. 
In the second stage I will ask: how does autopoietic closure affect the 
evolution of the law? If we regard law as being autopoietically organized, 
how then must we revise the present theory of legal evolution? My 
tentative answer is that the essential consequence of legal autopoiesis is the 
internalization of the evolutionary mechanisms. 
The third stage leads finally from evolution to regulation — to the 
problem of regulation of society by law. The historical relationship of "law 
and society" must, in my view, be defined as a co-evolution of structurally 
coupled autopoietic systems. Concepts of guidance must build upon such 
co-evolutive structural changes in order to be realistic. This leads us to a 
concept of guidance by law which is defined as the controlled structural change 
of autopoietic systems. 
II. Autopoiesis in Society and Law 
1. Innovations in Systems Theory 
Systems theory owes a great deal of its success and dynamics to the fact 
that it viewed systems as open to the environment and adaptive (Buckley, 
1967; 1968). In overcoming the former conception of systems as closed, 
windowless monads, systems theory made it possible to bring into the 
foreground the interaction between systems and their environments and in 
particular the dependence of systems on their environments. From neo-
Darwinism in the theory of evolution to the contingency theory in soci-
ology of organization (Lawrence and Lorsch, 1967 a; 1967 b; 1969), a 
paradigm was established whereby the environment sets the conditions 
according to which systems orient themselves and to which they have to 
adapt themselves as well as possible in order to be "successful", i. e., to 
survive. Viewed within the framework of open, adaptive systems, it was a 
matter of fact that systems could be changed, regulated and even determined 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
219 
by environmental influences. Flexibility and adaptability were necessary 
features of systems in order to conform to altered environmental condi-
tions — by internal changes in the system processes or even by qualitative 
changes in the functional regime in ultra-stable systems. This meant the 
following, regarding the possibility of regulating social systems: on the 
one hand, it involved building a high level of flexibility into the systems 
which had to be regulated, and on the other hand, it involved giving the 
regulating actors (leadership, management, government) the possibility of 
direct intervention by defining environmental constraints. 
Now it is important first of all to see that this paradigm of environmen-
tally open, adaptive systems is clearly a cognitive progress. That the 
environment has an effect on systems — whether these be organisms or 
organizations — is indisputable. It is obvious that politics and administra-
tion — by means of law — affect nearly all areas of society. This, however, 
in the meantime has also led to increased criticism of the "juridification" 
not only of all societal subsystems, but also of the "life-world" (Voigt, 
1983, 1984; Habermas 1984; Kübler, 1984; Teubner, 1987 b). 
The paradigm of open systems, the difference between system and 
environment, orients thinking to a great degree towards ideas and concepts 
such as input-output relations, adaptation to the environment, structural 
changes as a rudimentary process of system transformation, reinstatement 
of a disturbed equilibrium by control and regulation, or the "rational" 
system organization achieving results in the environment. Instrumental 
rationality, control, management, structural change and system equilibrium 
became the guiding concepts of political strategies of reform which were 
intended to produce definite changes in various social areas by means of 
law. This was based on an understanding of law as a means of direct 
intervention in social systems, comparable with an analogous understanding 
of other social media — power, knowledge, technology, etc. — as a means 
for purposeful intervention in adaptive, open systems. 
While interventions of this kind do produce effects, it became increas-
ingly clear that these effects in the social systems concerned were different 
from those which were expected: sometimes too slight, sometimes too 
strong, sometimes only effective for a short period, sometimes counter-
productive and frequently somehow "swallowed" by the system (see Teub-
ner, 1984a; 1985b; 1987b). Guilty parties were quickly found: too much 
policy or too little policy, too much law or too little law, deficiencies in 
implementation and overreactions, the wrong instruments and processes 
which were no longer adequate — until finally the main guilty party 
remained; that is, traditional reform policy and traditional direct purpose-
oriented intervention (see Görlitz and Voigt, 1985). 
It is perhaps not pure chance that a theoretical paradigm attracted 
increasing attention in this situation, at the center of which was the 
concept of self-organisation (Jantsch, 1980). The further development of this 

220 
Gunther Teubner 
paradigm as far as the theory of autopoietic systems (Maturana and Varela, 
1975; 1980; Varela, 1979; Zeleny, 1980; 1981 b; Roth and Schwegler, 1981) 
in this respect initially seems absurd, when the model of a closed system, 
which was thought to be a thing of the past, seems to celebrate a comeback. 
For the theory of self-referential systems assumes that systems with a certain 
level of complexity gain their identity through the fact that they refer to 
themselves in all their operations and processes. This means that systems 
can only bring about their continuous self-reproduction by having recourse 
to themselves, i. e., only in a form in which the operations of the system 
reproduce in a circular way the elements of the system, its structures and 
processes, its boundary and the overall unity of the system. 
This conception of self-referential systems presupposes that systems do 
not seek the fixed points of their mode of operation in the environmental 
conditions, to which they adapt themselves as best as possible (as in the 
paradigm of open systems), but in themselves; more precisely, in a self-
description which, as an internal regulation program, organizes the system 
processes in such a way that it corresponds to this self-description in its 
operations and consequently produces itself continuously by means of its 
operations. This interplay of self-description and operation presupposes 
that the basic molecular and biochemical structures of these capacities 
appear explicable at least in outline (Zeleny, 1981 a: 91 ff.). However, finding 
their equivalents in systems of meaning is by no means a simple process. 
However, it does at least seem to be clear that self-referentiality always 
occurs when complex processes revert to the production of their initial 
conditions hyper-cyclically (Eigen and Schuster, 1979) or ultra-cyclically 
(Ballmer and von Weizsäcker, 1974) and as a result become independent of 
their environment in this process. In this sense, self-referentiality leads to 
"organizational closure" (Varela, 1981 b: 37), to recursive, self-reproductive 
processes in a system. 
The question then, of course, is: what evolutionary advantage or stabiliz-
ing effect could self-referentiality have in comparison with the alternative 
of open systems? There is one possible answer in quite fundamental 
terms; namely, that without self-referentiality, without "basic circularity" 
(Maturana and Varela, 1980: 9) and organizational isolation the stabilization 
of self-containing systems is not possible. Only the recursive closure of a 
process which refers exclusively to itself in its operations makes possible 
the independent reconstruction of this total process according to inherent 
rules of regulation. A self-referential system appears dependent and free of 
influence from its environment in these rules, and must be so, because 
otherwise its own continual maintenance and reproduction would be de-
pendent on the environment and consequently on chance, rather than on the 
necessities of recursively organized systematic operations. (The overview of 
historical development given by Zeleny, 1981 a: 91 ff. is informative on 
this point.) Only the systemically organized connection and selection of 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
221 
operations (drawn up into a program of regulation as self-description) can 
stabilize that highly improbable complex process, which as autopoiesis 
(Maturana and Varela, 1980) forms the basis of living systems. 
2. Legal Autopoiesis? 
The difficulties of transferring the paradigm of self-referential systems to 
social phenomena are considerable (Beer, 1975; Zeleny and Pierre, 1976; 
Luhmann, 1981; 1984 b; 1985 a; 1987; Hejl, 1982 a; 1982 b; 1985; Zolo,1987; 
Teubner and Willke, 1984; Ulrich and Probst, 1984; Teubner, 1985 a; 1987 c; 
Haferkamp and Schmid, 1987). The problems arise in particular from the 
uncertainty as to whether one should think from the point of view of the 
autopoiesis of life (Hejl, 1982 a; 1982 b) and therefore consider societies as 
biological "systems of coupled human beings" (Maturana, 1980: 118), or 
not, and how strictly one conceptualizes the term of production (Varela, 
1981 b: 38). In this respect I am following Luhmann's highly sophisticated 
attempt to conceptualize societies as autopoietically organized systems of 
communication (Luhmann, 1984 b), and pose the question which follows 
from this idea: whether one can consider the differentiated functional 
system of law as being autopoietically organized within the autopoietic 
system of society (cf. Luhmann, 1984 a; supra: 12; Teubner and Willke, 
1984; Ladeur, 1984; infra). Alongside social autopoiesis, and building itself 
upon this, can one conceive of an independent legal autopoiesis? 
In the general theory of autopoiesis, Maturana has examined in greater 
detail this question of how autopoietic systems are intertwined in various 
levels of order and has made some interesting distinctions (Maturana 1980: 
107 ff.). In my opinion, however, it is necessary to make a crucial correction 
to his views. On the basis of an autopoietic system, a second-order 
autopoietic system can only develop if and when it produces its own 
components itself in the strictest sense; whereby — and this is the guiding 
factor — these self-produced components are not identical to the first-
order autopoietic system itself nor to the components of that system. In 
other words: higher order autopoiesis necessitates emergent phenomena. 
There must be new and different self-referential circles that form the basis 
for a higher order autopoietic system. In the case of the law that means 
that an autopoietic closure can only occur when a legal system which is 
already autonomous to a certain degree constitutes its own elements — the 
legal acts — which trigger off legal changes and hence initiate the auto-
poietic circulation of: legal act — legal change — legal act (Luhmann, 
supra: 16). Somewhat overstated, only the legal "invention" of legal action 
establishes the autonomy of law. However, this is only a necessary, not yet 
a sufficient condition of legal autopoiesis. Not only legal acts as elements 
of the legal system must be self-constituted, but every component of the 
legal system. For this purpose it is necessary to distinguish between self-

222 
Gunther Teubner 
constitution of system components by the system and their 
self-reproduction. 
It is one thing when a system constitutes its components, i. e., when it 
defines self-referentially its elements, structures and processes as units and 
uses them operatively. It is another thing if the system reproduces itself in 
the sense that elements produce structures and vice versa. We can think of 
systems which constitute their components without having those compo-
nents produce each other recursively. In order to make a self-reproductive 
cycle possible, the components must be compatibilized with each other. In 
other words, apart from the elements, also structures, processes, boundaries, 
and environments need to be cyclically self-constituted in such a congruent 
manner that they can be coupled to each other in a hypercycle. 
In this relation between self-constitution and self-reproduction lies the 
key for an adequate understanding of legal autonomy. When legal communi-
cations specialize in relation to general social communications, they inevit-
ably will have to be applied to themselves: legal communication thematizes 
legal communication in legal terms. This leads to emergent phenomena of 
self-reference, to "vicious circles" and "virtuous circles", to tautologies, 
contradictions, infinite regresses and paradoxes (Varela, 1979; 1981a: 19). 
The most important consequence, however, is that law begins to describe 
its own components in legal categories. It is the legal system and not its 
political, economic, and social environment that defines the premises for 
the validity of a legal act, or a legal rule. The law regulates its own 
operations, structures, processes, boundaries, and identity reflexively. Thus, 
legal acts, legal rules, legal procedures, and legal doctrines emerge as self-
referential phenomena. Their self-referentiality is the very foundation of 
legal autonomy. 
In order to grasp the full meaning of legal autonomy, one needs to give 
up the idea of "all or nothing" (Luhmann, 1987). Of course, circularity 
exists or does not exist — there is no such thing as half-circularity. Yet 
autonomy can be seen as a gradualized concept. It increases with the 
cumulation of self-referential circular relations within a system. Under 
certain conditions this cumulation leads to the circular reproduction of the 
whole system. 
I will assume the following stages of legal autonomization: (1) The 
starting point is social conflict. Not every institutionalized conflict solution 
should be identified with law. In particular, the ending of conflict by 
oppression, assertion on the basis of sheer power, mediation, arbitration, 
pure compromise, etc., are still non-legal forms of solving conflict. (2) 
Law — however socially diffuse — only appears when three conditions 
are fulfilled: when (a) social conflicts are defined as differences between 
expectations which require a decision; (b) conflicts are solved when one of 
the diverging expectations is defined as socially "valid"; and therefore (c) 
a definite mode of behavior is declared to be "correct". Such a law is, 
however, still produced allopoietically, i. e., by processes external to the 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
223 
law. For the production of an expectation relies upon mechanisms outside 
the law, be they socially diffuse communications in which social norms are 
produced; power processes, when the expectations of the superior are 
declared to be binding; religion, when norms are declared to be willed by 
God; morals, when norms are valid because they are considered to be 
"good"; or truth, when cognition produces law. (3) A certain functional 
differentiation of the law occurs at the point when legal communications 
specialize thematically; that is, when the distinction between legal right 
and wrong becomes independent from other distinctions and gradually 
becomes universal. However even this does not yet signify the self-referen-
tial production of law and the autopoietic closure of the legal system. (4) 
Self-referentiality only emerges when the legal system itself constitutes anew its 
own components (i.e., elements, structures, processes, boundaries, environ-
ments) which are different from general societal system components. (5) 
Autopoiesis in the strict sense emerges when those cyclically constituted 
components are constituted congruently so that they are linked up to a 
hypercycle. The result is a self-reproductive circle of act-norm-act. The 
concept of autogenesis has been introduced to describe this transition to 
autopoiesis (Zeleny, 1981 b). The concept is so important because it deals 
with the problem of how self-reproductive processes come into being in 
the first place. Zeleny deals with this problem using the example of life, 
but his thoughts are applicable to the emergence of other autopoietic 
systems, also in particular to the emergence of the legal system as an 
autonomous system. 
It is important to see that the products of an autopoietic system and 
even the processes of production can exist initially without a full-fledged 
autopoietic organization. Both of them can be constituted self-referentially, 
however, without producing each other. Only when these products and 
producing processes are organized in a certain complementary way does 
autopoiesis emerge; namely at the point when the processes of production 
produce the product and the product produces the processes of production. 
With regard to law, this means that law as an ordering of expectations, as 
well as a legal system as communications concerning law, can exist without 
the process of the production of law already being organized autopoietically. 
Law can be produced from many possible societal communications and 
communications about law are possible without them producing new law. 
Specialization in a function (conflict solution, formation of expectations, 
behavioral regulation) or the formation of a code of media (the distinction 
between legal right and wrong) are necessary but insufficient conditions 
for the autopoietic organization of the legal system. In addition, there must 
evolve a hypercyclical structure, the products must produce such a network 
of conditions that a new legal production emerges from it. The point is 
that this circularity can only come about when legal acts, legal norms, 
legal procedures and legal doctrine are self-referentially constituted in a 

224 
Gunther Teubner 
congruent manner. The premise for the self-reproduction of the whole 
legal system is the self-referential constitution of the components. For legal 
norms this is nothing new. H. L. A. Hart's "secondary norms" (1961: 
77 ff.) is a famous example for such a self-referential constitution. Via 
secondary norms the law produces an internal self-description. By constitut-
ing rules for the identification and creation of norms, the law creates its 
own norm-creating structures. It does not matter if secondary norms refer 
to internal legal processes or refer to social norms or religious revelation. 
What is decisive in all these cases is the autonomous "self-indication". 
However, secondary norms are only one among many instances of legal 
self-constitution of its components. The same holds true for legal acts. 
Whatever criteria the legal discourse is using for the definition of the legal 
act, the important thing is that it is nothing but legal communication that 
selects legal acts from the variety of social acts and events. One needs to 
extend this idea to legal procedure and legal doctrine. Both become self-
referential when the legal discourse selects certain procedures and certain 
reality constructs as legal ones. 
But even if legal systems in part or entirely self-constitute their system 
components, they are not yet autopoietic in Maturana's sense. Self-repro-
duction of law emerges only when legal rules produce legal acts and vice 
versa and legal procedure and legal doctrine reproduce each other mutually. 
It is only once self-description and self-constitution of the law's components 
have in this way created the necessary pre-conditions for hypercyclical 
coupling that the actual production of legal communication from legal 
communication via the network of legal expectations, controlled by doctrine 
and procedure, can begin. 
One special case of self-constitution is of interest for our purposes: when 
the rules of recognition refer no longer to extra-legal sources but to other 
internal components of the legal system. Only once legal rules are no 
longer defined by religious revelation or as resulting from the nature of 
man, but as products of legal acts (contract, legislation) they become part 
of an internal self-reproductive cycle. Vice versa, when legal acts are defined 
as the product of legal rules, the cyclical relation between rule and act is 
completed. Likewise, only once legal procedures are defined as internal 
processes of rule-production and legal doctrine as the system of relations 
between rules and acts, then the legal system as a whole takes on a self-
reproductive character. 
The circularity of the production process therefore plays a decisive role. 
In an allopoietic legal system, legal communications would have to be 
produced in the context of general societal communications just as legal 
norms would have to develop in general societal processes of communica-
tion. Legal autopoiesis occurs only at the point when both mutually 
produce each other. 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
225 
III. Autopoiesis and the Evolution of Law 
If we understand the autonomy of law as its autopoietic self-closure, what 
does this signify for the evolution of law? In particular, how do we interpret 
the development of law dependent on societal conditions, if changes in 
law now only proceed on a circular, self-referential and closed basis? 
1. Legal Evolution Today 
Before we attempt to answer these questions, we should clear up some 
misunderstandings concerning a concept of legal evolution which is sup-
portable today. In recent years, evolutionary concepts have been used 
increasingly to explain legal developments (Luhmann; 1970; 1985 a; 1985 b; 
Eder, 1976; 1978; 1985; 1986; Habermas, 1979; 1985; Unger, 1976; Rubin, 
1977; Priest, 1977; Nonet and Selznick, 1978; Brüggemeier, 1980; 1982; 
Tugendhat, 
1980; Hirshleifer, 
1982; Teubner, 
1983; Zemen, 
1983; 
Rottleuthner, 1985; 1986; Watson, 1985; Wesel, 1985). This has triggered 
criticism and provoked misunderstandings which stand in the way of a 
fruitful application of the concept of evolution to legal phenomena (Fried-
man, 1975: 279 ff.; Gordon, 1984; Blankenburg, 1984). The misunderstand-
ings are essentially founded on the burdens which have riddled the concept 
of evolution since the 19th century and which affect its normative-analytical 
status, its range of explanations and the model elements contained within. 
I propose that the burdens can be removed only by withdrawing claims 
which are too far-reaching in all these dimensions. 
The criticism is greatest where it is certain — in the criticism of normative 
implications of legal evolution. The "spectre of evolution" is conjured up 
in developmental logic and phase models which threaten the neat separation 
between empirically-based theory and normative projections (Blankenburg, 
1984: 273). Nevertheless one should not adhere to the wrongly-posed 
alternatives of description versus prescription. My answer to the question 
of practical orientation of action versus theoretical explanation is: both 
are acceptable, not concurrently, but according to system context, be it 
sociological analysis or reflection in legal theory. 
In any case the compact syndrome of the old evolutionist concept must 
be broken up. Progress and natural causation, necessity, irreversibility, 
unilinearity and directionality must be separated from the analytical core 
of evolution theory. The distinction between "evolutionist" and "evolution-
ary" makes the problem clear (Toulmin, 1972: 321 ff.; van Parijs, 1981: 
51 f.; Bühl, 1984: 302). Evolutionist concepts, in which a certain direction 
is attributed to processes of change (e. g., progress, stages of development, 
perfection) are not under discussion. With regard to such evolutionist 
concepts well-founded doubts arise, especially in view of their unexplained 
normative-analytical status (see Friedman, 1975: 287 ff.). This becomes 

226 
Gunther Teubner 
more difficult however with regard to evolutionary concepts which are not 
based on the direction of development but on mechanisms of development. 
I am referring in particular here to filter mechanisms and trial and error 
mechanisms (e. g., Nozick, 1974: 314 ff.). What we are discussing therefore 
is not evolutionist models of law which are directed by a mysterious 
normative logic, but evolutionary models of law in which certain identifi-
able mechanisms regulate legal development by means of their filter effect. 
It would be relatively difficult to identify normative projections in such 
models (Blankenburg, 1984: 284). 
This conceptual limitation makes it possible to clarify the theoretical and 
practical application of legal evolution. In the sociological discourse and 
in the legal discourse, legal evolution can be applied differently. Such a 
refined concept of evolution can be used in a legal sociological sense as a 
pattern of explanation for major trends of development in the law. At the 
same time, however, a concept of evolution as "more or less empirical 
theory with a practical purpose" (Rottleuthner, 1986: 222) can become of 
practical importance in law if it is taken up in legal theory in "strategic 
legal concepts" (Teubner, 1985 a: 301). I would like to question whether this 
strengthens the normative projections. Conceptions of "blind" interaction 
between legal evolutionary mechanisms clearly tend to put a damper on 
hopes for legal progress. 
I think that a theory of legal evolution has great analytical and practical 
power if it withdraws its extensive explanatory claims and returns to pure 
pattern predictions (Hayek, 1967: 22; Luhmann, 1975: 152; 1983: 193). 
Evolution theory is concerned with the question — and should be limited 
to it — of how systems develop filter mechanisms which guarantee the 
stabilization of structural patterns selected from blind variations and conse-
quently regulate the development of systems. Structural patterns, however, 
are not sufficient to predict individual events. Here explanations must be 
added which represent "chances" from the standpoint of evolution theory. 
Causal analyses of another kind must take place. A theory of legal evolution 
will therefore only be in the position to explain general structural patterns 
of the legal system, but not individual legal events, court verdicts, laws 
and acts of administration. The current reproach against theories of legal 
evolution that they can contribute nothing to the explanation of concrete 
legal phenomena (Gordon, 1984: 81; Rottleuthner, 1986: 217) misunder-
stands evolutionary explanations two-fold, by simultaneously overestimat-
ing and underestimating them. Structural predictions are no less important 
than predictions of events, so far as their explanatory usefulness is concerned 
as well as their practical relevance. At the same time, such a withdrawal of 
extensive explanatory claims clearly relativizes the criticism of "evolutionary 
functionalism" in law, like for instance that recently and impressively 
formulated by Gordon (1984). 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
227 
The main point of Gordon's criticism is that actual developments are 
reinterpreted as functional necessities. Legal forms are the necessary answer 
to societal requirements. Here there must be a fundamental misunderstand-
ing. The thing about neo-evolutionism is particularly that it reconstructs 
reality from the perspective of functional equivalents, from non-necessary, 
contingent alternatives. It is modern equivalence functionalism especially 
which produces contingency consciousness, the consciousness of historical 
alternatives which Gordon so urgently demands (cf. Luhmann, 1982; 
Teubner, 1983). Gordon's perspective is to point to the submerged "human" 
progressive alternatives in order to make them available again for political 
action. That is a commendable normative perspective. The question is 
only whether equivalence functionalism makes available better analytical 
instruments than good political intentions. An elaborated system of con-
cepts which permits comparisons and judgments on various alternatives 
relating to solutions of problems, resultant problems and side effects seems 
to me to be more fruitful than the critical complaint concerning submerged 
or repressed discourses. 
In fact, the idea of submerged discourses must be generalized by dissolv-
ing the causal relationship between society and law into contingent require-
ments and contingent solutions of problems. This was exactly the starting-
point for modern equivalence functionalism and in this it has proved 
itself — functional equivalence of solutions to a problem and multi-
functionality of problem solutions. Furthermore it must be made clear that 
every functional solution of a problem for its part can be defined as a 
problem again and that the choice of problems is contingent. All this, 
however, is not criticism of evolutionary functionalism, but rather forms 
the basis of it. 
Gordon also criticizes the fact, concerning customary causal models of 
law and society, that comparative studies have continually shown that 
societal causes and societal effects of law vary considerably despite similar 
conditions at the beginning. Whether one can criticize evolutionary func-
tionalism as a result — as Gordon does — seems questionable in view 
of the contingency consciousness of equivalence functionalism. Certainly, 
however, this should be taken as an argument for the relative autonomy 
of the legal system and even more so as an argument for uncontrolled 
mutual effects of self-reproductive social systems. 
In conclusion Gordon poses the important question whether it is not 
more appropriate to replace broad functionalist explanations by concrete 
explanations of developments by interests and strategies of interest groups. 
The system's theoretical answer to this is: do not replace, but supplement. 
Two different levels of societal differentiation are involved, as well as two 
levels of analysis. On the level of concrete interactions, particularly in the 
political system, legal norms can adequately be explained as the result of 
processes of power and decision-making by various interests and interest 

228 
Gunther Teubner 
groups. Concerning these findings, the question arises as to whether and 
how far these legal norms represent functional solutions to social problems. 
At the same time, important interactions between these modes of explana-
tion can be assumed. In particular, an analysis should be made of how far 
social structures and functions affect and delimit political strategies. 
2. Mechanisms of Legal and Societal Evolution 
What does the seed of evolution theory consist of — a seed which even 
today carries responsibility? The following three conceptions of this seed 
should be released from the fruitless shells of legal progress, normative 
developmental logic, universal history of law, etc.: (1) the "blind" interac-
tion of the evolutionary mechanisms: variation, selection and retention; (2) 
the combination of ontogenetic and phylogenetic development; (3) the co-
evolution of the law, society, and other social subsystems. If this seed of 
evolution is planted in the field of autopoiesis — and this is where I see 
my task — then we have some hopes for a good harvest. 
It is thanks to Campbell that biological analogies of evolution have 
become fruitful for social science. Socio-cultural evolution is possible when 
within socio-cultural units definite social mechanisms can be identified 
which guarantee the separation and the interaction of three universal 
functions of evolution: variation, selection and retention (Campbell, 1969; 
1970; 1974; 1975; 1980). These thoughts have been continued by Luhmann. 
With regard to the evolution of law, he suggested that the functions of 
evolution be carried out by clearly defined legal mechanisms (Luhmann, 
1970; 1983). In the legal system, normative structures take over variation, 
institutional structures (especially procedures) take over selection, and 
doctrinal structures take over retention. 
This is a decisive step to get rid of the legacy of social Darwinism which 
has discredited evolutionary thought for a long time. Apart from normative 
hypostatization of evolution, the main difference between a renewed evolu-
tionism and social Darwinism concerns the unit of evolution. Evolving 
units are not, as social Darwinism has it, human individuals and their 
aggregates, groups, organizations, nations, races, but socio-cultural phe-
nomena. Ideas, customs, organizational forms form the material which is 
produced and transformed by socio-cultural evolutionary filter mechanisms. 
Furthermore, the selection mechanism for social evolution is by no means 
the survival of the fittest in a merciless struggle for life. Rather, this is an 
extreme and improbable borderline case. Evolutionary normality is the co-
existence of a rich variety of viable socio-cultural phenomena. 
It is likewise the evolving unit which defines the main difference between 
socio-cultural theories of evolution and sociobiology. One of the main 
contributions of sociobiology was to redefine the evolving unit. Neither 
the individual nor the group but the "selfish" gene has been identified as 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
229 
the evolutionary material. On this basis, otherwise inexplicable patterns of 
social behavior, especially altruistic behavior, could be explained in an 
evolutionary framework (Wilson, 1978; Dawkins, 1976; Hamilton, 1978; 
Meyer, 1982). The main problem is that sociobiology short-circuits biologi-
cal and social evolution and thus fails to take account of the autonomy of 
social systems and their evolution. Social autopoiesis insists on the emergent 
property of social and legal communication systems. To be sure, they can 
exist only on the basis of an organic and psychic materiality continuum, but 
in their operations they are self-referentially closed. Accordingly biological 
mechanisms of evolution cannot determine social and legal development. 
Evolution in the social and legal sphere can occur only once the mechanisms 
of variation, selection and retention emerge as communicative mechanisms. 
The unit of social evolution which is shaped through evolutionary filter 
mechanisms is thus neither the human individual, nor a social aggregate 
of human individuals, nor the "selfish" gene, but society and law as systems 
of social communication. This is not to exclude mutual influences between 
social evolution and biological evolution. However, they are conceivable 
only as interactions between autonomously and self-referentially evolving 
systems and not as an integrated "bio-cultural" evolution, as a co-determina-
tion by biological and social forces (e. g., Bühl, 1984: 305). Co-evolution 
of organic and social systems means first of all autonomy and closure. And 
it is only "structural coupling" (Maturana and Varela, 1980) that allows for 
an indirect mutual influence. 
However, as promising a theory of socio-cultural evolution seems it to 
be, it has to cope with one major problem: how to determine social identity 
in continual social change stimulated by the dynamics of evolution. This 
problem appears in three different versions. First, the phenomenon of 
"stasis" is a permanent challenge to evolution theory (Wake et al., 1983). 
If cultural phenomena like the law are exposed to the permanent pressure 
of environmental selection, how can one account for the undeniable fact 
that certain structures of the law remain stable for centuries? A similar 
point has always been raised against evolutionary functionalism. How can 
social systems maintain their "identity" despite evolutionary transformation 
(Habermas, 1973: 11)? Related to this is the question: how does one explain 
that the relation between social developments and legal developments is 
under-determined? Gordon (1984: 100 ff.) backs his critique of evolutionism 
with the statement: "... that comparable social conditions ... have generated 
contrary legal responses, and comparative legal forms have produced con-
trary social effects". And "legal forms and practices don't shift with every 
realignment of the balance of political forces". How can a post-Darwinian 
evolutionism cope with these problems? 
Obviously, evolving social systems must have a higher potential of 
autonomy from external influences than the theory of selective environmen-
tal pressures suggests. Evolution must be more than a "meandering process 

230 
Gunther Teubner 
almost entirely shaped by environmental contingencies, rather than insu-
lated from them" (Campbell, 1969: 70). But how can one account for this 
evolutionary autonomy? Campbell considers solutions according to which 
the internal process of organization — the "organizational 'reality'" — 
itself is the selector for stability or change. However, its "undesirable 
circularity" is his reason to abandon this solution. It is thus the taboo of 
circularity which blocks the view to the most promising solutions of stasis 
and identity: the solution of self-referentiality. 
It is the very autonomy of normative phenomena which induces Ha-
bermas (1979; 1984) to develop a combination of two evolution models. 
The identity of the moral-normative sphere in society and its autonomous 
evolution, Habermas maintains, cannot be sufficiently analyzed by post-
Darwinian evolution models which use the interplay of variation, selection 
and retention. Thus Habermas supplements the system/environment model 
of evolutionary functionalism with a model of "rational reconstruction" 
which describes autonomous learning processes in the cultural-normative 
sphere. He uses theories of moral ego development in the tradition of Piaget 
and Kohlberg and translates them from individual into social context. 
The "evolutionary dynamics" of basic social structures is exposed to an 
"evolutionary logic" of normative structures, the law being one among 
them. From this interplay of two diverse processes of evolution follows a 
sequence of "social organization principles" which are characterized by 
irreversibility, structured hierarchy and evolutionary directedness. 
Admittedly the autonomous logics of legal development would resolve 
the above-mentioned problems of "stasis", social identity and evolutionary 
autonomy. However, the model of normative eigenlogics gives up the 
advantages of modern evolutionism described above. Habermas' rational 
reconstruction is basically a new variant of an embryological developmental 
model: "the evolution from an 'indefinite incoherent homogeneity to a 
definite coherent heterogeneity' takes place as a result of internal dynamics, 
... as an orderly, progressive, goal-directed unfolding" (Campbell, 1969: 
70). And the question what mechanisms achieve the transfer from individual 
ego development to the development of social morality remains unanswered 
(cf. Bühl, 1984: 319 ff.). 
The "early" Luhmann (1970; 1983) came up with another attempt to 
solve the problem of evolutionary autonomy of law. He multiplies the 
interplay of evolutionary mechanisms by introducing various system refer-
ences. Evolutionary mechanisms work "endogenously" as well as "exogen-
ously". They work in the interplay of rules, institutions and doctrine within 
the law and their determination by analogue mechanisms in other social 
subsystems. 
Societal-legal evolution is therefore hallmarked by the interaction be-
tween these "endogenous" mechanisms of legal evolution on the one hand, 
and the "exogenous" evolution of the societal environment on the other. 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
231 
And in fact the endogenous evolution of the law is influenced systemically 
by exogenous developments in such a way that definite organizational 
principles of the whole society variably increase and decrease the relative 
weight of the endogenous mechanisms (norms, procedures, dogmatics) and 
therefore externally influence the inner dynamics of the legal system. The 
law is adapted to various developmental stages of societal differentiation 
in such a way that the dominant organizational principle of society (segmen-
tation, stratification, functional differentiation) creates typical configur-
ations in the legal system and at the same time specific "bottlenecks" of 
legal evolution. 
In segmented societies, which distinguish themselves by a lack of alterna-
tives, the evolutionary challenge to "archaic law" is to produce a sufficient 
variety of normative structures. This problem of variety is only solved in 
stratified societies with a differentiated hierarchical order. While they are 
in the position to create a greater wealth of norms, however, the law of 
highly cultivated, pre-modern societies is exposed to problems of selection. 
In the end, functionally differentiated societies are hallmarked by a huge 
over-production of norms. "Positive law" may have for its part overcome 
the selection problem with the institutionalization of highly developed 
legal proceedings, adjudication and legislation, yet it only has insufficient 
stabilization mechanisms at its disposal in the conventional dogmatic-
conceptual structures. 
The problem with this model is that it still works with the assumptions 
of open systems theory. Environmental evolution in this view is directly 
influencing legal evolution, even if filtered through the internal mecha-
nisms. Thus, it cannot cope with the problems of stasis, system identity 
and evolutionary autonomy. 
3. The Turn Toward Autopoiesis 
Is the theory of autopoiesis in a position to solve these problems? This is 
what autopoieticists maintain for the general theory of evolution (Roth, 
1982; 1984; Wake et al., 1984). The autopoiesis of a system is a limit to 
evolution. Autopoiesis defines the functional limits for any evolutionary 
change. "Stasis", system identity, and evolutionary autonomy can be ex-
plained by the autopoietic closure of a system: the system can undergo any 
change, provided the circular organization is not interrupted. 
It has been pointed out in the general discussion on autopoiesis that it is 
necessary to revise the concept of evolution under conditions of autopoietic 
reproduction (Maturana, 1980: 11 f.; Roth, 1982; 1984). These authors 
criticize an orthodox neo-Darwinism which understands the process of 
development as if a system open to information willingly follows the 
instructions, i.e., the selective pressures of the environment. In the face of 
this, autopoietic organization is significant for selection. A self-reproductive 

232 
Gunther Teubner 
system defines tolerance limits for structural change by its organization of 
cyclical self-preservation. "The actual primacy of evolution ... is therefore 
the maintenance of internal cyclicity, not adaptation to the environment" 
(Roth, 1984: 5). 
I will take up this argument and intend to generalize it at the same time. 
What is being said here with regard to function and mechanism of 
selection 
should be extended to the corresponding contexts of variation 
and 
retention. 
My thesis: the emergence of autopoiesis signifies for the legal system a 
dynamic shift of the functions of evolution inwards; an internalization of 
the mechanisms for variation, selection and retention. More precisely, a 
central shift from "external" societal mechanisms of evolution to "internal" 
legal mechanisms is involved, in the sense that external 
mechanisms 
can only 
have a "modulating' 
e f f e c t on legal developments while the evolutionary 
primacy 
passes over to internal structural 
determination. 
In other words: only once the legal system reaches autopoietic closure 
can it become capable of autonomous evolution. It is precisely this point 
of autopoietic closure which marks the difference in regard to recent 
economic models of legal evolution. There are at least two versions. 
According to Hayek (1967: 32; 1979: 167) the interplay of cultural variation 
and selection creates spontaneous orders in which adequate legal rules 
emerge, in contrast to political processes that arbitrarily select rules and 
impose them on social order via a contructivist interventionism. The second 
version was developed in the context of the non-normative, positive version 
of Posner's question: "Is common law efficient?" Common law tends to 
produce (Pareto-) efficient legal rules due to processes of relitigation. As 
long as the legal system formulates a non-efficient distribution of property 
rights, it produces permanent incentives for religitation. This process comes 
to a standstill only once efficiency has been achieved (see for this discussion 
Rubin, 1977; Priest, 1977; Hirshleifer, 1982: 46 ff.). 
Both versions of an economic theory of legal evolution neglect systemati-
cally the autonomous role of the legal system evolving internally via diverse 
evolutionary filters. In both views, legal rules appear only as the selection 
product of genuinely economic processes without taking into account the 
autonomous potential of the legal process for variation of normative 
content, for selection via legal institutions according to their criteria and 
for stabilization by the legal culture. In Hayek's version this leads to an 
absurd over-evaluation of customary law and similar "spontaneous" orders 
and an under-evaluation of political legislation. And in Posner's version 
the result is that legal selectivity (access to justice) is not taken into account 
at all. 
In any case, autopoietic closure of the law makes it impossible to see 
legal evolution as the sheer product of social evolution or to localize the 
effective evolutionary mechanisms outside the law. Evolutionary models 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
233 
that tend to fuse social and legal development have a limited plausibility 
only for the pre-autopoietic stage of the legal system. 
If autopoiesis signifies the internalization of the three functions of 
evolution: variation, selection and retention, then this means that in a 
pre-autopoietic condition of law, all three functions are fixed in societal 
institutions and therefore are external to the legal system. The variation of 
law is singled out from the variation of general societal structures, especially 
from the social norm structures originating here. Social norms directly 
determine the variation potential of legal norms. The selection of legal 
norms is carried out in societal processes, that is, by societal approval of 
norms or in other words their recognition by society. Retention — that is, 
the passing on of law — is achieved by means of societal myths, doctrines, 
philosophies and ideologies. And as long as quasi-autonomous legal dogma-
tics develop, they must be anchored in natural law conceptions of society 
at large. 
After the emergence of autopoiesis, according to my thesis, these 
functions of evolution are internalized, i. e., taken over by internal mecha-
nisms. Evolution can then only be "triggered off' from outside, but no 
longer directly "caused". Henceforth it only follows one inner developmen-
tal logic — the logic of autopoiesis. 
Variation 
within an autopoietic subsystem can now only succeed when 
it is structurally determined within the subsystem. When the legal system 
is autopoietically closed then Maturana's formulation also applies to the 
possibilities for variation in the law: 
... that at any instant of its operation the structure of an autopoietic system specifies 
into what structural configuration it goes as a result of structural transition, regardless 
of whether this results from its internal dynamics or from its interaction with the 
medium. 
Social norms can then no longer be adopted directly into law. Processes 
outside the law can now only have a "modulating" effect on the production 
of legal variety (Willke, 1987). Societal conflicts trigger off internal legal 
processes; they modulate the legal formulation of norm conflicts, which in 
the end are responsible for legal innovations, but which have little in 
common with the social norm conflicts of the disputing parties. Hence the 
protest against "expropriation of conflicts" (Christie, 1976). Hence the 
motive for an idealistic de-legalization movement (Abel, 1982) and for 
"alternatives to law" (Blankenburg and Rottleuthner, 1980). Likewise in 
the law-making process it is not social interests which trigger off legal 
changes but only such social pressures as appear on the internal screens of 
the legal system which can have an innovative effect. The same is true for 
inventions in jurisprudence. Innovations in science in general can only 
become indirectly relevant to law when they can be formulated in the 
relevance criteria of legal dogmatics (see Heller, 1985: 183; Wiethölter, 
1986: 53 f.). 

234 
Gunther Teubner 
Similarly, legal selection is now carried out internally. Social approval of 
the norm is no longer the factor governing selection. The inner approval 
of the autopoiesis of law takes over this role. Out of the diverse expectations 
which are created within the legal system, the only expectations which can 
be fed into the internal legal circulation are those which are selected by 
legal actions — which are defined as being legally internal — as a change 
of the legal situation. The legal system itself defines the preconditions of 
a legal action and therefore its legal change as well. 
As regards the stabilizing function of retention, it is in the end true 
that in autopoietic systems system-internal mechanisms must be ready to 
guarantee retention. Its establishment in societal contexts — in moral, 
religious and political contexts — is increasingly being phased out in favor 
of internal references in the law: references to other conflict rulings, sets 
of norms, legal arguments, systematic concepts and autonomous dogmatics. 
4. Ontogeny and Phylogeny 
It seems to me important, particularly in the context of evolutionary 
stabilization, to introduce into the theory of legal evolution in addition the 
distinction between ontogenetic learning and phylogenetic evolution. I 
consider this distinction in a theory of the evolution of norms — as 
introduced by Habermas (Habermas, 1976: 12 ff., 63 ff.; 1979) - 
to be 
fruitful, but I believe that the ontogenetic unity should be defined dif-
ferently. It is not the moral development of the child, not the concrete 
human being which forms the ontogenetic counterpart of societal develop-
ment. Rather, the concrete interaction is the laboratory in which the experi-
ments of society take place. The problem posed by Habermas, to relate 
stages of child development to the development of social norms, would 
however in systems theory be a problem of the co-evolution of two 
interpenetrating systems, a problem which must be separated from the 
context of phylogeny and ontogeny. 
The interplay of phylogeny and ontogeny is therefore adopted, not 
however in the relationship of man and society, but in the relationship of 
individual interaction to the whole society (as well as to societal subsys-
tems). Stated in concrete terms it is found in the relationship of concrete 
legal proceedings to the whole legal system. Ontogenetic learning takes 
place in the interaction of the proceedings of adjudication, legislation, 
administration. In the proceedings there is sufficient variation and selection; 
retention is however limited to the "memory" of the interaction itself, that 
is, to the history of the concrete proceeding. Phylogenetic development — 
and consequently evolution — only occurs when mechanisms of retention 
intervene on the level of society as a whole or on the level of functional 
subsystems, and "bequeath" learning successes which have taken place in 
the laboratory experiment of the interaction. The difficult transitional 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
235 
mechanism must first of all be constructed to make it possible, for instance, 
that insight gained in legal proceedings is adopted into legal doctrine and 
consequently into the "memory" of law. 
The mechanism at work can be called "coupling of episodes" (for details 
see Teubner, 1987 a). This mechanism is responsible for the evolutionary 
capacity of law, since it makes possible that legal selections can be stabilized 
beyond the particular legal episode. It is via this mechanism that learning 
within legal episodes becomes evolution of the legal system. 
Each single legal episode is in itself an autonomous social system. The 
particular legal proceeding uses the legal code, has a particular history, 
forms its peculiar structures. However, legal episodes are transitory, they 
need to be related to each other if a permanent legal system is to emerge. 
Coupling of episodes means that structures which have been built up within 
one legal episode can be utilized in future episodes. Rather primitive forms 
of this coupling use only the individual memory of the judge or the 
collective memory of the court, while highly developed forms of episode 
coupling are in themselves autonomous legal discourses that thematize the 
relation between cases, the validity and consistency of legal rules, the 
establishment of principles and the construction of legal concepts. Coupling 
of episodes makes two things possible. The particular legal episode is 
furnished with elaborate structures. At the same time it produces via 
conflict resolution through rules a normative "surplus" which can be 
exploited in future legal episodes. 
Thus, the interplay of phylogenetic and ontogenetic development in law 
can be conceived as the linkage of two communicative cycles. The particular 
legal proceeding is in a sense the laboratory of law in which variations are 
produced and selection tried out. This is linked to the second communica-
tive cycle which decides about the stabilization of legal selections in legal 
culture and legal tradition. The concept of legal validity refers to the 
circular relationship between these two cycles. Legal decisions in concrete 
proceedings make reference to recursively culturally stabilized legal rules 
which have been shaped by recursive reference to other concrete proceed-
ings. On the other hand, we have the initial starting point for new legal 
developments within the sphere of legal culture. 
5. Coevolution and Regulation 
Until now, autopoiesis has led to the impression of a total internalization 
and isolation of subsystems in their evolution. Of course, it would be 
misleading to exclude the environment from the evolutionary processes. 
The environmental reference in evolution however is produced not in the 
direct, causal production of legal developments, but in processes of co-
evolution. The thesis is as follows: In co-evolutionary processes it is not only 
the autopoiesis of the legal system which has a selective effect on the 

236 
Gunther Teubner 
development of its own structures; the autopoiesis of other subsystems and that 
of society also a f f e c t s — in any case in a much more mediatory and indirect 
way — the selection of legal changes. 
Again the relationship of phylogenetic and ontogenetic development is 
crucial for this "process symbiosis" (Jantsch, 1980). The concrete interac-
tion (in law — the legal proceedings) forms the strategic hinge of coevolu-
tion. Societal interactions as a rule do not participate only in the autopoietic 
circulation of a subsystem, but are 
mostly bound in to various system 
circulations. It is the individual legal proceeding, the individual decision-
making process in a company, the confrontation in the family, in which 
the expectations of various subsystems converge, complement each other, 
supplement each other and conflict with each other. In the individual 
interaction it is, as it were, negotiated which expectations establish the 
direction and can be combined into practical clusters of roles. The individual 
interaction also rules on the compatibility of various subsystem structures. 
For here it must be concretely shown whether communication can still be 
achieved under various pressures of expectation and how they proceed 
under these pressures. 
The regulatory trilemma which I have analyzed elsewhere (Teubner, 
1985 a) only becomes clear in the individual interaction. It poses the choice: 
disintegration of the elements of the one subsystem or of the other, or 
finally, indifference and a lack of structural coupling. Where expectations 
totally diverge, either the interaction as a whole disintegrates or does not 
even materialize, or individual elements of expectation are ruled out as 
incompatible and irrelevant. A real disintegration can correspondingly not 
occur on the phylogenetic level or is only conceivable as an extreme 
borderline case. It can occur however on the ontogenetic level. The result 
is an interesting change of emphasis. What leads to disintegration on the 
ontogenetic level leads to a lack of structural coupling on the phylogenetic 
level. 
Coevolution by de-differentiated interaction can therefore be conceptual-
ized as follows. Variation is triggered off by impetuses to variation from 
the different subsystems. These must pass through the "needle's eye" of 
the interaction and can then, as mutual influences of the systems, produce 
pressure for change on each other. Selection happens in such a way that 
the structures which crystallize out of the concrete interaction form by 
exposure to the selection of the different autopoietic systems. Finally, 
retention happens in such a way that the expectation which has been singled 
out in the interaction must be adapted to the various philosophies and 
dogmatics. This can in the long term lead to a mutual influencing of the 
different subsystems by philosophies and dogmatics. These do not align 
themselves to each other by direct philosophical comparison and cognitive 
exchange, but by the requirement of compatibility with structures of 
expectation in the concrete interaction. This may then mean that philoso-

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
237 
phies in different subsystems are incompatible as regards their cognitive 
preconditions, but nevertheless that they produce compatibility in their 
consequences of expectation for individual interactions. An example is on 
the one hand the idealistic image of a legal subject which chooses its 
relationships in freedom, and on the other hand the image of an economy 
regulated by the market. Both do not necessarily agree in their cognitive 
conditions but in their consequences of expectation, for instance in the 
emphasis on contractual freedom, contractual compliance, etc. 
In this coevolution, processes of coordination between the different 
subsystems take place on the level of concrete processes of interaction, in 
which the requirements of the different subsystems collide with each other. 
If the problems of coordination become critical, this may be an occasion 
to deploy systems of interaction between the systems — as it were, 
artificially, consciously and controlled — which drive on this coevolution 
purposefully. This is the sphere of intersystem systems of negotiation, in 
which the coordination of philosophies and of expectations is consciously 
and purposefully practiced. This would be an occasion to speak of regulated 
coevolution (on this see Teubner, 1987 c). 
Translated from the German by Iain Fraser. 
Bibliography 
ABEL, RICHARD (ed.) ( 1 9 8 2 ) The Politics of Informal Justice. Vol 1 : The American 
Experience; 
Vol. 2: Comparative 
Studies. New York: Academic Press. 
BALLMER, T. and ERNST VON WEIZSÄCKER (1974) "Biogenese und Selbstorganisation", 
in Ε. von Weizsäcker (ed.), Offene Systeme I: Beiträge %ur Zeitstruktur 
von 
Information, 
Entropie und Evolution. Stuttgart: Klett. 
BEER, STAFFORD (1975) Preface to "Autopoiesis" in Η. Maturana and F. Varela, 
Autopoietic 
Systems. A Characterisation 
of the Living Organisation. 
Urbana. 
BERCUSSON, BRIAN (1987) "Juridification and Disorder", in G. Teubner (e.d.), 
Juridification 
of Social Spheres. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
BLANKENBURG, ERHARD ( 1 9 8 4 ) "The Poverty of Evolutionism: A Critique of Teubner's 
Case for 'Reflexive Law"', 18 Law Society Review 273. 
BLANKENBURG, ERHARD and HUBERT ROTTLEUTHNER (eds.) ( 1 9 8 0 ) Alternative 
Rechtsformen 
und Alternativen 
Recht. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
BRÜGGEMEIER, G E R T (1980) "Probleme einer Theorie des Wirtschaftsrechts" in H, D. 
Assmann, G. Brüggemeier, D. Hart and Ch. Joerges, Wirtschaftsrecht 
als Kritik 
des 
Privatrechts. 
Königstein: Athenäum. 
— (1982) "Wirtschaftsordnung und Staatsverfassung — Mischverfassung des demokra-
tischen Interventionskapitalismus — Verfassungstheorie des Sozialstaates. Drei Mo-
delle der Verflechtung von Staat und Wirtschaft?" in G. Winter and V. Gessner (eds.), 
Rechtsformen 
der Verflechtung von Staat und Wirtschaft. 
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
BUCKLEY, WALTER (1967) Sociology and Modern Systems 
Theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
— (1968) "Society as a Complex Adaptive System", in W. Buckley (ed.) Modern 
Systems 
Research for the Behaviorial Scientist. Chicago: Aldine. 

2 3 8 
Gunther Teubner 
BÜHL, WALTER 
( 1 9 8 4 ) "Gibt es eine soziale Evolution?" 3 1 Zeitschrift für Politik 
3 0 3 . 
CAMPBELL, 
DONALD T. (1969) "Variation and Selective Retention in Socio-Cultural 
Evolution", 14 General Systems 69. 
— (1970) "Natural Selection as an Epistemological Model" in R. Naroll and R. Cohen 
(eds.), A Handbook of Method in Cultural Anthropology. 
Garden City. 
— (1974) "Evolutionary Epistemology" in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy 
of Karl 
Popper, Vol. 1. La Salle, II: Open Court. 
— (1975) "On the Conflicts between Biological and Social Evolution and between 
Psychology and Moral Tradition", 30 American 
Psychologist 
1103. 
— (1980) "Social Morality Norms as Evidence of Conflict between Biological Human 
Nature and Social System Requirements", in G. S. Stand (ed.), Morality as a Biological 
Phenomenon. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
CHRISTIE (1976) "Konflikte als Eigentum?" 12 Informationsbrief 
der Sektion 
Rechtssoziologie 
der deutschen Gesellschaft für Soziologie 
12. 
DAWKINS, R . ( 1 9 7 6 ) The Selfish Gene. London: Oxford University Press. 
EDER, KLAUS ( 1 9 7 6 ) Die Entstehung staatlich organisierter 
Gesellschaften. 
Ein Beitrag %u einer 
Theorie socialer Evolution. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1978) "Zur Rationalisierungsproblematik des modernen Rechts", 29 Sociale Welt 247. 
— (1985) Geschichte als Lernpro^eß? 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1986) "Prozedurale Rationalität moderner Rechtsentwicklung jenseits von formaler 
Rationalisierung", 7 Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie 
1. 
EIGEN, MANFRED and PETER SCHUSTER (1979) The Hypercycle. 
A Principle of Natural 
Self-
Organisation. 
Berlin: Springer. 
ETZIONI, AMITAI ( 1 9 6 8 ) The Active Society. A Theory of Societal and Political Processes. 
New 
York: Free Press. 
FRIEDMAN, LAWRENCE M. (1975) The Legal System. A Social Science Perspective. 
New York: 
Simon and Schuster. 
GORDON, ROBERT W. (1984) "Critical Legal Histories", 36 Stanford Law Review 57. 
GÖRLITZ, AXEL and RÜDIGER VOIGT (1985) Rechtspolitologie. 
Eine Einführung. 
Opladen: 
Westdeutscher Verlag. 
HABERMAS, JÜRGEN (1973) Legitimation 
Crisis. Boston: Beacon Press. 
— (1976) Zur Rekonstruktion 
des Historischen 
Materialismus. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1979) Communication 
and the Evolution of Society. Boston: Beacon Press. 
— (1984) The Theory of Communicative 
Action. Boston: Beacon Press. 
— (1985) "Law as Medium and Law as Institution", in G. Teubner (ed.) Dilemmas 
of 
Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
HAFERKAMP, HANS and M I C H A E L SCHMID ( 1 9 8 7 ) Sinn, Kommunikation 
und sociale 
Differen-
zierung. Beiträge zu Luhmanns Theorie sozialer Systeme. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
HAMILTON, W. D. (1978) "The Evolution of Altruistic Behavior" in Τ . Η. Clutton-Brock 
and P. Η. Harway (eds.), Readings in Social Biology. San Francisco: W. Η. Freeman. 
HART, HERBERT L. A. (1961) The Concept of Law. London: Oxford University Clarendon 
Press. 
HAYEK, FRIEDRICH A. VON (1967) "The Theory of Complex Phenomena" in F. A. Hayek, 
Studies in Philosophy, 
Politics and Economics. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
— (1973) Law, Legislation 
and Liberty, 
Vol. 1: Rules and Order. London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
— (1976) Law Legislation 
and Liberty, 
Vol. 2: The Mirage 
of Social Justice. 
London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
— (1979) Law, Legislation and Liberty, Vol. 3: The Political Order of a Free People. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
H E J L , PETER M. (1982 a) "Die Theorie autopoietischer Systeme: Perspektiven für die 
soziologische Systemtheorie", 13 Rechtstheorie 
45. 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
239 
— (1982 b) So^ialwissenschaft 
als Theorie selbstreferentieller 
Systeme. Frankfurt a. Μ.: Campus. 
— (1985) "Konstruktion der sozialen Konstruktion: Grundlinien einer konstruktivis-
tischen Sozialtheorie" in A. Mohlar (ed.), Einführung in den Konstruktivismus. 
München: 
Oldenbourg. 
HELLER, THOMAS ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Legal Discourse in the Positive State: A Post-Structuralist 
Account" in G. Teubner (ed.), Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
HIRSHLEIFER, JADE ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Evolutionary Models in Economics and Law", 4 Research in 
Law and Economics 1. 
JANTSCH, E R I C H ( 1 9 8 0 ) The Self Organising 
Universe: Scientific 
and Human Implications 
of 
the Emerging Paradigm of Evolution. Oxford: Pergamon. 
KÜBLER, FRIEDRICH (ed.) (1984) Verrechtlichungvon 
Wirtschaft, Arbeit und socialer 
Solidarität. 
Baden-Baden: Nomos. 
LADEUR, K A R L - H E I N Z ( 1 9 8 4 ) Abwägung — ein neues Paradigma des Verwaltungsrechts. 
Frank-
furt a. M.: Campus. 
LAWRENCE, PAUL R. and JAY W. LORSCH (1967 a) "Differentiation and Integration in 
Complex Organizations", 12 Administrative 
Science Quarterly 
1. 
— (1967 b) Organisations 
and Environment. 
Boston: Harvard University Press. 
— (1969) Developing 
Organisations: 
Diagnosis and Action. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1970) "Evolution des Rechts", 1 Rechtstheorie 
3. 
— (1975) "Evolution und Geschichte" in Ν. Luhmann (ed.), Soziologische 
Aufklärung 
2. 
Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
— (1981) Politische 
Theorie im Wohlfahrtsstaat. 
München: Olzog. 
— (1982) The Differentiation 
of Society. New York: Columbia University Press. 
— (1983) "Evolution — kein Menschenbild" in R. Riedl and F. Kreuzer (eds.), Evolution 
und Menschenbild. 
Hamburg: Hoffmann & Campe. 
— (1984 a) "Die Rückgabe des zwölften Kamels". Paper presented at the Conference on 
Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University Institute, Firenze (December 
12-15). 
— (1984 b) Sociale Systeme. Grundriß einer allgemeinen 
Theorie. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1985 a) "The Self-Reproduction of Law and its Limits", in G. Teubner (ed.) Dilemmas 
of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1985 b) Λ Sociological 
Theory of Law (German original, 1972). London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul. 
— (1987) "Some Problems with Reflexive Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy 
as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO and FRANCISCO VARELA ( 1 9 7 5 ) Autopoietic Systems. A 
Characterisa-
tion of the Living Organisation. 
Urbana. 
— (1980) Autopoiesis 
and Cognition. Boston/Dordrecht: Reidel. 
MEYER, PETER (1982) Sosiobiologie 
und Sos'ologie. 
Neuwied: Luchterhand. 
NAHAMOWITZ, PETER (1987) "Difficulties with Economic Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
NOCKE, JOACHIM (1986) "Autopoiesis — Rechtssoziologie in seltsamen Schleifen", 4 
Kritische fust is 363. 
NONET, PHILIPPE and PHILIP SELZNICK ( 1 9 7 8 ) Law and Society in Transition. New York: 
Harper and Row. 
NOZICK, ROBERT (1974) Anarchy, State and Utopia. New York: Basic Books. 
PRIEST, GEORGE L. ( 1 9 7 7 ) "The Common Law Process and the Selection for Efficient 
Rules", 6 Journal of Legal Studies 65. 
R E I C H , NORBERT (1984) "Reflexives Recht? Bemerkungen zu einer neuen Theorie von 
Gunther Teubner", Festschrift für Rudolf Wassermann. Neuwied: Luchterhand. 

240 
Gunther Teubner 
ROTH, 
G E R H A R D (1982) "Conditions of Evolution and Adaptation in Organisms as 
Autopoietic Systems", in D. Mossakowski and G. Roth (eds.), Environmental 
Adaptation 
and Evolution. Stuttgart: G. Fischer. 
— (1984) "Erkenntnistheoretische Probleme des Prinzips der Selbstorganisation und der 
Selbstreferentialität". Manuscript: Bremen. 
ROTH, G E R H A R D and HELMUT SCHWEGLER ( 1 9 8 1 ) Self-Organising 
Systems. An Interdiscipli-
nary Approach. Frankfurt a. Μ.: Campus. 
ROTTLEUTHNER, 
HUBERT ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Aspekte der Rechtsentwicklung in Deutschland. Ein 
soziologischer Vergleich deutscher Rechtskulturen", 6 Zeitschrift für 
Rechtssoziologie 
206. 
— (1986) "Theories of Legal Evolution: Between Empiricism and Philosophy of His-
tory", Rechtstheorie Beiheft 9, 217. 
RUBIN, PAUL H . (1977) "Why is the Common Law Efficient?" 6 Journal of Legal Studies 
51. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Substantive and Reflexive Elements in Modern Law" 1 7 
Law and Society Review 239. 
— (1985 a) "After Legal Instrumentalism: Strategic Models of Post-Regulatory Law" in 
G. Teubner (ed.), Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (ed.) (1985 b) Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1987 a) "Episodenverknüpfung. Zur Steigerung von Selbstreferenz im Recht" in D. 
Baecker, J. Markowitz, R. Stichweh, Tyrell and H, Willke (eds.), Theorie als Passion. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1987 b) "Juridification — Concepts, Aspects, Limits, Solutions" in G. Teubner (ed.) 
Juridification 
of Social Spheres. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1987 c) "Social Order from Legislative Noise?" Autopoietic Closure as a Problem 
for Legal Regulation" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. 
Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
— (ed.) (1987 d) State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Regulation and Autonomy in a 
New Perspective. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER and HELMUT W I L L K E ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Kontext and Autonomie: Gesellschaftli-
che Selbststeuerung durch reflexives Recht", 6 Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie 4. 
TOULMIN, STEPHEN (1972) Human Understanding. London: Oxford University Press. 
TUGENDHAT, ERNST ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Zur Entwicklung von moralischen Begründungsstrukturen 
im modernen Recht", Archiv für Rechts- und Sozialphilosophie Beiheft 14, 1. 
U L R I C H , H . and G . J . B . PROBST (eds.) ( 1 9 8 4 ) Seif Organization and Management of Social 
Systems. Berlin: Springer. 
UNGER, ROBERTO (1976) Law in Modern Society. New York: Free Press. 
V A N P A R I J S , PHILIPPE ( 1 9 8 1 ) Evolutionary Explanation in the Social Sciences: An Emerging 
Paradigm. London: Tavistock. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO ( 1 9 7 9 ) Principles of Biological Autonomy. New York: North Holland. 
— (1981a) "Autonomy and Autopoiesis" in G. Roth and H. Schwegler (eds.), Self-
organising Systems. An Interdisciplinary 
Approach. Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
— (1981b) "Describing the Logic of the living" in M. Zeleny (ed.), Autopoiesis: 
A 
Theory of Living Organisation. New York: North Holland. 
VOIGT, RÜDIGER (ed.) (1980) Verrechtlichung. Frankfurt a. Μ.: Athenäum. 
— (ed.) (1983) Gegentendenzen zur Verrechtlichung. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
— (1984) Abschied vom Recht? Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp. 
W A K E , D A V I D B . , G E R H A R D ROTH and MARVALEE H . W A K E ( 1 9 8 4 ) "On the Problem of 
Stasis in Organismal Evolution", 101 Journal of Theoretical Biology 211. 
WATSON, A L A N ( 1 9 8 5 ) The Evolution of Law. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
WESEL, U W E ( 1 9 8 5 ) Frühformen des Rechts in vorstaatlichen Gesellschaften. Frankfurt a. M . : 
Suhrkamp. 

Evolution of Autopoietic Law 
241 
WILLKE, HELMUT ( 1 9 8 7 ) "Societal Guidance through Law" in G. Teubner (ed.), State, 
Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
WILSON, E. (1978) Sociobiology. The New Synthesis. Cambridge/London. 
WIETHÖLTER, RUDOLF (1986) "Social Science Models in Economic Law" in T. Daintith 
and G. Teubner (eds.), Contract and Organisation. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
ZELENY, M I L A N (ed.) ( 1 9 8 0 ) Autopoiesis, Dissipative Structures, and Spontaneous Social Orders. 
Boulder: Westview Press. 
— (1981 a) Autopoiesis. A Theory of Living Organisation. New York: North Holland. 
— (1981 b) "Autogenesis" in M. Zeleny (ed.), Autopoiesis. A Theory of Living 
Organisation. 
New York: North Holland. 
ZELENY, MILAN and N . PIERRE ( 1 9 7 6 ) "Simulation of Self-Renewing Systems" in E . 
Jantsch and C. Waddington (eds.), Evolution and Consciousness. Reading: Addison 
Wesley. 
ZEMEN, HERBERT ( 1 9 8 3 ) Evolution des Rechts. Eine Vorstudie %u den Evolutionsprins^ipien des 
Rechts auf anthropologischer 
Grundlage. Wien/New York. 
ZOLO, DANILO ( 1 9 8 7 ) "The Epistemological Status of the Theory of Autopoiesis and its 
Application to the Social Sciences" in G. Teubner (ed.) State, Law, Economy as 
Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law: A 
Critique of Niklas Luhmann, "The Unity of the 
Legal System" 
K A R L - H E I N Z LADEUR 
Bremen 
I. Competition and Substitution of Theories in Public Law 
1. "Argumentation Theory" vs. "New Dogmatics" — the Current 
Debate on Legal Methods 
It is with good reason that Krawietz in a critique of modern analytical 
theories of legal documentation called for a theory of "theory-substitution" 
(1979: 128; 1981; 1983 a: 354; 1984 a; 1984 b). He defines theory substitution 
as the "processes of severance and gradual replacement of 'old' theories of 
argumentation by 'new' ways of thinking". Krawietz understands the 
present interest and value-oriented jurisprudence (Interessen- und Wertungsju-
risprudenas 
a practical discipline, which is supported not only by common 
sense but by social theory, especially in its empirical knowledge (Krawietz, 
1983 a: 379). If this is correct, then one would not search for the "rules" 
of theory substitution in a metasystem of theory comparison, which in its 
turn would be in need of justification. Even the proponents of "rational 
argumentation" (Alexy, 1978; Peczenik, 1982; Aarnio et al., 1981; Aarnio, 
1981; for constitutional law, cf. Schlink, 1980; Ladeur 1982) refer their 
theory to the "groundlessness" of "forms of life" (Aarnio et al., 1981), that 
is, on historical contingencies.1 What is meant by "forms of life" is vaguely 
defined in the theory of rational argumentation, while the opposing theory 
gains access to them by its very pragmatism, which encompasses both 
normative and empirical levels. 
1 This reading implies the assumption of a quasi-spatial limit to rational understanding, 
the presupposition of minimal meanings. As opposed to this, a reading is to be 
preferred which sees the language game as being anchored in a "general agonistic", 
played as a competition (Lyotard, 1979: 23; Gondek, 1986). The public of the language 
game is not a fraction of a "universal auditorium" but the substrate of an historical 
consensus of praxis (Perelman and L. Olbrechts-Tyteka, 1969: 31). 

Perspectives on a Post-Modem Theory of Law 
243 
If one changes the question about theory substitution a little and asks 
about the conditions of the competition of theories — the replacement of 
theories by other theories can probably only be investigated over a longer 
period of time — then the "theory of argumentation" with its reliance on 
the relative autonomy and self-transparency of language (Broekman, 1983: 
105) as well as the possibility of gain of legal rationality through discursive 
experiences before an "auditorium" which is as comprehensive as possible 
is better associated with a social epoch or, more exactly, a trend of 
development which transcends the limits of the classical state, both in its 
"essence" as well as with regard to the personal substratum, in the direction 
of a "stronger plurality" (new social state agendas, the incorporation of 
groups into political and administrative processes, etc.). In constitutional 
law, that legal field in which political conjunctures show themselves most 
clearly, Häberle (1975) and Müller (1984) could be said to stand for this 
direction, Häberle for a more "personal" / group-oriented variant of the 
theory of argumentation with an orientation on "consensus" and the 
conditions of its maintenance in social state-induced change, and Müller 
for a more "factual" method insofar as he sees the rational "concretization 
of law" which goes beyond the classical concept of interpretation as 
being based in the "concrete dependency of normativity on factuality" 
(Sachbestimmtheit) and, therefore, designates the explanation of " 'basic' facts 
selected with the help of the program of norms" as the task of legal work 
(Müller, 1984: 253; Κ. Hesse, 1985: 16). For that other vein in the discussion 
of method which is of a dogmatically practical orientation, Böckenförde 
could be named in the area of constitutional law: Böckenförde (1983; also 
Krawietz, 1983 a; Schlink, 1984) stresses programmatically the dogmatic 
character of the "science of the law of the state" (Staatsrecht) which is 
oriented on the classical theory of interpretation. The employment of this 
term rather than "constitutional law" is, in itself, symptomatic. It would 
be wrong, however, to imagine nothing other than a backward-looking 
state-centeredness lies behind this — of course, that is valid for the other 
side of the controversy too: premature political estimations of the "theory 
of argumentation" are neither helpful nor intended here. It is much more 
a matter of describing social fields of perception. Especially practice-
oriented methods and those sciences understood as practical are particularly 
adjusted to the de- and re-structuring of those social fields of perception. 
This is accomplished through receptive (internal) assimilation and reactive 
(external) accommodation. Böckenförde's contribution contrasts remark-
ably with the context of the discussion of methods in the science of 
constitutional law in so far as, after the lively controversies of the seventies, 
stagnation is more readily to be observed. It would certainly not be correct 
to presume that in the discussion about constitutional law a "theory 
substitution" is announcing itself to the detriment of the theory of argumen-
tation: it has neither been predominant in constitutional law in the past 

244 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
nor will it disappear in the future, but it is certainly not misguided to 
suppose that dogmatic thinking in constitutional law at present and in the 
near future is likely to strengthen. This is the more so since the discussion 
of methods cannot be regarded as being independent from that criticism 
of the social state and of an instrumental understanding of law ("legaliza-
tion") which has been articulated both scientifically and politically in the 
last few years. A superficial generalization would certainly be misplaced 
but the method controversy and the political controversy run parallel to 
the extent that an important objection exists both to the practice of the 
social state and to the theory of argumentation in the accusation of disregard 
for or overburdening of the specific rationality and regulative capacity of 
the state and the law. Böckenförde emphasizes therefore — coupled with 
a sharp attack on Häberle in particular (Böckenförde 1983: 330; also 
1982) — the dogmatic character of the science of the law of the state which 
should orient itself much more strongly on the constitution as a prescribed 
order, that is, an order to be interpreted, and not a "still to be created" order, 
which is to be made concrete. The "uniform will" of the maker of the 
constitution, he says, is to be reconstructed and the science of the law of 
the state, as a dogmatic science, demands the adherence to a proven "method 
which [proceeds] according to rational, inter-subjectively conveyed and 
testable, and, therefore, objective criteria and standards" and is "thus not 
[open to] subjective preference or case by case pre-conceptions". He says, 
between the science of the law of the state and constitutional jurisdiction 
a methodically-conducted context of argumentation is to be maintained or 
established which "marks out and fixes the area of what can be said, 
dogmatized and criticized in the domain of the law of the state with a 
view to feedback and, thus, preserves the law of the state from political 
institutionalization". This approach is directed against the "anarchist plural-
ism of methods" which is characteristic of the so-called "open society of the 
interpreters of the constitution" (Häberle) and which sees the constitution as 
being constituted as a (group) process. As a consequence of the opposing 
position, the constitution would again become more strongly a citizens' 
constitution, as it is called elsewhere in Böckenförde. In representation, 
the immediate plurality of individuals finds a unity in which the "real self" 
of the citizen is brought to "public presentation". Groups would then 
again be more strongly reduced to their function as "mediating links" 
between state and citizen; they would forfeit the privileged position which 
the topical-open argumentative method of making concrete the constitu-
tion — even if not reflected in this consequence — has assigned them. 
The antithesis can be carried to the point that, according to Böckenförde's 
conception, the "privatized" and de-professionalized interpretation of the 
constitution accompanying the personal and technical extension of the 
state's duties should be concentrated, through the introduction of a "Nu-
merus clausus" for interpreters of the constitution in the profession of 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
245 
the specialists in state law and should be made more uniform through 
revitalization of classical methods of interpretation. 
On a higher level of abstraction, outside the doctrine of public law, 
Krawietz also holds this position: a teleological ordering of law is a specific 
type of legal systematization which allows the selection of aims and means 
and their hierarchization of intended results and unintended secondary 
effects. Its specific character can be found in the "area of aims and purposes 
of law which are empirically fruitful, sharply outlined in content, precisely 
circumscribed or, at least, circumscribable" (Krawietz, 1981: 335). This 
achievement in systematizing is neither purely linguistically based through 
the structuring of arguments or the analysis of "fields" of human experience 
and action, nor does it presuppose like the classical German legal positiv-
ism — often misunderstood, namely, by being reduced to a blind executive 
automatism — a pyramid shaped structure (Losano, 1984: 648), a "compre-
hensive idea rising in steps to the last rallying point" (Gerber, 1863: V). 
German legal positivism was, in accordance with classical, analytical scien-
tific thinking, based on the assumption of a hierarchical system of acts of 
volition, legal maxims and legal institutions, rising from the particular to 
the general. And the independence of positivistic legal dogma in particular, 
independent of the legislation of the legislator, was compatible with "blind" 
submission to the law to the extent that the middle level of the system-
structure (the level of legal maxims), did, in fact, leave a relatively large 
amount of room for maneuver between a constructively-modelled character 
of acts of volition by private and public body corporates and legal institu-
tions as the highest rules of legal action; but it saw its possiblities of 
development as being limited through already-existing structures of the 
"society of individuals" and through connection-constraints "from below" 
and "from above". The building of society on the basis of the will of the 
individual, the separation of state and society, the limitation of the state's 
duties which this entails, a linear, static model of equilibrium based upon 
this — these were the essential elements of construction which the specific 
rationality of the legal system laid down in a structure limiting the variabil-
ity of possibilities. The classical method of interpretation — in the form 
which already pointed beyond Savigny (1840: 260) and his primarily histor-
ical way of thinking — was also oriented on this: the hermeneutic systema-
tizing of legal texts sought in the change of perspective of "external" 
volition (variation) and "internal" grammatical combination (structure) to 
refer the new to connection possibilities which were to guarantee the 
continuity of the system in charge. 
2. From Orientation on Text-Structure 
to Situative 
Functionalization 
The crisis of the structure-oriented model of interpretation was unavoidable 
as the tasks of the state increased such that the relatively simple basic 

246 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
assumptions on which the system-construction of jurisprudence and the 
practice of law was built proved themselves to be too narrow because they 
allowed too few possibilities. The law which was applied (above all) to the 
social state, reflecting the transformation of the "society of individuals" 
into the "society of organizations" had, for its part, become fragmentary 
as a result of the change to the strategic handling of situations and the 
complex arenas of activity having plurally-bequeathed power, along with 
the interest-constellations particular to each. The structural unifying of law 
in a hierarchy of legal texts which were built pyramidically from the 
particular to the general proved itself to be too rigid. Even that canon of 
teleological explication of texts which seemed to be most flexible with 
regard to a future orientation by means of a "further consideration" of the 
aims pursued by the legislator and which, interestingly enough, is not to 
be found in Savigny could, on its own, not provide the concept of the 
application of laws with the necessary regulative capacity because of the 
fragmented decisional situations which could only be reflected upon in 
retrospect and no longer be reconstructed according to an already-existing 
model. This is, in my opinion, the reason for the appearance of methods 
of interpretation which give flexibility to the legal structure through 
proceduralizing, that is, through the generating of legal decisions ex post, 
through moulding the situation to be settled (and no longer only through 
subsumptive application of the general model to the concrete circumstances) 
(Ladeur, 1982: 393). This happened — as indicated above — in different 
directions through the widening of the circle of "interpreters"; through 
the involvement of the "auditorium" before which the situation has to be 
argumentatively constructed; through the greater gaining in autonomy of 
the "case area" whose development-dynamic is, at least partially, equipped 
with a carte-blanche, so to speak, in normativity; through "orientation on 
consequences" (Teubner, 1975; cf. also Liibbe-Wolff, 1981), etc. 
The "new dogmatics" represents a counter-movement in the old direction 
but one, informed through the theory of argumentation, on a higher level 
of complexity: today it should be agreed that a juridical methodology can 
no longer unconditionally revert to the re-building of the hierarchy of legal 
texts and the rule of the general over the particular. In this respect, a 
characteristic feature of an evolutionary development of theory — which 
will be examined more thoroughly below — asserts itself here: under the 
pressure of new problems, the old theory is initially maintained and shored 
up for a time through extensions and through an ever greater lengthening 
of the bond between legislative intention and teleological, situative interpre-
tation, only then to collapse. This collapse makes room for a new construc-
tion (Kuhn, 1962; Loeck, 1983) which, however, severs the bond in so far 
as it opens the legal formulation of judgements wider to criteria of rational-
ity drawn from the situation or from an argumentation proceeding. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
247 
Simultaneously, it is typical, however, that the historical character of this 
evolutionary step is generally not taken notice of. It does not appear 
compatible with the dignity of a theory claiming to be true when it is 
confirmed that its conditions of possibility correlate with the conditions 
of the development of a field of social action and perception, and that, 
therefore, between the origin and the understanding of phenomena, "iso-
morphy" rules (Riedl, 1985; cf. also Allen, 1980; 1982). The excluding of 
the observer from the field of observation, the freeing of the internal 
"establishment context" of a theory from the heteronymous dross of the 
"discovery context" is still widely regarded in social and cultural sciences 
as an almost incontestable command. Accordingly, a decided tendency exists 
to de-historicize a theory to such an extent that its historical "conditions of 
discovery" (Schlink, 1980) are only brought up to explain that the theory 
in itself had always been valid but had not been recognized earlier. Conver-
sely, there is also a widespread tendency to detach the "old" theories from 
the context of establishment in which they were "discovered" and to 
measure their "context of establishment" using the criterion of the "new" 
theory which has, so to speak, raised itself to the level of a meta-theory, 
and to discard it as ideological. German constitutional potivism in particular 
has been a privileged victim of such a procedure (Oertzen, 1974; generally 
Feyerabend, 1976; M. Hesse, 1980; Lyotard, 1979: 42; Rorty, 1981; 1984: 
180). 
In this respect, Krawietz's question about the conditions of theory-
substitution, which have also to be analyzed historically, is the more 
remarkable in a legal dogma, however, which sees itself as a "practical 
science", and is also the more urgent (Krawietz, 1976). (The justification 
for such an isomorphy — which could have been regarded as an ideology 
in the traditional discussion context polarized by materialistic and idealistic 
reductionism — can be explained in newer approaches to an evolutionary 
theory of cognition.) 
The counter-movement of the "new dogmatics" maintains its thrust in 
that, while recognizing the context-dependency of the application of legal 
norms which changes the interpretation to a "concretization" (Krawietz, 
1981: 332), it insists on the rationality of a specific-legal form which has, to 
say the least, been neglected by the different variants of the "argumentation 
theory" in their search for a rationality presenting 
(Broekman, 1983: 96) 
itself directly in the discourse procedure of the people involved or in the 
reconstruction of the "nature of the case area" (as Müller, 1984, puts it). 
Juridical rationality has been — as Broekman (1983: 100) justly accepts — 
transferred from the theory of argumentation to a general social purpose-
rationality. With the discarding of the structural prescriptions of the pyra-
mid-shaped hierarchy of legal texts and of those formalistic rules necessary 
for application, the discursiveness of legal activities as language activities 
seemed to gain direct access to natural language as a medium of social 

248 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
communication and self-enlightenment, a possibility which the structure 
of the governing rules of deduction and the close reference to certain 
canonized texts of the classical legal method had obviously tended to 
impede (Broekman, 1982; 1983; 1984). Against this, the form-exactitude, 
thus the rationality specific to the law, is, in the view of the new dogmatics, 
to be distanced from substantial aims of justice and general demands 
for consistency and universalizability of social discourses: even if legal 
argumentation is not primarily restricted through particular (textual) struc-
tural prescriptions, there emerges a new, more flexible, but, nonetheless, 
specific selectivity from specific functional demands of the legal system 
(Krawietz, 1981: 333; see also Kitschelt, 1980). The reconstruction of 
system-thinking in jurisprudence vis-ä-vis procedure-oriented argumenta-
tion theory thus does not proceed ahistorically but transposes the orienta-
tion of selectivity from the structure to the function. This function consists 
above all in "absorbing", through the respective juridical decision-making, 
that uncertainty occurring in the legal system as a consequence of the 
structural imprecision of legal rules referring to the correctness of the 
normative result of the decision. Herewith, the function takes over the 
regulation of the aspect of cognition, which does not restrict itself to being 
a general, social self-enlightenment but is also adjusted to order "the 
experience and action of all people ... through the law according to particular 
aims" (Krawietz, 1981: 333). The absorption of uncertainty through the 
process of structure formation is made flexible through the linking to 
function because no longer is only one structure possible. A rather horizontal, 
variable structure formation is demanded which pays heed to the con-
nection-capability of decisions produced "with new information content" to 
former and to later decisions (Krawietz, 1983 a: 333). Initially, the function 
admits many possibilities but their fulfilment in time does not allow a new 
beginning either with regard to the matter or the person concerned; 
possibilities are always being excluded through earlier experience/knowl-
edge and activity as well as through decisions, which possibilities can only 
be newly thematicized at a high political and legal cost. Therewith, the 
"really effective relationships between legal norm-structure and human 
experience and action" (Luhmann, 1972) are admitted in a new form which 
distinguishes itself markedly from the structure-defined unity of traditional 
system-concept. The linking to the function of absorption of uncertainty 
also admits the demand — pointing beyond the old style of norm applica-
tion — to carry on legal system-formation only in the area of possibility 
where both the function and the limitation of law are clearly outlined and 
defined. This corresponds with the demand to build this legal realism into 
a theory of society founded on an empirical-scientific basis (Krawietz, 
1983 a: 383). Only thus can the fulfilment of the orientation-function of 
law, its normative stabilization of expectations and, thus, simultaneously 
the enabling of the "relief of consciousness" (Krawietz, 1981: 307; Schelsky, 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
249 
1972), be guaranteed. The further development of the connection-con-
straints, to which the new decisions are to be adjusted, is controlled through 
the stronger emphasis on professional self-control of the legal interpreters 
(educated in the science of law), which is irreconcilable with an "open 
society" of all those interested and, thus, with the search for as big an 
"auditorium" as possible. 
The relationship of the classical hierarchy model to the theory of argu-
mentation and to the "new dogmatics" can — by greatly simplifying a 
complex development — be reduced to a succession of granting privileges 
to different factors in the system-formation: the system-formation is 
changed over from structure (classical method) to process (the theory of 
argumentation) and, finally, in the "new dogmatics", to function. In the 
next intermediary step, an attempt shall be made to shore up the evolution 
of juridical system-elements, as it has first been demonstrated in one area, 
through a recourse to the element of time in more recent evolutionist 
theories of cognition in order then to examine Luhmann's concept of "self-
referential systems" in regard to its aptitude for the lasting stabilization of 
a function-oriented concept of the legal system. 
3. Time and Theory: The Concept of Autopoiesis as the Basis of a 
Self-Reflexive Theory of Evolution? 
A theory of the "unity of the legal system" which overcomes the old 
structure-oriented ideas of a system-construction based on the "ordering 
of perceptions according to a unified point of view" (Coing, 1954: 191) 
has recently been outlined by Luhmann (Luhmann, infra; see also Hejl, 
1982 a; 1982 b). This concept attempts to integrate the dimension of time 
into a theory which — not least sensitized through the change of theory-
concepts and theory-systems — places itself as a "theory of the system in 
the system" and, thereby, abandons the claim of classical subject-thinking 
to constitute unity as a synthesis of all appearances through concepts (rules) 
in the identity of consciousness as the subject of itself and, through the 
difference of the subject from the appearances, to make objectivity finally 
possible. Such a theory, which does not take the formation of identity and 
difference as a transcendental basis of "timeless cognition" (von Weizsäcker, 
1981: 19) but, on the other hand, does not evade the legitimation problem 
through a plea for pragmatic "social engineering", must be of interest 
regarding the question of the rules of competition and substitution of 
theories in legal dogmatics. The question concerning the theory of cogni-
tion in general and in legal dogmatics in particular was always due to a 
"need for restriction", the search for a "foundation" beyond which one 
cannot return (Rorty, 1981: 343). This is especially valid paradigmatically 
for "legal cognition": Kelsen ultimately hypothesized the foundation of law 
in the postulate of a "basic norm". Von Weizsäcker has pointed out that a 

250 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
greater sensitizing to historical change in social knowledge, to the relation 
between matter and movement as the alternation between two "roles in 
the game of knowledge" does not significantly make it appear reasonable 
to expect "an unending succession of ever more general theories. One 
would more readily expect a final theory to be the fulfilment of the 
paradigm 'theory'. ... A theory of theoretical knowledge itself" which can 
"hold a reflexion on itself insofar as this reflexion can receive the form of 
theoretical knowledge" (von Weizsäcker, 1981: 28). 
Thus, a position is reached which in classic philosophical thinking is 
furnished with the warning, "hie sunt leones". The tenet of the excluded 
third, namely, that something cannot simultaneously be and not be is 
demonstrated through shocking examples of the different paradoxes which 
"pedagogically" accompany occidental thinking, beginning with the tenet 
of Epimenides ("all Cretans lie"). It is precisely this paradoxical thinking, 
however, which Luhmann tries, in the wake of more recent theories of 
evolution, to make productive for a legal theory of the "unity of the legal 
system", which can self-referentially co-thematicize structural changes in 
its object and, simultaneously, in itself in the "form of imperceptible 
evolution" or "planned structural change". An evolutionist theory of 
cognition, in which context Luhmann's new system-thinking is also to be 
placed, transforms the classic subject as the "beginning" of knowledge into 
a series of observer-positions which are interchangeable and mutually 
detachable and "mark" (Spencer Brown, 1969: 26) a difference from which 
relations are possible. Indeed, this concept assumes that the observer is, in 
the end, identical to the difference, to the drawing of boundaries (Weinert, 
1984). The differences, the boundary-drawings are products of the interac-
tion between reality and the logical nature of the human mind. Cognition 
is therewith no longer understood simply as the empirical "application" of 
terms but, even from its origins, that is, from the concepts themselves, is 
placed in the movement of time (Costa de Beauregard, 1963: 90; 1967; von 
Foerster, 1981a). As a process, it is not reversible and cannot be traced 
back to the beginning but presupposes irreversible proceedings in the 
formation of "memory" (von Weizsäcker, 1981: 28; von Foerster, 1969) 
and systems (Atlan, 1984; 1979: 205; 1983 a; de Rosnay, 1981) which 
transform the linear time of reversible trajectories through irreversible 
incisions into a differential, evolutionary "sequence of levels and crises" 
(von Weizsäcker, 1981: 28). With the recognition of the autonomous 
existence of time, which makes possible the change not only of appearances, 
the new, the indeterminate, uncertainty itself is accepted which first gives 
time a direction: complete cognition would suppress time and place all 
elements in a succession which is only apparent but, in truth, however, 
would make them happen simultaneously. (This is precisely the basis for 
the autonomy of the subject of cognition which is postulated against the 
object: cognition becomes timeless, the new cognition has "actually" also 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
251 
been possible earlier (Atlan, 1985 b; 1979: 177; Prigogine, 1984).) Several 
theoretical fundamentals of the evolutionist cognition-theory will be further 
dealt with below. Before discussing the change of Luhmann's concept of 
a self-referential legal system which assumes evolution (time) and which 
constitutes itself as an autonomous system with its own criteria of self-
reproduction through the drawing of boundaries (Luhmann, 1987; generally 
1984; Teubner, 1983; Teubner and Willke, 1984) and henceforth observes 
reality only on its own "screen",2 (though this is linked to other "observa-
tion points"), a further intermediary step is necessary which joins the 
concept of self-referential systems with the fundamentals of the biological 
theory of self-organizing (living) systems and should examine their fruitful-
ness for the formation of social and legal scientific theory analogies. 
System-formation informed by the concept of "autopoiesis" is "no longer 
merely a matter of 'existence' or 'preservation of existence' nor merely of 
problems of self-organization which relate only to the structural level" 
which can change living systems on the basis of experience; it is much 
more a matter "of the elements of which the system consists" (Luhmann, 
supra: 14). The biological theory of autopoiesis is a decisive progress in 
cognition insofar as it reversed the classical adaptation model of "open 
systems" which develop through exchange of energy with their environ-
ment, point-blank into a model of closed systems: biological systems have, 
accordingly, no direct contact with their environment, all external impulses/ 
items of information are, so to speak, "digitalized" and only decoded in 
the system, in particular in the neuronal network of the brain through the 
"culling structures" which are produced and reproduced there. Emphasis 
thereby displaces itself from the input to the internal structure which needs 
external stimuli only in order to activate and preserve itself. The brain 
behaves self-referentially and in circular fashion insofar as it is both operator 
and operated upon — contrary to the tenet of the "excluded third" — a 
paradox which has now become thinkable or tolerable through the reflec-
tion on the irreversibility of time (Varela, 1981; also Scudder, 1975). The 
physiological view of living systems was characterized by the hierarchiza-
tion of single cells into larger function-units (organs) while the newer view 
(Varela, 1978: 78) already considers the individual cell as a circular chain 
of chemical processes which draw and maintain their own boundary and 
also form and reproduce a "higher" unity as an organ also through a 
circular interaction of the "endless repetition of the always identical" 
(Varela, 1981: 302). The two sides of reductionism, the fixation on the 
elements or, conversely, the fixation on the "organic" context, are aban-
2 But the boundary of a social system is not a distinction drawn between an inner and 
an outer space; it is rather to be viewed as the impact of the productive matrices of 
the "dissipative structure" of the system which are the preconditions of emergent 
new meaning (Ceruti, 1985: 34). 

252 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
doned, the search for the beginning proves itself to be in vain. The brain 
and its components produce nothing other than themselves. Maturana has 
formulated this peculiarity of autonomy and self-reference in a general 
form as follows (Maturana, 1981: 21): "We maintain that there are systems 
that are defined as unities, as networks of productions of components that: 
(1) recursively, through their interactions, generate and realize the network 
that produces them; and (2) constitute, in the space in which they exist, 
the boundaries of this network as components that participate in the 
realization of the network." 
This necessarily simplified description may be interrupted at this point 
as we are here chiefly concerned with the discussion of "secondary model-
ling" of this concept for juridical system-formation and with the conse-
quences resulting for the self-observation of the legal system and its "theory 
substitution". Details will be returned to during the presentation and 
criticism of this concept. 
II. Luhmann's Theory of "Self-Referential Systems'* — 
a Complex Model of the Self-Reflexion of Legal Systems? 
1. The Possibility of a Theory of the System in System 
Following Maturana's system-concept for living systems, Luhmann formu-
lated the following thesis for the legal system: "The indissoluble unity of an 
element for the system can be constituted only by the system; it follows from 
its capacity to associate which is produced within the system. An autopoietic 
system therefore constitutes the elements of which it consists through the 
elements of which it consists. In doing so it sets limits which do not exist in 
the substructure complexity of the environment of the system" (Luhmann, 
supra: 14). Thereby, what matters primarily to him is the unity of the element 
(Luhmann, supra: 16). Into the self-reproducing social system a "self-descrip-
tion of the system by itself must therefore be introduced" so that points 
of connection for further elements can be created again and again for the 
"continuous self-constituting". "The function of formation of unity — al-
ways presupposing differentiation — lies in the autopoiesis of the system". 
This means that the self-reproduction of law takes the form of change of 
law, of the transference of the quality of normative validity to partially new 
expectations (Luhmann, supra: 17 — 18). The legal system is closed to the 
extent that only the legal system can grant its elements legal-normative quality 
and, thereby, can constitute them as units. 
Normativity has no "purpose" which lies outside itself but has, rather, 
the function of "continually rendering the self possible from moment to 
moment, from event to event, from case to case". Thereby, naturally, 
adjustments to the environment are not excluded but the normativity of 
events can only be produced through the system itself. To enable demarca-

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
253 
tion from other normative systems (moral) and therewith to specify its 
own system, the law requires a function: "To the theory of the self-
referential completeness of systems there consequently belongs a theory of 
the function of law." This is — in the further development of the concept 
developed in Rechtsso^iologie — seen in the "exploitation of conflict perspect-
ives for the formation and reproduction of congruently (temporally/objec-
tively/socially) generalized behavioral expectations" (Luhmann, supra: 27). 
For the initial question, some important assumptions emerge from this: 
dogmatics is, thereby, more strongly required to take into account the self-
reference of the legal system on the level of the elements (in particular, of 
the individual decisions), because one element supports the other 
(Luhmann, 1987). For this purpose, the law no longer requires a hierarchy 
of norms but, rather, a "binary structure" (legal/illegal) upon which condi-
tional schemes can be built. Legal theory and legal dogma are, thereby, 
considerably relativized in that the "communications" through which the 
autopoietic reproduction of the legal system ensues — which, therefore, 
transfer the normative validity to other communications — do not seem 
able to be planned or regulated, whether vertically through recourse to 
universal principles or horizontally through the selection function and 
filter function of certain argumentation procedures (Luhmann, 1987). The 
instrumentalizing of law for social state regulative processes, which are 
aimed at inducing positive and avoiding negative conditions, is no more 
reconcileable with the self-referential, circular self-reproduction of the law 
than would be a dogmatic which did not understand itself as a continuance 
of the evolutionary process of the continual adaptation of arguments to 
a problematical relationship of redundancy and justification, autopoietic 
recursiveness and asymmetrical structure (Luhmann, 1987). 
The theory cannot, thereby, have as its task the replacing of an old 
through a new and better one; rather it must illuminate the context in 
which juridical argumentation takes place. This thesis makes one see the 
consequential renewal of the status of theory: theory and, still more, 
dogmatics are themselves built into an evolutionary process of the reproduc-
tion of law, as a theory of the system in the system. Dogmatics and legal 
theory produce, thus, terms and constructions whose aggregation-state is 
to be settled between "crystal and smoke" (Atlan, 1979); that is, they 
operate with the redundancy of the law, which — as follows from what is 
to be stated below — is no deficiency of the law but, rather, constitutes 
its possibility and necessity to develop. This is partly removed, partly used, 
but always employed in an asymmetrical way (Luhmann, 1987), that is, for 
the formation of structure, in particular through the justification of a 
decision. With its self-referential circularity, the law can activate events 
(actions, decisions) (Luhmann, 1985) within its system by exploiting the 
binary scheme legal/illegal — differentiated through evolution — in its 
privileged technique of conditional programming (if/then), if, and only if, 

254 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
events occur. With this procedure, "long event-chains" can be built up in 
which every step depends on the other, previously-accomplished steps and 
all depend on the normative validity of themselves and the others. The 
infinite regression is interrupted in this conception in that it sees the 
theory anchored in a network of references-contexts between origin and 
understanding, between "proven expectation" and "confirmed experience", 
in that it accepts the non-arbitrary combination-ability of connection-
restraints created through evolution in "levels and crises" (von Weizsäcker, 
1981: 28) but sees simultaneously in this redundancy the pre-condition for 
a self-reflexion of corrtl&tion-possibilities 
of the autonomous, autopoietic 
system. The introduction of the dimension of time, thus, in particular, the 
renunciation of the consciousness-centered philosophical establishment of 
the "beginning" of conceptual thinking, makes the theory, rather, into one 
of many forms of asymmetrical refraction with symmetrical interrelations 
through (understanding) recombination of possibilities, which is iso-
morphic to their origin. The concept avoids the fatal dilemma of the 
paradox: it neither solves the relationship between action and perception 
(observation) in the direction of a, finally, transcendental consciousness nor 
does it reduce perception simply to a reflection-relationship. It therefore 
prescribes, to neither one side nor the other, an external measure of 
"optimization" (Varela, 1984 a: 219), rather, the concept upholds this 
relationship as such in that it conceives perception, theory formation, 
dogmatics, etc., as a dynamic process of "cobbling together", accomplished 
in time, using the "materials" for structure-formation (its transformation 
and re-structuring, secondary modelling) created through the redundancy 
of possibilities of a self-referential system. But everything takes place on 
the "screen" of the self-referential system on which specific forms of 
"computing a reality" (von Foerster, 1981 a: 39) happen. Through feedback, 
new ramifications of avenues of possibility appear which, however, always 
presuppose those possibilities realized — with the exception of others — 
earlier in time. From this there emerges (as Varela and Maturana, in 
particular, have formulated for biological systems) a kind of "drift" of the 
history of internal options, examinations of interactions and ramifications 
through an autonomous autopoietic unity (Varela, 1984 a: 219; Maturana, 
1984) in a "dynamic landscape" (Gould and Lewontin, 1979), its field of 
possibility, in which it must maintain its unity. 
2. Self-Reproduction of the System and Self-Reproduction of its 
Elements 
The self-referential nature of the legal system is primarily related by 
Luhmann — in so far, displaying a certain difference from Maturana and 
Varela — to the reproduction of the individual elements (Luhmann, 1985: 
119): "The indissoluble unity of an element for the system can be constituted 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
255 
only by the system ... An autopoietic system therefore constitutes the 
elements of which it consists through the elements of which it consists" 
(Luhmann, supra: 14), because it is they which, through their transference-
achievement, through the linking from moment to moment, (re-)generate 
the reproduction of the system. 
But how does the element of movement, of change, of learning present 
itself now in this theory of the self-referential legal system? Firstly, it cannot 
be too clearly emphasized that the self-containment of self-reference cannot 
be regarded as synonymous with the condition of entropy of energetic 
systems, which have no relationship of exchange with their environment. 
Self-referential systems learn throughout and maintain interaction-relation-
ships to their environment but their specific openness is conveyed through 
self-reference and its translation achievements (Luhmann, 1985: 119). There 
emerges in this way a characteristic coupling of openness and self-contain-
ment. The closure interrupts indiscriminate exchange through boundary 
drawing in order to no longer only exchange energy/information, but with 
every operation to simultaneously activate the code of its possibilities for 
self-reproduction (Luhmann, supra: 15 — 16). 
In Luhmann, the concept of self-reference which is based on the elements 
presents itself thus: the legal system, with the help of legal codes (legal/ 
illegal) controls its "own negation-possibilities", that is, constructs its own, 
above all, counter-factual reality. "Items of information" from the environ-
ment are selected through the conditional mechanism (if/then) and make 
possible a connection between non-learning and learning: on the normative 
level, the system does not permit any purposes, compulsions or categories 
to obtrude. Normativity is not gained from the environment. It "remains 
... dependent on the self-generating context of legal elements and their 
boundaries" and reproduces the system-environment-boundary. The general-
ising of the conditional mechanism fixes the possibilities of reaction in its 
own selectivity for items of information, the norm anticipating even deviant 
behavior, and builds up, in contrast to this, its own (normative) reality, 
which does not mean that programs cannot also be changed "under the 
pressure of acts". But even the change can only ensue through transforma-
tion into normativity (Luhmann, supra: 20). It must, therefore, continue the 
interruption of the complex reciprocal actions through system-formation in 
a new form. In this respect, cognitive processes, and thus, learning pro-
cesses, keep the system open: the employment of the program presupposes 
the processing of items of information from the environment and the 
examination whether certain presuppositions are realized or not. The nor-
mativity (self-containment) which is self-referentially oriented on its own 
model is meant to absorb uncertainty and risk but makes the activating of 
the program itself dependent on facts (Luhmann, 1985: 119; supra: 20). 
This combination of general non-learning (with reference to normativity) 
and specified learning (fact-related), constitutes the legal function to which 

256 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
the exceptions, not ignored by Luhmann — which should, in fact, prove 
the rule — are to be related. The legal system should be sensitized, in fact, 
to particular situations. Through legal doctrine, learning processes are made 
possible which surpass specified "learning"-learning channelled through the 
conditional mechanism. It makes changes possible through a kind of 
reflected trial action because terms and constructions are not normatively-
binding decisions (Luhmann, 1974: 49; 1985: 120). The unity of the legal 
system which has been differentiated through evolution and which is 
reproduced through autopoiesis demands, however, that changes on the 
level of court practice and of dogmatics should be integrated. New dogma 
must be adjusted to suitable cases and new standardizations of practice 
depend on terminological developments. All this requires time, according 
to Luhmann, because normative and cognitive, general and specific levels 
must be co-ordinated. Luhmann sees a disturbance of the balance in favor 
of the cognitive level in the primacy of the legislator, whose activities 
ensure that, through the statutes, the law is adapted to society: a process 
whose acceleration can impair the self-referential character of the law. At 
this point, convergences and divergences of system-formations which are 
built on structure or on function become clear: the horizontal restrictions 
of function-orientation take the place of those restrictions written into the 
structure of the pyramid shaped legal arrangement. 
The legal system can certainly transpose coincidences to a new normativ-
ity because no structure can process any longer all the problems in the 
relationship of system and environment. A danger of overstrain can, 
however, be seen if result-oriented jurisdiction and legislation produce a 
complexity which by-passes the self-reproduction ability of normativity 
because "states" aspired to can, indeed, be a subject of opinion but cannot 
guarantee, in the form of "balanced" decisions without adhesion to norms, 
connectibility for new decisions. In new conference papers, Luhmann 
considers it possible, though he does not declare it as being necessarily 
so, that through functionally-unsuitable legislation and jurisdiction an 
irreversible state has, in the meantime, set in. Perhaps doctrine is, according 
to Luhmann, only possible as a form of self-observation and self-description 
of the system (Luhmann, 1985: 119, 121, 125). 
3. Contribution of the "New System Theory" to the Self-
Thematicizing of the Legal System 
The decisive, qualitatively new step in Luhmann's reading of system theory 
consists — as has already been emphasized — in a new function-definition 
of the law as a self-referential system which is no longer simply fixated on 
the problem of reproduction of a given state of society but situates the 
theory of normativity within the legal system itself. It does not, therefore, 
appear as a social scientific theory beside a normative theory of law which 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
257 
adheres to the highest norms, methods and legal principles, but, as a theory 
of self-referential systems, it is simultaneously a theory of self-observation 
and self-substitution of theory and dogmatics within the evolutionary 
process of the differentiation and self-reproduction of the law. It gains its 
impetus from a global paradigm change: understanding proves itself to be, 
within the context of the evolutionist theory of cognition, a time-dependent 
self-reference to the functioning of systems. To be sure many elements of 
the concept are not new: they have been, as references to the above so-
called new dogmatics indicate, part of a practice-oriented dogmatics. The 
newness consists much more in connecting the reference context of theory, 
method, dogmatics and practice circularly in a reproduction process which 
can thematicize the conditions of self-change in various avenues of possibil-
ity. Thereby, a theoretical level is attained from which a theory of the self-
substitution of competing theoretical and methodological starting points 
can become thinkable, a concept which reflects the fact that the historical 
consumption of theories has discredited claims of validity which cannot 
connect understanding circularly with the origin of the understood. It thus 
contributes to a new relativism which co-thematicizes its own conditions 
of possibility. 
Luhmann's new reading of system theories in general and their differen-
tiation for the legal system in particular is impressively stringent. Precisely 
because of this, however, the question must be raised whether this 
stringency is compatible with the concept of self-organization/self-reference 
and — related to this — whether this very stringency of self-reference does 
not block the explanation-potentialities contained in the concept of self-
organisation jautopoie sis. In the first instance, doubts exist concerning the 
very self-willed separation of the self-organization of the system from the 
self-reference of the elements (actions). In Luhmann's view, self-organiza-
tion becomes a form of self-reference of structures through the possibility 
of self-alteration, while self-reference on the level of the elements consists 
in the ability of elements produced in the system to connect to other 
elements. Thus, self-reference means that the legal system as a system of 
actions consists only of elements "which, through the operations of the 
elements of the systems, are themselves built". Here, however, there arises 
a fundamental problem: the system is not simply made up of actions. This 
would more truly be a traditional, analytical view through which reality 
would be mistaken as which the system produces and reproduces itself 
(Luhmann, supra: 14). In order to clarify further the relationship between 
system and element, a further intermediary step is now necessary by means 
of which the difference between communication and action has to be 
introduced: a social system consists of communications which establish a 
synthesis out of information (environmental reference), communication 
(system reference) and understanding (interpenetration between system and 
environment). Social systems reproduce themselves through communica-

258 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
tions (Luhmann, 1982: 368; 1984 b: 191; supra: 17) and that means through 
the "mutual accentuation of meaning". Actions introduce into this system 
of communication an asymmetry and a temporalization in that, through 
selectivity and through the apportioning of responsibilities, the building 
up of communication-chains is made possible. Action is the reduction 
which effects the transmission of meaning in that it creates connections on 
which depends who can further communicate what and to whom. "Every 
meaning, even the meaning of purely factual events, can become legally 
relevant, i.e., can enter into the self-reproduction of the legal system ... 
But within this sphere of relevance there exists the core of legally valid 
action which ... makes possible new normative expectations which would 
not have acquired legal quality without this action of engendering ... The 
constitution of these elements is an autonomous achievement of the legal 
system" (Luhmann, supra: 17). The action side of communication makes 
possible the self-perpetuation of the system which only by means of a 
"strongly simplifying self-observation" is enabled to reach the aim of 
establishing, "sufficiently quickly, simplified connections (partners, themes, 
items of information, messages) for the formation of further elements". 
The system communicates about itself in that it evidences its own boundary: 
through self-observation, the system uses its difference (from something 
else) in its operations in order — through interruption of communication, 
so to speak — to portray itself as a chain of defined and definable actions 
which it simultaneously "credits" as its own and, in so far, cuts off the 
interrelation of communication. 
This "self-simplification" through self-observational modelling of chains 
of action, proves itself to be the prerequisite for autonomy as communica-
tion about communication and possibility of the selection of basic elements 
through whose reproduction the system reproduces itself as a whole. Only 
in this way can it also develop and change (autopoietic) structures as 
consolidated action-expectations for the formation of future actions. The 
drawing of boundaries between system/environment repeats itself on the 
basis of the elements as the difference between event/situation. The term 
"event" is meant to indicate that the stability of the system rests on 
instability: the situation as the "horizon of the event" refers to the system, 
its environment and the latter's difference, but does so selectively in that 
it refers to the limited possibilities of production of the next event 
(Luhmann, 1985: 119, 122). Here the recursive circle closes: the difference 
between system and environment is, so to speak, "processed" in the 
system, in that the system uses for self-reproduction the distinction between 
"information" as (hetero-)reference to the environment and the "communi-
cation" as self-reference to the ^/^»-possibilities of the system. In this 
way, the system continually activates the relationship between closure and 
openness as a means for the selection and conveyance of meaning. 
Every element is thus, as an action, a selection which is under the 
compulsion to produce the next element and the next action. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
259 
III. A Critique of Luhmann's Reading of the Theory of 
Self-Referential Systems 
1. The Theoretical Status of the "System" — the Relationship 
Between System and Element 
The last statement above all makes plain that the autopoiesis of the legal 
system is seen in terms of the element and not so very much from the 
reproduction of the system as a whole. In my view, this point can best be 
explained if one compares Luhmann's concept of evolution and of the 
differentiation of the function of the legal system applied in this process 
with the different readings of the autonomy of biological systems (es-
pecially, of the brain) and the construction of the concept of system in 
general systems theory: in both fields, there is the tendency to consider 
systems ontologically as a holistic complex of relations whose autonomy 
is relatively stably constituted in an evolutionary step of development (if 
this is demonstrated by using brain research as a model, this means 
approximately that the neuronal connection-possibilities have already been 
inborn and the environment is more or less reduced to the "animation" 
and stabilization of the activated connections) (cf. Hubel and Wiesel, 1984). 
In general systems theory, this accords approximately with Bertalanffy's 
(1969) approach. The other conception stresses — in research on the 
brain — more or less strongly the instructive character of the environment, 
a character which specifies neuronal connections without, however, aban-
doning the concept of self-organization (Bourguignon, 1981: 452) — on 
the contrary. In general systems theory, this variable concept stresses 
evolution less than a quasi-ontological prefixing of system and function. 
It allots to these terms a much more conventional status, dependent upon 
the observer. The observer has, therefore, in this reading of system theory 
a far more significant status than in the other view: according to this 
reading, the system is constituted as a kind of modelling, as a "picture" of 
a particular complex of relationships to the environment which, as such, 
that is, as a model, can be used in "self-regulation" through the actualization 
of further possible relations which, with the previous "distinctions" (of the 
system), have become visible. Systems theory in this sense is, in a consider-
ably more pointed form, a "logic of the possible" within which the 
observer — who is not simply the subject but a variable point of reflexion — 
construes "pictures"/conceptions and is itself simultaneously construed as 
a point. This second variation thus connects action and observation more 
strongly, while for the former the system precedes its actualization in the 
elements (Lacroix, 1980: 43; von Foerster, 1981 a; Pardi, 1983: 570). 
In my opinion, Luhmann's concept belongs to the first variant: the 
strong emphasis on the self-reference of the system on the level of the 
reproduction of the "elements" is only possible if the system and its 

260 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
function can be seen as stabilized in such a way that the reproduction is, 
in the end, nothing other than a process of self-application in the process 
of the reproduction of elements: the function itself cannot be transcended. 
Rather, the function has originated in the process of differentiating the 
social system's "society" and cannot be varied with the other sub-systems 
through adjustment. In contrast to this, the second system concept would 
define the function, rather, in the relation to other sub-systems (that is, in 
the relation which Luhmann himself sees as an achievement of the function 
differentiated on the level of society), which gives the variation greater room 
for maneuver (a point which will be returned to later). This scientific-
theoretical difference is not, despite all the differentiation of terminology-
formation in other respects, clearly expressed in Luhmann's works. It is, 
however, of great significance, not only for the conception but also for the 
question of the possibilities of legal-theoretical reception. In my view, 
those possibilities of the autopoiesis-concept which are fascinating precisely 
because of the prospect emerging of a new, inter-disciplinary, integrative 
theory-construction, are not exhausted in Luhmann's reading. It seems to 
me that the second variant of system-theory, rather, makes possible a 
system-theory of the "second generation" which can also be made fruitful 
for jurisprudence. Its difference when compared with the first variant 
would consist primarily in its connecting much more closely than is the 
case in Luhmann the level of self-organization as self-change of the structu-
res and self-reference on the level of the elements. Precisely that mutual, 
interactive establishment of elements which in Luhmann becomes an actual-
ization of the system through a sense-conveying chain of actions (Luhmann, 
1981), forces the various levels to be united operationally more closely. 
The autonomy of systems originates precisely at the intersections of the 
levels, that is, at the "inter-twining" which, with the formation of logical 
statement-systems, leads to paradoxes (Varela, 1981: 294). This means that 
the self-reproduction of the legal system does not proceed primarily from 
element to element but is to be explained thus: that the function of the 
system can at first be varied and. above all, differentiated imperceptibly 
but then also self-reflexively. If one bears this in mind, the rigid linking 
of the concepts themselves — which is scarcely reconcilable with the 
concept of autopoiesis — can be slackened and opened to non-directed 
historical learning and differentiation processes. The "self-description", as 
a system of action which is self-prescribed for the system for the reproduc-
tion of the elements is, from the start, limited in Luhmann to self-
thematicizing as a chain of attributable actions. Therein, the thought is 
contained that the construction of a reality is inseparably connected with 
an action (Lacroix, 1980: 43; Motulsky, 1980; Varela, 1983: 160). Through 
the perception/construction of an event through a system, the modus operandi 
of the construction is always simultaneously co-thematicized. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
261 
Luhmann's concept of the function of social systems in general and of 
the legal system in particular carries the comparison of biological and 
social-scientific evolutionary theory too far: the relation between element 
and system — by chance or intentionally — matches the relation between 
epigenesis and cell/neuron of biological system theories. These start from 
the premise that the "basic plan" for the formation of organisms, but also 
for mental objects in the brain, is contained not in the single elements but 
in the functional system of the combination of cells, or synapses "between" 
these (Riedl, 1985: 146; Changeux, 1983: 277, 327). Epigenesis ensures the 
reproducibility of the function in the autopoietic process of fluctuations 
which proceed with the construction and activity of the (constructed) 
"apparatus". The "basic plan" determines the construction and activity, 
simultaneously, however, the "hyper-cycle" (Eigen and Winkler, 1983: 257) 
enters into the organization again, as essential characteristics, the elements 
formed through identical replication. The internal reproduction of the 
function "gradually copies its own practice": "decision and event form a 
circle of action, a unity" (Riedl, 1985: 146, 155). The "memory" stores, so 
to speak, the structure-forming capacity of the events. 
This achievement in selection in living systems consists in that they 
realize a previously "tested" and proven basic plan and, for the rest 
permanently test limited possibilities of adaptation, that is, survival of a 
total population (van Parijs, 1981: 53) (thereby, human behavior should be 
initially left out of consideration). Its evolutionary "attractor" is a local 
optimum. The evolution of social systems, however, knows no natural 
selection but only the reinforcement of permanent patterns of reaction (van 
Parijs, 1981: 96) which must be processed within an organized system and 
are not optimized through variations of the individuals of a population 
(van Parijs, 1981: 50; generally Hadley, 1983). This processing is carried 
out in "social memories" in complex interference-relationships between 
processes which generate information and processes which block this 
information and, thereby, form organization. In social systems the internal 
reproduction of functions, therefore, is circular in a more comprehensive 
way than in living systems. Therefore, also the unambiguous relationship 
between learning and non-learning as the exhaustion and elimination of 
possibilities is only possible in living systems (Changeux, 1983: 326, 328). 
The mental objects of the memory and the associative capacity of its 
individual and collective forms (Green, 1983: 356; Pascot and Le Moigne, 
1980) which have been processed through the "intertwining" of levels 
(here, for example, the blocking and generating of information ) — enabled 
a virtuality of language (Fornari, 1979: 112) which is characteristic of the 
evolution of social systems. The knowledge of autonomous systems is, 
especially through the more complex intertwining of its levels in a more 
problematical way identical with itself because it can vary its own reproduc-
tion of functions (Dupuy, 1982 a: 120, 137; 1982 b). The relevant regularities 
are to be found in the evolving network of actions and interactions, a 

262 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
context in which meaningfulness cannot follow on a priori connectivity set 
by a given function of a system (Winograd, 1980: 227). The system itself 
becomes an evolving network whose "progams" are probabilistic and not 
deterministic in as much as it not only needs the products of its own 
readings (Pattee, 1977: 262) (a new version of the hermeneutic circle) but 
also develops functional redundancy for "perturbations" (which can to 
some extent be protected against error). It modifies its own rules not by 
meta-rules but by its random construction as a "pattern recognizer", where 
"the pattern to be recognized is the outcome of the functioning of the 
system itself. A posteriori this pattern can be analyzed and the functioning of 
the recognition system can be understood as the behavior of a complicated 
dynamic system evolving towards one of its many attractors" (Atlan, 1985 a; 
Milgram and Atlan, 1983 a: 525, 538; see also Dupuy, 1985; Dupuy and 
Dumouchel, 1984; Fischer, 1981). (The random component which is in-
accessible to control provides an explanation of the system's ability to 
extract "order from noise".) 
The self-(re-)production of the legal system does not consist in the 
transfer of a sort of "trait" (validity of social expectations) from the 
elements of the system to new elements. Crucial for the closure of the 
system is the interconnectivity of the components (Varela, 1985: 146; 
Probst, 1981: 291) and their mutual definition. The stabilization of a 
network-like "landscape of internal coherences" (Varela, 1984 b: 26) requires 
a capability of self-observation and self-description which is distributed 
over the whole process of the (re-)production of the system (but of course 
not in equal "portions"). That is why the system has not got complete 
mastery of its meaning (Dupuy, 1985: 28). 
A legal action may include a plurality of future possibilities and so induce 
an auto-catalytic process of fluctuations moving toward the stabilization of 
a new form of eigenbehavior (see Varela, 1984 b: 27; Fischer, 1977: 65). 
There is not either "insensible evolution" or "planned change of structure" 
(as Luhmann, 1983: 136 puts it). The theory of autonomous systems must 
be primarily concerned with what lies in between: the "succession of 
catastrophes" and stabilities resulting in unintended "dissipative structures" 
of intentional acts. 
It is especially the infinite succession of "computation of computation" 
(von Foerster) Luhmann is referring to (1983: 136) which characterizes the 
systemic recursivity of a program reading the results of its own lecture. 
That is why the system cannot be said to consist of elements. The system 
is in a paradoxical way made of ... systems! "Le systeme est toujours plus 
grand que lui-meme" (Barel, 1979: 169, 186). 
2. Autopoiesis — Time — Memory: System-Function and the Status 
of the Observer 
The mechanism of self-indication of social systems can avoid a collapse 
into chaos only in that it stabilizes its own states or complexes of internal 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
263 
relations. This cannot — as with living systems — occur through a quasi-
ontological function but only through the training of a specific memory 
(von Foerster, 1969: 44). In this memory, not only would events not be 
preserved but neither would their structure-forming power (as Luhmann, 
1984 a: 16, puts it). Precisely this may be assumed only of living systems. 
The structure of the memory of social systems, however, is to be constructed 
as stochastic: this means that memory has its "own" internal culling-
structures which are reproduced through recursive self-indication, through 
"blocking" of information, but this structure represents, as a kind of 
"convergent" organizing principle, only one side of a "dissipative structure" 
of a non-linear equilibrium model whose other side is represented by a 
divergent distribution of internal items of information which, within the 
complex network of junctions and tracks of the structure, carry out a kind 
of game of chance with intruding external disturbances ("noise") (von 
Foerster, 1984; 1960; Atlan, 1979; 1983 a: 115; 1984 a: 109; Prigogine, 1984; 
1979; Prigogine and Stengers, 1981) and try out "new things" (Paillard, 
1983; Tabary, 1983; Le Moigne, 1983; 1984). This means that the possibility 
of change does not necessarily correlate with the function which has been 
stabilized through "blocking". The redundancy of the culling-structure 
includes an element of chance which makes possible a continual change 
between organizing elements and thereby also opens to change the function-
modulation with the other subsystems. The culling-structure itself can, for 
example, be maintained in that smaller "fluctuations" are ignored and 
others encapsulated as "exceptions", etc., or differentiated in alternative 
structures for particular special fields. A fluctuation can, however, reinforce 
itself to such an extent that the system arrives at a "bifurcation" at which 
it must take a new form (Allen: 1980: 21). Thereby, the history 
of the 
fluctuations and bifurcations becomes a part of the evolution of the system 
(Prigogine, 1984: 44); simultaneously, it is also recognizable why a change 
of the legal system, as of all other systems, is difficult to anticipate. The 
evaluation-structure always "converges" with the maintenance of the system 
and can, only with difficulty, check whether a self-transcendency is indicated 
concerning the divergent disturbances (Atlan, Salomon, Fogelman, and 
Weisbuch, 1982: 193; Atlan, 1976). This depends simultaneously on the 
internal differentiation of the social memory and on the degree of connect-
edness between the different parts of the evolutionary network, the "mem-
ory" (Atlan, 1976: 125). The memory of an autopoietic system must contain 
a certain chance component, without which self-organization is not possible. 
Therewith, simultaneously, time is no longer a horizon of the connectibility 
of actions but an element of creativity of the experiment (Prigogine, 1984: 
44). The structure of the memory as an evolutive network changes in time 
and thereby not only the (internal) structure but also the external function 
of the system can change (Atlan, 1983 a: 115; Le Moigne, 1982; Varela, 
1979: 125). The single "elements" change the rules governing how they 

264 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
can be combined and precisely this, the paradoxical inter-twining of dif-
ferent levels (system, structure, element), constitutes what is new in the 
concept of autopoiesis. The recognition of temporality makes possible the 
construction of a "cascade", of iterative change of organization — action — 
organization — action, etc., in which there is no linear stability regulated 
through a unified legal parameter but only a non-linear process of equilibra-
tion. In this way, the memory of a social system acquires a paradoxical 
character typical of autonomy in so far as the perception of an event 
exhibits either the actualization of other events or, better,, of the traces left 
behind by them, or it induces a virtualization in which the event is initially 
only processed through the different parts of the evolutive network-
memory and then taken into "reserve" (Le Moigne, 1983: 155). Thus, one 
can, on the other hand, also imagine the origin of new "pictures": the 
memory contains, so to speak, traces of the events which, beside the stable 
culling-structures, continually rotate through a kind of chance-generator 
and produce something more or less useful. This is a further consequence 
of the construction of social systems as networks of relations with emergent 
characteristics which are not characteristics of the structure or the elements 
(Jantsch, 1979: 51, 54; Riedl, 1985: 146; Prigogine, 1979: 67; Prigogine and 
Stengers, 1981; see also Haken, 1981). In so far, the memory is also in no 
way — as Luhmann assumes — geared to the storing of structure-forming 
characteristics of events. 
In this way, one could even speak of several time-levels on which the 
system operates and, therewith, simultaneously construct the plurality of 
the observer-positions within the system: the system observes itself and it 
registers on a higher level that also alternative possibilities of self-observa-
tion are possible from other points. This, of course, presupposes that the 
connectivity of the structure-elements is not too rigid and, in fact, a 
potential for (limited) self-transcendency is built-in and the system under-
takes in the memory, rather, a kind of equilibration of different perspectives 
of modelling rather than enforcing one "correct" culling structure (Le 
Moigne, 1983: 149). 
In the point of view just presented, the origin of system theory itself 
can be co-thematicized as an evolutionary step: system theory as a science 
of "modelling" is the reflexion of an evolutionary development in which 
the observer — as already indicated at the beginning — no longer stands 
outside the "re-presented" object and the object is no longer analytically 
reduced but variable distinctions and relations are thematicized which 
incorporate the observer and the consequences of this action. It is, simulta-
neously, a recursive result of (self-)observation in that the observed is ever 
more strongly permeated by the "artificial" created by the observer and, 
therefore, can be constructed, rather, in functional 
relations and no longer 
in static-parametric causalities 
(Simon, 1969: 6). These are, it is true, no 
longer analyzed through systematic simultation, construction of scenarios, 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
265 
etc., but are flexibly modelled and operationalized in a form which is no 
longer without alternatives. The circularity of self-reference/autopoiesis 
originates from the fact that the observer can observe his observation and, 
therewith, the observation of the first level becomes, quasi-independently 
of the observation of the second level, the object, but remains "self-
dependent" on the mode of observation (Varela, 1981 a: 16). 
From this, a new view of regulation may be gained for social systems: 
the concern is no longer with the regulation of behavior within the model 
of homeostasis — a linear equilibrium-model in which the individuals were 
only abstract components of the equilibrium-function of the market and 
other "normalities" (Pizzorno, 1974: 17) — but with a model of homeo-
rhesis according to which the functional conditions of a non-linear equili-
brium is constructed of inter-active action-networks (Pascot and Le Moigne, 
1980: 230), for which a more complex memory and a suitably more complex 
modelling are necessary. For theoretical system models, this means that 
there can also be no linear equilibrium between reality and thought-
structure but that the unity of science and cognition must be replaced 
through a construction-model of a sequence of equilibrations, disequilibra-
tions and re-equilibrations which evolves in non-linear fashion and ensues 
in a never-ending process between observer and observed (see generally 
Piaget, 1980; Kesselring, 1981). The observation/modelling itself becomes 
a form of equilibration and not of the image of an object. 
In the theory of science an evolutionary thought-model, is thereby 
emerging that considers itself no longer as parametric (oriented on object-
independent variables) but as strategic, i. e., that is built on thinking 
in functional alternatives and "enters" in circular-reactive manner the 
consequences of its operations into the thought-model again (van Parijs, 
1981: 196). 
3. The Internal Differentiation of the Legal System — the Possibility 
of Variation of Functions 
One can, following Paillard (1983: 156), distinguish the following levels 
in autopoietic systems on the analogy of a model drawn from neuro-
physiology: 
(I) The organized level (structure in the classical meaning of an executive 
model); 
(II) the level of the "organizing function" (which controls and regulates 
the transformations on level I through activating the function which 
remains latent on level I); 
(III) the level of the "virtualizing" of structure and function. 
On this level, a potential of the de-stabilization of the memory is made 
possible and those divergences of level I excluded or bracketed through 

266 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
level II are experimentally processed and varied. On this level of experimen-
tation, there is, so to speak, no hierarchy but rather "strange loops" (of 
levels) which lead, among other things, to a fluctuation which has appeared 
on level I being mitigated on level II, strengthened on level III and leading 
to a change of function on level II. In this way, in an autonomous system 
different levels are, indeed, connected to each other. This highly conditional 
modelling presumes an evolutionary step which leads social systems not to 
strive any longer for certainty but, on the basis of learning processes about 
the de- and re-structuring of systems in time, to operate with uncertainty, 
thus not to operate with only one reality but with a plurality of possibilities.3 
In the future, new interactive technologies will perhaps make possible a 
more comprehensive strategy for the replacement of the central "distribu-
tion media" through a pluralization of norm-systems (Wersig, 1985: 137). 
This concept permits a fruitful criticism of Luhmann's understanding of 
self-reference on the transactional level (level I): transactions of the (legal) 
system are, in Luhmann's system-concept, selections which make asymmet-
rical the symmetrical communications between the legal system and personal 
as well as other social systems in that they no longer admit "everything" 
but create connection-possibilities for other future transactions and, thereby, 
enable the actualization of the function of the (legal) system, namely, to 
generalize "congruent behavioral expectations" and, thereby, to guarantee, 
through the reduction of complexity, the transferability of meaning. A 
language theory is associated with this concept, as indicated by a reference 
to Bühler (Luhmann, 1985: 114; Bühler, 1965: 34), in which language acts 
primarily as a "sign system" (see also Hjelmslev, 1968), as a medium of 
transfer. The stable sign which is maintained as a unit in different situations 
of use and in the conflict-perspective even against the deviant perception 
of the addressee, enables a pre-notion of meaning which changes the 
internal processing of meaning which is carried out through the different 
levels of the legal system and its culling structure into a "term" that is 
transferable to others (Eco, 1984: 51). 
Luhmann makes the homogenizing function of the sign-concept fruitful 
for the concept of the "symbolic generalizing of the self-reference of 
meaning", through which the reference-structure of every meaning is 
condensed into "expectations" which "indicate what a given meaning-
situation proposes" (Luhmann, 1984 a: 137,139). The system makes possible 
the generalizing of meaning through self-simplification, by which the 
3 Concerning the literary-theory aspects of the development of the post-modern novel 
which no longer centers a particular social or historical context in an individual 
consciousness (and its development) but engraves an interactive network of several 
"voices" on different levels of the text and makes the author to appear as "arranger" 
within the text, see the examples of Calvino, 1983; Kundera, 1984, cf. hereto Sato/ 
Nielsen, 1984. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
267 
process 
of 
(re-) activation 
and 
(re-) virtualization 
is 
"conditioned" 
(Luhmann, 1984a: 97, 100). 
"Vibration" of the foundation of reality is "eliminated through emergent 
self-referential systems". Indeed, the paradox which Luhmann places within 
the system itself (the system reproduces the elements which maintain its 
unity) repeats itself in the relationship, system-environment4: the construc-
tion of the system is itself dependent upon an external standpoint of the 
observer who, thereby, anticipates a metasystem and is thus referred to the 
historical possibilities, experiences and contingencies of operating with 
system-constructions (Lanzara and Pardi, 1980: 128). The historically 
diagnosed loss of the center is also valid for the observer of the system 
who finds no solid, unified assumptions of the system-construction (see 
Barel, 1984: 187; 193). Complexity has a relative, topological character 
which points to the historical realm of possibility of the system-construction 
(Lanzara and Pardi, 1980: 125). Precisely that emphasizing of the condition-
ing of meaning-process through differentiated systems which are based on 
generalizing imposes narrow limits on the historical perception of the 
possibility of "local", plural, non-generalizable meaning which demands a 
different system-construction. If, however, one does not define evolution 
only in terms of differentiation, and regards systems as constructs for the 
processing of information and the orientation of actions, (Crozier and 
Friedberg, 1977: 25), one must accept that systems which originate through 
strategic games are also circularly changed through them again and again; 
that is, that the process of change is not continually assimilated through 
the generalizing-possibilities of the system. Meaning-systems, therefore, 
have, rather, a "dissipative structure" whose fluctuations in dependency on 
time lead to phase-transitions in which the relationship between order and 
disorder is determined in a new way. 
Through an action, which is simultaneously an object (of the transfer-
ence) and a self-referential operation (Varela, 1975; Schwartz, 1981; Schne-
ider 1983; generally Maturana and Varela, 1980: 191), the system undertakes 
permanently, so to speak, a self-fulfilling prophecy: the problem to be dealt 
with cannot be perceived "objectively" but just as it is observed from the 
system in an action-perspective. The perception is self-referential (Motulsky, 
1980: 103) in that it breaks down the problem in a (language) model which 
is itself based on distinctions and relations which the observing system has 
constructed on the basis of interactions with the environment. But, finally, 
the systemic perception results from the "original act of severance" (Spencer 
Brown, 1969: 26; Motulsky, 1980: 108; Costa de Beauregard, 1963: 90). 
The artificial (originally, arbitary) element of distinction remains permanent, 
4 As for the relationship of system and (natural) environment cf. Godard (1984). 
Luhmann (1984 a: 36) rejects the concept of "eco-system" because "eco-complexes" 
have no boundary. 

268 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
while the postulation of the (language) action means also an incision in a 
processing, evolutive network of connectivities. The language-action is 
constituted through a productive element of temporality: time does not 
continue a chronology of "action-points"; it is much more the horizon of 
an irreversible projection of internal operations which are externalized as 
action-terms (Schneider, 1983: 5). 
In Luhmann, the replacement of the hierarchic-structural subsumption of 
acting under the law through the strategic-situative, functional processing 
of connection-constraints does not seem to be carried out consistently. In 
particular, the construction of meaning-transference in language theory 
shows that the loss of the traditional (ideal type) unity of the state as 
macro-subject, which through the unity of the hierarchical-structural code 
of the "signs" of law simultaneously gives unity to the individual subjects 
(Eco, 1984: 53), cannot be compensated for by the postulate of the unity 
of the legal system (and its function). The strategic acting of the subjects 
which undermines the presuppositions of the classical "subsumption" model 
itself and which anticipates a more complex model has not only affected 
their own unity — a phenomenon which leads Luhmann as a consequence 
not to build his system any more on the unified subject — but has also 
turned the unity of the symbolic generalizing of meaning into a problem.5 
Adherence to the unity of the legal system enables the decomposition of 
the subjects to be intercepted in the construction of the unity of the 
(sub-)systems and the "permeability" and plurality of the subjects to be 
processed in the blank reference to the no longer systemically conveyed 
transference of meaning (Rositi, 1983: 19). 
5 The "dissemination", the "dissipative structure" of meaning cannot be interrupted 
through the functional differentiation of specific systems, in particular, the separation 
of individual and society as a psychic and a social system. The self-referential iteration 
of the identity and difference of meaning cannot "de-layer" specification as an 
irrevocable evolutionary step, as a pre-condition of the further processing of transfer-
ence and connection possibilities. (Cf. in general Derrida, 1977: 24; 1972). Precisely 
this assumption is based on an indeterminate concept of language (cf. Habermas, 
1985: 441). In Luhmann, language exhausts itself in symbolic generalizing, in the 
"segmenting, abstracting and generalizing" of meaning (cf. Habermas, 1985: 439) 
through the substitute of the sign. A "structuralist" language concept, on the contrary, 
will assert the "emergence of the significant of the linguistic as an always differential, 
articulated order but order which is open and which is grasped as displacement" 
(Gondek, 1986) and will, thereby, open a persepctive in which the other (and, 
therewith, the otherness of the language) is never simply the alter ego. Language 
retains the circle of self-reference in that it binds cognition reticularly into the "trace" 
of experience of the world. This "trace" indicates nothing other than uncertainty 
which the language games (and their rules) refer back to the characteristics of play 
and makes linguistically-conveyed rationality dependent upon language-transaction. 
The unity and rationality of language is always made possible through a practical 
incision (consensus) in the non-reversible plurality and temporality of language-
transaction (Murphy, 1984: 136; 139; Derrida, see Waldenfels, 1983: 543). 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
269 
As an adjunct to the model outlined above the question must, however, 
also be raised about the possibility and necessity of a unit of normative 
meaning systemically and functionally brought about by the self-referential 
reproduction of connectable performance-elements. The transfer to a more 
complex, non-linear model of equilibrium oriented upon new phase-trans-
fers and self-transformation which sets in with the loss of the subject's 
unity can only be construed in a temporal, plural logic of negotiation and 
equilibration of heterogeneous values. The new function of law, which co-
thematicizes its own conditions of evolution, could consist precisely in 
making possible an abundance of alternatives, openness, flexibility and the 
examination of the dimensionalizing of time-perspectives for such a logic of 
bargaining and compatibilization instead of the generalizing of expectations 
(Donzelot, 1984: 259). 
Individuals and organizations as addressees of (legal) transactions are no 
longer completely dependent on meaning-transference to the same extent 
as in the time of the old-style equilibrium model for which they were 
basically only abstract components of a linear equilibrium. For this time, 
one can introduce Luhmann's function-concept into the system (on level 
II) in order to test how it "processes". In the modelling, however, it then 
becomes evident that the conflict-perspective which signals the sensitivity 
of the more flexible yet still unified legal parameter towards deviations 
from equilibrium, is evaded by strategic co-ordination and, similarly, by the 
fragmented harmonizing of behavioral expectations in different political 
and administrative arenas (Pizzorno, 1974: 10). Thereby the identity of the 
personal and organized systems as addressees of legal decisions also becomes 
a problem. The conditions of possibility for legal decisions are considerably 
changed if in organizationally-controlled fields of action, specified transac-
tion networks which can no longer be a meaningful object of congruent 
generalised behavioral expectations are "installed". The transference of mean-
ing, as an activation of generalizable meaning, which in conflict perspective 
results in making possible single, individual actions, would then possibly 
prove to be insufficient. The situation-specific methods of "consequence-
consideration", etc., which Luhmann criticizes spring not only from the 
search for function-alien aim-orientation but result from changes in the 
conditions of interaction between the legal system and its environment (for 
the economic system see Luhmann, 1984 c)6. 
4. The Transition from the Parametric to the Strategic Orientation of 
the Legal System — Consequences for Function and Autonomy 
The selective transference of meaning through decisions, in Luhmann's 
sense, assumes that the connections are clear for further actions: for 
6 In former epochs of evolution this remained primarily in a state of latency to be 
activated only in "exceptional" states of crisis and transition. 

270 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
large organizations and groups, however, unlike for individuals or smaller 
organizations, particular selections are — for different reasons — not the 
"last word", and this without their disregarding decisions. Here only 
processes of negotiation and adjustment are possible. This, however, has 
decisive repercussions on the action-perspective, particularly of the legal 
system. Problems become of necessity insoluble on level I. In many fields 
of action, the legal system must vary its own function-adjustment with 
the other sub-systems through the building of "consensual domains" for 
interactive networking. This does not mean the end of autopoiesis through 
the opening for exchange with other systems. The legal system remains 
restricted to its own homeorhesis, to operating with constraints, produced 
by its closure, which cannot be assimilated through a mere adaptation to 
standards set externally (Varela, 1983: 158) and which impose limits on its 
own transformation-possibility. In connection with the thesis expounded 
above, that an observer does not have an ontological or subject-character 
but is a variable which is bound to a system, one can accomplish a further 
conceptual step regarding the domain of the function-adjustment of the 
legal system here problematicized: as a social system, the legal system, 
unlike living systems, has neither in a literal nor in a figurative sense 
topological (spatial) limits; much more are they self-constituted through 
its own operations (Varela 1981 a: 14; 1976). It is therefore possible, on the 
basis of the de-stabilization potential of level III (see above), to add to 
level I a level F, which is partially constituted together with the actors in 
a specific arena. This means that a combination is created (Motulsky, 1980: 
116; for the concept of consensual domain see Maturana, 1978: 41; 1975: 
323) in which a field of action is modelled together with the actors and a 
common "observer" is created. The autonomy of the legal system does not 
disappear, not even partially, in this "consensual domain" but remains 
conveyed through a separate evaluation level, II', and is also retained in 
the "consensual domain" though the common level III. The strategic acting 
of the legal system remains bound to the horizon of the production of 
action-orientations in other systems, but instead of orienting itself on the 
equilibrium-parameter of behavior-regulation, the law orients itself on the 
possibility of the (re-)equilibrizing and compatibilizing of values and action-
perspectives for complex action-Ätf/wör&r. This presupposes a broader per-
spective on structural coupling of systems which "takes place as a process 
of reciprocal selection of congruent paths of structural changes in the 
interacting systems which result in continuous selection in them of con-
gruent dynamics of state" (Maturana and Guiloff, 1980: 139). The legal 
system activates and accelerates its virtualization potential in order to 
maintain and broaden the range of possibilities in other systems.7 As such 
7 It should not be forgotten that level 1 does not disappear. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
271 
it generalizes a flexible procedural modal (and not substantial) rationality 
accompanying the evolving interaction-networks by (re-)constructing, eval-
uating and (re-)arranging the constraints 
inherent in their connectivity (see 
Teubner, 1983; Teubner and Willke, 1984). (This is, for example, characteris-
tic of the field of proceduralization of planning through "interest weighing" 
{Abwägung), the field, in constitutional law, of decisions by the constitutional 
courts of justice on basic problems of the harmonization of essential 
conditions of competition and co-operation, in particular in decisions on 
the reversibility or irreversibility of particular options and, therewith, on 
the narrowness or breadth of the connectivity of system-elements (for 
example, party prohibitions, problems with radicals, educational policy 
decisions, abortion, co-determination of workers, the structure of the 
media, etc.) (Ladeur, 1980; Schulze-Fielitz, 1984). In this area, the separation 
of cognitive learning ability and normative non-learning can no longer 
hold out. The actual enforceability of decisions and their consequences 
must also be reflected in this context as the concern here is not with actions 
but with making action-networks compatible. This, also, does not mean that 
the law should not pursue its own ends and should henceforth adapt 
to the production of justice or similar complex aims which cannot be 
operationalized. Rather, the law should, in this area in which there can 
only be a non-linear equilibrium, orient its perspectives on the 
maintenance 
of uncertainty 
against the building of large strategies which exclude alterna-
tives and should assert the plurality of the realms of possibility — which 
have become conceivable through evolution — against conformity and 
thus function as a kind of interruptor of trivialization within the "consen-
sual domain" constituted by the history of structural coupling with other 
systems. From this could come a new perspective for the control of 
irreversible political and administrative "large projects" which could ex-
clude variable, reversible options in the future. Where irreversibilities are 
to be feared, the maintenance of learning capability could be compelled 
through new proceduralizations (this is particularly valid for the area of 
the strategic use of the environment where irreversibilities threaten to a 
high degree). A new perspective could confront the law in the wake of 
the successful spread of new technologies: if it turns out that, in fact, a 
large part of humanity will be excluded from the production process in 
post-industrial society, the question arises concerning the necessity of 
making possible plural and also alternative life styles outside the area of 
high productivity and the large organizations oriented thereon as, so to 
speak, a necessity of compensation in order to maintain a dynamic equilib-
rium which can no longer be realized in a unified model and which is, 
thus, non-linear. Also in the field of communication technology, there arises 
for the law the problem concerning the maintenance of the possibilities of 
learning, of difference and divergence from the building of control strat-

272 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
egies in a plural space which, simultaneously, becomes ever larger. This 
should suffice for the moment as a description of an alternative perspective. 
The change of perspective here indicated or, better, the pluralization of 
perspectives, must still be specified historically: the first social state phase of 
the "society of organizations" can be seen as a continuation of the linear 
equilibrium model with other (collective) means of distributing resources and 
creating parity of opportunities and groups instead of contractual freedom, 
etc. The new phase of the "society of organizations" is characterized by the 
loss of a linear development trajectory, the entry into a dynamic development 
of non-linear equilibrium, of dissipative structures, of uncertainty, but an un-
certainty which should not be regarded as a product of the decomposition of 
certainty and, therefore, to be converted as soon as possible into a state of 
new (or old) certainty. This uncertainty is an uncertainty of many possibilities, 
of plurality of developments and scenarios, which can and must be accepted. 
To this extent, the social system has, in general, to change from the stability 
of one reality to the mode of plural possibilities. 
IV. Outlines of an Alternative Model 
1. Operating with Uncertainty — a New Challenge for the Legal 
System 
This flexible operating within uncertainty could also be a new paradigm for 
the law. Against the background of the model of temporalized, autopoietic 
systems, this could mean for the law that it does no longer primarily pursue 
behavior-orientation or behavior-regulation but engages in adjustment with 
other autopoietic systems. The role of the law would be to facilitate and 
evaluate interactive networks, which means in some cases to interrupt them 
or to reconstruct them. Instead of a simple goal orientation which Luhmann 
ascribes to the materialization of law, the law would have to seek new forms 
of self-referentialprocedurali^ing. In so doing, the concern is not at all primarily 
to achieve henceforth "correct" methods instead of achieving "correct" re-
sults through making possible the interaction of those concerned. Rather, the 
relativistic perspective which is contained in the insoluble combination of 
observer/system and action, of descriptive and prescriptive elements of law, 
has to be radicalized for the evolution of the legal system as an autopoietic 
system (see Locker and Coulter, 1977). This means, the concern is no longer 
to transfer the old demand for objectivity to a new pluralistic context which 
is found through processes of argumentation or of "analysis of the field of 
norms". What is decisive is that with the increasing complexity of problems, 
particularly as regards the shaping of the future (for the limits of majority 
rule see Preuss, 1984), present social knowledge is more and more devalued 
(Masuch, 1984:137) and this cannot be without consequences for the function 
of law, above all, of constitutional law, but also of the law of the planning 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
273 
administration. For law making which is to be integrated into a self-reflexive 
concept of the autopoietic legal system which thematicizes its own historical 
possibilities, this means an orientation on an experimental, flexible norm-
model which, above all, is working with the mechanism of proceduralizing 
and is "non-linear" and would have to operate with iterative forms of the 
bringing about of action- and negotiation-networks, of the introduction of 
self-observing evaluation. Also, as regards evaluation, the point would no 
longer be to establish anew old illusions of a self-explanation of "reality" 
conveyed through social sciences; the concern is, rather, with the opening 
and maintenance of realms of possibility in which paths of development are 
drafted, compared, corrected and operationalized. This perspective could be 
supported in the near future by the integration of computer models into the 
decision-making process (see Haefner, 1984). The greater the time-horizon 
of a project is, the less the value of present knowledge and the quality of a 
political/legal decision (Masuch, 1984: 137). It cannot be too clearly pointed 
out that such models should not be used to produce new certainties but, on 
the contrary, to project trajectories of possibility — their ramifications, their 
connection-possibilities, their risks and prospects — and to allow options 
which are not to be referred to certain rigid "supreme values" (individualism, 
progress, industrial growth), but instead co-reflect variably and flexibly their 
own self-transcendence in time and, therefore, simultaneously try out exper-
imentally alternative possibilities (Krippendorff, 1984). What is required is a 
model for regulation of complex Action-tie (works and cause-networks instead 
of action-chains, that is, a legal culture of uncertainty (for experimental law 
see Stock, 1981; Hoffmann-Riem, 1980). 
The classical liberal action and society model was based upon the 
deliberation of the individual about his own needs; the socialist alternative 
rested upon planning the satisfaction (and development) of needs and, 
thereby, also proceeded from a certainty which can be called into question 
(because there is no procedure for its establishment) (Allen, 1982: 95; also 
Morin, 1984; 1977; 1980; Atias and Le Moigne, 1984). In liberal society, 
the law executed an abstraction, an incision, which established the "man 
within" instead of concrete local bonds as the point of orientation, a project 
which aimed at the assimilation and comparison of the Marktburger through 
self-observation in the "looking glass" of the others (A. Smith) (Costa, 
1974: 236).8 A new thought-model for the politico-legal regulation of 
8 But here too the "monetary code" is nothing more than the symbolic medium which 
makes the connectivity of "unit acts" ("the acts of paying") possible. But money has 
a paradoxical character insofar as it is a complex of rules — representing the totality 
of market economy — which are constantly redefined by the acts of "application". 
This systemic effect which is not completely controllable (neither at the macro- nor 
at the micro-level) finds its expression in crises as accumulation of unintended 
consequences of individual or collective acts (see Orlean, 1985: 152, 154). 

274 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
society must be erected above all on the institutionalizing of the permanent 
capacity to learn the design of a complex non-linear system whose reference 
points are neither the element (liberalism) nor a whole (socialism) but 
relational, recursively linked autopoietic networks of networks of networks 
. . . A counter-movement can, for example, be seen in that in environmental 
law "science and technology" as sub-systems are to guarantee certainty 
which previously was reproduced from all social sub-systems through, so 
to speak, interpenetration and through the formation of the classical rule-
models. With this in mind, the hypothesis might be tentatively advanced 
that it is precisely the lack of a new political and legal culture based on 
uncertainty which favors sub-cultural compensations for uncertainty which 
can only be personally experienced in pseudo-religious, political, therapeutic 
and other sub-cultural invocations of identity. 
2. An Alternative Orientation of Legal Doctrine? 
A prefatory remark must be made to the outline of the consequences arising 
from the model presented here for doctrine and legal theory which have 
changed with respect to operating with uncertainty: dogmatics receives a 
different status merely in that also the law, as a system of distinctions/ 
incisions in previous practice, does not represent a beginning from which 
something is to be derived but constitutes a self-referential unit of operation 
and "term" (legal norm). Dogmatics continues this self-referential game in 
that it constructs in time further operations/terms which allows connections 
in concrete situations of cases and decisions for other cases. That the textual 
reference of dogmatics has been so strongly emphasized lies not least in 
the fact that the law makes a distinction regarding local, fragmented 
practices and does not only make possible the changeability of the law 
positivistically but, above all and decisively, bases the construction of the 
law on the universality of the individual, which can behave towards itself 
as towards a[n] (changeable, exchangeable) object. 
Texts, through whose reading the self-awareness of the individual since 
the earliest modern times had, in particular, developed, were actually the 
privileged medium in which the self-references of different individuals 
could be made compatible with one another because, through the mouth 
of the judge, they brought to expression, so to speak, the "man within". 
Dogmatics referred the uncertainties of behavioral expectations which arose 
in the fluctuations in actions around the point of equlibrium (of the 
market and of the law) again and again to the "form of 'centralized inter-
dependence' " in that "the similarity of cases is reflected upon and is made 
the criterion of relationing" (Luhmann, 1974: 18). Dogmatics represented 
through retaining viewpoints centrally, the equilibrium that could not be 
regulated by individuals themselves but which produced itself as a cross-
section of the actions which were oriented on abstract parameters (money, 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
275 
justice). The portrayal of the uncertainty of individuals in action-situations 
as uncertainties of the text is, in the face of the dependence on model-
formation and action, neither objectionable as ideological, "false" con-
sciousness, nor in any other way. 
If one accepts this self-reference of the legal system which, historically, has 
only become possible as a consequence of the operations of the legal system 
itself, it is taken into account that the identity of the legal text, the unity of 
the law as a system, has always been borne by the unity of the state to which 
the individual subject stood in a hetero-referential relation and which first 
made possible the self-reference of the subjects (Varela, 1975; 1976; 65). Thus, 
the pluralization of dogmatic and methodological concepts which has arisen 
in the meantime is hardly surprising. A dogmatics for legal action in frag-
mented arenas with non-linear equilibrium can no longer generate "inter-
dependencies centralized" (Luhmann, 1974:18) through the processing of one 
text (Legendre, 1983: 524). Together with Touraine, (1979: 410), one could 
even ask whether — at least as regards society's organizationally dominated 
fields of action — an identitarian concept of the state as reference point for 
the self-reference of persons can still be adhered to and whether instead it is 
not necessary, rather, to proceed from plural, differential, evolutive action 
and negotiation networks (Masuch, 1984: 137). 
For legal doctrine, this means the transition from a central logic to a 
local logic of inter-dependencies (Rosenstiehl and Petitot, 1974). A doctrine 
which is no longer oriented on individual uncertainties and, correspond-
ingly, on a parametrically determined model of equilibrium, but is oriented 
on a non-linear, dynamic model of equilibrium based on plural networks, 
should, for its part, develop a new, non-individual plural method of making 
compatible and equilibrating organizational action-networks. Such a doc-
trine must, with reference to the network,9 structure inter-dependencies 
from case to case, however in a horizontal and de-centralized way. Such a 
doctrine can, therefore, only be developed with reference to specific areas; 
a starting point of a successful, even if not developed, doctrinal construct 
9 Cf. Ladeur, 1983; 1984; the problem of new approaches to the reconstruction of a 
general understanding of constitutional law independent from situative-strategical 
valuations consists precisely in the fact that the loss of the structure-forming function 
of the equilibrium model of the society of individuals is not sufficiently reflected 
upon — the "reconstruction of the classical function of fundamental law" by Schlink 
(1984) is, insofar, theoretically insufficiently founded and, therefore, rather, leads up 
to the pragmatic plea to leave the legislator greater scope in valuation; in the face of 
the difficulty of formulating in law a public interest comprising the private, this 
postulate can only be made plausible through specification according to areas of 
activity; also Suhr's (1984) concept of "freedom through sociability" lacks, in contrast 
to classical individualism (in its time), the structure-forming power of a paradigm 
which cannot be won alone through the antithetical fixation on the metaphor of the 
"homo 
negatorius". 

276 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
for the regulation of strategic, evolutive networks is — as indicated 
above — the method of "interest weighing" (Abwägung) in planning law 
(Ladeur, 1983). This cannot be worked out here in detail. 
Finally, however, the initial question shall at least be briefly taken up 
again: the claim of the above so-called new dogmatics also holds good 
tested against the conception developed here, insofar as dogmatics — and 
legal theory — as one form of evolutionary self-regulation of practice, can 
be established against the background of an evolutionist theory of model-
ling. The limitation also of the new dogmatics, however, lies in the fact 
that it is too little sensitized to problems which, through the appearance 
of the different variants of the argumentation-theory, have been signalized 
rather than mastered — namely, the necessity for the development of 
procedure-oriented dogmatic constructions for the equilibration of evolu-
tive action- and negotiation-networks which are no longer referable to 
"congruently generalized behavioral expectations". Argumentation-theory 
does, indeed, signalize the problem but tries through recourse to generalized 
discourse-procedures to develop a solution for which there can be no 
abstract solution. The reference-context of argumentation-theory, reason 
and life-form also only leads back to the necessity of institutionalising 
and, 
thereby, of specifiying in a plurality of life-forms. 
The historical assumptions of the "grand theories" which dissect their 
object into concepts, according to the pattern of classical cognition-theory, 
are no longer valid. The concept suggested here has the advantage of 
situating the temporal differentiation of fields of practice in a theory 
which sees itself as a self-observation of the system. It makes possible a 
systematization of evolutionary steps — observable in practice itself — 
towards the development of new, procedural dogmatic concepts. Further-
more, the concept shares recent tendencies to overcome the "cleavage in 
the worldview" (Spaltung des Weltbildes) (Riedel, 1985) between natural 
sciences and the humanities. In the perspective of a new relativism, it aims 
at constructing a horizontal logic of multiplicity. To be sure, its success 
depends not only on conceptual precision but also on the practical question 
of how much complexity the legal system can assimilate. 
Translated from the German by Gillian Fidler. 
Bibliography 
AARNIO, AULIS (1981) "On Truth and Acceptability of Interpretation Propositions in 
Legal Dogmatics", Rechtstheorie, 
Beiheft 2, 35. 
— (1984) "On the Sources of Law: A Justificationary Point of View", 15 
Rechtstheorie 
415. 
AARNIO, AULIS, ROBERT ALEXY, and ALEKSANDER PECZENIK ( 1 9 8 1 ) "Grundlagen der 
juristischen Argumentation" in W. Krawietz and R. Alexy (eds.), Metatheorie 
der 
juristischen 
Argumentation. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
277 
ALEXY, ROBERT (1978) Theorie der juristischen 
Argumentation. 
Frankfurt a. Μ.: Suhrkamp. 
ALLEN, P. M . ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Self-Organization in Human Systems", 4 Revue beige de 
statistique 
d'informatique 
et de recherche operationnelle 
21. 
— (1982) "Evolution, Modelling and Design in a Complex World", 9 Environment 
and 
Planning (part B) 95. 
ATIAS, CHRISTIAN and JEAN LOUIS L E MOIGNE (eds.) ( 1 9 8 4 ) Edgar Morin: Science et 
conscience de la complexite. 
Aix-en-Provence: Librarie de l'Universite. 
ATLAN, HENRI ( 1 9 7 6 ) "Les modeles dynamiques en reseaux et les sources d'information 
en biologie", in A. Lichnerowicz, F. Perroux, and G. Gadoffre (eds.), Structure 
et 
dynamique des systemes. Paris: Maloine-Doin. 
— (1979) Entre le cristal et la fumee. Paris: Seuil. 
— (1983 a) "L'emergence du nouveau et du sens", in P. Dumouchel and J. P. Dupuy 
(eds.), Εautorganisation: 
De la physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
— (1983 b) "Information Theory", in R. Trappl (ed.), Cybernetics — Theory and 
Application. 
Berlin: Springer. 
— (1984) "Disorder, Complexity and Meaning", in P. Livingston (ed.), Disorder 
and 
Order. Saratoga: Proceedings of the Stanford International Symposium. 
— (1985 a) "Functional Self-Organisation and Creation of Meaning", Cognitiva '85. De 
ΐintelligence 
artificielle 
aux biosciences. Paris: CESTA. 
— (1985 b) "Temps biologique et auto-organisation", 41 Communications 
123. 
ATLAN, HENRI, J . SALOMON, F. FOGELMAN, and G . WEISBUCH ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Random Boolean 
Networks", 8 Progress in Cybernetics 
and Systems Research 185. 
BAREL, YVES ( 1 9 7 9 ) Ee paradoxe et le systeme. Grenoble: Presses Universitaires de Grenoble. 
— (1984) Ea societe du vide. Paris: Seuil. 
BERTALANFFY, LUDWIG VON ( 1 9 6 9 ) General Systems Theory. New York: Braziller. 
BÖCKENFÖRDE, ERNST-WOLFGANG ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Mittelbare/repräsentative Demokratie als ei-
gentliche Form der Demokratie", in G. Müller, R. A. Rhinow, G. Schmid, and 
L. Wildhaber (eds.), Staatsorganisation 
und Staatsfunktionen 
im Wandel, Festschrift 
Kurt 
Eichenberger. 
Basel: Helbing & Lichtenhahn. 
— (1983) "Die Eigenart des Staatsrechts und der Staatsrechtswissenschaft", in N. Achter-
berg, W. Krawietz, and D. Wyduckel (eds.), Recht und Staat im socialen Wandel, 
Festschrift 
Hans Ulrich Scupin %um 80. Geburtstag. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
BOURGUIGNON, A. (1981) "Fondements neurobiologiques pour une theorie de la Psy-
chopathologie", 24 Psychiatrie 
de ΐ enfant 445. 
BROEKMAN, JAN M. (1982) "Rechtsfindung als diskursive Strategie", in Th. Ballweg and 
M. Seibert (eds.), Rhetorische Rechtstheorie, 
Festschrift 
%um 75. Geburtstag v. Th. Viehweg. 
Freiburg/München: Alber. 
— (1983) "Die Rationalität des juristischen Diskurses", in W. Krawietz and R. Alexy 
(eds.), Metatheorie 
der juristischen 
Argumentation. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
— (1984) "Argumentative und diskursive Objektivierung im Recht", in W. Krawietz, 
Th. Mayer-Maly, and O. Weinberger (eds.), Objektivierung 
des Rechtsdenkens. 
Gedächt-
nisscbrift für Ilmar Tammelo. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
BÜHLER, O. (1965) Sprachtheorie. 
Die Darstellungsfunktion 
der Sprache. Stuttgart: Fischer. 
CALVINO, ITALO ( 1 9 7 9 ) Se una notte d'inverno un viaggiatore. 
Torino: Einaudi. 
CERUTI, MAURO ( 1 9 8 5 ) "La hybris deH'omniscienza e la sfida della complessita", in G . 
Bocchi et al. (eds.), La sfida della complessita. 
Milano: Feltrinelli. 
CHANGEUX, JEAN-PIERRE (1983) Ehomme neuronal. Paris: Fayard. 
COING, 
HELMUT 
( 1 9 5 4 ) "Geschichte und Bedeutung des Systemgedankens in der 
Rechtswissenschaft", Gesammelte Aufsätze yu Rechtsgeschichte, 
Rechtsphilosophie 
und Zivil-
recht, 1947-1975, 
Vol. 1 ( 1 9 8 2 ) . Frankfurt a.M.: Klostermann. 
COSTA, PIETRO ( 1 9 7 4 ) II progetto giuridico, 
Vol. 1, Torino: Giuffre. 

278 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
COSTA D E BEAUREGARD, OLIVIER (1963) Le second principe 
de la science du temps. Paris: 
Seuil. 
— (1967) "Two Principles of the Science of Time", 138 Annals of the New York Academy 
of Science 407. 
CROZIER, M I C H E L and ERHARD FRIEDBERG ( 1 9 7 7 ) L'acteur et le systeme. Paris: Seuil. 
DERRIDA, JACQUES (1977) "Limited Inc.", Supplement to Glyph No. 2. 
— (1979) L'ecriture et la difference. 
Paris: Seuil. 
DONZELOT, JACQUES (1984) L! invention du social. Paris: Fayard. 
DUPUY, JEAN-PIERRE ( 1 9 8 2 a) "Epistemologie de l'economie et analyse de systemes", in 
J. Lesourne (ed.), La notion de systeme dans les sciences contemporaines, 
Vol. 2: 
Epistemologie. 
Aix-en-Provence. 
— (1982 b) Ordres et desordres. Paris: Seuil. 
— (1983) "De l'economie consideree comme theorie de la foule", 7 Stanford French Review 
245. 
— (1985) "La pensee systemique", 218 Magazine Litteraire 
28. 
DUPUY, JEAN-PIERRE and PAUL DUMOUCHEL ( 1 9 8 4 ) "L'auto-organisation: du social au 
vivant et du vivant au social", 5 Cahiers Science — Technologie — Societe 45. 
Eco, UMBERTO (1984) Semiotica e filosofia 
del linguaggio. Torino: Einaudi. 
EIGEN, MANFRED and R. WINKLER ( 1 9 8 3 ) Das Spiel der Natur. Naturgesetze 
steuern den 
Zufall. München/Zürich: Piper. 
FEYERABEND, PAUL ( 1 9 7 8 ) Against Method. London: Verso. 
FISCHER, R. (1977) "On Dissipative Structures in Both Physical and Information Space", 
3 Journal of Altered States of Consciousness 
61. 
— (1981) "Le cerveau, modele de l'esprit et createur de ses propres modeles", Diogene 
No. 116, 20. 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON (1960) "On Self-Organizing Systems and their Environments", in 
C. Yovits and S. Cameron (eds.), Self-Organising 
Systems. Oxford: Pergamon. 
— (1969) "What is Memory that it may have Hindsight and Foresight?", in S. Bogoch 
(ed.), The Future of the Brain Sciences. New York: Plenum. 
— (1981 a) "Das Konstruieren einer Wirklichkeit", in P. Watzlawick (ed.), Die 
erfundene 
Wirklichkeit. 
München/Zürich: Piper. 
— (1981 b) On Observing Systems. Seaside: Intersystems. 
— (1984) "Disorder/Order: Discovery or Invention?" in P. Livingston (ed.), 
Disorder 
and Order. Saratoga: Proceedings of the Stanford International Symposium. 
FORNARI, FRANCO (1979) I fondamenti 
di una teoria psicoanalttica 
del linguaggio. 
Torino: 
Boringhieri. 
GERBER, CARL FRIEDRICH VON (1863) System des deutschen Privatrechts. 
Jena: Mauke. 
GODARD, OLIVIER ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Autonomie socio-economique et externalisation de l'environne-
ment", 37 Economie appliquee 315. 
GONDEK, 
H . D. ( 1 9 8 6 ) "Die Universalien der Sprache und ihre Parasiten — Zur 
Infrastruktur kommunikativer Rationalität", 3 Parabel 104. 
GOULD, STEPHEN JAY and R. C . LEWONTIN ( 1 9 7 9 ) "The Spandrels of San Marco and the 
Panglossian Paradigm", 205 Proceedings 
of the Royal Society (Series B) 581. 
GREEN, A . ( 1 9 8 3 ) "L'homme machinal", 4 Le temps de la reflexion 
3 4 5 . 
HABERMAS, JÜRGEN (1985) Der philosophische 
Diskurs der Moderne. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhr-
kamp. 
HADLEY, J . L . ( 1 9 8 3 ) "The Representational System: A Bridging Concept for Psycho-
Analysis and Neurophysiology", 10 International 
Review of Psycho-Analysis 
13. 
HABERLE, PETER (1975) "Die offene Gesellschaft der Verfassungsinterpreten", 30 Juristen-
Leitung 297. 
HAEFNER, KLAUS ( 1 9 8 4 ) Mensch und Computer im Jahre 2000. Ökonomie und Politik für eine 
human computerisierte 
Gesellschaft. 
Basel: Birkhäuser. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
279 
HAKEN, Η. (1981) Erfolgsgeheimnisse 
der Natur. Synergetik — die Lehre vom 
Zusammenwirken. 
Stuttgart: Deutsche Verlagsanstalt. 
H E J L , PETER M. (1982 a) So^ialwissenschaft 
als Theorie selbstreferentieller 
Systeme. Frankfurt 
a. M.: Campus. 
— (1982 b) "Die Theorie autopoietischer Systeme", 13 Rechtstheorie 
45. 
HESSE, KONRAD (1985) Grund^üge des Verfassungsrechts 
der Bundesrepublik 
Deutschland, 
15th 
ed. Heidelberg: C. F. Müller. 
HESSE, M. (1980) Reconstructions 
and Revolutions 
in the Philosophy 
of Science. 
Brighton: 
Harvester. 
HJELMSLEV, LOUIS (1968) Die Sprache. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft. 
HOFFMANN-RIEM, WOLFGANG ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Modellversuch als Scheintest", 1 3 Zeitschrift 
für 
Rechtspolitik 
31. 
HUBEL, DAVID H . and Τ. N. WIESEL (1984) "Die Verarbeitung visueller Informationen", 
Gehirn und Nervensystem. 
Spektrum der Wissenschaft (Sonderheft). 
JANTSCH, ERICH ( 1 9 7 9 ) Die Selbstorganisation 
des Universums. 
Vom Urknall %um menschlichen 
Geist. München: Hanser. 
KESSELRING, THOMAS (1981) Entwicklung 
und Widerspruch. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
KITSCHELT, HERBERT ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Moralisches Argumentieren und Sozialtheorie", 6 6 Archiv 
für Rechts- und So^ialphilosophie 
391. 
KRAWIETZ, WERNER (1976) "Interessenjurisprudenz", in J. Ritter and K . Gründer (eds.), 
Historisches 
Wörterbuch 
der Philosophie, 
Volume 4. Basel/Stuttgart: Wissenschaftliche 
Buchgesellschaft. 
— (1979) "Zum Paradigmenwechsel im juristischen Methodenstreit", Rechtstheorie, 
Bei-
heft 1, 113. 
— (1981) "Rechtssystem und Rationalität in der juristischen Dogmatik", 
Rechtstheorie, 
Beiheft 2, 299. 
— (1983 a) "Juristische Argumentation in rechtstheoretischer, rechtsphilosophischer und 
rechtssoziologischer Perspektive" in N. Achterberg, W. Krawietz, and D. Wyduckel 
(eds.), Recht und Staat im socialen 
Wandel, Festschrift 
für Hans Ulrich Scupin %um 80. 
Geburtstag. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
— (1983 b) "Theoriesubstitution in der Jurisprudenz", Die Naturrechtsdiskussion 
heute und 
morgen, Gedächtnisschrift 
für Rene Marcic. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
— (1984 a) "Juridisch-institutionelle Rationalität des Rechts versus Rationalität der Wis-
senschaften?", 15 Rechtstheorie 
423. 
— (1984 b) Recht als Regelsystem. 
Wiesbaden: Steiner. 
KRIPPENDORFF, KLAUS (1984) "An Epistemological Foundation for Communication", 34 
Journal of Communication 
21. 
KUHN, THOMAS (1962) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
KUNDERA, M I L A N (1984) Die unerträgliche 
Leichtigkeit 
des Seins. München: Hauser. 
LACROIX, G . ( 1 9 8 0 ) "De la cybernetique comme logique du fonctionnement et de l'auto-
organisation", Actes du 9e Congres de 
Cybernetique. 
LADEUR, K A R L HEINZ ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Konsensstrategien statt Verfassungsinterpretation?" 
2 1 
Der Staat 391. 
— (1983) "Abwägung — ein neues Rechtsparadigma", 69 Archiv für Rechts- und Sosyalphi-
losophie 463. 
— (1984) Abwägung — ein neues Paradigma des Verwaltungsrechts. 
Frankfurt a. Μ.: Campus. 
LADEUR, K A R L HEINZ and F. HASE (1980) Verfassungsgerichtsbarkeit 
und politisches 
System. 
Frankfurt a. M.: Campus. 
LANZARA, GIAN FRANCESCO and FRANCESCO PARDI ( 1 9 8 0 ) Linterpretayione 
della 
complessitä. 
Napoli: Guida. 

280 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
LEGENDRE, PIERRE ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Les maitres de la loi", 3 8 Annales 
5 0 7 . 
LE MOIGNE, JEAN LOUIS (1982) "Formalisations systemiques de la theorie de l'organisa-
tion, part I: Vers les logiques de l'organisation". University of Aix/Marseille: GRASCE. 
— (1983) "Autoorganisation des systemes de decisions", in B. Roy (ed.), La decision — 
ses disciplines, 
ses acteurs. Lyon: Presses Universitaires de Lyon. 
— ( 1 9 8 4 ) La theorie du systeme general. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France. 
LOCKER, A . and W . A . COULTER ( 1 9 7 7 ) " A New Look at the Description and Prescription 
of Systems", 22 Behavioral Sciences 197. 
LOECK, GISELA ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Antirationalistische Erklärungen in der Wissenschaftstheorie", 2 0 
Erkenntnis 341. 
LOSANO, M A R I O G. ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Der Begriff 'System' bei Gerber", in W. Krawietz, Th. 
Mayer-Maly and O. Weinberger (eds.), Gedächtnisschrift 
für llmar 
Tammelo. 
Berlin: 
Duncker & Humblot. 
LÜBBE-WOLFF, GERTRUD ( 1 9 8 1 ) Rechtsfolgen 
und Realfolgen. 
Freiburg: Alber. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS ( 1 9 7 2 ) "Systemtheoretische Beiträge zur Rechtstheorie", 2 
fahrbuch 
für Rechtssoziologie 
und Rechtstheorie 
255. 
— (1974) Rechtsdogmatik 
und Rechtssystem. 
Stuttgart: Kohlhammer. 
— (1981) "Temporalstrukturen des Handlungssystems" in N. Luhmann, 
Soziologische 
Aufklärung, 
Vol. 3. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
— (1982) "Autopoiesis, Handlung und kommunikative Verständigung", 11 
Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie 366. 
— (1984 a) "The Autopoiesis of Social Systems". Paper presented at the Conference on 
Autopoiesis in Law and Society, European University Institute, Firenze (August). 
— (1984 b) Sociale Systeme. Grundriß einer allgemeinen 
Theorie. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1984 c) "Die Wirtschaft der Gesellschaft als autopoietisches System", 13 
Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie 308. 
— (1985) "The Self-Reproduction of Law and its Limits" in G. Teubner (ed.), 
Dilemmas 
of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
— (1987) "Some Problems with 'Reflexive Law"' in G. Teubner (ed.), State, 
Law, 
Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
LYOTARD, JEAN-FRANCOIS ( 1 9 7 9 ) La condition postmoderne. 
Paris: Minuit. 
MASUCH, M I C H A E L ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Steering Societies"? 1 3 Kybernetes 
1 3 3 . 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R . ( 1 9 7 5 ) "The Organisation of the Living: A Theory of the 
Living Organism", 7 International Journal of Man-Machine 
Studies 313. 
— (1978) "Biology of Language: Epistemology of Reality", in G. A. Miller and E. 
Lenneberg (eds.), Psychology and Biology of Language and Thought. New York: Academic 
Press. 
— (1981) "Autopoiesis", in M. Zeleny (ed.), Autopoiesis. 
A Theory of Living 
Organization. 
New York: North Holland. 
— ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Reflexion: Lernen oder ontogenetischer Drift", 1 Delfin 
6 0 . 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R. and G . D. GUILOFF ( 1 9 8 0 ) "The Quest for the Intelligence 
of Intelligence", 3 Journal of Social and Biological Structures 
135. 
MATURANA, 
HUMBERTO R. and FRANCISCO VARELA 
( 1 9 8 0 ) Autopoiesis 
and 
Cognition. 
Boston/Dordrecht: Reidel. 
MILGRAM, M. and HENRI ATLAN (1983) "Probabilistic Automata as a Model for Epi-
genesis of Cellular Networks", 103 Journal of Theoretical 
Biology 523. 
MORIN, EDGAR ( 1 9 7 7 ) La methode·. Vol. 1, La nature de la nature. Paris: Seuil. 
— (1980) La methode·. Vol. 2, La vie de la vie. Paris: Seuil. 
— (1984) "The Fourth Dimension: On the Place of the Observer" in P. Livingston (ed.), 
Disorder and Order. Saratoga: Proceedings of the Stanford International Symposium. 
MOTULSKY, BERNARD ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Implications epistemologiques de l'approche systemique", 
Ph. D. Dissertation, University of Laval, Canada. 

Perspectives on a Post-Modern Theory of Law 
281 
MÜLLER, FRIEDRICH ( 1 9 8 4 ) Strukturierende 
Rechtslehre. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
MURPHY, J. W . (1984) "Une rhetorique qui deconstruit le sens commun: Jacques Derrida", 
128 Diogene 125. 
OERTZEN, PETER VON (1974) Die sociale Funktion des staatsrechtlichen 
Positivismus. 
Frankfurt 
a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
ORLEAN, ANDRE ( 1 9 8 5 ) "Certitude et paradoxe", 3 8 Economie appliquee 
1 3 3 . 
PAILLARD, J. (1983) "Les sciences du systeme nerveux et le formalisme du hazard 
organisationnel" in P. Dumouchel and J. P. Dupuy (eds.), LIauto-organisation: 
de la 
physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
PARDI, FRANCESCO ( 1 9 8 3 ) "Soggettivita e sistema sociale: Problemi di metodo", 
2 4 
Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia 553. 
PARIJS, PHILIPPE VAN (1981) Evolutionary 
Explanation. 
An Emerging 
Paradigm. 
London/ 
New York: Tavistock. 
PASCOT, DANIEL and JEAN-LOUIS L E MOIGNE ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Organisation, construction et 
destruction de la memoire" in Ρ. Pascot and J. L. Le Moigne (eds.), Les 
processus 
collectifs de la memorisation. 
Aix-en-Provence: Librarie de l'Universite. 
PATTEE, HOWARD (1977) "Dynamic and Linguistic Modes of Complex Systems", 3 
International Journal of General Systems 259. 
PECZENIK, ALEXANDER ( 1 9 8 2 ) "Rationality of Legal Justification", 6 8 Archiv für 
Rechts-
u. So^ialphilosophie 
137. 
PERELM AN, CHAIM and L . OLBRECHTS-TYTEKA ( 1 9 6 9 ) The New Rhetoric: 
A Treatise on 
Argumentation. 
Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press. 
PIAGET, JEAN ( 1 9 8 0 ) Les formes 
elementaires 
de la dialectique. 
Paris: Presses Universitaires 
de France. 
PIZZORNO, ALESSANDRO (1974) "Incompletude des systemes", 10 Connexions 5. 
PREUSS, ULRICH Κ. (1984) Politische 
Verantwortung 
und Bürgerloyalität. 
Frankfurt a. Μ.: 
Suhrkamp. 
PRIGOGINE, ILYA (1979) Vom Sein %um Werden. München: Piper. 
— (1984) "Order out of Chaos" in P. Livingstone (ed.), Disorder and Order. Saratoga: 
Proceedings of the Stanford International Symposium. 
PRIGOGINE, ILYA and ISABELLE STENGERS ( 1 9 8 1 ) Dialog mit der Natur. München: Piper. 
PROBST, GILBERT J . ( 1 9 8 1 ) Kybernetische 
Geset^eshypothesen 
als Basis für Gestaltungs- 
und 
Lenkungsregeln 
im Management. 
Bern/Stuttgart: Haupt. 
RIEDL, RUPERT ( 1 9 8 5 ) Die Spaltung des Weltbildes. Biologische 
Grundlagen des Erklärens und 
Verstehens. Berlin: Parey. 
RORTY, RICHARD (1981) Der Spiegel der Natur. Frankfurt a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
— (1984) "Habermas, Lyotard et la postmodernite", 40 Critique 180. 
ROSENSTIEHL, PIERRE and JEAN PETITOT ( 1 9 7 4 ) "Automate asocial et systeme acentre", 
22 Communications 
45. 
ROSITI, FRANCO (1983) "Tipi di identita e tipi di mezzi", 24 Rassegna Italiana di Sociologia 
19. 
ROSNAY, JOEL DE (1981) "La valeur du temps" in Lamenagement 
du temps. Paris: Denoel-
Gonthier. 
SATO, K. and G. M. NIELSEN (1984) "Critique dialogique et postmodernism", 20 Etudes 
fran^aises 75. 
SAVIGNY, FRIEDRICH CARL ( 1 8 4 0 ) System des heutigen Römischen Rechts, Vol. 1. Berlin: Veit. 
SCHELSKY, HELMUT ( 1 9 7 0 ) "Systemfunktionaler, anthropologischer und personfunktio-
naler Ansatz der Rechtstheorie", 1 Jahrbuch für Rechts Soziologie und Rechtstheorie 
37. 
SCHLINK, HERNHARD ( 1 9 8 0 ) "Bemerkungen zum Stand der Methodendiskussion in der 
Verfassungsrechtswissenschaft", 19 Der Staat 73. 
— (1984) 
"Freiheit 
durch 
Eingriffsabwehr 
— Rekonstruktion 
der 
klassischen 
Grundrechtsfunktion", 11 Europäische 
Grundrechte Zeitschrift 
457. 

282 
Karl-Heinz Ladeur 
SCHNEIDER, J. (1983) "La logique auto-referentielle de la temporalite", unpublished 
manuscript. 
SCHULZE-F[ELITZ, 
HELMUTH ( 1 9 8 4 ) Der informale 
Verfassungsstaat. 
Berlin: Duncker & 
Humblot. 
SCHWARTZ, DANIEL G. (1981) "Morphisms of Spencer Brown's Laws of Form and 
Varela's Calculus for Self-Reference", 8 International fournal 
of General Systems 239. 
SCUDDER, CH. L. (1975) "The Mind: An Evolving System of Models", 14 Fields 
within 
Fields 49. 
SIMON, HERBERT ( 1 9 6 9 ) The Sciences of the Artificial. 
Cambridge: M I T Press. 
SPENCER BROWN, GEORGE ( 1 9 6 9 ) Laws of Form. London: Allen & Unwin. 
SUHR, DIETER 
( 1 9 8 4 ) "Freiheit durch Geselligkeit, Institut Teilhabe, Verfahren und 
Organisation 
im systematischen 
Raster eines neuen Paradigmas", 
Europäische 
Grundrechte^eitschrift 
529. 
STOCK, MARTIN ( 1 9 8 1 ) Koordinationsrundfunk 
im Modellversuch. 
Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. 
TABARY, J. C . (1983) "Auto-organisation ä partir du bruit et systeme nerveux" in P. Dumou-
chel and J. P. Dupuy (eds.), Auto-organisation 
— de la physique au politique. Paris: Seuil. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 7 5 ) "Folgenkontrolle und responsive Dogmatik", 6 
Rechtstheorie 
1 7 9 . 
— (1983) "Substantive and Reflexive Elements in Modern· Law", 17 Law & Society 
Review 239. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER and HELMUT WILLKE ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Kontext und Autonomie", 6 
Zeitschrift 
für Rechtsso^iologie 
4. 
TOURAINE, ALAIN (1979) "Les deux faces de l'identite", 28 Quaderni di Sociologia 407. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO J. (1975) "A Calculus for Self-Reference", 2 International Journal 
of 
General Systems 5. 
— (1976) "Not one, not two", 3 CoEvolution Quarterly 
62. 
— (1978) "On being Autonomous. The Lessons of Natural History for Systems Theory" 
in G. Kür (ed.), Applied Systems Research Recent Developments 
and Trends. New York: 
Plenum. 
— (1979) Principles 
of Biological 
Autonomy. New York: Elsevier. 
— (1981a) "Autonomy and Autopoiesis" in G. Roth and H. Schwegler (eds.), Self-
Organising 
Systems. An Interdisciplinary 
Approach. 
Frankfurt a. M./New York: Campus. 
— (1981 b) "Der kreative Zirkel. Skizze zur Naturgeschichte der Rückbezüglichkeit" in 
P. Watzlawick (ed.), Die erfundene Wirklichkeit. 
München/Zürich: Piper. 
— (1983) "L'auto-organisation: De l'apparence au mecanisme" in P. Dumouchel and J. 
P. Dupuy (eds.), LI auto-organisation: 
De la physique au politique. 
Paris: Seuil. 
— (1984 a) "Living Ways of Sense-Making: A Middle-Path for Neuroscience" in P. 
Livingston (ed.), Disorder 
and Order. Saratoga: Proceedings of the Stanford Inter-
national Symposium. 
— (1984b) "Two Principles of Self-Organization" in H. Ulrich and G. J. B. Probst 
(eds.), Self-Organisation 
and Management 
of Social Systems. Berlin: Springer. 
— (1985) "Complessitä del cervello e autonomia del vivente" in G. Bocchi and M. Ceruti 
(eds.), La sfida della complessitä. 
Milano: Feltrinelli. 
WALDENFELS, BERNHARD (1983) Phänomenologie 
in Frankreich. 
Frankfurt a. Μ.: Suhrkamp. 
WEINERT, F. ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Conta Res Sempitemas", 6 7 The Monist 
3 7 6 . 
WEIZSÄCKER, CARL FRIEDRICH VON (1981) "Zeit und Wissen" in K. Maurin et al. (eds.), 
Offene Systeme II. Logik und Zeit. Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta. 
WERSIG, GERNOT ( 1 9 8 5 ) Die kommunikative 
Revolution. Opladen: Westdeutscher Verlag. 
WINOGRAD, I. (1980) "What Does it Mean to Understand Language"? 4 Cognitive 
Science 
209. 

Accounting for Law 
THOMAS C . HELLER 
Stanford 
Since the mid-1960s in the United States, there has existed a protracted, often 
bitter, somewhat confused debate about bilingual or bicultural education. 
There have always been outlying examples of private schools which attempted 
to preserve the linguistic and cultural integrity of national or religious groups 
that had emigrated to the United States. However, it is generally true that 
public school systems have insisted upon the dominance of English language 
instruction and expected immigrant children to struggle with classes not 
taught in their native languages until such point as they could manage in 
English or leave schooling behind them. This policy came under challenge 
both in the legislatures and the courts during the past two decades. Bilingual 
education acts were enacted in the United States Congress and a number of 
state assemblies in response principally to pressure brought by the increas-
ingly self-conscious Spanish speaking community concentrated in the region 
from Texas to California and expanding due to the legal and illegal influx of 
workers from Mexico. In addition, the United States Supreme Court in 1975 
ruled that under federal civil rights statutes, non-English speaking children 
had a right to some sort of special educational programming that recognized 
their linguistic difficulties in traditional schools. Neither the bilingual educa-
tion legislation nor the judicial constitution of linguistic rights were highly 
specific with regard to the details of implementation of new educational 
structures or legal obligations. A process of interpretation by both adminis-
trative and lower court rulings on the meaning of these acts became the focal 
point of a conflict over educational and, ultimately, a broader cultural politics 
that has led to a particular evolution of the character of bilingual or bicultural 
schooling in the United States. 
This essay will first examine two contending representations of what was 
at stake in this conflict and why the issue was resolved in the predominant 
form that has now emerged. These representations may be basically associated 
with, on the one hand, mainstream institutions and interests demanding a 
continuity with established educational practice because such practice is con-
sistent with the orthodox construction of American social organization. On 
the other hand, a contending interpretation of the controversy was put for-

284 
Thomas C. Heller 
ward by a coalition of oppositional groups centered around alternative images 
of national identity and socialization thereto that were described as more 
authentically Hispanic. If I can broadly classify the orthodox account of the 
events as liberal and the Hispanic as structural, I would then propose to 
consider how the representation of this history might be reformed by a post-
structuralist discourse that is built around the analysis of autopoietic systems. 
One possible benefit of this very brief sketch of a third, disparate account of 
the bilingualism conflict is to generate a previously unexplored space for 
pragmatic solutions to continuing political and economic difficulties in this 
area currently not well resolved. More generally, the introduction of exotic 
and unsettled theoretical terminology allows us the opportunity to reflect 
upon the definition of central terms and figures in this unfamiliar set of 
categories and concepts that must be clarified if we are to employ it coherently. 
Consequently, the essay is a speculation about what commitments we make 
when we speak of the world in the grammar of autopoiesis, about some 
immediate methodological puzzles that attend this usage, and finally, about 
the politics, intellectual and industrial, in which this linguistic practice makes 
sense. 
I. Representations of the Controversy: American Liberalism 
The standard response of American legal authorities to the demand for in-
struction in Spanish and schooling attuned to the normative organization of 
local Hispanic communities has been to understand those claims in terms of 
a more general liberal discourse of education and language. I have argued 
previously that the central figure of liberal discourse is the autonomous 
individual subject (see Heller, 1984). This subject has direct access, through 
empirical and logical processes, to knowledge of the external environment 
and, through immediate perception of its own consciousness, to knowledge 
of normative evaluations. Social organization is designed to maximize the 
ability of such autonomous individuals to carry forward their self-defining 
projects through some appropriate combination of market and public institu-
tions. Conversely, government is prohibited from imposing any collectively 
established, normative standard of human welfare since such a standard could 
only be based on substantive interpretations of human history or being that 
have no objective epistemological grounding. 
Within such a configuration of experience, the roles of education and lan-
guage are constrained. Since the goal of social institutions is to facilitate the 
likelihood that individuals can satisfy their own normative preferences, the 
purpose of education cannot easily include the shaping of those evaluative 
structures. In the absence of any theory of the public good that may go beyond 
the aggregation of individual welfare, the notion of education to a collective 
moral ideal is displayed from the central place it occupied in traditional sys-

Accounting for Law 
285 
tems. Instead, the function of liberal education is twofold. First, it is a form 
of technical empowering that equips the individual with empirical knowledge 
and logical skills that will permit him or her to coherently define, order, and 
subsequently implement a coherent set of projects and constitute, over time, 
one's self-identity. Second, education provides an odd sort of holding station 
where immature subjects can be controlled and entertained while their onto-
genetic passage to full autonomy progresses. Since, until this genetic matura-
tion has been completed, children are less than full legal or moral subjects, 
schooling provides a paternalistic discipline for beings whose normative 
choices do not yet merit social respect. The culture of the liberal classroom is 
in theory at once individualistic, morally anarchic, competitive, and techni-
cally oriented. However, the reality of hierarchical control, especially in the 
early years, imposes a constant counterpoint to the Utopian end point of 
subjective autonomy. 
Similarly, language in liberal discourse has a practical character. Because 
the access of true subjects to the objective world and to their mental processes 
is unmediated by conceptual representations, the world is in no way con-
structed by or contained in discursive orders. For classical liberalism, a word 
either corresponded to an unchanging aspect of the objective world or repre-
sented a self-evident idea or intention. Language was not understood to create 
meaning, but rather to operate as a tool to uncover and manipulate a con-
cealed, but already known or knowable, order. The content of this order was 
neither altered by, nor contingent upon, the mediation of the encounter with 
language itself. Rather, language ought to be seen, in this view, as a tool of 
action in that it allows our will, cognizant of the consequences of its action, 
to become effective in the world. Like all cultural institutions, it implements 
individual intentions. Both its development and adequacy must be under-
stood and appraised with reference to the voluntarist projects that motivate 
its use. Finally, translation, too, is ultimately only a technical exercise made 
possible by the shared extralinguistic referents of speech. To translate, one 
must locate the object or idea being associated with expressions in different 
languages. The commonality of the non-linguistic world of material and ideal 
forms should always permit the persistent and competent translator to make 
this discovery. 
Given these core images of subjectivity, education, and language, Ameri-
can legal authorities reworked demands from the Mexican community for 
bilingual/bicultural education into familiar patterns. Since American liberal 
education did not imagine itself to socialize children into any collective moral-
ity or cultural structure, no demand that it reform its pedagogy or classroom 
organization to reproduce any particular cultural order or series of orders 
could be recognized as legitimate. Moreover, in as much as speakers of dif-
ferent languages had access to a single reality, the use of one language or 
another in school carried no serious epistemological or ontological conse-
quences. Instead, there was only a technical question of how to most effi-

286 
Thomas C. Heller 
ciently bring a Spanish speaking child as rapidly as possible to employ the 
English representation for the common referent. This technical problem re-
sulted in a widely shared agreement that there was a need for special programs 
during the period in which children became proficient translators — a con-
sensus converted into a legal right to some form of exceptional remedial 
attention. Additionally, research funds were made available to study which of 
several different methods of teaching English and managing the transitional 
period was pedagogically superior. In effect, any radical implications of the 
demands for bilingual/bicultural education that might arise in a non-liberal 
discourse were themselves translated or re-represented in liberal images of 
education, language, and identity. At the close of the legislative, administra-
tive and judicial process in which what might have been deviant were assimi-
lated claims into a well understood set of established representations, newly 
established legal rights responded to the abnormal educational requirements 
of peculiar individuals in a fashion consistent with liberal images of subjective 
capabilities and repressed any implicit reference to an alien discourse that 
privileged not the subject, but the culture that constituted it. 
II. Representations of the Controversy: Latin Structuralism 
Hispanic proponents of the movement for bilingual/bicultural education ac-
counted differently for both the origins and the resolution of the controversy. 
However, like their American counterparts, they grounded their arguments 
about education and the place of language within it in more abstract represen-
tations of identity and social organization. In contemporary American liberal-
ism identity is associated with the existential self-definition of the autonomous 
will, social contract with the voluntary assent of such wills to public coopera-
tion, and modernity with the supercession of collective institutions that im-
posed culturally ascribed roles and definitions of character. At the same time, 
there continues to exist in Latin American thought a vital tradition of inter-
pretation of self in which culture is not seen as a stage in human evolution, 
but as a permanent attribute of human existence. Political norms of organiza-
tion are not determined by the pre-social consent of individuals, but are 
derived directly from the defining principles of the social structure that pro-
duces identity of the participants in the system. Similarly, authority does not 
flow from the voluntaristic adherence to contractual relations as it does in the 
deculturalized liberal image of modernity. The authority of culture is located 
in its organic origins in charismatic revelations (Catholicism) or immutable 
tradition (Meso-American views of world order). The continuing practice of 
an objectivist discourse that imagines culture structures to reproduce themsel-
ves through both language and other institutions of socialization transforms 
the question of the (bi)cultural education from an issue of technique to a 
matter of ontology. 

Accounting for Law 
287 
To illustrate the potential connection between current political discourse 
in Mexico and biculturalist accounts of culture and education, I will refer to 
Octavio Paz's Labyrinth of Solitude — a classic of the genre of essays defining 
Latin culture by negative reference to North American society. In his poetic 
elaboration of organic discourse, Paz gives complete primacy to the Meso-
American and Catholic heritage of Mexico. He describes the Mexican as fa-
talistic and non-instrumental. Aztec culture fully determined man's lot and 
life. Freedom was assigned to the Gods alone. There was no sense of personal 
salvation in Indian religious images or activities. All activities, including 
human sacrifice, had no individual or subjective meaning, but were directed 
to the preservation of the social and universal order. In turn, Latin Catholi-
cism stresses the blood and suffering of Christ, the indelibility of original sin, 
and the free gift of the condition of grace. The patroness Virgin of Guadelupe 
represents pure receptivity to fallen man seeking only a return from his pain 
and a passive absorption to his salvation. 
For Paz' Mexico, the world is not a mirror of man's creative efforts. Man's 
constitution of social forms mirrors the world as a determining and dangerous 
reality, which is stable and unmoving. For example, male and female are 
understood as natural characteristics of universal order played out as machismo 
and submissiveness. Paz dwells on the Mexican obsession with death, the 
final determinism, and the quest for transparency and disappearance. He ar-
gues that unremitting conflict, both with other men and external reality, has 
been the dominant attribute of Mexican psychological history. This conflict 
reflects the centrality in our nature of a minetic and rivalrous combat for non-
material forms of the desirable (status, power) which are necessarily in limited 
supply. At the same time, Mexico aspires to community in ritual and ideology 
in order to struggle against the loneliness created by increasing confrontra-
tions with the inevitable. Human tragedy is at the core of a being both alie-
nated from and in constant need of other men. There is an indissolvable 
contradiction of actuality and ideality to which is traced the pessimistic tone 
of Paz' Mexico. His claim is that the opposition between the natural sense of 
solitude and the communal effort to overcome the separations imposed by 
time and space produces Mexico's quest for a unity of being in a fixed present. 
It is the illusory expulsion from timelessness into time which establishes 
the unnatural nature of individual human life. It is a return from narrative 
diachrony to synchronic order toward which Mexico strives. 
Paz' definition of the culture which is Mexico may be grasped by its structu-
ral opposition to North American history. The United States is optimistic, 
activist, reformist; Mexico pessimistic, quietist, without illusions. [North] 
Americans eliminate death, Mexicans are obsessed with it. Americans are 
incredulous, Mexicans believers. Americans love fairy tales and detective 
stories; Mexicans myths and legends. Americans want to understand, Mex-
icans contemplate. Americans consider the world something to be perfected; 
Mexicans consider it something to be redeemed. "We enjoy our wounds and 

288 
Thomas C. Heller 
they enjoy their inventions." Even the two central events of the history of 
Mexico are to be understood as symbolic of her cultural identity. Mexico, for 
Paz, is born not in self-proclaimed revolt but in the collective pain of the 
externally imposed conquest of the accepting Aztec. The quest for communal 
fulfillment, Mexico's Revolution, is not an instrumental program, but rather 
a repudiation of foreign intrusions of liberalism. The Revolution is no more 
than a desire to purify and recapture Mexican cultural origins. It has no ideas. 
It is only "a sudden immersion of Mexico in her own being," "an explosion 
of reality," "a return and a communion." The posited relationship between 
North and Latin America (Mexico) is both semiological and political. The 
two entities are defined by the negative of the other and evaluate their own 
merit by depreciating the quality of that which they are not. 
Commitment to such a structuralist form of discourse that privileges 
culture as an unanalyzed term logically alters the understanding of the 
relation of meaning, language, and schooling. At the core of the American 
liberal account of language are fundamental propositions about both the 
particularity of meaning and the agency of the subject. The former specifies 
the correspondential relation between linguistic units, the internal mental, 
and the external physical worlds. The latter defines the character of language 
as instrumental and renders concrete the history of linguistic evolution. 
Structural theories of language displace both of these propositions. Initial 
formulations of structuralist linguistics relocated the production of meaning 
within the network of relations that was language itself. Structuralism 
argued that the systematic form of language, rather than the particular 
linguistic elements of actual spoken words, gave rise to intelligibility. 
Similarly, since meaning was contained in the intralinguistic system, the 
role of the speaker as agent was displaced. The speaker was now dependent 
on language itself to engage in meaningful activities. The meaning available 
to a subject was that opened up by the conceptual ordering his or her 
language afforded. The subject was better understood as a product of 
culture, an identity created in language, a potentiality limited by the 
language that defined the conventions of a world. 
To a linguistic structuralist to abandon a particular language is to abandon 
a discrete universe of meanings and the representations of personal existence 
it alone makes possible. Acquiring English — understood in an instrumental 
theory of language — is neither an excessively difficult or disruptive task. 
Learning English — understood in a structuralist theory of language — is 
another matter. To learn a new language will be understood to be a metaphor 
for entering a new world. We do not learn English so much as we learn how 
to see or reconstruct ourselves. There is an unspoken shift in the meaning we 
attribute to the campaign to defend the dominant use of English, or of any 
one language, as our theory about the meaning of language shifts from liberal 
instrumentalism to structuralist representation. The anger and repression 
associated with the defense against biculturalist education results from the 

Accounting for Law 
289 
reinterpretation of its text to mean that the rejection of English is the rejection 
of the way the liberal world is constructed. 
Similarly, in a structuralist representation of social order, the role of the 
school in the reproduction of the individual assumes a greater importance 
than it can have in a liberal theory of education. It is essential for an analyst 
speaking a discourse of culture to integrate an account of the activity of 
all socializing institutions that transmit the formative structure of the code. 
Hispanic advocates of educational reform insisted upon a program of cultural 
maintenance that required predominant and continued teaching in the Span-
ish language because it imagined a particular construction of reality, and 
upon the reorganization of the American classroom form that reflected liberal 
understandings of schooling. Bilingual/bicultural ideologies (see, e. g., Rami-
rez and Cardenas, Cultural Democracy, 
Biocognitive 
Development 
and Education) 
argue that liberal education rewards universalism, secularism, rationality and 
competitive individualism. Conversely, it illegitimately disparages the attri-
butes of Latin order — traditionalism, ritual, community and interdependent 
learning. Bicultural education attempts to improve the relatively poor educa-
tional performance of Latin children in American schools by creating a conti-
nuity and concordance between the culture of the Mexican home and family 
and that of the school. 
There are four value clusters, familiar elements of the Latin organicist dis-
course, which at once define Mexican-American culture and distinguish it 
from the dominant Anglo culture. The Latino's primary self-identification is 
particularistic with reference to family, community, and ethnic group. Social 
relations are personalized rather than conceived as universalizations of the 
abstracted capacities of dehistoricized subjects. Status acquisition and role 
definition are ascribed through family and local community. Finally, there is 
a general world construction associated with fatalistic Catholic ideology. In 
describing the family, in both its nuclear and its extended form (La Raza), as 
the fundamental unit of social analysis, biculturalists speak of the cultural 
tendencies to subordinate individual to collective need, to render time less 
narrative through the sense of the repetitive continuity of family reproduc-
tion, and to contrast Hispanic communality to the liberal understanding of a 
predominantly personal identity. Communalization implies mutual depend-
ence rather than independence, cooperative achievement rather than indivi-
dual competitive projects, and a desire for guidance, direction and support 
from authority figures. Cultural ascription rather than individual definition 
of status and role produces both an emphasis on conformity to prescribed age 
and sex roles and a valued recognition of traditional internal hierarchies. As 
in Mexico, religion reinforces, by the constant presence of ritual, the cultural 
production of the individual as a determined aspect of the collective. 
The biculturalist case for educational reform centers on a hypothetical 
reconstruction of educational institutions in such a way that they would 
mirror, rather than undercut, Latin cultural attributes. At the least, schools 
must not produce a type of cultural schizophrenia by socializing children with 

290 
Thomas C. Heller 
a double-binded message about appropriate identity formations. Bicultural 
education requires first an alteration of the incentive-motivation style of 
schools. There must be less stress on individual achievement and competition, 
and more on cooperative and collective effort, to cause Mexican-American 
children to participate. Human relations between student and teacher must 
shift toward nurturing, creating social affiliation within the group, providing 
need succorance, and diminishing the remoteness of authority figures. Differ-
ences in valued intellectual attributes would produce a redirection of learning 
toward the transmission of skills that related to being sensitive to the social 
environment rather than to abstracted analytic reasoning. Most importantly, 
educators must recognize that the cognitive abilities of Chicano children are 
field dependent rather than field independent. Field dependent children learn 
better with materials that are social rather than impersonal, with tasks that are 
more verbal than purely logical, with authority figures who express approval, 
with situations in which fantasy, humor and socialibility are present. 
The judicial and administrative decisions which denied the biculturalist 
arguments that the Hispanic community had a legal right to particular restruc-
tured educational programs must be characterized within a structuralist repre-
sentation of politics as acts of repression. Those who articulate the discourse 
of Latin culture employ a grammar that deconstructs the dominant American 
discourse of universal subjectivity by translating it into a regional discourse 
of Anglo culture. Heaving asserted the equality of discourses by reducing all 
conceptual orderings to limited cultural practices, Hispanic educators claim 
that school environments should be adjusted with respect to their modes 
of communication, human relations, motivational techniques and learning 
theory so that discordant fits between institutional design and the organiza-
tion of alternative cultural forms are eliminated. The heart of this biculturalist 
thesis is that the dominant self-understanding of the American educational 
theory is a form of false consciousness. The notion that schools can be profi-
cient transmitters of factual (empirical) and technical (logical) information or 
could be neutral with respect to cultural (normative) content is treated as 
ideology. With the deconstruction of liberalism's grammatical denial of its 
own status as a culture, biculturalism seeks to expose the parochial and con-
tingent context in which subjectivity is spoken. It is implied that the delegiti-
mation of the dominant theory must at least open a space for localized institu-
tional reform. To biculturalists the refusal of the legal system in the United 
States to incorporate these alternative images into its doctrinal representa-
tions of identity, language and education was evidence only of its ideological 
role in the reproduction of an existing, exclusive social order. 
III. Metastructural Oppositions 
The opposition of two contradictory characterizations of the result of the 
legal process that settled the contested practices of bicultural education 

Accounting for Law 
291 
may be described as the outcome of the encounter of two structurally 
disjunctive discourses. Both the translation of the claims into legal terms 
compatible with the predominant American liberal discourse and the conse-
quent repression in the legal system of the alternative representations that 
pictured education as an artifact of cultural reproduction are expectable 
phenomena in what we might call a metastructural analysis. Metastructural-
ism treats discursive formations as mediating structures that organize 
experience: (1) by taking as primitive some selected aspects of that experi-
ence and (2) explaining all other phenomena in accounts privileging or 
refusing to reduce to prior explanatory sequences those central terms. 
However, when two such discourses are placed in active contention with 
one another, there is necessarily an incompatibility between their simultane-
ous expression. Since each privileges central terms that the other treats as 
explainable in terms of its own irreducible categories, to speak the two 
discourses together undercuts whatever semblance of order the other pur-
ports to permit. Where conflict between mutually deconstructive discourses 
comes to our attention, it would seem appropriate to have recourse to a 
procedure for the resettlement of disturbed practices that would permit us 
to go on without dehabilitating confusion or the adoption of ironic attitude 
about the contingency of our claims to knowledge that most of us seem 
incapable of sustaining for long. Either one discourse must be shown to 
be wrongly used or distinguishable from other inconsistent linguistic 
practices, or, alternatively, the boundaries must be reinstitutionalized that 
previously served to prevent the direct confrontation of these opposed 
representations of events. 
The reciprocal deprivileging of the essential terms of the opposing liberal 
and structural discourses involved in the biculturalism controversy can illus-
trate the broader argument. Within liberal accounts the central image is the 
existential account of the passage of subjectivity across narrative time. This 
passage is demarcated with respect both to the lives of individuals and the 
progressive evolution of social organization. The autonomy of the subject 
is represented in the phenomenology of the indeterminacy of action, the 
experience of the openness of the future, and the need to construct through 
choice normative projects that can constitute a self. From this perspective, the 
unanalyzed categories within a discourse of culture are reduced to elements of 
an earlier, pre-modern stage. Just as the liberal interpretation of the genetic 
psychology of Piaget and Kohlberg shows that the individual subject follows 
a natural teleology from dependent childhood to a mature and responsible 
adulthood, so liberal political economy argues that societies progress from 
a pre-modern or undeveloped condition toward a particular form of self-
governance. To be pre-modern is to see individual roles and identity as as-
cribed by a static and traditional reproduction of culture. To be undeveloped 
is to fatalistically accept such ascriptions, to see social differentiation as the 
outcome of luck and not individual effort, to understand economic processes 

292 
Thomas C. Heller 
as the partition of a restricted quantity of the good and not as a cooperative 
game of indefinite expansion. 
Modernity is precisely the obliteration of the limits on individual expres-
sion and the end of ideology and other collective discursive categories such 
as culture. These terms are reduced by liberalism to the political instruments 
of those who would continue to disempower the subject. The figure of culture 
is translated into an ideological mechanism of oppression in the pre-modern 
world and into a chosen attribute of self such as ethnicity or lifestyle in the 
developed sphere. The undeveloped are condemned to cultural determinism; 
the modern may put it on or shed it like a costume for weekend food festivals. 
Consequently, the liberal analyst can easily explain in causal terms the ongoing 
predominance of pre-individualist discourse in Latin America as a defensive 
reaction to the North American overcoming of the barriers that delayed the 
emergence of the subject. A non-evolutionary and fatalistic perspective on 
human history is more to be expected from those who have less reason to feel 
satisfaction with their current historical condition. 
From the perspective of liberal theory, it is apparent that the purported 
virtues of Hispanic culture are not original characteristics of the attributes 
of communal society. Instead, they are simply nostalgic inversions of the 
several components of the familiar critique of pre-modern society put 
forward by American economists, educators, and anthropologists in the 
post-war period. In this Latin transformation of the liberal developmentalist 
account of pre-modern culture, immaturity is revalued as realism, adherence 
to tradition rendered into the recognition of universal forms. Fatalism 
becomes resignation. Ineffectiveness becomes communion. The limited 
good is no longer a reflection of a relatively primitive epoch of the history 
of production. It is a permanent condition which makes the distribution 
of immaterial rather than material goods into the meaningful core of human 
relations. Similarly, in educational discourse the return to a theory of field 
dependence is a nostalgic movement analogous to the shift in general 
political discourse. Field independence was initially produced as a genetic 
development to which modern education could aspire. Field dependence 
and reliance on authority relations were originally conceived as pathological 
or immature conditions to be superseded by progression toward a healthy, 
independent state. In its advocacy of a permanent, rather than a remedial, 
restructuring of educational environments toward field dependence, bicul-
turalism both accepts the validity of the categorical distinctions of liberal 
education theory and attempts to revalue the discourse of culture by 
derogating the universalistic pretensions of field independence as the condi-
tion of psychological normality. 
In translating the imagery of culture into (1) an attribute of a more primitive 
stage of the human teleology, (2) an instrument for ongoing political oppres-
sion, and (3) a nostalgic but pathological defense mechanism of a collective 
psychology, liberal theorists assimilate the contradictory grammar to their 

Accounting for Law 
293 
own familiar categories and delegitimate its usage. However, the opposite 
deconstruction and translation is no more difficult to manage. All structuralist 
discourses begin in our ability and our need to account for the past as meaning-
ful and to discover a determinate order of events that supercedes the vagaries 
of our immediate experience. The unprogrammed evolution of time and the 
autonomy of the subject — the unanalyzed figures of liberal discourse — 
must be re-presented if such objective accounts are to be possible. To speak of 
the continuing presence of a meaningful ordering of experience is to relegate 
historical change to the exceptional or the ephemeral. To understand the 
mechanisms by which this order is reproduced is to see the artifactuality of 
the institutional forms and personal identities in which the structure becomes 
manifest. The reduction of all particular phenomena, including human indivi-
duals, to the artifacts of a cultural structure, transposes liberalism into one 
culture among many. However, the effects of this translation associated with 
biculturalism are especially critical for American society because it so contra-
dicts the dominant legal modes of speech. It is not simply that the authority 
of one recognized understanding of the world is challenged by another. Ra-
ther the crisis is grave and anxiety-creating precisely because it identifies 
liberals as having a culture which may be a proper object for challenge. The 
individualist terms in which one speaks of one's actions are translated from 
what seem now to be universal categories to one historically contingent ar-
rangement of, or cutting up of, experience. The primacy of the subject is 
reduced from the journey's end of the evolutionary narrative to no more than 
one discourse among others. 
When biculturalism exposes liberalism as a discrete culture, it threatens to 
expose much that has been with effort forgotten. One is thrown back from 
the hard won present where culture has been left behind, into the pre-modern 
past. According to the evolutionary liberal metaphors of modernity one is 
cast out of adulthood to childhood, from health to pathology. The meaning 
of progress from past to future and of the growth of the self-constituting 
subject that supercedes the immaturity of culturally-constituted object be-
comes illusory. The sudden and total recharacterization of the individual 
subject as no more than an element of a local discourse is the loss of phenome-
nological freedom. The application of the discourse of culture to deconstruct 
liberal practice recreates individuals as objects of knowledge and, thereby, of 
power. The superior position assumed by the knower to that which is known 
is now to be shared equally with others who previously were denied the 
capacity to name the modern. The shift of discourse may be both psychologi-
cally disruptive and politically revolutionary. To the extent that a (meta)struc-
turalist theory of law associates the operation of legal institutions with the 
reproduction of the established discourse, the theory should predict the devel-
opment of mechanisms to repress or marginalize the use of representations 
that contradict discourse or alter the meaning of its practice. 

294 
Thomas C. Heller 
IV. Post-Structural Elements 
Autopoiesis is a post-structural discourse in both a chronological and a prag-
matic sense. It need not deny that a legal controversy, such as biculturalism, 
can be analyzed as a struggle over the reproduction of differentiated discursive 
orders (one of which, liberalism, has the grammatical property that it denies 
the primacy of discourse). It can accept the view that among contemporary 
institutions, the legal system is a principal arena of ideological representation 
where this struggle is likely to manifest itself. At the same time, however, 
autopoiesis must rework what have now become excessive simplifications of 
pure structuralist accounts. It must resituate the understanding of historical 
time and individuality, representations which are reduced to derivative arti-
facts of structure in the discourse of the collective, in order to open up new 
space for innovative approaches to political conflicts that are not being re-
solved as currently imagined within the field of alternative discourses now 
deployed. Dissatisfactions with the (meta)structural account may revolve 
around the following points: 
1. An accurate mapping of the theoretical and practical discourses actually 
in place in any set of institutions shows that there is never reference to only 
one representation of events. Instead of structural unity, any functioning 
system displays a complex topography of partial accounts that very often 
contradict one another when brought close together. In the liberal legal sys-
tem there are wide areas of practice organized around a series of determinist 
discourses whose fundamental grammar would deconstruct the liberal indivi-
dualism that dominates the system. The behavior of the insane, of children, 
formerly of women or slaves, of immigrants and primitives has been charac-
terized as the product of objective social and genetic mechanisms. Its perpetra-
tors have thus been absolved of legal responsibility and control. In some 
restricted domains collective entities such as families and even nations have 
been ascribed the status of phenomenological subjects normally reserved for 
individuals. However, such well established differences in legal categorization 
do not stand up to close analysis that examines the coherence between such 
practices and the operative terms of the liberal discourse that ought to deter-
mine legal practices in a structurally integrated legal system. In fact, the 
presence of outlying and contradictory practices in every complex representa-
tional order suggests that one essential attribute of legal institutions is to keep 
firm boundaries between conceptually indistinguishable areas of practice that 
at once coexist and threaten one another within a legal system. 
2. An account given in a discourse built upon the figure of autopoietic sys-
tems may move beyond the imagery of opposed, untranslatable, and mutually 
deconstructive structures by emphasizing the hierarchical organization of 
information systems and relations among multiple levels of representation. 
In a sense, the liberal and cultural representations of the world never touch 

Accounting for Law 
295 
one another since they aggregate information about experience at quite dif-
ferent levels of abstraction. Like computer languages in which there may be 
more or less detailed or compiled descriptions of available information, the 
discursive ordering of information may cut into the set of innumerable pos-
sible representations of events by means of wholly disparate and logically 
discrete characterizations. A liberal discourse that privileges an existential 
phenomenology imagines and describes all reality from the standpoint of 
an individual subject. It aggregates the multiple physical subsystems that 
compose the individual into one unitary entity while disaggregating all more 
complex social orders into collections of individual wills. Since this stand-
point or mode of organizing information is exclusive, it is not coherent to 
describe experience from other locations within the complex topography of 
possible representations of information in the same voice that we use when 
we speak of ourselves as the elemental units we call subjects. However, it is 
easily possible to re-present events as more or less aggregated chunks of 
information so that individuality is only: (1) a product or sub-unit of a higher 
level system (e. g., cultural discourse), or (2) a composite field of interactions 
among more reduced physiological or psychological entities. 
To see the endless range of possible systems into which information can be 
differentiated displaces the impression that any single arrangement is natural 
or teleologically privileged. All arrangements of information must suppress 
other imaginable systematizations in order to create meaning. Because the 
production of significance from chaos (information from noise), demands 
repression of some information available in discarded representations, the 
total information content of all particular systems approaches constancy. At 
the same time that autopoiesis deprivileges any single discourse in the hierar-
chy of multiple orderings, it poses questions about the historical deployment 
of discourses. Although discrete arrangements of information are epistemo-
logically necessary to permit the emergence of meaning, it is not evident how 
such systems are to be defined, how they institutionalize the reproduction of 
their elements, or how they evolve and are superceded. Since it is possible 
to use alternative discourses sequentially to describe the same domain of 
experience or simultaneously to describe differentiated domains of experi-
ence, it is not necessary to assume that the evolution of discourse must involve 
transformative eclipse of, or epistemological break with, existing practices. 
Instead, a post-structural discourse may involve a pastiche of rearranged 
practices taken from established linguistic orderings, partially replicated and 
innovatively juxtaposed, to create a reworked image of the identity of self-
organizing systems. Similarly, autopoietic time should be reimagined as a 
forking, uncertain passage through a labyrinth of equally probable accounts 
of events rather than as either a continuous narrative of individual lives or as 
a succession of disjunctive structural periodizations of history. 
3. Although pure structural accounts described the production of practice 
by theory as determinate, a poststructuralist grammar can emphasize the 

296 
Thomas C. Heller 
openness and interpretative ambiguity of this relationship. Practice ought 
to be seen as discontinuous from theory to emphasize that all theory 
undetermines the production of more concrete operations and each practice 
has overdetermined explanations. Autopoiesis must posit a discursive sys-
tem in which the linkage of practice to theory, at each level of abstraction 
of information, is historical rather than logical and the nature of authority 
to establish both theory and practice is not formally rational or exclusively 
objective. 
In addition to the indeterminacy that characterizes the internal arrangement 
of the elements of meaning systems, autopoiesis can be distinguished from 
structuralism or earlier systems theories by its focus on the instability of 
discourse. There is a dynamic tendency in all autopoietic systems of order to 
break down. Given (1) that there exist multiple possibilities for the representa-
tion of information, (2) that the repression of alternative representations must 
attend the emergence of any particular order, (3) that the indeterminacy of 
the process by which practice is settled within a discursive order will repeat-
edly recall our attention to the contingency of representations, and (4) that 
every discursive order contains contradictory references to alternative ar-
rangements of information within it, it is most plausible that any meaning 
system will have a limited capacity for self-reproduction. Instead of structural 
fixity and equilibrated systems, autopoiesis expects the death of systems and 
exposes the unexplored field of far-from-equilibrium events. 
4. Autopoiesis and all post-structural discourse is fundamentally local and 
not global. Discursive practices, both of theory and differently institutional-
ized forms of expression, are not consistent across all sub-systems of a wider 
interactive system. The complex and local normal state of discursive orders 
can be observed by examining the contradictory accounts of events given by 
the same actors in different institutional arenas. For example, Hispanics who, 
when confronting North Americans, argue that Mexican culture produces an 
identity rooted in community and a recognition of a wider structural order, 
will, when engaged in domestic Mexican politics, castigate their Indian popu-
lations as non-individualistic and resigned to perpetual poverty. Similarly, 
North Americans, who formulate an educational policy vis-ä-vis Latinos in 
a liberal discourse, will invoke all forms of psychoanalytic, sociological, or 
geopolitical determinisms in internal regional struggles situated in other pol-
itical institutions. Identity, like discursive practices more generally, is de-
ployed within and derived from local political confrontation. Since the outco-
mes of institutional processes that establish the evolution of discourse within 
a specific domain are indeterminate, it is logical that discrete but interactive 
sub-systems will develop incompatible practices over time. This dispersion 
of representations may lead to dissonance and intrasystemic conflict that redu-
ces the stability of any established ordering of events. The interactions among 
locally evolving institutions that concurrently reproduce highly selective, 

Accounting for Law 
297 
differentially systematized information will emerge as an originary or genetic 
style in post-structural accounts. 
5. An autopoietic discourse will be post-liberal in that it characterizes indivi-
dual self-consciousness as a non-privileged standpoint from which to view a 
complex hierarchy of representations. It shares with structuralist accounts an 
acceptance of social discourse that operates at a higher level of aggregation 
than the individual actor. However, it is post-structural in that it opens a 
new discursive space for politics by generating accounts that emphasize the 
contradictory, multi-storied, unstable and local nature of systems of meaning. 
Additionally, a coherent autopoietic discourse must be closed in form so that 
it may offer an autopoietic account of its own genetic, local, and transitory 
character. A post-structuralist representation must both rearrange the con-
figuration of images to expose fresh grounds for semiotic expression and, 
given the circular movement of an autopoietic logic, be self-conscious of its 
status as one discourse among many in a more complex information system. 
Autopoietic discourse must account for the genetic politics of its evolution 
and be content with the indeterminate nature of its own self-definition. By its 
own terms, autopoiesis cannot be an unsituated meta-account of experience. 
Rather, it must be located within a particular history of evolving institutional 
practices in order to clarify, convey, and reformulate the world in which those 
practices will compete for survival. 
V. An Autopoietic Sketch of the Biculturalism Controversy 
An autopoietic account of bilingualism would be too lengthy to attempt in 
this essay. Instead, I will simply begin to elaborate the kind of narrative that 
one might employ, outline some of the major points that a full account would 
have to discuss, and conclude by speculating about the political meaning of 
the invocation of a discourse of this type. 
1. Intersystemic Origins of Perturbations of the Legal System 
In the initial half of this century, the American economic and legal systems 
underwent substantial change. The rise of mass production industries based 
upon technologies that increased the ratio of capital to labor and encouraged 
enlarged economies of scale brought about a reorganization of corporate 
enterprise. The growing need for semi-skilled laborers, trained in shop-spe-
cific tasks and amenable to the industrial pace necessary for uninterrupted 
long production runs influenced the reform of industrial organization. Indus-
trial relations in the advanced sector stabilized around shared administration 
of the workplace between management and worker representatives and a 
splitting of the economic rents between capital and organized labor. At the 

298 
Thomas C. Heller 
same time, the legal system evolved from a relatively laissez-faire liberal order 
to a neo-liberal order featuring a variety of new interventionary practices. 
The period from 1917 to the Second World War saw the institutionalization 
of rights of labor to bargain over economic surplus and administer the shop 
floor, the establishment of macro-economic controls to uphold the level of 
aggregate demand required by capital intensive production, the passage of 
limited transfer systems of social security and unemployment compensation 
aimed principally at the modern element of the workforce, immigration re-
strictions targeted upon the European populations that had always supplied 
the unskilled labor pool in America, and a vast expansion of regulatory 
authority to alter market structure and the relative prices of productive activi-
ties. These changes in the law were not conceived to be aberrations from 
the pre-existing liberal order. Rather, they were represented as corrective 
procedures needed to permit the implementation of the projects of autono-
mous subjects in markets that did not correspond to technically ideal condi-
tions. 
The evolution of institutional practice in the national economic and legal 
systems was matched by corresponding shifts in the political and cultural 
domains. Politically, the dominant trends involved the growth of bureaucra-
tization and planning in various administrative authorities and a movement 
of legislative power toward a coalition composed of organized labor, 
corporate capital and state bureaucrats. At the same time the task of 
completing the incorporation of marginal groups, most importantly Blacks 
and women, to the status of full participation as autonomous individuals 
became a central focus of the increasingly prominent state apparatus. In 
cultural matters, the reaffirmation of traditional images of American identity 
to create the appearance of the continuity of American history was an 
overwhelming concern. The discontinuities and contingencies in the Ameri-
can liberal self-presentation occasioned by the strong flirtations with social-
ism and a kind of technological utopianism of a corporatist form in the 
1919 — 37 period were overtly repressed in the post-War II years. Economic 
unionism as the natural order of industrial relations, immigration as a 
process of individual investment in human capital and flight from pre-
modernity, regulation as the perfection of liberal market processes — all 
represented a Whiggish reconstruction of the recent past to banish its 
deconstructive implications. 
After 1945, the transformation of the national system penetrated the 
order of international relations as well. The international economic system, 
in which the national state as an aggregate unit was represented as an 
autonomous actor, had been characterized in the interwar era as an unco-
ordinated realm marked by conflicting, autarchic national domestic policies. 
However, given the preponderant force of the United States in the non-
socialist world after the Second War, it was possible for American interests 
to impose new international institutions more consistent with the American 

Accounting for Law 
299 
political economy. The creation of largely integrated markets for trade in 
goods (GATT), the stabilization of currencies (IMF), the increased world 
wide demand (IBRD and Marshall Plan), and the opening of borders to 
multinational capital flows met the demands both of the American military 
attempting to rebind the West and the intact American mass industrial sector 
seeking to avoid potential unemployment by exporting its unimpaired high 
levels of production. The reform of the international order allowed the 
continued institutionalization in the United States of the economic system 
that had been developed before the war under conditions of relative 
isolation from external economic competition. As a consequence, prosperity 
in the unionized or advanced production sector sustained a socio-psycho-
logical shift in which it came to be expected by Americans that they should 
have stable, organized, well paying, semi-skilled or skilled jobs connected 
to job ladders that promised a career of advancement. Dead end, unskilled 
jobs outside the advanced sector were rejected as demeaning. This rejection 
was supported by a system of compensating public transfer payments 
supported by the government share of the economic surplus produced in 
modern industry. 
This configuration of the American national system has proven to be 
unstable since 1970. The spread of American capital and technology to 
other nations, combined with recovery of Western Europe and Japan, 
began to compete away the economic rents on which the system depended. 
Competition drove American capital in the advanced sectors to seek lower 
cost labor and productive conditions by investment in facilities overseas 
and by the introduction of labor saving technologies at home. In addition, 
in the agricultural, small service, and traditional manufacturing sectors 
where good jobs on the industrial model had never been plentiful, relatively 
low profit margins created a growing demand for low wage, high quality 
labor that American workers were relatively unwilling to provide. In 
expanding regions like the Southwest and West, this sectoral labor shortage 
was made up principally by importing Latin workers illegally from Mexico 
across frontiers where the immigration laws had never been focused or 
functioned. The increasing Hispanic population, although initially com-
posed principally of temporary-stay young males, has always deposited a 
percentage of its members as a permanent residence community and has 
recently shifted toward greater employment of young women with aptitude 
in light assembly and manufacturing. Moreover, as the migration grew, it 
spawned communities that replicated the institutions of Mexican daily life 
and diminished the cultural exile that a temporary worker necessarily 
suffered in the United States. The gradual reproduction of a cultural 
system that linked areas of origin in central Mexico with communities of 
destination in California and Texas has produced a social order that is 
situated in extended geographical space. At the level of the working class, 
the normalization of migratory networks has produced an adjustment 

300 
Thomas C. Heller 
toward a binational or a transnational cultural system that has evolved 
along a trajectory consistent with that of the transnationalized economic 
system. However, the contemporary frontiers of the economic and cultural 
orders no longer coincide with the boundaries of the American political 
and legal systems. 
Just as the American domestic economy responded to effects generated 
in the restructured internal economic order, the Mexican domestic system 
evolved in relation to those broader economic operations. Mexican post-
war development strategies were imagined in terms of their relation to an 
integrated global order. In spite of abundant supplies of labor, the basic 
drive has been to retrace the industrial history of more advanced societies 
through a strategy of building import substituting industries that were 
relatively capital intensive. These industries were often initially financed 
by direct multinational investment and later through borrowing of portfolio 
capital from the North. In addition, the subsistence or rain-fed agricultural 
sector received little state attention or investment. Agricultural capital was 
channeled into capital heavy, irrigated corporate farms aimed at export 
production. As a result, Mexico, like most semi-peripheral economies, made 
available large pools of surplus labor as an export good to the labor short 
sectors of the American market. The Mexican role in the integrated world 
economy depended on the obliteration of economic frontiers between the 
two increasingly interdependent domestic systems. The presence of a mas-
sive, relatively stabilized Mexican labor force in the United States remains 
wholly consistent with a Mexican development policy whose unchanged 
basic form is still encouraged by the institutions of the post-war inter-
national system. 
In accounting for the intersystemic origins of the biculturalism issue, it 
is necessary to point to multiple levels of interaction. National evolutionary 
trends in the United States penetrated the international system that in turn 
fed back consequences to the national level of various systems. The particu-
lar form of the institutions that emerged in the national and international 
systems were not inevitable and each could be analyzed separately to show 
much more complex histories about the nature of their constitution. Why 
technology, social psychology, legal theory, and international economics 
interacted to yield the specific conjunction of sub-system evolutionary paths 
that existed until quite recently is a part of some larger project. Moreover, 
the current situation is unstable and non-predictable in a number of 
dimensions. The economic system itself functions in a manner which does 
not correspond to the interests of the political coalition that set it in place. 
The open global economy was established to protect and expand the 
American share of world rents on behalf of a state/labor/capital coalition 
in the advanced industrial sector. It ought, therefore, to be expected that 
there will be strong initiatives to close off American economy from the 
effects of integration and to alter the existing terms of competition to limit 

Accounting for Law 
301 
the ability of other nations to exploit their relative advantages in low wages 
or lack of regulation. The recurrent legislative efforts to cut off Mexican 
migration are misguided in their focus on economic activities beyond the 
mass industrial sectors where the political crisis lies. However, they may 
symbolize a return to autarchic national policies that escape the unintended 
and dysfunctional consequence of earlier integrative strategies. 
A spillover from the reshaping of economic boundaries also is manifest 
in the biculturalism controversy in the legal system. It is the presence 
of a permanent Latino community culturally linked to an alternative 
representation of identity, language, and education, that set up the 
possibility of perturbation of established legal practice. It is problematic 
whether the legal system has the capacity to reproduce itself as an 
autonomous system in the face of a refiguration of concrete practices 
in both the economic and cultural subsystems discordant with existing 
legal representations. Schematically, that historical evidence suggests that 
beginning from a state in which there was a convergence of representa-
tions (statei) between the national American subsystems of law, economy, 
culture and politics in the 1945 to 1960 period, the penetration of the 
American economy into the international economic system led to an 
unforeseen evolution (state2) of the penetrating subsystem itself and a 
secondary shift in the operation of cultural institutions. The uneven 
development of subsystems that figure in each other's representations 
of events gives rise to an inquiry about the nature of the linkage of 
autopoietic systems and the possible paths of behavior of American 
legal and political institutions in such circumstances. 
More reduced or less aggregated units of analysis 

302 
Thomas C. Heller 
2. Elements of an Autopoietic Analysis 
Autopoietic meaning systems are distinguished from prior representa-
tions of social systems by their internal complexity, system closure, instabil-
ity, and locality. Grammatically, if we are to speak coherently of their 
behavior in particular historical circumstances, we must: (1) define with 
care which information must be reproduced for systemic continuity within 
an ordering that normally contains multiple and contradictory representa-
tions of experience; (2) describe the interactive effects among coexistent 
systems, each of which autonomously represents the other to itself and in 
so doing may originate instability between themselves; (3) explain the 
internal dynamics of self-reproduction within a single autopoietic system 
given the epistemological and political contingencies associated with the 
generation and maintenance of any specific construction of order. Stylisti-
cally, if autopoietic analysis is to be interesting, the content of the self-
organizing systems of meaning must be defined in such a way that its death 
or inability to continue reproduction is a possibility under imaginable 
circumstances. The sources of variation within the system must illustrate 
the complicated sense in which autopoietic systems must be both closed 
to the environment if they are to be autonomous and open to cognitive 
adjustment and response if they are to endure. An evolutionary account in 
which selective response to system variation functions as an operative 
term should be described with fractile cybernetic models that allow for 
catastrophic solutions. By fragmenting the representation of space into 
multiple coexisting domains and of time into discontinuous histories, the 
figure of locality recalls our attention to the contingency of order and the 
costs of avoiding chaos. 
A complete autopoietic account of biculturalism might follow the out-
lined points and diagrams below. 
A. System Definition and Dynamics 
a) Meaning as differentiated, patterned information 
a. Self-presentation and truth 
b. Contradiction (absence) or asymmetric presentation as the normal 
condition of meaning 
c. Boundary maintenance in legal systems 
d. Definition of core information to be reproduced for system mainten-
ance 
e. System as institutions, theory, authority as opposed to general system 
programming or self-specification 
f. The relation to concrete practices as core information 
1. disruption of practice at hand and crises of theory (law as resettle-
ment) 

Accounting for Law 
303 
2. familiar worlds and understanding 
a. historically linked units 
b. psychology of multi-level stories for interpretation of shared 
referents 
3. the unity of all levels of information representation as practice 
g. Interaction of local systems and autopoiesis 
1. closure of self-organized systems and reciprocal representation 
2. legal autonomy as more than the logical interpretation of meaning 
h. Instability of system and sources of variation in indeterminacy 
1. differential representation within and between systems given va-
ried institutional histories 
2. surplus of meaning and construction of information 
3. dynamics of mimesis and repression in social order 
4. legal mechanisms to produce all possible interpretations within an 
autopoietically restricted field: the indeterminacy of legal practice 
Figure 2 
Liberal l/iew of Identify!Language 
Cultural (Structural) 
Identity}Language 
Other 
Non core-
Practices 
(e. g., foreign 
language 
instruction 
for English 
speakers) 
Core 
Practice 
(English 
instruction 
only) 
Individual 
""Choice 
/Family 
f Choice 
Represented 
Core 
(transitional 
Spanish or 
English as a 
second 
language) 
V 
/ 
Rejected 
Practice 
(cultural 
maintenance 
in Spanish-
only 
instruction; 
optional) 
Community 
Choice 
Rejected 
Practice 
(mandatory 
Spanish-
only 
instruction 
in marginal 
communities) 
B. The Mechanics of Reproduction 
a. Prefiguration of informational claims 
1. constitutional claims and statutory ambiguity in biculturalism 
b. Reproduction of core practices 
1. translation as re-presentation 
2. retention mechanisms in legal system 
c. Marginalization of claims in bounded field 
1. metaphors of differentiation 
2. state participation and magnitude of claiming population 
d. Repression of disruptive practices 

304 
Thomas C. Heller 
Figure 3 
Dissonance and Paths of Adaptation 
Dissonance and assimilation of biculturalism claims 
Legal system penetration and reconstruction of dissonant subsystems 
Withdrawal, power, and the preservation of legal autonomy 
Reformation and the reconstitution of system identity in local political 
process 
1. the metaphor of evolution and selection in social systems 
2. reconstitution of image of time 
3. frontier culture as illustration 
a. 
b. 
c. 

Accounting for Law 
305 
Figure 4 
3. The Politics of Autopoiesis 
The politics of the use of a post-structuralist discourse, such as autopoiesis, 
remain as yet obscure. On the one hand, the account is overtly deconstruct-
ive and seeks to define a reformed theoretical space that escapes the 
historical difficulties attendant upon both determinist discourses and narrat-
ives of free consciousness. On the other hand, autopoiesis must not be 
critique alone and cannot define itself as only an affirmation of the absence 
of those representations with which we have become familiar. At the level 
of theory, in order to close its own circle and give a self-reflective account 
of itself, autopoiesis must explain its own evolutionary appearance in terms 
of the particular historical possibilities allowed by the disruption of accepted 
theoretical practices in epistemology and the philosophy of science. In 
addition, however, according to its own discursive terms, the politics of 

306 
Thomas C. Heller 
autopoiesis must be equally manifest in concrete institutional practices of 
wider scope than a dialectics of knowledge alone would suggest. Because 
autopoiesis does not distinguish qualitatively between levels of representa-
tion, there is no logical hierarchical relationship between practices at 
different levels of aggregation of information. Consequently, to evaluate 
the emergence of post-structural discourse, we should move beyond the 
evolution of theory to examine the development of the economic and 
cultural institutions in which the discourse is commonly spoken. This final 
element of the essay will focus on the deconstructive implications of post-
structuralist imagery for existing political traditions and the potential 
interests for which autopoiesis may become the dominant ideology. 
/W-structural discourse has been read as a«//-structuralist. Since auto-
poiesis emphasizes the complex, the local, the closed or self-referential, and 
the unstable, it evidently assaults structuralist accounts that center upon 
the operations of global, coherent, artificing and equilibrating mechanisms, 
whether physical, biological or cultural. In particular, the force of post-
structuralist analysis has been directed against the unitary and continuous 
philosophy of history explicit in Marxism and the institutional embodiment 
of centralized power in the contemporary welfare state. Post-structuralism 
has been castigated by sophisticated progressive critics as a reactionary form 
of late capitalism precisely because it disrupts this last great emancipatory 
narrative of the Enlightenment Tradition and delegitimates the modern 
advances of the social democracy linked to that narrative. 
The post-structuralist polemic was originally directed against the ideal 
of the disciplinary and totalitarian state that reproduces its own image in 
every niche of social life. Its analysis has more recently spilled over into a 
more generalized critique of existing regulatory institutions, their ability 
to control a complex, interactive social network, and the stability of the 
coalition of capital, labor, and bureaucratic interests that sustain them. 
However, it is a misjudgment to fold post-structuralist discourse back into 
either an amended Marxist stage theory or into a revived libertarian 
argument against the collective per se. Once it is accepted that continuous 
histories like that of humanistic Marxism have been effectively de-
constructed theoretically, to call for their reaffirmation as effective mass 
myths brings the left close to a politics of fascism. The argument that 
autopoiesis is the ideology produced by late capitalist corporations seeking 
to disempower their regulators is a more potentially interesting line of 
analysis that too often flounders in highly simplistic accounts that ignore 
the changing political economy of both governmental and corporate organi-
zations for the sake of narrative continuity. Nevertheless, it is correct to 
see that the political evaluation of autopoiesis is concretely linked to a 
judgment about the desirability of the newly emergent institutions and 
disciplines which express themselves autopoietically. On the other hand, 
to suggest that post-structuralism is a resuscitation of liberal individualism 

Accounting for Law 
307 
is to lose sight of the displacement of the figure of the autonomous subject 
within the core representations of autopoietic discourse and to forget the 
fundamental anti-humanism that carries over from structuralism to the 
images emerging from it. If we understand autopoiesis as the beginning 
of an answer to structuralism's suppression of temporality and its oblitera-
tion of the experience of subjectivity, we must not forget how much 
structuralism has altered us. 
The non-humanist or non-liberal character of autopoiesis can be high-
lighted in several ways. Liberal humanism arose in conjunction with a 
bifurcated epistemology. Normative knowledge was available in the direct 
examination of subjective inner discourse. Moral judgment was necessarily 
individual, available publicly only when confessed by the evaluator, unveri-
fiable and uncriticizable by collective standards. Factual and logical know-
ledge was not a matter for interpretation, but for immediate apperception. 
The domain of the objective — positive science and mathematics — was 
not in need of mediation by representational structures whose very nature 
was to construct order rather than discover it. This division of the ways 
of knowing was reified into a bifurcation of types of being and the creation 
of an image of a separable realm of the human with its own intellectual 
disciplines and activities. Structuralist anti-humanism struggled to empty 
this differentiated realm by reducing its contents to the artifacts of one 
objective mechanism or another. Autopoietic scientific practice rejects both 
this extension of positive science to the status of a universal discourse and 
the bifurcation that preceded it. Instead, if we examine the biology of self-
organizing systems, the anti-classical mechanics of dissipative structures in 
physical chemistry, catastrophe theory in mathematics, or the principles of 
system formation and reproduction in cybernetics and information theory, 
it is apparent that the production of scientific knowledge involves represen-
tation, selective repression of information, indeterminate behavior of sys-
tems and other attributes formerly reserved for the discourse of the human. 
However, if for autopoiesis technique is hermeneutic, so is interpretation 
technical. To point out that contemporary science depends on the recogni-
tion of the value of terms originating in phenomenological discourse does 
not consent to the general primacy of that discourse as historically practiced. 
To speak of the representational character of all knowledge and the indeter-
minacy in the evolutionary history of every system is consistent with the 
proposition that each discourse occupies only a local standpoint in the 
hierarchy of possible representational orders. Indeterminacy does not arise 
because the standpoint of the human individual is in some way privileged 
or central. Rather, indeterminacy is an element of the grammar of complex 
systems or a feature of the observation/system relationship. Von Neumann 
writes in his description of quantum mechanics: "The state of a [physical] 
system evolved perfectly deterministically; it was the observation that 
introduced an element of absolute randomness. But if the process of 

308 
Thomas C. Heller 
observation were itself observed from outside, it could be regarded as 
deterministic. There was no way of saying where the indeterminacy was; 
it was not localized in any particular place." 
In a systems discourse, indeterminacy, consciousness and the other 
elements of phenomenological discourse do not imply a specialness to 
human experience. They arise in the task of creating order through differen-
tiation. Because observation or the entry of information into a system is 
necessarily selective and requires an imposition of order by the observing 
system, indeterminacy is an artifact of the process in which alternative 
characterizations of what is received are rejected. From the standpoint of 
the human individual, systems are the creation of autonomous authors. 
Yet, reflecting upon the experience of an author who selectively organizes 
the elements that define a system out of a number of plausible accounts, 
it is incorrect to conclude that systems have a fictional character or that 
the liberal discourse which expresses this experience is in some way more 
real. In a systems grammar that emphasizes a hierarchy of levels of represen-
tation, the indeterminacy of system definition may be expressed as the 
overdetermination of all explanatory structures relative to the event to be 
explained. Indeterminacy is an attendant consequence to every shift among 
levels of representation. In a subjectivist discourse that privileges the 
individual author's phenomenology, indeterminacy names the experience 
of constructing a text that moves among discourses. 
Still more aggregated information 
National systems (collective) 
underdetermined practices as causal or 
probabilistic relations ι i 
Individual systems 
1 1 
constructive relations; 
or human subjects 
system definition as overdetermined 
still more reduced information 
Alternatively, the shift of levels can be expressed as the underdetermina-
tion of practices by any single theory. Within an objectivist representation, 
this will be labelled the probabilistic nature of scientific cause. From this 
higher level, or more aggregated standpoint, human identity is only an 
output of system activity. Each discourse reports the problem of informa-
tion organization at different levels of aggregation distinctly and in its own 
terms. No discourse has preeminent claims against the other. All must be 
evaluated in conjunction with the historical institutions and practices in 
which they are articulated. 
The question of the relationship between the politics of individualism 
and those of autopoiesis is posed again in the apparent contradiction 
between the concept of system autonomy and the role of the analyst in 

Accounting for Law 
309 
constructing systems. An autonomous system is one which defines and 
reproduces its own elements, boundaries, and processes. However, if the 
specification of its nature is left to the system itself, it is likely to describe 
and name its current composition as its identity or to define its content at 
such a high level of generality that no concrete transformation threatens 
its existence. For example, if we accept the legal system's account of its 
own identity to determine what constitutes the system, it may specify some 
particular form of property relations it manifests at the moment of the 
inquiry. Nevertheless, if at a subsequent date the practice of property law 
is greatly altered, an interrogation of the legal system at this later time will 
yield a revised account of itself that will identify the newer property rules 
as essential. Alternatively, if theorists of the legal system assert that its 
identity lies in having a set of rules which it describes as property rules, 
or institutions to generate such rules, or learning procedures to generate 
such institutions, then the act of self-definition is again emptied of analytic 
value. In either case self-specification seems to offer no firm ground upon 
which to develop an evolutionary systems grammar. 
If we use a biological analogy, the differentiation of the genetic identity 
of species seems to require an analyst who stands outside the evolutionary 
history. We might imagine a process in which genome yields a phenome 
that is subject to selection and reproduces itself as genome2. There must 
be some pragmatically nominalist definition of how much maintenance of 
the information content of the linked genomes must be constant in order 
to constitute a single species. Over an extended period of time, as genetic 
information patterns are altered, only the continuity of the evolutionary 
history may link two individuals. Yet the very fact of that historical 
connection may be named by those individuals as the essence of their joint 
identity. To escape the methodological problems of self-definition we may 
invoke the figure of the observer/analyst/author to specify how species, 
systems, or any categories used to organize information are to be deployed. 
However, this tactic seems to involve the loss of system autonomy to 
whichever other being defines the system as an object. 
System autonomy and the activity of authorship are made compatible 
with one another by post-structuralist image of complex hierarchies of 
multiple discourses of meaning systems that are closed to one another. 
Closure, or the qualitative discontinuity between the levels of aggregation 
of information within autopoietic and liberal discourses, segregates self-
referential definition and analytical objectification. In a liberal representa-
tion, an author/analyst with an already specified identity constructs the 
figure of the system as his existential project. In a discourse of autopoietic 
systems, the identity of the individual author is defined only within the 
process of system formation and is stabilized only by the mechanisms of 
system reproduction. There is no self-identity that pre-exists that which 

310 
Thomas C. Heller 
emerges in the political conflicts that simultaneously define subjective 
character and system content. 
For autopoiesis, neither the identity of the analyst nor the nature of the 
system precedes the other. Both are elements of a coherent story or account 
of experience in which they figure concurrently with a variety of other 
technical, institutional and theoretical practices. These story elements are 
unified neither by theoretical logic nor authorial intent, but by their 
association in constituting a praxis in the world. To insist that the intention-
ality of the author is prior to the autonomy of the system is to abandon 
post-structural discourse. The grammar of autopoiesis requires that repre-
sentations at multiple levels of aggregation emerge and function conjointly 
to differentiate experience meaningfully. Which particular discourse will be 
spoken depends neither upon choice nor theory, but upon the politics of 
the practical activities wherein these various accounts are retold. 
We must distinguish autopoietic histories from both an author's creation 
of texts and a theorist's sociology of knowledge. Autopoiesis is rooted in 
a series of innovative projects in science and politics that is ongoing and 
likely to expand. These activities include making computers, doing biologi-
cal engineering, and struggling against centralized concentrations of power 
that impede the development of new forms of organizing and transmitting 
information. The evolution of systems discourse is tied to its convergence 
with historically specific changes in technology and the organization of 
production. The claim of autopoiesis to authority is essentially Heideg-
gerian. It will be recognized along with the activities in which it is grounded 
and whose self-expression it represents. Autopoiesis is appropriate to and 
facilitates the emergence of a world where these endeavors play an impor-
tant part. 
An autopoietic account of the recent evolution of post-structuralist 
discourse would be rooted in the local politics of theoretical and other 
productive institutions. Since there are in autopoietic discourse no qualita-
tive distinctions or hierarchial relationships between theoretical and more 
concrete practices at any level of representation, within each autonomous 
system the production of theory and practice will be organized according 
to the same semiotic referents. If theory and practice are one, then all levels 
of theory, including the meta-theory that is autopoietic discourse, are 
part of the post-structural political project. This as yet ill-defined project 
recognizes that contemporary changes in the organization of science and 
technology, communication, and production economics could have exten-
sive implications for the reorganization of social life. The possibility of a 
qualitative shift in the underlying basis of social relations calls into question 
the dominant images of liberal capitalism, social democracy, and an inter-
national order founded on the interaction of national states. Autopoiesis 
represents an impetus to reform both cultural and political institutions so 
that the current boundaries between technique and culture, science and 

Accounting for Law 
311 
production, collectivity and individual, state and enterprise, capital and 
labor become problematic. The potential outlines of these reforms should 
not be discussed as developments within the logic of the abstracted social 
theories or narratives that now empower the modern national state and the 
political coalitions which are committed to the continuation of its program. 
Rather they should be examined in the contingent institutional experiments 
that are evolving at the margins of advanced industrial societies. 
Post-structuralism does not criticize the contemporary national state in 
order to justify a return to pre-regulatory capitalism on behalf of multi-
national capital. The orthodox left cannot replace the shift in discourse 
within the familiar Enlightenment meta-story of social democracy or wel-
fare liberalism unless it asserts a continuity in the nature of productive 
relations between capital, labor, and the state that is denied by the technical 
practices of the institutions where autopoiesis is expressed. At the same 
time, post-structuralism does not criticize the expansion of state power in 
order to celebrate the end of ideology and institute an anarchism of 
unrestricted individual desire freed of the mythic narratives of real history. 
Instead, autopoiesis insists that meaning is an artifact of local systems 
contained within limited, but collectively generated and reproduced, do-
mains. The claim that post-structuralism is an invitation to the barbarism 
of unreason in the wake of the disruption of the positivist/Cartesian 
tradition is not to be purely judged at the level of theory, but against the 
emerging practice in which these revised accounts of authority, institutions, 
theory, and technique are grounded. Critical phenomena including the 
reorganization of work and social relations in information based industries 
and research facilities, the restructuring of communication and educational 
institutions around differentiations other than the humanistic/scientific 
dualism, the political repositioning of a superskilled technical/management 
class and an unskilled working class whose productive lives are played out 
in networks and enterprises that are transnational in character must consti-
tute the practices on which the representations of autopoiesis will spread 
or recede. It is the evolution of practice in the reformulated processes of 
production, distribution, communication and coordination that attend the 
institutionalization of the discourses of information science whose potential 
for progressive politics must be evaluated. 
Bibliography 
HELLER, THOMAS (1984) "Structuralism and Critique", 36 Stanford haw Review 134. 

The Fact of Law* 
P A T R I C K 
N E R H O T 
Montpellier, Firenze 
Considering the theory of autopoiesis in its application to law, we propose 
to examine in this paper the notion of autonomy in law. In so doing, we 
do not wish to reproduce the major flaws that any confirmed theory in 
general has, consisting in taking only one more or less central aspect and 
specifically regarding it to the point of equating it with the theory as a 
whole. Take for instance the concept of autopoiesis, which recently has 
gained so much attention. It seems to be overlooked that it is only one 
part of a much more general question of the systems theory built around 
the notions of "structure", "element", "information", "communication", 
etc. We shall not forget that, but this theory covers so many questions and 
deals with them in sometimes such a new way that it would be impossible 
for us to approach them all in the context of this article. Accordingly, we 
shall confine ourselves to one aspect only. 
When it is said that the law can be regarded as an autopoietic system, 
what that essentially means is (and this is the major departure from 
traditional systemics or cybernetics) that it is the law itself, regarded as a 
system, that says what is law and what is not, with the theory defining the 
way in which that statement is made. Let us note immediately that we shall 
refrain from speaking about boundaries or limits between the legal system 
and other social systems, especially since that separation is, as a general 
rule, used as a methodological distinction intended to be explanatory for 
law, a thing we shall eventually refute. 
The source of law as lying within law itself: that is one of the major 
points of Luhmann's transposition of the theories of Maturana and Varela 
The title may seem to indicate that we are speaking about facts in law in general; in 
reality, we would tend to say that each particular legal area constructs its own facts. 
It would thus be more accurate, in conformity with our thinking, to speak of the 
fact in public law, economic law, etc. We have kept this general title because we shall 
throughout this article endeavor to think about how a fact is constructed in law, not 
to identify the type of reality that each particular legal field has to deal with. We shall, 
however, draw on specific examples taken essentially from private law. 

The Fact of Law 
313 
into legal science. The relation of an object to its context comes to be seen 
in terms of the capacity that this particular object may have to organize 
itself, to reproduce itself. The major idea of this transposition thus consists 
in positing that the law presupposes 
and reproduces 
itself \ that it is the result 
of a self-referential process. Put another way, a law becomes legal through 
the interplay of mechanisms internal to the legal system itself; it is not 
merely determined by the environment. 
Using the language of systems theory, we shall say that the legal system 
is an autonomous system because it is the only one able to assign to its 
elements a legal (normative) quality, and thus to constitute its elements as 
unity of the system. Normativity can be produced only through the legal 
system, in a self-referential process.1 
To describe this mechanism, systems theory traditionally uses the terms 
"closure" and "openness", in general in contraposition: a system is said to 
be either closed or open. In the theory of autopoiesis, this distinction or 
opposition does not exist; the two concepts are instead inseparable, cannot 
be seen as alternatives, and are articulated in a mechanism reflected in the 
idea of organizational closure. 
To say that the legal system is autopoietic, then, is to say that it is 
"normatively closed". The "information" (various events) coming from 
the environment is selected through mechanisms intrinsic to the legal 
system (idea of closure), but the functioning of the system as a whole 
depends on "facts" (idea of openness). The system's self-reference we 
mentioned above consists, at the level of system elements, in the empower-
ment of elements produced within the system to deal with other elements, 
that is, to give them a specific meaning, to "transform information into 
communication", in Luhmann's terms. 
Coming to the question of the autonomy of the legal system expressed 
through the concept of "operational closure",2 we would note that the 
debate on the issue has always taken place on an extremely abstract level; 
we would even tend to say extra-legal, within theories about systems. 
In our own treatment of this question, we shall instead endeavor to 
bring out what the notion implies when applied to law, and hence what 
new it may bring for the analysis of legal practice. We thus take up 
Teubner's idea (Teubner, 1984: 292) when he says for instance: "To use it 
[this theory] as a strictly heuristic device. What follows for the problematic 
law and society relation if it is formulated in terms of self-referentiality". 
1 It would be interesting to demonstrate the links that exist between this theory and 
structuralism. 
2 A term still rather shakily founded, since the terms "functional", "operational", 
"normative", "informational" closure, etc., are used by turns. It is nevertheless quite 
fundamental for the theory of autopoietic systems. See e. g., Varela, 1979: 55; Teubner, 
1984: 293. 

314 
Patrick Nerhot 
Enquiring into legal practice in order to strengthen the notion of 
"normative closure" inevitably leads in our view to posing once again the 
traditional problem of the distinction between fact and law.3 In doing so, 
we go to the point where the law realizes itself in practice, at the very core 
of legal life, to what was for Ihering "the life and truth of law". 
Our thoughts on the practical realization of law will, then, consist in an 
enquiry into the way the law apprehends the facts,4 on the basis of the 
idea of self-reproduction. In doing so, we shall reuse a number of the 
established tools of social science, which if they no longer today have the 
charm of total novelty that the theory of autopoiesis may have, still remain 
extremely rich, especially when reintegrated into this new legal theory. 
Thus, we are brought to develop a critique of the positive conception 
of legal dogmatics, whereby a theory is deduced from facts, as for instance 
mathematical theorems are deduced from axioms. Contemporary epistemol-
ogy has amply shown that none of the endeavors made to show that there 
is "a valid mode of inductive inference thanks to which theories could be 
deduced from facts" have ever succeded (O'Neil, 1969: 278). 
From fact to idea, the circuit posited by positivism, is too short: every 
fact is interpreted, and unless this is done, a fact is nothing. Bachelard has 
shown that even before authenticating a fact, one explains it (Bachelard, 
1983: 43).5 Through this idea of self-reproduction of law, we shall seek to 
imagine a possible trajectory there might be between fact and rule; to 
understand its "intrigue", in Veyne's terms (Veyne, 1978: 203). The two 
guiding points of our discussion will be: 1) the concept of fact in positive 
legal philosophy; and 2) legal science and the nature of things. 
I. The Fact in Positive Legal Philosophy 
Legal dogmatics systematically treats the logical question of the distinction 
between fact and law as a purely technical question: the extent of control 
by appellate jurisdictions on the one hand, and that of the sytematization 
of rules on the other, carried out on the basis of the notion of legal fact, 
most frequently contraposed to that of legal act; or else on the basis of a 
determination of the role of the judge and the parties in the judicial process, 
where the latter are supposed to bring out the facts for the judge to lay 
down the law (Dialectica, 1961). 
3 Which would, moreover, be to fulfil Teubner's wish: "To be sure, self-referentiality 
is a highly abstract concept ... Thus, one of the most important tasks for this theory 
will be to identify the concrete mechanisms of self-referential closure and openness 
and the linkage between them" (Teubner, 1985: 314). 
4 The literature on this point is extremely rich, see, e. g., the latest volume on the 
question in Italian, Irti, 1984. 
5 "Est-il vrai que les feux follets disparaissent vers minuit?" (Bachelard, 1983: 43). 

The Fact of Law 
315 
Take, for instance, the question of the extent of control over lower 
courts by the Appeals Court. Since the Appeals Court is to exercise control 
over the legality of judicial decisions, doctrine has thought that it could 
consider a limit to this control as being laid down scientifically by appealing 
to the distinction between fact and law: errors of law would be referred 
to the Appeals Court, but not errors of fact. This dichotomy, which has 
the virtue of simplicity and clarity, has a relatively recent history in doctrine. 
From the Enlightenment, the revolutionaries had retained two principles: 
that of national sovereignty and that of the separation of powers. The 
Declaration of the Rights of Man stated that the freedom of individuals 
could be restricted only by the law as an expression of the general will; 
and (recalling the Ancien Regime) that the judiciary power could not limit 
that freedom, or in other words, take part in making law. The position of 
exegesis was that the law was a set of abstract general rules, and an order, 
the keystone of which was the written law. However, the enlargement 
of control by the Appeals Court from formal breach of the law to its 
misinterpretation and its application (made necessary by the elimination of 
summary legislative procedure — a cumbersome and technically inefficient 
method), as well as the power conferred on it to impose its assessment 
over resistance by the trial judges, with an eye to the unification of positive 
law, led to the opposite result from what was sought: the setting up of a 
case law, the extent of which, it had been claimed, would be limited by 
positing this distinction between fact and law. 
A study could be done on this: this procedure, presented as a purely 
technical question, involves another aspect not without interest as being 
intended as the basis of a major political organization, that aimed at warding 
off "government by judges". This distinction would thus invite us to 
inquire into the legal practices whereby power is organized and to pursue 
the historical evolution of that organization (Marty, 1929). However, such 
research could not be done before undertaking a preliminary study of 
another underlying issue, without which an inquiry into what that legal 
practice represents would be much impoverished. The previous question 
is whether this distinction between fact and law is as simple as is claimed, 
and above all, what it actually says. 
Rational legal systems — such as for instance Roman law — are all 
organized around a fundamental distinction between what is supposed to 
be, in a terminology widespread today, the order of the "given" and the 
order of the "constructed". A new legal epistemology was worked out in 
the 16th and 17th centuries (Villey, 1975: 347): the law exists in the 
consciousness of man (and is therefore no longer the object of knowledge); 
it is constructed artificially by individuals. The law became an operational 
system of rules (the predominant idea being that of conceiving definitions, 
of classified types of law — Grotius) held to express laws of nature (positive 
law as based on natural law), a nature that was getting steadily farther 

316 
Patrick Nerhot 
away from the classical conception, the new conception being increasingly 
mechanistic. The sole mode of apprehending it was to be expressed by the 
notion of "fact"; this relationship to nature thus led to society's being 
objectivized in the way a fact is. 
As long as one seeks to set up abstract scientific systems, such notions 
as "law" or "fact" seem easy to define. The real difficulty appears when 
this relationship has to be qualified, when these concepts have to be handled 
in a practical way (Kuhn, 1962). Thus Dalloz's general jurisprudence of 
1847 says, in his article on the Court of Cassation: "The distinction between 
fact and law seems easy in theory, but in application gives rise to the most 
embarrassing doubts and raises the most metaphysical questions". 
Legal dogmatics approaches these difficulties by splitting up the opera-
tion of the application of the law into three periods: the substantive 
finding of the facts, their subsumption by a legal concept, and the legal 
consequences deduced from these two operations; the first being a "judg-
ment in fact",6 and the second two "judgments in law", and subject as 
such to appeal. 
However, this method has never been totally satisfactory, for the simple 
reason that it is based on too many ambiguities, particularly because the 
situation that gives rise to application of a rule is constituted by a set of 
acts, circumstances, etc., that have to be picked out of an often complex 
and obscure context. At bottom, what this method tends principally to 
ignore is the way in which it proceeds in order to know, to apprehend, 
the context submitted to it. 
Reducing this problem to a purely technical question is perhaps a bit 
hasty. Our way of knowing the law, which posits in particular that it is 
abstract and general, while the facts are concrete and particular, does 
permit the development of a legal argument (and the subsequent technical 
statements); but first of all it expresses a theory of legal knowledge. Legally, 
when we oppose fact and law, we argue as if the facts were all given, as 
if at bottom the difficulty consisted only in finding them (the function of 
legal science). The legal rule and the finding of a fact are supposed to be 
presented, fully elaborated, to an interpreter, who has only to fit them 
together in order to be able to lay down the law. 
"The epistemological obstacle" is that, as Atias well points out (Atias, 
1985: 154), it often happens that the jurist allows himself to be caught in 
the trap of realism, being always tempted to believe that the quality of a 
legal concept can be measured very exactly by its capacity to express reality. 
Regrettable as this confusion is, it is very widespread today, with all the 
6 A distinction which does not resolve all the difficulties, even technically. Take for 
instance the law on proof: there is a question of law (which therefore leads to a 
judgment in law), which is raised during establishment of the facts (and leads to a 
judgment in fact). The distinction is, then, hardly operational in this case. 

The Fact of Law 
317 
harping on about how law should espouse only the facts (not just some 
facts — which is rather significant). 
The ultimate goal of law should indeed be to embrace, as exactly as 
possible, all the forms of facts and their solution.7 This means that there 
are the world of facts (equated with reality) and the world of law, i. e., 
what has been worked at by reason in order to organize that reality. A 
perfect society would be one that rejected any misfit between reality and 
its legal organization, in other words one that could" always juridically 
reflect any social novelty, immediately representable by the notion of facts. 
In the traditional positivist conception, the law is perceived only as a 
condensation of the facts, and making law means reflecting reality (Hayek, 
1983: 137): making the law means picking out from the raw materials of 
social relations the normative principle which, once crystallized, has in 
future to govern those relations. By constituting itself on the pattern of 
the methods employed in science, legal positivism thought it could assert 
the objectivity of its findings. Legal rationality would then be based on 
the capacity our legal system has to reflect reality, a reality knowledge of 
which is supposed to be immediate and complete. To bring this out a little 
more, we shall take a detour through the notion of legal fiction. 
The legal fiction is presented as a concept that fails to recognize reality; 
it is considered that it is not concerned with inquiring into likelihood, but 
instead denies what is generally regarded as the reality of things. Let us 
quote Geny: "instead of contemplating things as they are, in the whole 
splendor of their truth, to reproduce their most varied aspects or penetrate 
their hidden arrangements, man takes pleasure in imagining ways of being 
that nature does not offer him" (Geny, 1930: III, 361). It is enough to 
introduce an element manifestly alien to the "strictly natural" representation 
of things into a classical concept in order for us to be in the presence of 
fiction. 
It is at the cost of this illusion8 that legal statements are worked out. 
The most important thing for us to keep to here is that the notion of 
fiction implies the idea of a natural concept, in order to oppose to it a 
more or less arbitrarily manufactured concept. The legal fiction states 
explicitly that facts are denatured, but also implicitly, and principally, that 
there are concepts that are "real" as being the very expression of reality. 
Using Geny's vocabulary, there is a "given", reality, which jurists have to 
reflect scientifically. 
The fiction is supposed to be an unscientific elaboration of law, as being 
a deformation of reality, an open denial of the real; some authors do not 
7 The legislation dreamed of seems to become alien to the world of ideas. It must be 
laid down in fact, "embrace", "follows", "coincide with them". (Atias and Linotte, 
1977: 253). 
8 Which, we stress, is extremely frequent in our legal systems. 

318 
Patrick Nerhot 
even hesitate to speak in terms of "conflict between the idea and the reality" 
(Yssa, 1968: 2). For legal positivism, the jurist's scientific work is supposed 
to consist in the observation, knowledge and then understanding of reality; 
a legal structure is supposed to be nothing more or less than a raw social 
fact put into legal form, and the fiction to be a procedure representing a 
grave anomaly vis-ä-vis the truth of things. 
The law would, then, be a general, abstract construction emerging from 
a natural order, from a "given", that is immediately perceptible, and the 
norm would be a pure product of that given, deriving completely therefrom. 
The idea is rejected that the law relates to situations or institutions whose 
elements are linked by teleological links and that, if one can in fact speak 
of a "given", a common denominator of all societies, namely the mental 
and physical structure of our species, then the legislator must inevitably 
be conditioned by it — for the simple reason that he is not directly 
confronted with it (Atias, 1985: 177). 
This distinction will be used to justify another distinction, between 
"positive law" and "legal science", the latter being aimed at raising positive 
law to the highest stage, to the point of coinciding with reality. What we 
shall however be led to find is that positive law and legal science, far 
from being separate, on the contrary express a unity, as abstractions that 
unceasingly refer to each other. 
Far from positing this dichotomy between the given and the construct, 
the theory of autopoietic systems instead compels reconsideration of this 
idea of given, by asking how we know the facts that claim to express 
reality and seem to be adequately represented by the theoretical model. Let 
us, moreover, note with interest that however obvious the notion of fact 
might seem to be, we find a multiplicity of methods of gathering (O'Neil, 
1969: 124). 
We know that in science experiment is identified with the facts, since 
regarding an experiment as a fact amounts to asserting its objectivity; in 
other words, any observer whatever may carry it out. For Comte (1974: 
31), "only facts need be considered, since they do not depend on who is 
observing them. Fidelity to reality, without which there could be no science, 
is itself possible only by confining the sciences to the determination of 
laws". The latter are held to be derived from the observation of facts. 
Objectivity, as guarantor of the success of the sciences, assumes that 
propositions can be the object of experimental verification; that facts 
(reality) can be symbolized directly. 
Returning, then, to our field, the rational realization of law implies the 
possibility of conceiving of reality; the rational legal order is possible only 
if the natural is itself regarded as a rational order. Motulsky (1948: 26) 
before expounding his method, states that "the jurist conceives of the legal 
community as the juxtaposition 
of individual spheres (our emphasis) in which 
the law shuts up the members of the collectivity ... these spheres by 

The Fact of Law 
319 
definition fill the whole space of the collectivity's legal life; no one can 
emerge from their own circle without entering someone else's area ...". 
Nominalism is at the very basis of the method. It is still more interesting 
to observe how the faithful reflection of nature by legal science is asserted 
conceptually: nature is made up of individual beings, and man is the center 
of nature, sovereign of his territory. The whole legal system is supposed 
to be built up on this original truth; which leads Motulsky to the following 
remark, in the passage already cited: "... physical persons and legal persons, 
so improperly called moral persons ..."; we shall come back later to this 
legal perception of reality and the way that perception is handled.9 
Positive legal philosophy refers back to the philosophy of nature offered 
us by the classical philosophy of science. Physics, from the 17th century 
onward, solely sought laws. Reality was made subject to the "atomistic" 
logic of scientific thought, and split up into non-complex isolated frag-
ments. Motulsky's text just cited is a striking illustration of this passage 
of the method of natural science into legal science. Logic has thus to 
operate perfectly on propositions isolated from each other; to develop 
"particular argumentations" about the real (Morin, 1980: II, 195), fragment 
by fragment. The real becomes a logical idea. The elaboration of a rational 
legal order and the perception of nature constitute the same operation, 
within which it is impossible to distinguish what is supposed to be the 
order of the "given" and what is that of the construct. The "given", as 
we shall see, is the "given of a construct". 
What seems to us the most fundamental thing to bear in mind here is 
that, in its process of rationalization, the rule can be abstract and general 
only because the facts it is intended to regulate can be reduced to a common type. 
In other words, the distinction drawn between nature and science is the 
very essence of the rationalist method; far from imposing itself naturally 
on scientific method, it is the outcome of it. For primitive law or magical 
law, etc., questions of fact do not exist; nor do those of law in their 
technical or rational aspects. The distinction between fact and law can 
appear only once primitive legal systems give way to rational legal systems 
(Max Weber). 
The distinction between fact and law is the very product of legal 
rationality, which means that the norm is most certainly not, as positivist 
doctrine regards it, the product of the actual situation; this distinction is 
at the heart of legal rationality. The fact is not external to that rationality, 
but internal to it. For this reason, we shall say that the delimitation of the 
legal sphere is definitely not posited in terms of "frontiers" laid down from 
outside which objectively circumscribe the legal sphere. To say that facts 
can be independent of a theory underlying them, that a limit can objectively 
9 On these distinctions, see e.g., Amselek, 1964: 86. 

320 
Patrick Nerhot 
be set to the legal sphere, would amount to saying that the method of 
reasoning was objective in itself. Finally, we shall say that the foundation 
of law is the law itself and therefore that law presupposes law. Here we 
come to Niklas Luhmann's major statement in transposing the theory of 
self-reproduction to the law regarded as a system. 
Legal thought, when it claims to be positive, posits facts as all given, 
as "always already" present, constituted, independent of the discipline that 
claims to found them. This really is a fiction. As we shall see, a fact is the 
result of a conceptualization that puts together a set of elements separated 
from their context. 
II. Legal Science and the Nature of Things 
Let us first of all note that the term "finding the facts", used to describe 
the operation carried out by the judge when he works out his judgment 
on the basis of situations brought before him, is an unfortunate one. The 
term, a pure product of positive philosophy, is a rather poor representation, 
in our view, of the operation carried out by the judge. He does not "find" 
anything in the sense that the expression "finding of fact" would suggest; 
the judge decides. He decides on the basis of situations as put before him 
by the parties and brought by them into relationship with legal statements. 
He thus decides on the basis of the relationship of identity felt by the 
parties between their situation and what they regard as being covered by 
the legal text they have adopted, and he decides as to the legal consequence 
argued for by the parties of the identity relationship that they have 
previously posited. He intervenes, thus, in respect of an identity relationship 
and of a causality relationship; if he is brought to find anything, he does 
so at the very center of the intellectual operation whereby he assesses these 
relationships brought before him by the parties. 
We are here at the very heart of the life of the law; the legal mechanisms 
whereby the identity and causality relationships are assessed is part of a 
constantly changing story, in which Clause 2 of Art. 12 of the French New 
Code of Civil Procedure is the latest outcome.10 Legal positivism is not 
right in stating that this provision means that the law is deduced from 
facts since, as the text itself states, the facts in question are qualified 
ones: 
the nature of this operation is passed over in silence. 
The judge's decision is not a pure and simple application of the rules it 
refers to, but an assessment of the situations presented by the parties. This 
10 Art. 12.2 of the New French Code of Civil Procedure says that the judge "must 
supply or restore the proper designation of the facts and acts at dispute, without 
being bound by the description given by the parties". 

The Fact of Law 
321 
is, quite obviously, within the framework that these rules set forth, and in 
that sense the decision is bound up with facts, but, and this is an important 
point, the latter cannot be regarded as either a fragment of reality or even 
as the manifestation of something underlying it (Goodman, 1982: 18). The 
object of the human sciences in general and of legal science in particular 
is a representation covering a diversity of experience with a view to "putting 
it in order" and thus providing and organizing a rational knowledge of 
reality. 
This object is manifested only indirectly through knowledge, through 
language, through practices (Kuhn, 1962) which are only one aspect of 
reality, and cannot be recognized as such except by someone who already 
knows reality in a particular way. The reading of all these signs thus 
presupposes prior knowledge and an interpretation of the "given" in its 
light (Watzlawick, 1976). 
We were already able to say that the situation that gives rise to the 
application of a legal rule was constituted by a set of acts or circumstances 
extracted from a most often complicated context. We may now look at the 
way this extraction takes place: how are the facts gathered in legal science? 
Let us remain with the example of the judge. 
This basis on which the judge builds up his judgment, far from imposing 
itself by itself, is on the contrary determined by the rule under which the facts 
have to be brought (Husson, 1974: 125). It is in fact such rules that supply 
the grid whereby on the one hand the facts are chosen and on the other 
their meaning(s) are read. 
The organization of facts that allows the application of a rule is supported 
by a prior interpretation, without which these facts have no sense whatever. 
This prior interpretation is supplied by the legal rule itself, and is in no 
way an objective datum, a pure reflection of reality. It is a commonplace 
today to say that the fact is a pure creation; that the "raw" fact does not 
exist. The choice of givens in a particular situation made by the judge is 
determined by the norm in terms of which they are judged. 
Husson (1974: 259) reminds us that "a single system of positive law will 
offer those concerned a choice of various grids, and a single fact may 
display opposite characteristics, of lawfulness or unlawfulness, depending 
on the grid applied to it". The advocate's skill consists, after all, in a 
particular choice of elements, of "facts", to make one rule applicable rather 
than another. The judge in fact decides within limits traced out for him 
by the conclusions exchanged between the parties; Motulsky even consid-
ered that the judge has no right to regard as false what both parties declare 
as true.11 
The legal rule enters in not merely in order to decide which treatment 
to apply to establish facts, but first of all to trace out the background 
11 Motulsky, 1948: 81. The new Article 12 we cited above has now settled this question. 

322 
Patrick Nerhot 
against which these facts have to be defined and analyzed, in order for it 
to be applied. The argumentation underlying the constitution of the parties' 
cases and the judgment that the judge delivers is teleological. Thinking 
about the goal they wish to attain, the parties pick out the legal rules 
necessary to attain that goal (at least, those they imagine to be so) and seek 
to present facts liable to make these rules operational. For his part, the 
judge picks out the rules necessary to secure the goal desired by the parties, 
and then decides whether the facts presented to him are indeed compatible 
with the rules chosen. 
In his Pure Theory of Law, Kelsen had already shown that no norm could 
be deduced from a "raw" fact (Kelsen, 1967). Speaking legally, no fact can 
be stated without reference to a rule. The fact, as legal science understands 
it, is in no way a given that imposes itself by itself, external to legal science. 
Quite the contrary, legal science in fact speaks of "conclusive" facts (i. e., 
those able to convince the judge), of "pertinent" facts (useful in the matter, 
but no more), and conversely of "inconclusive" or "non-pertinent" facts, 
i. e., facts which do not exist for the law "having regard to the circumstances 
of the case". Frustra probatur quod probatum non relevat. 
This barrier alleged to exist between fact and law can evidently not 
appear other than as badly traced, fugitive, "raising problems of a meta-
physical nature". By definition and in consequence of what we have just 
said, the law takes a grip on the fact and, far from being separate, facts of 
law constitute a unity, or better, a totality. 
They constitute a totality because the law is in no way attached to the 
"materiality" of the facts, acts, and various events that it considers, but to 
the meaning they have within the legal system itself. This meaning is in 
no way bound up with the elementary events, taken in isolation, that 
constitute them (which would mean joining with the "atomism" of the 
natural sciences to which we alluded); it results from the whole of them 
as a construct under the rules. 
In saying this, we are doing no more than describing daily legal practice, 
as may be illustrated by repeating an example from Husson (1974: 220): 
"When case law and doctrine have to evaluate the causal link required by 
Art. 1382 in connection with damage and the fact to which it is attributed, 
they do not take into consideration all the relations that may substantively 
be established between the bringing about of this damage and the very 
varied factors that have had to concur in order for it to be produced; they 
consider only those which in their eyes imply non-observance of a duty". 
Let us go on to say that this duty is itself defined by a set of rules. 
We have said (at the beginning of this second section) why in our view 
the expression "finding the facts" used to describe the judge's function is 
an unfortunate one. The fact is not meaningful in itself, but only when 
bound up with and integrated into a set of practices that give it meaning. 
To reject this expression amounts to rendering the legal epistemology it 

The Fact of Law 
323 
emerged from suspect. The term "finding the facts" is in fact located within 
a general conception of law where the judge is regarded as finding a reality 
(and therefore that nature is "given"), that he goes on to determine its 
legal nature (and thus that the jurist's scientific work consists in reflecting 
the statements of nature as faithfully as possible) in order finally to give 
these facts legal effect (hence the idea, here too, that the norm is a pure 
product of the factual situation). 
Far from finding the facts in the first place, the judge, as we said, first 
seeks the conclusion he wishes to reach (Motulsky, 1948: 155/6). Legal 
reasoning is, in this sense, teleological. Once the goal is identified (and 
hence the possible legal rule identified), the judge must think what typical 
situation justifies the application of this rule. Here, the legal apparatus may 
become extremely complex. 
The appeal to experts, for instance, has the goal of conceiving of this 
situation. Thus, the scientific process whereby legal science reflects reality 
is accomplished by a detour through other social sciences (organized by 
legal science). We are thinking here, for instance, of .the role of economic 
science in the drawing up of an economic law. What is being worked out 
in this phase is the very meaning to be attributed to a legal rule. But the 
mechanism that we describe for legal science, the relationship between 
norm and society, will clearly be repeated in the same way for the other 
social sciences. The theoretical model posited by, for instance, economics 
refers to ideal facts. The "openness" of the legal system thus refers to the 
process of "informational closure" of economics. 
Motulsky spoke here of "presupposition" (1948: 156). This would be 
the model worked out on the basis of the rule but not yet on that of the 
various events argued by the parties. The facts adopted by the judge will 
be those that seem to him to be similar to those in the model derived from 
the rule (and here we again find the notions of conclusive, pertinent, etc., 
facts). The "informational closure", the mechanism of openness, in other 
words, of the legal system, thus organizes a series of detours in order to 
grasp reality. 
Reality is like the horizon, which one continually approaches but never 
reaches. Once this operation in accomplished, the judge then proceeds to 
a comparison between the type situation model and the facts of the case 
presented by the parties; in so doing the notions of conclusive, pertinent, 
etc., facts are thus created. The mechanism of openness of the legal system 
would, then, be located in this exchange between a judge abstractly positing 
facts once the rule that might be applied to the case has been determined, 
and the parties who, on the basis of different events, have imagined the 
rule that legitimates their acts and subsequently picked out facts that can 
support their claim to the expected right. In all this there is no question 
of "finding facts". The point is to compare two types of facts, which are 
the resultant of a priori knowledge of legal rules. This, we feel, constitutes 

324 
Patrick Nerhot 
the operation that brings about the articulation between what Luhmann 
calls "information" and "communication" in the legal system. 
The operation that consists in "finding facts" does indeed exist, but has 
in our view a quite different meaning from the one traditionally attributed 
to it. In the parties' allegations, since the applicable rule (and hence the 
law, consecutive to it) is justified 
by a set of elements (called facts), it is up 
to a party that wishes to deny its opponent's claim to dispute the elements 
justifying the application of the rule. And it is because facts justifying 
application of a rule will be disputed that the judge has to find the facts 
raised in the case (Motulsky, 1948: 155). 
Perhaps an objection might be raised here that a number of social 
practices have preceded the existence of legal rules; that in other words 
facts preceded law (and therefore that law emerged from fact). This 
hypothesis ought not to seem to contradict what we are trying to show; 
only the conclusion is disputable. We would even say that regarding this 
hypothesis as inoperative would amount to saying no less than that the 
law is a "closed" system. That would be a pure absurdity; by definition, a 
system in the social sciences has to be "open". It would perhaps be 
appropriate to distinguish the "facts" on the basis of which the legislator 
works from "facts" brought out in the context of litigation. 
Take for instance penal law. By the principle of the legality of offenses 
and penalties, we have a sort of "discontinuity" of criminal law, since the 
law, through this principle, is posited as the exception, and the absence of 
legal relations as being the rule. But clearly nothing prevents a particular 
social situation not apprehended by the penal law at a particular moment 
from being so later. But in this case is it not more accurate to say that a 
new penalty has created a new type of crime, and that therefore it is indeed 
law that creates the facts and that the foundation of law is the law itself? 
Man is not a thief by nature; he is a thief in the light of the law. 
A number of social practices do not, by definition and in consequence 
of what we have said, constitute the object of any involvement by the law. 
Only those events are taken into consideration that allow the demanding 
of a right or the operation of rules. Carbonnier (1976: 26) had already 
noted this phenomenon when he spoke of the "self-neutralization" of law. 
It is in fact through its own needs that the law manages to annihilate itself. 
The need for proof, for instance, puts outside the law everything that 
cannot be proved (1976: 28). 
Just as legal rules can be the source of new social practices, as we observe 
daily, and this is the very goal of law, so social practices can be the origin 
of new legal rules. But saying that social practices are at the origin of new 
legal rules (as was the case for labor law, environmental law, economic 
law, etc.), it does not imply that the law emerged from the fact. It means 
in our view that situations devoid of legal effect had such effect attributed 

The Fact of Law 
325 
to them; and therefore that situations regarded as simple facts, non-existent 
for legal science, thenceforth came to form part of the legal order. 
There is no opposition between fact and law, but an opposition between 
social practices that are non-existent in the eyes of the law and a situation 
for which legal effect has been imagined. We have seen how social practices 
were not purely and simply the situations that the law constitutes. This 
distinction consists in counterposing to the unqualified fact those facts 
which through being treated as legal become bound up with legal effects; 
these facts are themselves a "legal situation" (Rigaux, 1966: 85). We here 
agree with Luhmann on the point of the "autonomous" element of the 
legal system. 
The object of legal rationality is the relationship between these two 
situations, and to positive legal thinking that says that this relationship is 
in part a function of the facts and in part immediate, we shall say first of 
all that the relationship is mediated, and secondly that it is not directly a 
function of the facts. Positive thought says that the meaning of the 
relationship is immanent within the facts themselves. Dilthey has shown 
that "lack of skill in posing methodological questions is due to the fact 
that an abstract scheme has been arbitrarily borrowed from the natural 
sciences" (Dilthey, 1957: 320). 
In the physical sciences, in fact, far from demonstrating the existence of 
the natural order, one constantly verifies through facts the partial orders 
expressed by the law and theories (Kuhn, 1962). The facts are therefore 
inseparable from the theories; and this relationship should be the same in 
the social sciences. 
While for the natural sciences the interpretation of data consists in fitting 
them in with other data of the same order (Parain-Vial, 1966: 11), for the 
human sciences, on the contrary, interpreting data consists in linking them 
to a "reality" of a different order. We have seen this notion of reality 
worked out by the law, and we have shown that the notion of fact, which 
seems to be identified with that of the real, is twofold. The fact is sometimes 
what is gathered, sometimes the reality of which it is the manifestation and 
to which interpretation allows us to ascend. 
Let us once again cite Motulsky. The phrase "the defendant is the 
employer of the plaintiff' has a twofold content; on the one hand, it closes 
the analysis of the circumstances of the case and has the nature of a finding 
of facts; "... but at the same time it implies the conclusion that if a 
comparison is made between facts and the elements that generate the law 
invoked, it does appear that the legal notion of employer is reflected in 
the circumstances of the case: this conclusion is part of law" (Motulsky, 
1948: 157). 
What a discipline has to do is to set up concepts specific to it; but this 
is equally true of the data it selects through these concepts. Since they do 
not have the same concepts, the jurist's facts are not those of the sociologist, 

326 
Patrick Nerhot 
for instance (O'Neil, 1969: 177). We may likewise say that within a discipline 
subdisciplines (others might say systems and subsystems) arise, using dif-
ferent concepts. For legal science, for instance, let us think of the birth of 
labor law which, from its beginning, has been marked off from the other 
subdiscipline of civil law, by forging its own concepts and consequently 
its own "reality".12 
In his remarkable study on the Welfare State, an analysis of the transition 
from "liberal" State to "social" State, Ewald (1986: 41) shows that any 
judgment expresses a type of rationality, and that facts will be taken into 
consideration or not as a function of it: "What changes in the 1830s is that 
facts till then excluded from law come to have a place in it, to be recognized 
in it and to be associated with a sanction" (Ewald, 1986: 103). Nothing 
authorizes idealism, for which reality amounts to the sum of the facts, to 
regard givens as determined in the same way as things, with both equally 
able to be relied on by the laws, because before they take on meaning they 
must, as we have seen, be interpreted. 
This primary operation, interpretation, has to do in legal science with 
what is termed description: the operation that defines reality. As we know, 
the role of the judge, who has not been a witness to the situation he has 
to define, consists in interpreting legal rules. He therefore arrives at 
cognizance of the facts through rules, or in other words takes cognizance 
of the situation brought before him using methods authorized by the law. 
We have seen that the judges' investigation into the facts is organized, 
limited by principles of procedure; moreover, the burden of proof, the 
hierarchy of means of proof set down by the law, the degree of probative 
force of the elements invoked, etc., are questions of law raised by the law 
itself, that is, by the legal treatment of the facts. We were thus able to say 
that a fact can be noted only in terms of a goal that is sought; that a fact 
is the result of an operation whereby a particular element is taken out, 
isolated from a context of its own, to be placed in another context that 
gives it a particular meaning. 
At the same time, however, as Husson has noted (Husson, 1974: 167), 
this goal appears only "in the presence of facts and to an extent that it 
guides their analysis". We can see why it is not appropriate to speak in 
terms of "boundaries" of the legal system, for that would be to suppose 
that the law is kept within limits that are objective to itself. 
A legal solution is the outcome of a twofold pressure, of an event and 
of the goal sought for in terms of the representation we historically have 
of each. History, as Duby tells us, is "a constrained dream"; we could use 
this formula for the operation of description carried out by the judge, and 
12 Passage from one to the other, far from being impossible, is used very frequently, 
because by changing discipline and hence concepts, one secures other facts, (another 
reality) more pertinent to the goal one is seeking. 

The Fact of Law 
327 
call the fact the outcome of a "plot" (Veyne, 1978: 33). In the same way, 
the goal sought takes form only "by being reflected in a rule, and the 
action of that rule, with its manifold implications, transforms the situation 
that posits it, poses new problems and raises new claims" (Husson, 1974: 
168). 
Having shown that the norm was produced by the legal system itself, 
we shall now posit that this production results from a circular, self-
referential process in which the factors react indefinitely on each other. But 
in positing this, we have to consider that it is by definition not possible 
to pick out external ahistorical notions used by the law, any more, by the 
way, than it is possible to conceive of the law comprehensively as a system 
of purely logical relationships. 
Legal description contributes to both creating 
and modifying 
a reality 
that 
it is its object to found. For a fact to be used in objective knowledge, we 
have seen that it must be interpreted, and have shown that it is the legal 
rule itself that supplies the keys for this conceptual interpretation. The 
finding of facts to which legal reasoning is applied is not independent of 
the evaluation that motivates and orients the intervention of the law. For 
this reason, legal truth is neither absolute not objective; it consists only in 
the judge's belief, formed according to legal bases (Motulsky, 1948: 85). 
Along the same lines, it would in our view be erroneous to conceive of 
legal proof as the specification of a particular situation for which an 
explanation is supplied. Legal proof is the justification 
brought to an 
argument within which the rules were chosen and facts, acts, and various 
events selected with a view to attaining a particular goal. All that can be 
the object of proof, then, we said, is the circumstances, which are to be 
regarded in the same way as the judge does in applying the chosen rule 
with an eye to the goal being pursued. 
If doctrine runs into blind alleys in its theory of description, this is 
because it posits that there exist a priori 
natural frontiers between the 
marking of law and social reality, which are no longer there when it comes 
to appeals in positive law. Here, far from being separate, fact and law are 
organically united, constituting what legal science calls "grounds". Since 
there is no room for the concrete in legal argumentation, the question of 
the legal description raises the problem of supplying and giving the nature 
of the "grounds" that a judge has invoked in his argumentation. Let us 
now set up a few landmarks. 
The grounds may have three types of defect: they may be non-existent 
(when Art. 7 of the law of 21 April 1810 would apply, for "lack of 
grounds"); inexact (when there would be "breach of the statute" 
on the 
basis of the same text); or insufficient (an opening worked out in case law; 
here there would be "lack of legal basis"). 
We said at the outset that before approaching the question of the 
distinction between fact and law in order to determine the extent of 

328 
Patrick Nerhot 
competence of the highest court, we would first have to think about the 
very principle of that distinction. We may now, perhaps, say something on 
this criterion of competence. 
The hypothesis of the self-reproduction of law has enabled us to show 
in what way it is wrong to say that the highest court is competent only 
for questions of law; more exactly, if by the criterion of the distinction 
between fact and law it is intended to demonstrate that the highest court 
can only deal with law, then we would say that this demonstration can 
never be given. In fact, we have shown at length that any description raises 
a legal problem, and therefore that the highest court of appeal ought to 
be competent for any decision given by lower courts. What, then, would 
be the criterion? 
Art. 7 of the law of 20 April 1810 states explicitly that the Court of 
Cassation is entirely competent to assess the facts, which is in line with 
what we have endeavored to show throughout this study. What we have 
said is that the investigation carried out by the judge is a question of law 
raised by the legal treatment of the fact, but also that the goal sought 
appeared only in the presence of facts, to the extent that it guided their 
analysis. In other words, the informational closure (openness) of the legal 
system brings ideal facts, regarded a priori 
as necessary by the judge in 
order for such-and-such a rule to be actuated, into contact with a set of 
elements put forward by the parties with a view to having the right that 
that rule confers recognized. The whole of this operation is essentially that 
of law, and law alone, and the Supreme Court is therefore competent to 
exercise control over all its aspects. In exercising this control, it will talk 
about inexact, non-existent or insufficient facts. This is part of what we 
have called the informational closure. 
By contrast, the area where the Supreme Court regards itself as incompe-
tent is where one party disputes the veracity of facts alleged by the other. 
This dispute obliges the lower court judge to verify the veracity before 
proceeding to the operation of description. Here we are no longer at the 
level of the process of informational closure; we are outside it. Exclusive 
competence is given over to the trial judges. The Supreme Court intervenes 
only in the comparison phase we described above, in which (legal) meaning 
is manufactured out of (legal) meaninglessness. 
Conclusion 
The theory of autopoiesis applied to the legal system abandons the classical 
methodology positing the rule of general before particular, which amounts 
to positing the dependence of the concrete (the fact) on the abstract (the 
rule). This theory, in our view, gets out of the impasses of positivist legal 
dogmatics, and to do so posits that the norm is engendered by the norm; 

The Fact of Law 
329 
that law constitutes the elements that constitute it. The idea of autopoiesis 
implies that organizational rules are internal to the system regarded as 
"informationally closed"; cognitive interactions with the environment are 
valid only for it. 
The question of autonomy becomes central because it expresses the idea 
that the legal character of a situation can be produced only by the system 
itself; that it is dependent on its "self-generation". "The recursive closure 
of the production of the elements by the elements is, from a logical point 
of view, equivalent to the self-indication of the system. This is its autonomy, 
its unity" (Luhmann, 1987). 
Luhmann conceives the idea of the system's self-reproduction on the 
basis of the distinction he draws between information, which is in some 
sense a hetero-reference to the environment, and communication, which is 
the self-reference of the system's possibilities of action (Varela, 1979: 211). 
We have sought to develop this point by trying it out on the basis of a 
critique of the distinction between fact and law, and in so doing we have 
found that the idea of autopoiesis might prove to be a very rich one. 
Going back to the example of the legal fiction, which allowed us to 
highlight the ontology of the real underlying the distinction between fact 
and law: in consequence of what we have said throughout this article on 
this distinction, the fiction is not be to perceived as a negation of reality; 
it is in no way "an anomaly with regard to the truth of things". At bottom, 
if the legal system produces legal reality, it would be more correct to regard 
the legal system as a whole as a fiction from the viewpoint of the other 
social sciences. 
The legal procedures traditionally meant in speaking of legal fictions do 
not express a relationship between the legal system and something outside 
("reality", say); what these procedures express is non-knowledge, let us 
say, of legal reality, or putting it differently, a non-logical relationship 
inside the legal system itself, to allow internal communication in the system 
to continue to function. Take for instance the legal notion of "moral 
person": there the fiction is not in relation to reality external to the legal 
system, such as the physical reality of an individual, but in relation to the 
legal reality, which is that of the legal notion of personality of individuals. 
Geny, for whom it is for the jurist to "bring social reality into law", 
gave the question why the fiction the following answer: "this is a why that 
really seems to me unfathomable" (Geny, 1930: 378). This procedure, 
generally perceived as among the most shocking and condemned by the 
"given" (Geny, 1930: III, 396), must inevitably disappear.13 
The "natural person", which was, and still is for some tendencies in 
legal thought, the "sovereign and conscious" individual, had, and has, as 
13 See Association Henri Capitant, 1948: 247, Fuller, 1967. 

330 
Patrick Nerhot 
long as the natural law represented by the idea of legal subject lasts, 
autonomy of will; for the school of jus naturalis, jus gentium, legal rules are 
the work of individual wills (or of the general will) and sovereignly 
translate into contracts or law the a priori requirements of Universal Reason. 
This natural person was spectacularly denied by the idea of moral 
personality. In our view, however, it will take a lot for this procedure ever 
to disappear. The error consists in calling what is construct "given",14 and 
moral personality is nothing but a deepening of the notions of law contained 
in the legal notion of personality; we reply thereby to the question that 
Geny, in his initial hypothesis, regarded as inconceivable. 
Throughout this article we have been able to claim to transcend the 
distinction between fact and law posited by legal science by making use of 
the idea of autopoiesis; but that does not mean we have worked out the 
actual model proposed by the theory of autopoiesis applied to the law 
regarded as a system. This is not simply due to the fact that, by dealing 
with only one aspect of that matter, namely autonomy, we were not able 
to claim to speak about all of it. We have deliberately maintained a certain 
reserve. The question that applies to all theories and is obviously essential 
is to know the goal they are pursuing. Thought about law that wants to 
be theoretical is also, and above all, an analysis of practices, or the adoption 
of a stance on the matters at stake in the law at a given historical moment. 
Without that, it is nothing but pure rhetoric, not worth even a minute's 
effort. What, then, is the goal that this theory is pursuing? 
It is not easy to answer that question, for many reasons,15 and the reply 
has to be a very qualified one. If, to give a beginning of an answer, we 
stay with the distinction between fact and law, the question that should be 
put to this theory is whether it intends to rethink the notion of fact. Legal 
science calls itself positive because it sees itself as conceiving a rationality 
on the basis of objects that impose themselves by themselves — facts — 
and with this rationalization being a conceptualization of those facts. Is 
the autopoiesis theory put forward by Luhmann a break with this method? 
Is the abusive use of "fact" in the human sciences put into question by 
this method? 
In regard to that author's writings that we have been able to read (and 
such understanding as we may have been able to arrive at), we posit that 
there is in fact a shift. If we take as an example the classical distinction we 
mentioned above between positive law and legal science, then the novelty 
14 Geny, 1930: III, 418, note 4 had another notion of what is "natural" and said in 
connection with the will, "by nature autonomous": "I believe that it is the attitude 
that is necessary in regard to fictions of the will, which under the pretext of applying 
it, falsify the legitimate action of the principle of autonomy". 
15 One of the most essential being that autopoiesis is not yet definitely a new "paradigm". 
For a contrary view, see Zolo, 1986: 129/173. 

The Fact of Law 
331 
in Luhmann is not so much to go back on the basis of that distinction, 
but to rethink the relationship. Thus, the question of the distinction 
between fact and law is not a primary question in him: but because the 
question of the sources of law become central, the problem of fact will 
arise. 
If in the natural sciences experiment has to be identified with the facts, 
because the objectivity of the experiment lies in regarding it as a fact that 
can be arrived at by any observer whatever. That is the very basis of 
positivist philosophy, and Luhmann posits it as a theoretician endeavoring 
to conceive of a possibility of this kind of interchangeability between 
observers/operators. This endeavor may however make the "fact", as 
expression of nature, become substantially different. 
In conceiving a systems theory within the system, Luhmann in fact 
abandons the classical idea of the thinking subject (conscious and autono-
mous) and seeks, through the notion of system unity, to set up a sort of 
synthesis. The classical subject is transformed into a series of positions of 
interchangeable observers. 
The idea of autopoiesis thus becomes a radically new method for inter-
preting and thinking about the sources of law. For Geny, for instance, 
legal science was the scientific interpretation that the jurist had to give of 
reality; an interpretation that would subsequently be given a technical 
translation into legal language. In Luhmann the idea remains, but these 
two operations that bring about legal rationality no longer express a 
situation external/internal to the law; everything becomes internal. It is 
here that we come to the terms "information" (a construct already able to 
be translated by the legal system) and "communication" (the internal 
mechanisms of the legal system; its techniques, as Geny would have said). 
Luhmann abandons the model of the autonomous, conscious, voluntary 
subject as the foundation of law, as well as any idea of exteriority that 
founds the legal system. The "natural" that imposed itself with axiomatic 
force was the basis of law for the jus naturalis, jus gentium 
school. The 
rational method of the natural-law school posited the distinction between 
fact and law and stated the nature of their realtionship. With the so-called 
positivist school, it was the nature of this relationship that was changed. 
In that school's view, nature was, no doubt, the source of law, and laying 
down the law perhaps meant interpreting nature, but the law was the result 
of a scientific elaboration: interpreting nature is not laying down law. 
Luhmann's theory is an accentuation of positivist thought. Legal positiv-
ism does not in fact deny that the foundation of positive law may be 
natural law; with this author, on the contrary, the foundation of law cannot 
be anything but law itself. The law is a scientific construction, but the 
"given" disappears; nature disappears as an entity outside law. Nature and 
reality are no longer obstacles to a rationality that no longer has anything 

332 
Patrick Nerhot 
to do with processes and relationships among processes brought about 
through elements themselves determined by those processes. 
When Varela (1979: 6) put forward the idea of autopoiesis, he stated that 
his problem was "the living organization, and therefore our interest will 
not be in properties of components but in processes and relations between 
processes realized through components". This "therefore", far from being 
obvious, nevertheless very clearly expresses the mechanistic nature of this 
method, and the author even goes on to clarify (Yarela, 1979: 7, note 4) 
that "'machines' and 'systems' are used interchangeably".16 This metaphor, 
consisting here in regarding living organization in the way one does a 
machine, is also prevalent in the human sciences. 
One cannot, however, confine a metaphor to a single realm of application 
as easily as one may pretend to. Whether we want them to or not, 
"metaphors seduce the reason" (Bachelard, 1983: 78). Nor did this escape 
Varela, who writes: "The understanding of life becomes a mirror of our 
epistemological choices, which carry over to human actions" (Varela, 1979: 
46). For thirty years Jacques Ellul has been teaching us that nothing would 
be able to dominate technique. What this theory shows is the infiltration 
of technique into the epistemology of our society, in the sense that it is 
the logic of artificial machines that is increasingly applied in our lives and 
in our society. 
With society being regarded as a machine, the body politic becomes 
more than ever the object of experimentation, but with an essential novelty 
brought by this method, by comparison with instrumentalism. Here there is 
nothing "determined", transcending social practice;17 there is no "invisible 
hand", any more than there is any goal to be reached; this theory functions 
on the indeterminate. 
From being external to legal practice, purpose becomes internal to it; it 
is an aspect of the (dynamic) legal system. The evolution of the legal system 
is perceived as a blind mechanism. 
Teubner writes in this connection: "An 
autopoietic closure occurs when a legal system which is already autonomous 
to a certain degree constitutes its own elements — the legal acts — which 
trigger off legal changes and hence initiate the autopoietic circulation of 
legal act — legal change — legal act" (Teubner, supra). The object of law 
would then consist in dealing with any social practice, any conflict (pro-
cessed in the form of "information"), and its function lies in the formation 
and reproduction of generalized conforming expectations of behavior. A 
theory of communication becomes central.18 
16 There follows the definition that the author gives us of an autopoietic system, Varela, 
1979: 13. 
17 A major difference from classical liberal thought, even though the theory has many 
points in common with it. 
18 "The legal system is seen as a system of actions comprising not only legal discourse 
about norms or organized actions like court decisions and legislation, but human 
communication which has reference to legal expectations." (Teubner, 1984: 294). 

The Fact of Law 
333 
A total impasse is reached regarding the underlying stakes of the legal 
question, what Ewald calls "the rule of judgment", i. e., that whereby one 
judges "about the way in which at a particular time, in a particular society, 
it is thought that behavior ought to be judged" (Ewald, 1986: 37). 
This theory is positive, indeed hyper-positive, a "formalism" in the sense 
meant by Fassö (1970: 217), and it leaves the central questions of legal 
theory on one side. Even if the "epistemological conjuncture" constrains 
us to be positivist, as one author feels (Ewald, 1986: 39), a theory of law 
claiming to discard the problem of justice would be merely a theory of 
legality — a formalism. 
Translated from the French by Iain Fraser. 
Bibliography 
AMSELEK, PAUL (1964) Metbode phenomenologtque et theorie du droit. Paris: Librairie Generale 
de Droit et de Jurisprudence. 
ASSOCIATION 
HENRI 
CAPITANT 
POUR 
L A 
CULTURE JURIDIQUE FRANCAISE 
( 1 9 4 8 ) 
Le 
Probleme des fictions en droit civil. Paris: Dalloz. 
ATIAS, CHRISTIAN (1985) Epistemologie juridique. Paris: Presses Universitäres de France. 
Ατι AS, CHRISTIAN and DIDIER LINOTTE (1977) Le my the de I'adaptation du droit au fait. 
Paris: Dalloz Chronique. 
BACHELARD, GASTON ( 1 9 8 3 ) La formation de /'esprit scientifique. Contribution a urn psychanalyse 
de la connaissance objective. 12th Ed., Paris: J. Vrin Librairie philosophique. 
CARBONNIER, JEAN ( 1 9 7 6 ) Flexible droit: Textes pour une sociologie du droit sans rigueur, 3rd 
Ed. Paris: Librairie Generale de Droit et de Jurisprudence. 
COMTE, AUGUSTE ( 1 9 7 4 ) Cours de philosophie positive. Paris: J. Vrin. 
DIALECTICA 5 9 / 6 0 ( 1 9 6 1 ) Le fait et le droit. Volume 15, no. 3/4. Neuchätel Suisse: Du 
Griffon. 
DILTHEY, WILHELM ( 1 9 5 7 ) Origine et developpement de l'hermeneutique. Le monde de l'esprit 
(German original, 1900). Paris: Aubier. 
EWALD, F R A N C I S (1986) LEtat providence. Paris: Grasset. 
FASSO, GUIDO (1970) Storia della filosofia del diritto. Bologna: II Mulino. 
FULLER, LON (1967) Legal Fictions. Stanford: Stanford University Press. 
GENY, FRAN501S (1930) Science et technique en droit prive positif, 4 Volumes. Paris: Sirey. 
GOODMAN, N. (1982) "The Fabrication of Facts", in Μ. Krausz and J. W. Meiland (eds.) 
Relativism: Cognitive and Moral. Notre Dame, in University of Notre Dame Press. 
HAYEK, FRIEDRICH AUGUST VON ( 1 9 7 9 ) Law, Legislation and Liberty: Rules and Order. 
London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. 
HUSSON, LEON (1974) Nouvelles etudes sur la pensee juridique. Paris: Dalloz. 
IRTI, NATALINO 1984) Normt e fatti. Saggi di teoria generale del diritto. Milano: Giuffre. 
KELSEN, HANS (1967) Pure Theory of Law. Berkeley: University of California Press. 
KUHN, THOMAS (1962) Structure of Scientific Revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
LUHMANN, NIKLAS (1987) "Some Problems with 'Reflexive Law'", in G. Teubner (ed.) 
State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
MARTY, GABRIEL ( 1 9 2 9 ) La distinction du fait et du droit. Thesis: Universite de Toulouse. 
Paris: Librairie du "Recueil Sirey". 

334 
Patrick Nerhot 
MORIN, EDGAR (1980) La Methode, II, La vie de la vie. Paris: Seuil. 
MOTULSKY, HENRI ( 1 9 4 8 ) Principes d'une realisation methodique du droit prive (La theorie des 
elements generateurs des droits subjectifs). 
Paris: Sirey. 
O ' N E I L , WILLIAM (1969) Fact and Theory: An Aspect of the Philosophy of Science. Sydney: 
Sydney University Press. 
PA RAIN-VIAL, JEANNE ( 1 9 6 6 ) La nature du fait dans les sciences humaines. Paris: Presses 
Universitaires de France. 
RIGAUX, FRAN501S (1966) La nature du centrale de la Cour de Cassation. Bruxelles: Bruylant. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER ( 1 9 8 4 ) "Autopoiesis in Law and Society: a Rejoinder to Blanken-
burg". 18 Law & Society Review 291. 
— (1985) "After Legal Instrumentalism? Strategic Models of Postregulatory Law", in 
G. Teubner (ed.), Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State. Berlin: de Gruyter. 
VARELA, FRANCISCO ( 1 9 7 9 ) Principles of Biological Autonomy. New York: North Holland 
Series. 
VEYNE, PAUL (1978) Comment on ecrit I'hist aire. Suivi de: Foucault revolutions 
I'histoire. 
Paris: Edition du Seuil. 
VILLEY, M I C H E L ( 1 9 7 5 ) La formation 
de la pensee juridique moderne. Cours tFhistoire de la 
philosophie du droit. Nouvelle edition corrigee. Paris: Montchretien. 
WATZLAWICK, PAUL (1976) How real is real? Communication, Disinformation, 
Confusion. New 
York: Random House. 
YSSA, SAYEGH JEAN (1968) Les fictions en droit prive. Thesis: Universite de Dakar. 
ZOLO, DANILO (1986) "Autopoiesis, un paradigma conservatore". MicroMega: Le ragioni 
del la sinistra. 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of 
Law 
NIKLAS LUHMANN 
Bielefeld 
I. 
The debates about law as an autopoietic system bring out a number of the 
difficulties that arise when a general theory is transferred too directly to a 
limited special field. The general theory may make use of simplifications, 
which need not be relinquished for more concrete applications, but may 
need modification. This is true even when, as in the case of the theory of 
autopoietic systems, one is dealing with a particularly rich theory. The 
increased wealth of ideas for very heterogeneous fields can be attained only 
by means of abstraction. And this abstraction must be maintained in all 
applications; to do otherwise would be to abandon the theory. Nevertheless, 
at the same time it must be possible to account for those aspects that are 
not susceptible to generalization. 
When one starts from a systems theory viewpoint, this general problem 
takes on special outlines. The theory discusses system and environment as 
if there were only one type of case. It is true that the distinction between 
system and environment makes it clear that a solipsist position is being 
avoided. A system can reproduce itself only in an environment. If it were 
not continually irritated, stimulated, disturbed and faced with changes in 
the environment, it would after a short time terminate its own operations, 
cease its autopoiesis. But all that does is to remove a classical objection 
that even Kant no longer needed to take too seriously. The question 
remains how the environment impinges on the system, and what relevance 
this has for the system's self-reproduction, for the continuation of its own 
operations. 
If the theory of autopoietic systems speaks about self-production or self-
reproduction, this does not however imply that the system controls the 
totality of all causes. On the contrary, such a supposition would nullify 
the concept of production. Therefore empiricists who strive for unambigu-
ous causal attribution may find such statements as "the system and environ-

336 
Niklas Luhmann 
ment always interact causally" to be a vague concept of production (see for 
example Rottleuthner, supra: 119, 122). On the other hand, the voluminous 
empirical research on causal attribution teaches us that in the matter of 
causality there is no way of avoiding selective judgement, and this shifts 
the question of the "essential" causes (system or environment) into the 
question of the structural conditions of the causal plan used. 
In this respect too the general theory of autopoietic systems still gives 
discernible guidance. It first of all disregards causal attributions, since this 
is a matter for the observer and can accordingly be handled differently 
according to the structure and the autopoiesis of the system being observed. 
Autopoietic closure therefore does not mean isolation; nor even that 
internal causes are more important than external ones. Such evaluations 
are left for observation of the system — and here external observations 
may differ from each other and from internal ones. The mere fact that the 
question cannot be put precisely — what, after all, does "more important" 
mean? — confirms this thesis. 
The concept of autopoietic closure therefore initially states only that the 
recursive application of its own operations to the results of its own 
operations is an indispensable aspect of the system's reproduction. This 
defines the unity and autonomy of the system. How large the system's 
share in this process is, from the causal point of view, is not prejudged 
thereby. The theory's impetus is towards quite other questions. 
First of all, with a comparable theoretical approach, it replaces Kantian 
premises. This has chiefly affected epistemological questions. Autopoietic 
systems need not be transparent to themselves. They find nothing in 
themselves that could be regarded as an undeniable fact of consciousness 
and applied as an epistemological a priori. The assumption of an a priori is 
replaced by recursivity itself. Zolo (1987) rightly points out that for this 
idea of recursiveness, there are so far only biological (and one ought to 
add mathematical) descriptions, that cannot be transferred to psychic and 
social systems operating on the basis of meaning. This cannot, however, 
rule out the search for equivalent forms in the area of meaning systems, 
and precisely in the theory of science it is very easy to find countless 
examples of recursiveness. Scientific methodology is specialized in exposing 
observation to observation, and eliminating whatever cannot stand up to 
an observation of observations. It may be that the continuing application 
of the operations available to the system to the results of precisely those 
operations produces stable states (which means states that repeat themselves 
in further operations, so-called "eigenstates"), or it may not, and depending 
on the type of operation, many, or few, or only one of these self-referentially 
stable states may exist. How far the system itself possesses reflexive capacity 
to observe its own states and finds its own "identity" in them is another 
question. 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
337 
Another starting point is that structures of the system can be built up 
only by operations of the system. This too must take place in such a way 
as to be compatible with the system's autopoiesis; in the case of social 
systems, for instance, with communication. There is accordingly no input 
and no output of structures or operations of the system, and at this level, 
there are no exchange relationships with the environment. All structures 
are operationally self-specified structures of the system, which orients its 
operations to these structures. In this respect, too, the system is a recursively 
closed system. As presumably no one who accepts the distinction between 
system and environment will deny, it cannot operate outside its boundaries, 
in its environment; which undeniably means that the relationships between 
system and environment, as an observer can see them, cannot be actualized 
as operations of the system. The system may produce ideas of its own or 
communications of its own about its environment, but can never grasp 
and reprocess thereby everything that it itself presupposes as environment. 
(Not least for this reason, the environment appears to the system as a 
"horizon".) 
Epistemological "constructivism" concludes from this that what the 
system, at the level of its operations, regards as reality is a construct of 
the system itself. Reality assumptions are structures of the system that uses 
them. This can be clarified once more using the concept of recursiveness. 
The system controls the environment, operationally inaccessible to it, by 
verifying the consistency of its own operations, using for this a binary 
scheme which can record agreement or non-agreement. Without this form 
of consistency control, no memory could arise, and without memory there 
can be no reality.1 
These assumptions meet with considerable resistance, because they con-
tradict the reality assumptions of everyday life. But even disregarding this 
and allowing science to have its own peculiar theory designs, a theory at 
this level of generality is not sufficient to explain the actual restrictions of 
the mode of operation of particular systems. It suggests, for instance, that 
autopoietic systems transform chaos into order (order from noise), whereas 
such chaos is in fact nowhere to be found. Even modifying this into "order 
from order plus noise", the statement remains so unspecific that not much 
can be done with it. Clearly, the obvious and trivial fact that the system 
1 von Foerster (1969: 19 ff.) further shows that memory is nothing but this consistency 
check, and is therefore to be understood as an undistinguishable aspect of all cognitive 
operations (and not, say, as a kind of "store", where with a bit of luck something 
may be found). And specifically, on the need for binarization: "Self-reference enters 
the system through two channels, one via a priori established "good" or "bad" signals 
( + ) ( —) that report the consequences of an action; the other one via the loop (A) —• 
(A + ) -* A or, mutatis mutandis, via corresponding other loops that report the state 
of its own actions" (1969: 35). On this cf. also Ladeur, infra. 

338 
Niklas Luhmann 
cannot carry out any operations outside itself cannot be understood in such 
a way that the environment is chaos for the system. 
Taking a lead from the neo-Darwinist objections to Darwin, this objec-
tion may also be formulated in terms of evolutionary theory: a system that 
had to start from purely random relationships to its environment and wait 
for noise or irritation would take much too much time to build up its own 
order for it to be capable of evolution. The rate at which complex structures 
are built up cannot be explained in this way. 
The thesis of self-referentially closed systems thus leads to a dilemma. 
On the one hand, it underlines the scarcely deniable fact that no system is 
capable of carrying out operations in the system's environment. Taken 
seriously, this explodes the traditional idea that the system might have 
some kind of access to a reality outside it or that the environment might 
be able to specify the structures of the system. This would call for special 
operations (e. g., in the sense of the classical distinction between sensation 
and reflection) which cannot be found even at the neurophysiological level. 
On the other hand, the rate at which structures of complex systems are 
built up requires the assumption of a non-random, structured environment 
that confines the system. A theory of knowledge based on the theory of 
self-referential systems must be capable of resolving this dilemma and 
satisfying both requirements. 
II. 
All systems form in a presupposed materiality continuum, which Maturana 
calls medium. For example, they presuppose a structure of matter rooted 
in atoms, just as the formation of atoms obviously presupposes energy 
capable of being bound. In the formation of systems, then, there is never 
any kind of recreation of the world in each individual case. This materiality 
continuum which has in each case to be presupposed takes no heed of the 
system boundaries of the differentiating system; it is both inside and outside 
the system. It nevertheless limits the possibilities of system formation, since 
only such systems are possible that are compatible with the materiality 
continuum. 
The emergence of social systems based on meaning processing pre-
supposes the existence of a multiplicity of such materiality continua, and 
is thus rather improbable. The physico-chemical structure of matter must 
have life added, moreover in highly organized forms, in order to make 
communication possible. None of this is questioned by a constructivist 
theory of knowledge (or only if it is misunderstood). On the contrary, it 
is only from this that the physical limitations on the physicist's efforts at 
knowledge, the living limitations of all human knowledge, etc., emerge, 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
339 
on which more recent materialist or biological epistemologists lay so much 
value. 
The thesis of operative closure says merely that for any system, only 
what is accessible for its own operations is accessible; that, therefore, for 
any system, only what can be formed as a unity through these operations 
can be a unity. This is because of the high complexity of the materiality 
continuum and the necessary selectivity of all system operations. Thus, for 
instance, the human body is not a unity of life, but a unity of conscious 
perception or of communication. The individual cell would not, as a closed 
autopoietic system, be able to observe any unity of the body, apart from 
the unity of the genetic reproductive context, for which the organism is 
only a transitional stage in reproduction. Similarly, a person is a unity 
formed only for purposes of communication, merely a point of allocation 
and address; it is that consciousness forms its own autopoietic unity (not 
as person) (which does not exclude the possibility of its imagining that it 
is a person). 
Corporality and personality are therefore complexity reductions and unity 
syntheses, used in higher order systems in order to observe aspects of their 
material of continuum. They have to do with structures of other autopoietic 
systems than the ones denoted thereby. In this sense it is quite permissible, 
indeed necessary, to put it that bodies, or persons, are what they are not 
in themselves but through observation, in accordance with the "laws of 
form" (Spencer Brown). 
For post-ontological theory design, it is quite possible to assert that 
everything that "is" is formed through complexity reduction, and that the 
autopoietic systems in consequence form everything that acts as a unit for 
them through their own operations; for this in no way denies that for 
every system (and for all of them together) this complexity of their 
materiality continuum exists, and to it distinctions and denotations, identifi-
cations and negations can be applied. 
III. 
Even these considerations are, whatever contribution they may be able to 
make towards clarifying the reality of the world of law, still couched very 
abstractly; and one is well advised always to abstract theoretical decisions 
as far as possible, in order to widen their sphere of application.2 Above 
all, we have still kept to speaking of a system in relation to which something 
2 As can be easily seen, this rule clashes with the usage of applying theories in a manner 
specific to a discipline, and meeting any analogy to situations outside the system with 
mistrust. 

340 
Niklas Luhmann 
is environment, or is materiality continuum. We shall not now abandon 
this restriction, but we shall modify it, for in the case of law, system 
differentiation has to be included in the picture. The legal system is a 
subsystem of the social system. Two system references therefore always 
come into play: that of society as a whole and that of law. 
Since law is possible only in society, every autopoietic operation of the 
legal system is always also a continuation of society's autopoiesis. Any 
transfer of normative qualifications from one operation to a further one is 
always also communication. The law can use neither chemical nor even 
merely psychic modes of operation (which of course does not exclude its 
having chemical or psychic consequences). This means on the one hand 
that it must fit in with social limitations of possible communication, and 
therefore for instance use language correctly, or at least comprehensibly. 
On the other hand, communication is also the way in which society's 
construction of reality is mediated to the law. The law need not and cannot 
concern itself with whether particular words like "woman", "cylinder 
capacity", "inhabitant", "thallium", are used with sufficient consistency 
inside and outside the law. To that extent, it is supported by the network of 
social reproduction of communication by communication. Should questions 
such as whether women, etc., really exist arise, they can be turned aside 
or referred to philosophy. 
To be sure, the general physical/chemical/biological materiality conti-
nuum must be distinguished from the special effects of social system 
differentiation.3 System differentiation, however, strengthens still more the 
assumption of a continuous reality not bound up with the boundaries (in 
this case internal boundaries) of the system, which cannot be arrived at as 
a result of information processing. In this sense, the law participates in 
society's already achieved construction of reality, without having to work 
it out itself. It makes use of language and of a more or less consistent use 
of words inside and outside the legal system. 
Nevertheless, the law differentiates out within society as an autopoietic 
system on its own, by setting up a network of function-specific communica-
tion which in part gives words a narrower sense, in part a sense incompre-
hensible for non-legal communication, in part adding coinages of its own 
(for instance liability, testament), in order to make the transformations 
needed by law communicable. Whether thallium is necessary in the produc-
tion of cement and what consequences that has is not a specifically legal 
question. It may however be the case (or else not) that an environmental 
law develops that gives this question additional legal relevance. Should 
new findings emerge in this area, they may have legal relevance or not — 
3 This was pointed out to me (orally) by Gunther Teubner. (See also Teubner, 1987.) 
I have not however followed his suggestion to stop, for that reason, calling the 
densified connections within differentiated systems "materiality continuum". 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
341 
hrrespective of their chemical or economic relevance. It is only once the 
legal system is differentiated as an operationally closed system that structu-
res emerge, through the operations of this system, which allow and compel 
independent selection of aspects of the environment. 
Accordingly, the fact that the legal system is dependent on the operational 
mode of communication and therefore necessarily takes on social preconcep-
tions and links up with society's construction of reality must be distin-
guished from the law's special cognitive operations which prepare legal 
decisions or process other legal expectations. The law can of course not 
cognitively verify all implications of its continuous communication, or 
even merely qualify them as cognition. In this respect, it may remain ill-
defined, but presupposes that any communicatively processed assumption 
can be an object of cognitive verification, as soon as the autopoiesis of law, 
the processing of normative expectations, so requires. Whether electricity is 
a moveable "property" within the meaning of the law becomes relevant 
and is verified when someone claims that someone else has "stolen" 
electricity. In any case, the scheme is used normatively and cognitively 
within the legal system and does not, without further ado, represent within 
the system the difference between system and environment too; and very 
frequently this schema refers the law back, even in cognitive questions, 
not to the environment, but to itself, and to the intended meaning of 
hitherto usual formulations. What did the system mean, or seek to exclude, 
in the formulation "moveable property of another"? 
It nevertheless remains correct to say that the cognitive operations 
guarantee the system's openness to the environment (not its relations with 
the environment!); and likewise, that as regards the function and code of 
the system, cognitively oriented operations are secondary by comparison 
with the system's recursively closed autopoiesis. It may always be that legal 
norms or other previous decisions on which an effort at a finding is based 
prove invalid, or that other constructions of legal dogma change the 
approach to the issue; and then the cognitive operation, with its willingness 
to learn, immediately stops too, because the changing of findings (learning) 
would then no longer have any function within the system. 
Entering into this primacy of the law's normative autopoiesis by compari-
son with all claims to meaning of daily life is something one learns in the 
course of legal studies. Other things connected with this are the principle 
of the brevity of legal argumentation and justification of decisions, and the 
often dominating preoccupation with what has nothing to do with the case. 
IV. 
Further consideration of the law's reference to reality presupposes that 
there are systems that consist of nothing but events, that have no duration 

342 
Niklas Luhmann 
in which they can change, but disappear immediately on their emergence:4 
Such systems consist, then, of unstable elements that acquire duration only 
by continually replacing disappearing elements by other ones; and by 
contrast with biological replication, these need not be the same elements, 
but can be of a different type. A communication cannot be followed by 
the same communication, but only by a suitable different one. 
Since the social system (and the legal system within it) consists of nothing 
but communications, it belongs to this type of system that consists of 
events. In such cases, then, autopoiesis does not mean reproduction despite 
threat from without or despite natural decay of the elements. Instead, the 
elements are produced in order to end immediately, the system continually 
disintegrates itself. And the autopoiesis stops at every moment — unless 
continued. 
As far as reality references are concerned, this peculiar, devious system 
structure, oriented towards almost simultaneous dissolution and recreation, 
has a particular advantage. It can allow events to act simultaneously on 
several systems, as long as only their selectivity and their self-referential 
interweaving with other events always belong to different systems. Thus, 
communications are always also events in the consciousness of the partici-
pants.5 Nevertheless, the systems remain separate, because the events (which 
can be identified by an observer as one event of conscious communication) 
select in each case from different systems in relation to different other 
possibilities; this constitutes the meaning of the event in each case. That 
the elementary operations have the character of events can guarantee a 
high degree of interpenetration of the various systems, preventing, through 
the disappearance of the events, the systems from becoming stuck to 
one another. Thus, albeit in extremely precarious form, extremely close 
relationships between system and environment can be produced. The 
transience of the "material" is exploited in two ways; for the reproduction 
of the system and for the interpenetration of system and environment. 
While this type of linkage between system and environment is brought 
about almost obligatorily in the relationship between social system and 
consciousness, the twofold membership of events in various systems can 
also exist within society, albeit more occasionally. An act of payment is 
economically relevant, but may also take place in fulfilment of a legal 
obligation. An act of legislation has political meaning, and if legally valid, 
simultaneously brings about a structural change in the legal system. Here 
4 There is no intention to deny that this takes a certain time and to that extent 
presupposes duration in the sense of a "specious present". The decisive point is that 
the event has no duration in which it could change, since this would amount to breaking 
up the event into smaller events. 
5 Not always of all participants. It may very well be that one of them experiences as 
communication something that the other did not mean as communication. 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
343 
again it is true that any system can constitute the event as an element of 
its own through self-referential reference to other operations of its own 
system; at the same time, an observer uninterested in the sharper distinctions 
can in each case see one event of economic law or political law respectively. 
The networks of communication and the selective pattern of the definition 
of the elements in each case remain different; at the same time, however, 
on the basis of the participation on all sides in social communication, it is 
clear that the legal system could not treat a payment as a payment, were 
it not a payment in the economic system; just as the political system could 
not see a law as proof of success of political activity, or combat it as an 
opposition, if the legal system were to treat the law not as a law, but, say, 
as a legally irrelevant expression of opinion by certain politicians. 
One might go on to imagine examples of a much looser linkage, in 
which even an external observer would have trouble in relating the twofold 
membership to a definable event. Attendance at school is in compliance 
with the legal obligation, but learning cannot be legally required. The 
purchase of Christmas presents may be an event within the system of the 
family that is not perceivable as such in the shop, and only rarely brings 
up legal problems — if, for instance, the present has been chosen in such 
a way as to amount to grounds for divorce. 
In any case, whether tightly or loosely coupled, this reality mediation 
through events has to be distinguished from what the systems involved 
process as information. 
Information is nothing but selection exclusively 
internal to the system — conditioned by the system's selection horizon. It 
is therefore neither possible nor necessary for the simultaneous presence 
of events in several systems to be used by the latter as information. 
Correspondingly, the surprise value of one and the same event differs in 
different systems. The now notorious practice of economic contributions 
to political parties was a surprise only for the legal system, while the 
political system was surprised only by the fact that the legal system was 
surprised thereby and the economy continues to attribute no significant 
informational value to such slight sums. 
In regard to information, i. e., selection from a range of equally possible 
other events or non-events, every system is dependent on itself, and this 
is true for the informational value of operations carried out by itself as it 
is for that attached by the system to events that it assigns not to itself but 
to the environment. For information is nothing other than a component 
of communication, and thus an aspect of internal autopoietic operation, 
and its cognitive structures are based on the internal representation of the 
difference between system and environment within the system. 
The distinction offered here between linkage to environment through 
materiality continua and through simultaneous presence of events, on the 
one hand, and information processing on the other, solves a problem that 
has been exercising minds since the age of skepticism. On the one hand, 

344 
Niklas Luhmann 
the system has available only its own mode of operation and processes 
information using only its own operations. Everything the system deter-
mines about reality in this way remains subject to its own operations and 
therefore negatable. In the system, therefore, certainty as to reality can be 
reached only through recursive application of its own operations to the 
results of its own operations, i. e., only by second-order cybernetics, and 
by eigenstates in Heinz von Foerster's sense. On the other hand, the system 
has to be supported in carrying out its own operations by materiality 
continua. It does not have sufficient "requisite variety" to be able to 
reconstruct everything that exists within itself as information.6 The legal 
system especially must be able to base itself on the general possibilities of 
communicative interaction (and therefore on its own sociality) as well as 
on multiple membership of events in systems; since otherwise it would go 
from hundredths to thousandths and ultimately have to treat every event 
as a selection of one world-state from all other possible world-states. 
Skepticism was right in its view that the certainty of living in a really 
existing world could never be expected as the result of information process-
ing. The equally well-known counterargument that this view cannot be 
consistently advocated does not, however, lead back to pre-skepticist cer-
tainty of reality. It only indicates that consistency tests within the system, 
whereby its own operations are referred to the results of its own operations, 
are used within the system as a reality indicator, and that this is enough if 
the system also possesses the distinction between self-reference and hetero-
reference and is thereby able to differentiate the consistency tests according 
to whether it assigns the selection of information to itself or to the 
environment. 
That this procedure already presupposes reality is easy to see for an 
observer; but the autopoiesis of the observing system operates under 
precisely the same restrictions, and thus likewise processes only its own 
information. For the system itself the same state of affairs appears, quite 
marginally and as it were out of the corner of an eye, from the fact that 
any information processing presupposes a reduction of complexity. Thus, 
the legal system may treat a payment, according to the circumstances, as 
fulfilment of contract, tax evasion, bankruptcy offense, etc. — but not as 
wearing out banknotes or as power consumption by a computer, nor as 
fictional dealing with a reality invented by the economic system. Communi-
catively and as far as events are concerned, it can take the payment for 
granted as "what is understood thereby". 
6 If this is true, it is hard to see how systems of interaction between autopoietic systems 
can emerge to which the same limitation of requisite variety does not apply equally 
or even more narrowly. Systems formed among systems can (precisely because of 
their extremely limited capacity) be important for handling conflict, but not as a way 
of confrontation of systems with reality. On this cf. also Teubner (1987), and Hutter 
(1987), on "conversation circles". 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
345 
V. 
If all this is presupposed, the concept of autonomy of the system can be 
freed from traditional assumptions and redefined. Autonomy, then, does 
not mean having a large share in the causes of one's own operations or of 
the continued existence of the system — an idea that would compel 
weakening the concept in the direction of "relative autonomy" and obscure 
any clear boundary between autonomy and non-autonomy.7 
But autonomy also does not simply mean self-regulation or self-organiza-
tion with given interdependencies of system and environment. This may 
of course be accepted as a provisional conceptualization, more useful than 
the one focusing on causality; but it neglects the fact that the system has, 
in order to regulate its operations, to use precisely the type of operations 
that regulate it. Law-making and law applying operations cannot be distin-
guished in principle, even if the system itself has institutionalized this 
difference. Autonomy in the sense of self-regulation would, then, mean 
nothing other than institutionalization of the difference between rule-
formation and rule-application in the system. However, this merely leads 
back to the question how the system is then in a position to set up such 
a difference. This question can be answered using the concept of operational 
autonomy. 
From the genetic point of view, autonomy is thereby to be reduced to 
the fact that operations can be linked with operations only selectively, and 
that recursive applications of operations to results of operations therefore 
inevitably, if they occur, lead to the differentiation of systems. Such systems 
are then autonomous at a basal level, since they can reach forwards or 
backwards to operations of their own in order to produce operations of 
their own. 
The obverse of this autonomy is that the corresponding conditions can 
neither be taken from the environment as input or given to it as output, 
i. e., cannot be exchanged. Thus, the legal quality (whether validity or 
invalidity) of claims and decisions can be derived only from other operations 
of the same system (for instance, by reference to statutes or to precedents 
or to such dubious recourses as "prevailing opinion"); it cannot be supplied 
from external sources like religion or politics or the economy; and if in 
the legal system such references to external sources can be found, then 
these references are in turn already legal norms, which legally legitimate 
block acceptance of external norms or decisions (of good morals, say, or 
sound management, or the majority decisions of political processes). Any 
7 If this concept is recommended by Lempert (supra) as especially suitable for empirical 
research, this unclarity as to "how much" would have to be removed by further 
indications; and considering the well-known problems of causal attribution, it is hard 
to see immediately how this can be done. 

346 
Niklas Luhmann 
other view would have the problem of explaining how law and morals, 
rules of sound management, etc. could then be distinguished. 
While for the emergence of the autonomy of the social system it is enough 
to have communication that is ultimately constituted by the distinction of 
information and communication of information,8 functional systems like 
the legal system are dependent on particular codings.9 Accordingly, law 
emerges only if, and only in so far as, the need is communicated to 
distinguish between legal and illegal. It is only under this condition of split 
self-reference that operational recursivity takes on the form of legal — not 
illegal — legal (instead of: legal — legal — legal). It is only this that equips 
the legal system for internal consistency testing; and it is only in that way 
that wrong conclusions from legal to legal (e. g., from the lawful purchase 
of a car to permission to drive) can be avoided. Only this intermediate 
check of whether legality may not perhaps be illegal prevents the law from 
legitimating too many expectations which cannot then any longer be 
brought into a complementary order. 
As for autopoiesis in general, it can also be said about autonomy that it 
either exists or does not. It cannot be realized a little bit. Neither can there 
be relative autopoiesis — and if so, compared with what? All that is gradual 
is the degree of differentiation of the system according to the quantity and 
nature of the operations that it can carry out. The struggles for "autonomy" 
of the law against theological and political tutelage, against the legal 
exemption of the church, against the linking of legal doctrine to theological 
appropriateness, against royal interference in legal process, etc., are (insofar 
as this is all not just liberal legend-making) to be understood as processes 
of the law's increased differentiation, i. e., as aspects of the historical 
transition to a functional differentiation of the social system, ending ulti-
mately in the universality of the legal system's functional competence. 
It has just as little sense to fear a loss of the law's autonomy if 
political forces, or economic interests, are impinging more on the law. The 
instruments of this influence — parliamentary legislation and freedom of 
contract — were, not by chance, created at a time at which the desirability 
and the reality of the law's autonomy were beyond question. This historical 
connection between the law's differentiation and the instrumentalization 
of the possibilities of using it shows sufficiently clearly that the point is 
an increase in the law's independence and dependency in relation to its 
social environment, i. e., its differentiation. Seen as social implementation 
8 For more detail see Luhmann, Sociale Systeme: Grundriß einer allgemeinen Theorie, 
Frankfurt, 1984: 191 ff. 
9 The fundamental importance of binarization of self-reference for the differentiation 
of systems arises from the need for discriminative capacity in the linkage of operations. 
Binarity is the simplest, quickest and therefore evolutionarily the fittest form for this; 
see also Note 1, above. 

Closure and Openness: On Reality in the World of Law 
347 
of a claim for autonomy, the process would be paradoxical; for that would 
mean that the autonomy was to be guaranteed by surrendering the arbitrary 
power of restricting it. 
The law's autonomy is in danger only when the code itself is in danger — 
for instance when decisions are taken in the legal system itself increasingly 
according to the difference between beneficial and harmful rather than the 
difference between legal and illegal. Tendencies of this nature can be 
found. They have been promoted by lnteressenjurisprudenz and by "social 
engineering" doctrines. In the extreme case one may reach the point when 
the anti-trust courts can no longer be distinguished from the anti-trust 
agency, or youth courts from the youth welfare office itself (or only as 
organizational instances). It is precisely when one wishes to analyze such 
developments that crystal-clear conceptualization is important. And precise-
ly in practical questions, it will be of little use concentrating on more or 
less influence, and defining the bottle as half full or half empty according 
to one's initial expectations. 
VI. 
What is it that allows the theory of autopoietic systems the assumption 
that the existence of these systems corresponds to reality? Zolo even 
believes that he has discovered a grave contradiction here, namely the 
introduction of "metaphysical" premises into constructivist theory (Zolo, 
1987). This is, however, a misunderstanding, and again a grave one, of the 
whole theoretical design; and the misunderstanding shows how difficult it 
actually is to base the theory on the idea of self-reference and to stick to 
that decision. 
If social systems as such, and therefore science also as a social system, 
are autopoietic, then all the assumptions developed for law, society and 
other social systems apply also to science, to sociology and to the communi-
cative context of a theory of autopoietic systems. The discoveries of this 
theory must be applied to the theory itself, and in fact they can be so 
applied. The theory would indeed contradict itself were it to claim for 
itself an exceptional position, with privileged access to "external reality". 
This is, however, neither meaningful nor necessary. The constructions of 
the theory are applied in all consistency to the theory and also to its 
communicative context. The statement that "autopoietic systems exist" 
then means nothing other than that the reality construction of the theory 
of autopoietic systems is built upon this assumption. It does not form 
"merely analytical" concepts which would introduce a difference between 
analytical and real facts, but through its constructs refers directly to what 
is reality for it. And the test lies ultimately in the recursiveness (doubted 

348 
Niklas Luhmann 
by Zolo), namely in the insight that this functions even when the theory 
itself is driven toward self-reference. 
Perhaps this is "meta"-physics; at any rate, a universalistic position that 
allows no exception. But the point is no longer ontology, since it is no 
longer assumed that there exist in the world (or outside the world) positions 
from which the world can be correctly (or perhaps falsely) described as it 
is. Such positions consistently end up with cancelling out the observer; for 
if he observes correctly he sees only what is the case, and therefore adds 
nothing of his own, and if he observes wrongly, his observation is worthless 
for that reason alone.10 The new natural (or material, biological, sociological 
or, in any case, empirical) epistemologies differ in principle from traditional 
epistemologies by presupposing the observer's own contribution, insepar-
ably bound up with his system structures, his autopoiesis, his equipment 
as a condition of knowledge. The thesis of the recursive closure of all 
cognition draws a radical consequence from this (already widespread) post-
ontological epistemology. If it is rejected as untenable, then the question 
arises whether an observer's own contribution can be construed otherwise 
(and perhaps better) — or whether the assertion is ventured that there is 
after all a privileged (and therefore negative!) place for observing the 
world. And that would have to be the place of the person making that 
assertion. 
Translated from the German by Iain Fraser. 
Bibliography 
FOERSTER, HEINZ VON (1969) "What is Memory that it may have Hindsight and Foresight 
as Well?" in S. Bogoch (ed.) The Future of the Brain Sciences. New York: Plenum. 
GÜNTHER, 
GOTTHARD 
( 1 9 7 6 ) Beiträge 
%ur Grundlegung 
einer operationsfähigen 
Dialektik, 
3 vols. Hamburg. 
HUTTER, M I C H A E L ( 1 9 8 7 ) "How the Economy Talks the Law into Co-Evolution: An 
Exercise into Autopoietic Social Control", in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, 
Economy 
as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
LUHMANN, 
NIKLAS (1984) Sociale 
Systeme: 
Grundriß einer allgemeinen 
Theorie. Frankfurt 
a. M.: Suhrkamp. 
MERLEAU-PONTY, M A U R I C E ( 1 9 6 4 ) Le visible et I'invisible. Paris. 
TEUBNER, GUNTHER (1987) "Social Order from Legislative Noise", in G . Teubner (ed.), 
State, Law, Economy as Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
ZOLO, DANILO ( 1 9 8 7 ) "The Epistemological Status of the Theory of Autopoiesis and its 
Applications to the Social Sciences", in G. Teubner (ed.), State, Law, Economy 
as 
Autopoietic 
Systems. Berlin: de Gruyter (forthcoming). 
10 Thus, e. g., Merleau-Ponty (1964) who, starting from these considerations and taking 
up from Husserl's late philosophy, puts the human body in the position of an 
epistemological a priori·, also, with remarkable coincidences in the formal analysis, 
Günther (1976: 80). 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
Peter Kennealy 
Firenze 
A religion and a drug were two of the metaphors used to describe the 
concept of autopoiesis at the Florence conference where many of the 
chapters of this book were first presented as papers. However, not all of 
those present were either devotees or addicts and some, as it emerged, 
were highly critical of the attempt to transfer the idea of autopoiesis 
and related concepts of self-reference from their initial application in the 
biological and cognitive sciences to social and legal studies. One of the 
avowed autopoieticists had only to say something like "when I say 'open' 
I mean 'open' in a closed sort of way" (G. Teubner — Day II) to send 
looks of consternation — not to say apoplexy — across the faces of the 
unbelievers. 
Indeed, the religious metaphor is the most apt for classifying the partici-
pants of the conference. In the role of prophet was Niklas Luhmann, 
progenitor of the most sophisticated attempt yet to achieve a full-scale 
implementation of autopoietic concepts in social theory. Next to him — 
on the right hand side so to speak — were the disciples who, with indecent 
haste and under the stern eye of the magus, seek to make theoretical 
adjustments that would remove some of the uncongenially purist implica-
tions of the original (particularly those concerned with the closure of 
systems and their mutual incommunicability). However, compared to the 
next group the disciples had not fallen completely from the state of grace; 
for these were the Doubting Thomases of modern social theory, the 
empiricists, who will believe once they have seen that the theory can 
perform adequately at a mundane level. Finally there were the critics, some 
of whom belonged to well-established rival sects (such as the Anglo-
American theory of law), others who were trying to get their own sect off 
the ground (IPSES, law as a game), the remainder being, of course, the 
natural skeptics that belong to any age. 
Membership of these tendencies was not exclusive. Many of the disciples 
were keen to make theoretical advances because of what they saw as 
empirical difficulties while the critics based their dissent on a mixture of 
immanent criticism and methodological inadequacy. Still, there is no doubt 

350 
Peter Kennealy 
that the discussion at the conference tended to follow the pattern of an 
attack by a critic, a statement/defense from the prophet, the suggestion of 
a possible development from a disciple and a plea from the empiricists for 
the theory to take into account certain obvious facts of the real world. 
The issues on which these temperaments were brought to bear also fall 
into four groups: 
Firstly, there were those to do with the status of the theory. Was the 
whole elaborate construction just a sophisticated biological metaphor or 
was it a fully-fledged scientific theory rigorously applied to social phenome-
non? Were social systems analyzed as autopoietic really like that or was it 
just that we chose to see them in that way? Was the autopoietic standpoint 
one among many which we could use pragmatically when and as we wished 
or were we compelled of necessity to adopt it when dealing with this sort 
of object domain? 
The second set of issues had to do with the applicability of the theory. 
Why was the law (legal subsystem) suitable for treatment in an autopoietic 
manner? What were the advantages of applying such an approach to the 
legal system? What elements of the legal system corresponded to the already 
given categories of this theory? Did there exist a "surplus of significance" 
where the theory failed to accommodate self-evidently important aspects 
of law and society? What was to be hoped for from such a theoretical 
analysis of the legal system? 
A third set of issues was concerned with the testing and evaluation of 
the approach. Once we have erected the theoretical apparatus, what happens 
when we set it in motion? Is it coherent? Does it yield valuable results? 
Does it make sense of phenomena previously obscure and, if so, does it 
pay a price in rendering opaque and problematic what was once taken for 
granted? What sort of evidence would prove the theory wrong? Is the 
theory a complete and adequate characterization of the legal system and its 
relations with other social systems — particularly the political and 
economic? Does it help identify features of law that had previously gone 
unnoticed? 
The last set of issues was about the development of the theory — about 
extending its range and explanatory power and clarifying its practical 
implications. In this report I have treated these together with the third 
group of questions. 
These questions are not logically separate and remarks made during 
discussion did not fall rigidly into any one of these categories. But they 
are the sorts of issues one would expect to be raised in the course of a 
conference about the implementation of a new theory in social science so 
it was not surprising that in three days of argument the same questions 
cropped up again and again. Naturally, practitioners from the more settled 
areas of the discipline wanted to be alerted to exactly what sort of theory 
they were being asked to take on board, whether it had even plausible 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
351 
initial applicability and, moreover, some sweetener in the form of interesting 
insights or theoretical power; and whether its evident shortcomings were 
such as to eliminate it from consideration or whether potential develop-
ments were likely to repair these. 
I. The Status of the Theory 
1. Metaphor? 
It is possibly only because of the vestigial power of the organicist metaphor 
that we can entertain readily enough the idea of transferring a theory used 
in the natural science of biology (and even there considered to be exotic 
although it is only fair to point out that autopoiesis is held, by its adherents 
to be a feature of all living systems including cognitive ones) to the 
sociological study of the legal system? Without doubt any suggestion that 
social sub-systems should be characterized in the same manner as sub-
atomic systems would, I suppose, be greeted with derision. Yet why should 
the principle of organization governing, among other things, the most 
basic of living entities be any more applicable to collectivities containing 
millions of people than the relations between quarks, charms and neutrinos. 
Surely, it was suggested many times, the whole thing is a metaphor. 
Apart from size, too many all-too-obvious differences exist between a 
cell and a social system, the most glaring of which is that a cell is primarily 
a physical entity and a social system is not. Consequently a cell is separated 
from its environment by a physical boundary behind which it organizes its 
self-reproduction through deterministic chemico-physical processes — us-
ing its elements to produce its elements. Viewing this as a metaphor for 
the social system would have several advantages: it allows us to be flex-
ible — cavalier even — in deploying the terms of the theory so that they 
are no longer tied to their strictly delimited use in the original field. After 
all metaphors are designed to be illuminating and provocative rather than 
explanatory and the metaphorical use of a biological concept is likely to 
be more imaginative and wide-ranging than a strictly theoretical one. 
Moreover, the lower level of committment in treating the approach meta-
phorically enables us, in the face of a bad fit between construct and reality, 
merely to switch metaphor. 
Many of the critics, not surprisingly, were attached to this view of 
things. Seeing the law as if it were an autopoietic system allows us better 
to understand some of its features such as its unity and its autonomy and 
even its difficulty in regulating other social sub-systems. But taken too 
seriously the results were seen by some as less palatable (see below) so why 
not abandon the metaphor at the limit of its usefulness and switch to seeing 
law as if it were a game (Ost), a metaphor apt for highlighting the strategic 
behavior of actors within a system of rules and constraints; or as an input-

352 
Peter Kennealy 
output machine — a metaphor that immediately suggests itself for the 
relations between law and society? 
However, there was no gainsaying Luhmann's radical intentions of 
autopoiesis, although a feature of certain biological and cognitive systems, 
is not held to be peculiar to to these areas. Any system is a possible 
candidate. A theory of autopoietic systems is itself quite formal and 
independent of the media involved; if this is true then the non-physical 
nature of a social system is not of its own an impediment to the employment 
of the theory. Clearly Luhmann was engaged upon a radically committed 
use of autopoietic terms within the sociology of law notwithstanding — 
but not ignoring either — the difference of media. In fact, the difference 
of substrata does enjoin at least one significant alteration: in the physical 
world of the cell-system autopoiesis refers to the network of elements 
reproducing themselves by replacing themselves with identical elements, 
that is elements distinguishable from each other only temporally. In the 
social system a different basic element has been chosen — that of a single 
communication — which if it were to reproduce itself identically would 
lead to absurdity (imagine the foreman of the jury replying to the question 
'do you find the prisoner guilty or not guilty?' with the identical phrase). 
In social systems, then, it is not the same element that is reproduced but 
an another one — in the form of an appropriate response to the original 
communication (in the example, when the foreman delivers the verdict, 
the judge pronounces sentence, the defendant launches an appeal and so 
on.) 
2. Realism or Constructivism? 
So a reasonably clean start had been made. Autopoiesis was a theory and 
not a metaphor — which seemed to put us onto the home stretch: set up 
your theory, make hypotheses, match them against the facts and with a 
nod in the direction of paradigms draw the relevant conclusions. Whatever 
the sophisticated state of the philosophy of science today, most social 
scientists operatively subscribe to some sort of naive realism about facts 
and testability about theories. If autopoiesis was a bona fide scientific 
theory, considered by some to be well corrobborated in the biological and 
cognitive sciences, what about putting it through its legal-system steps? 
Straightforward enough, one would have thought, but an obstacle immedi-
ately presented itself: was the theory of autopoietic systems that kind of 
theory at all? 
The question arose when it was pointed out that there existed in 
Luhmann's work a tension between realist and constructivist emphases. 
On the one hand "system" and "self-reference" are not analytic constructs; 
they seem to be the sort of concepts that have empirical criteria for their 
proper use. That is to say, if certain sorts of things were not happening 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
353 
or were not present in the law we would not be entitled to describe it as 
either a system or self-referential. On the other hand systems are said to 
construct their environments through certain internal operations — and 
that means that the worlds created are system-relative. 
A possible origin of this tension was indicated in the differing approaches 
of the originators of the theory, Maturana and Varela. Where the first had 
an essentialist view of the position of autopoiesis in the world of systems, 
Varela adhered to a variety of perspectivism in which autopoiesis is consid-
ered to be a characteristic of the description of systems. The implication 
of this is that other types of descriptions of systems are possible and 
Luhmann assented to this when he said that an autopoietic description 
does not preclude an input-output description merely that the "closure 
perspective was more interesting". 
This lands us right back in the realm of metaphors and analogies: we 
choose the perspective that is most interesting and illuminating, switching 
metaphors as any one of them approaches redundancy. Luhmann's remark 
that there is no privileged grasp on reality certainly appears to radicalize 
his constructivism — but not in the sense of reality being some realm of 
ineffable essences Protean against our attempts to capture them in a net of 
incompatible metaphors. There is no privileged grasp on reality because 
not only are law, politics and the economy autopoietic with their system-
relative and system-created environments but so is the science system itself! 
This certainly launches us into a pluralist world because it prevents us 
from saying that any particular environment is more real than another. To 
the extent that we may assign degrees of reality to system environments 
committment to the autopoietic viewpoint only allows to say that the 
environment of the science system is just as real — and no more real — 
than the environment of any other system (which rather removes the point 
of using the word "real" at all). This unexpected turn also has the slightly 
fazing effect of making us realize that, like Moliere's Monsieur Jourdain, 
we have been speaking autopoietically all our lives without knowing it. 
The implications of this double autopoietic twist are not to be lightly 
dismissed. For a start, the very distinction "realist-constructivist" is not a 
description on the part of a subject of how certain theories deal with reality 
but "the result of a self-description of the scientific system" (Luhmann — 
Day I). And science, like any other system, autopoietically reproduces itself 
on the basis of its code (true/false) and in accordance with its function — 
in the manner of any other autopoietic system. It would also be a mistake 
to think that there is a difference between the science system and the other 
systems along the following lines, viz., that all social systems except for 
science are closed and self-referential, creating an environment that can be 
dealt with in terms of the system's code and its operations, while the 
science system is somehow open. It is not about itself but about the other 
systems which form an objective reality against which the hypotheses of 
the science system can be tested. To be good autopoieticists we must accept 

354 
Peter Kennealy 
that the environment of the science system is equally a product of the 
system as the environment of law or economics. (There does remain, 
however, one difference between science and the other social systems which 
has to do with the code. The legal code (right/wrong) and the economic 
code (paid/not paid) we can both accept as arbitrary: which is to say that 
it is a matter of various constitutive rules belonging to the system that 
determine whether a legal or illegal act has occurred or whether a proper 
payment has taken place. But it is difficult to accept that in science, truth 
or falsity is a matter of accordance with some internal rule of the 
system. 
Whatever our notion of truth it is not easy to get away from the idea that 
the truth of a proposition is independent of our asserting it. So if the 
environment of the science system is a creation of the system itself, what 
are the independent constraints on the application of the code "true/false"?) 
A second implication of this autopoietic double-bind is that we are not 
engaged in legal theory but in the sociological theory of law. Legal theory 
can be taken to be something like the conceptual analysis of law (Hart, 
Raz, Kelsen et al.) and within the autopoietic theory of social sub-systems 
counts as a self-description of the legal system. But the sociological theory 
of law as an autopoietic system stands outside the legal system and its 
environment and can see things about the system that the system cannot 
see about itself: the arbitrariness of its code, the partiality of its functional 
orientation, the interrelationship of its openness and closure ("open" in a 
closed sort of way). This, in turn, raises the important question of what 
would happen if the autopoietic viewpoint became the operative self-
description of the legal system. What would happen if the legal system 
came not only to see itself as autopoietic but as one autopoietic system in 
a world of such systems? 
This brings to mind an apparently odd statement made during the 
conference — that an account of autopoiesis should itself be autopoietic 
(Heller) but not quite in the way the speaker intended. The claim that the 
science system is autopoietic and, therefore, that the descriptions of the 
legal system as autopoietic are themselves the product of an autopoietic 
system should be distinguished from Heller's demand that any account of 
autopoiesis should itself be autopoietic. Luhmann's claim is that an account 
of systems as autopoietic is itself the product of an autopoietic system. 
Now it is one thing to say that a statement shares the same characteristics 
as the thing it is describing for this is merely the demand that the 
statement be autological — as when the word "short" is short and the word 
"polysyllabic" is polysyllabic (rather an arbitrary demand, I should have 
thought) — and another that the description of the legal system as auto-
poietic is the product of another system that is itself autopoietic. 
So we have come some way to appreciating the all embracing way of 
looking at things that autopoiesis is and which made it appropriate to liken 
the theory to a drug or a religion. But does it work? Will it lead to 
epistemological salvation or will it just blow our minds? 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
355 
II. The Categories of Autopoietic Theory and their Application 
to the Legal System 
If the legal system is to be described successfully as an autopoietic system 
then it must be the case that there are some minimal criteria for the 
application of the term "autopoietic" which, if the term is to be useful, are 
not met by some systems. Thus a car, considered as a system of elements, 
structures, and organization is not autopoietic but allopoietic because a car 
does not meet the essential criterion of autopoietic systems, viz., that they 
use their elements to produce their elements. A car produces motion (and 
exhaust-fumes and injuries to pedestrians) and consumes petrol and metal 
and rubber all of which have to be replaced if the car is to continue as a 
viable system adequately performing its function. By contrast, an auto-
poietic system reproduces itself by using its elements to produce its ele-
ments. 
So why is the law best considered as an autopoietic system rather than 
as an input-output system. To some of the participants at the conference, 
if they had to adopt the language of systems theory at all, the second 
perspective seemed more natural — after all, law is in continual interaction 
with society at large: where would law be without politicians legislating? 
Where would society be without the law settling conflicts? How could the 
economy function without legal definitions of money and property and 
contract? On the face of it, society looks like a series of complex, interlock-
ing and symbiotically related input-output systems. But is it? 
An autopoietic system has been defined by Maturana as: 
a dynamic system that is defined as a network of production of components that: a) 
through their interactions recursively regenerate the network of productions that 
produced them; and b) realize their network as a unity by constituting and specifying 
its boundaries in the sphere in which they exist (1980: 52 — 53). 
The central idea is that of self-production and it is as well to be aware 
from the beginning that this is a notion quite foreign to our more usual 
ways of thinking. Typically, a production process produces something other 
than itself: capital and labor produce output; grapes and fermentation 
produce wine and not more grapes and fermentation; and so the primary 
meaning of production appears to belong to an input-output way of 
thinking. 
We should not attempt to interpret self-production along these lines; it 
makes no sense to think — outside of the religious system anyway — of 
creatio ex nihilo, the making of something tangible where nothing tangible 
previously existed. Evidently the medium of the system is not its object 
and systems are not described as autopoietic in virtue of any medium in 
which they subsist. The self-production referred to in autopoiesis is the 
self-production of the organization of the system. 

356 
Peter Kennealy 
Maturana (1980: 48) defines organization as "the relations among compo-
nents, whether static or dynamic, that constitute a composite unity as a 
unity of a particular kind". The organization of a system determines its 
class identity — or more simply what sort of thing it is. Thus a car is a 
set of relationships between its engine (whether diesel or petrol, internal 
combustion or steam) its steering mechanism (stick or wheel), its contact 
with the road surface (three-wheel, four-wheel, tracks). In spite of the 
possible variety any number of things count as cars because of their 
organization. Organization is to be differentiated from the actual structure 
of the system which is the concrete instantiation of its organization — 
what we might call the particular conception of the thing. It follows that 
many different structures can instantiate the same organization (a Fiat 500 
and a Rolls Royce are both cars but that is about all they have in common). 
The system is the unity of its organization and its structure and for the 
system to count as autopoietic they must both be reproduced. Obviously, 
we are dealing with dynamic processes and not with a static system as a 
table or a house. Such a system is subject to a decay of structure that 
ultimately entails a loss of organization (for example, the loss of its 
"tableness"). Many dynamic systems like cars also suffer from the decay of 
their components which, being in no position to replace them, brings about 
the same loss of structure and organization. But in an autopoietic system 
the elements are organized in such a way that their very turnover creates 
the conditions for their replacement by identical elements in the same 
structure. Such a system can properly be called self-reproductive. 
This ceaseless material turnover of components and yet continuity of 
pattern means that the autopoietic system acquires the material to replace 
its components from somewhere outside the system. For example, a cell is 
constantly absorbing heat, water and nutrition from its environment and 
expelling waste matter. Its own organization, however, remains unchanged 
by this process and this allows us to say that the system is organizationally 
closed with respect to its environment but open in terms of energy and 
matter. In the case of physical systems this is ensured by a physical boundary 
that responds to certain aspects of the environment in order to ingest 
materials (and in this sense the system is open in a closed sort of way). 
Zeleny (1980 a: 4) sums it up concisely: 
an autopoietic system is a distinguishable complex of component-producing processes 
and their resulting components, bounded as an autonomous unity within its environ-
ment, and characterised by a particular kind of relations among its components and 
component-producing processes; the components through their interaction recursively 
regenerate, maintain and recover the same complex of processes that produced them. 
1. Advantages? 
It sometimes seemed to the critics and skeptics at the conference that the 
advantages of applying autopoietic theory to the legal system could only 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
357 
be appreciated by one already committed to that viewpoint. Yet in many 
ways the advantages claimed by the autopoieticists for their approach were 
quite conventional in their scope: that it enabled us to reach a more refined 
and differentiated view of the law; that it highlighted important legal 
characteristics obscured or neglected by other approaches; and that it had 
greater explanatory power with respect to certain outstanding problems. 
In the course of discussion at least some of the following were mentioned 
as factors in favor of seeing the law as an autopoietic sub-system. 
1. One of the advantages claimed by the autopoieticists for their approach 
is that it is capable of taking account of the legal system's self-description 
without being bound to it. There is, of course, necessarily a tension 
between these perspectives — the law's view of itself, its operative self-
understanding, is bound to clash with the external viewpoint of a sociologi-
cal theory of law. The legal system tends to see itself in terms of legal 
norms, institutions and acts, operating within a definite hierarchy; insofar 
as it thinks in terms of system and environment, it works in terms of an 
input-output model: the law receives inputs in the form of demands for 
legal solutions to problems and processes these as best it can. Autopoietic 
theory accepts the importance of this self-description especially for the self-
reproduction of the system. On certain points there is a measure of 
convergence between the two perspectives — on the question of normative 
closure, for instance. However, a systems theory approach is bound to 
focus on other aspects and thus depart from the internal point of view: it 
is not so much interested in the operation of law as law but in the operation 
of law as a system. Where the law sees the rules of the system as the basic 
elements out of which its other structures are constituted, systems theory 
concentrates on the basic binary code of the system and construes its 
elements as communications which use that code. Moreover, unlike the 
norms of the system legal communications are not part of any hierarchy. 
2. The autopoieticists believe that the systems theory approach can make 
sense of certain features of the legal system that might otherwise be puzzling 
or heighten those that might be obscured. Just two may be mentioned 
here — circularity and paradox. The question of autonomy on which 
autopoieticists place special emphasis is dealt with in a later section. 
The concentration of autopoietic systems theory on self-referentiality is 
not merely an academic exercise but points to the presence of circularity 
as a real phenomenon in law. Legal communications refer to other legal 
communications, to legal structures and to legal acts. This is not a specifi-
cally new discovery on the part of systems theory — one has only to think 
of Hart's secondary rules, for example, which deal with the production 
and validation of other rules. However, autopoietically speaking, self-
referentiality is seen not in terms of the production and validation of norms 

358 
Peter Kennealy 
by norms but as part of the self-reproduction of the system's elements and 
organization over time. 
Another feature of the law to which systems theory pays particular 
attention is the possibility of the emergence of paradox. This occurs 
when the code, according to which the communications of the system are 
thematized, is applied to itself. In the case of the legal system it happens 
when the question is asked whether the code of the legal system, "right/ 
wrong" is itself right or wrong. This might seem a fairly remote possibility 
but instances of it can be found as, for example, the right, found in some 
constitutions, of civil disobedience. Perhaps a more common example is 
that of equity law where the legal system contains a program for overriding 
its own statute law in the interests of fairness. 
3. An autopoietic approach enables us to deploy a theoretically sophisti-
cated apparatus in dealing with problems insufficiently analyzed by less 
exalted versions of legal theory. Part of this power stems from the fact 
that the sociological theory of law as an autopoietic sub-system is part 
of a wider theory of functionally differentiated social sub-systems and, 
consequently, the theory supplies interesting perspectives on the inter-
relationships of the legal and other systems — on the interactions of law 
and society. Why does legal regulation often fail to achieve its intended 
results? Why does it occasionally work? What are the conditions for the 
successful interaction of functionally differentiated, autopoietic social sub-
systems? 
2. Fortuitous fit? 
Two sorts of problems can be expected in applying to the law a model as 
precisely articulated as the autopoietic one. In the first instance, it is 
possible that the law might not contain enough components to fill out the 
model in a non-trivial manner (what we might call the problem of paucity). 
Secondly, there is the possibility already mentioned, that the law might 
contain a surplus of significant components above and beyond what the 
theory is capable of dealing with. It is even possible that both problems 
might occur together: there could be such a bad fit that not only would 
some objectively important autopoietic categories remain empty but there 
would also remain self-evidently important legal phenomena with no place 
in the theory whatsoever. 
It is not being claimed here that there must exist some pre-determined 
fortuitous symmetry of parts between the theory and its object. One of 
the hopes in adopting any new theory is that it will alter our conception 
of law, enabling us to identify hitherto passed-over areas of significance 
and to re-assess traditional ideas of the self-evident importance of other 
parts (which, of course, raises the question of where we acquire our 
standards of the significance of the various components of the legal sys-

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
359 
tem — are we talking about their functional significance, their normative 
significance or their social consequences?). 
This suggests that there are two sets of criteria for the application of 
autopoietic concepts: the theoretical set which requires that what is selected 
will perform the necessary role in the model; and the object set which 
stipulates that the elements do in fact exist in the legal system. Problems 
with either of these two sets of criteria are likely to arise from the same 
source: that even if law is an autopoietic system it is one that operates in 
a very different medium from other autopoietic systems. 
For a start, in a non-physical system, the notion of a boundary within 
which the elements are organized becomes a metaphor (or, at least, must 
be reinterpreted). But if this is so how do we distinguish between a system 
and its environment and how can we tell that the elements of the legal 
system are organized in such a manner that they are self-reproductive? 
Luhmann's first step to achieving this is to designate social systems, 
along with psychic systems, as meaning-processing. In psychic systems — such 
as the self — consciousness is the mode of meaning-based reproduction. 
But in the legal sub-system legal communications are indicated as filling 
the role of elements in the autopoietic model, as being the things that 
vanish and so need to be reproduced along with their organization. In the 
course of the conference there were some objections to this decision. Why 
legal communications (which are defined as communications intended to 
have legal effect and change legal expectations), it was asked. Why not 
legal acts, or legal actors, or legal rules or statutes or judgements? Legal 
actors were particularly suggested because of their central importance in 
the legal system — producing, observing and submitting to law. However, 
in Luhmann's conception, where the subject, if not entirely eliminated 
from the game, has certainly been sent off the pitch, legal actors are part 
of the environment because everything is environment except communication. 
And it is through looking at this idea that we discover the nature of the 
boundary between a system and the environment. 
Legal communications are a subset of general social communications 
that have been thematized according to the legal code which is the binary 
normative code of right and wrong. This is not to be understood as right 
and wrong in any wider normative sense but right and wrong according 
to legal norms. Evidently, legal communications would not exist if legal 
actors did not exist — obviously nothing "social" would exist if there were 
not any human beings — but though they are necessary to the existence 
of the legal system they are not part of it. What is distinctive about placing 
legal communications in the role of elements within the model is that while 
elements must still be produced by elements the replacement of one 
communication by another only makes sense if the produced communica-
tion is different. 

360 
Peter Kennealy 
Legal communications have both normative and a cognitive quality. 
Normatively speaking, they refer to the code of the system, legal/illegal, 
and some points were raised about this during discussion. One difficulty 
was whether the legal system could correctly be said to possess only one 
binary code. After all, many norms of the system were not directly con-
cerned with prescribing or forbidding types of behavior but in making 
possible types of behavior which would not exist without the norm. In 
other words, some legal rules are constitutive rather than regulative — for 
instance, marriages, wills and divorces are neither prescribed or forbidden 
by law but made possible and in the circumstances it is not correct to 
speak of a marriage being right or wrong but valid or invalid. 
It is interesting to see why this reasonable criticism misses the mark. At 
one level, it could be pointed out that the code right/wrong is not of itself 
intrinsically regulative but only requires that relevant behavior be in 
accordance with the norm, whether that norm is regulative or constitutive 
in scope. Going a little deeper, we can see that this is not just a verbal 
gloss but demonstrates the close connection between the code of a system 
and the function of the legal sub-system. Law, as a functionally differenti-
ated sub-system is specialized in the maintenance of the stability of expecta-
tions which it achieves through normative closure. By normative closure 
is meant that in the face of a disappointed expectation about behavior the 
system does not react by changing its attribution "right" or "wrong". For 
example, if someone is caught evading income tax the legal system does 
not just change its norms concerning the duty of everyone to pay income 
tax but goes ahead and enforces the norm thereby maintaining everyone's 
expectation that they will have to pay income tax. Now unless a legal 
system is completely moribund it will not preserve rigidly and indefinitely 
the same set of expectations. The creation of new norms and the replacement 
of outdated or completely ignored norms is going to change the profile of 
the set of expectations. Constitutive norms act in a private fashion in this 
manner allowing the individual to change the profile of his own particular 
portfolio of expectations. Constitutive norms once invoked soon lead to 
new regulations being applied to the invoker and consequently to new 
expectations about his behaviour on his own part and on the part of others. 
However, still on the question of the code, a more serious problem was 
raised. What happens in case of undecidability or where the system self-
referentially negates its own code? The first issue is surely linked to the 
problem much discussed in Anglo-American jurisprudence of whether there 
is always a right answer and lies outside the scope of this report. The 
second issue is potentially more problematic for the autopoietic view of 
things. An example — if self-referential negation seems too abstract — 
would be where a Supreme Court allows for a right of civil disobedience 
because the implication is that the requirement of submission to norms 
depends on some extra-systemic factor — some higher code. 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
361 
The closure of the system clearly refers to its norms; but for the norms 
to operate the system must be in some sense open — cognitively open. 
There is no point in having norms if the system doesn't know what is 
going on in its environment, that is whether the norms are being respected 
or not. Yet it should be made clear that when it is said that the system is 
open to information it is not meant that it perceives everything going on 
around it. The environment exists for the system, for the most part, as 
meaningless noise which the system refuses to take into account in its 
operations. Still, some events in the environment are of relevance to the 
law because they have been conditioned by legal norms and it these sort 
of events that count as information for the system. In a sense then, the 
information is purely internal: "it" is not created by the system but the 
system creates the possibility of its becoming information. 
One way of putting this is to say that the system has two environments: 
one which we as observers can point to and includes everything outside 
the system including other funtionally differentiated sub-systems with their 
own operative codes. The other is the system-relative environment created 
by the system's unique network of distinctions and indications and which 
are closely tied to the system's code. According to the theory, the inhibition 
placed on the system's sensors is a severe one because of the mutual 
untranslatability of the codes precludes the possibility of any system becom-
ing part of the accessible environment of another. Each system is completely 
separate and autonomous even where some element seems to be common 
to each. Take the example of money — vital to the economic system and 
unimaginable in its present form without either the legal system or the 
political system. Yet the theory of autopoiesis holds that this is not a case 
of the interaction or even of the overlapping of systems and refers to the 
phenomenon as dual membership — rather like a man who belongs to two 
clubs and behaves differently in each. But this is only a metaphor and it 
is not clear that it works. What counts as money is a product of the legal 
system; the supply of money and, therefore, part of its value is controlled 
by the political system. So how can we say that the economic system is 
autonomous? Why does autopoietic theory not accept this as part of the 
mutual dependence of the functionally differentiated sub-systems? 
III. The Interaction and Autonomy of Autopoietic 
Sub-Systems 
This section includes the last two sets of issues that were raised at the 
conference — those to do with the testing and the development of the 
theory. Many of the critics and the empiricists felt that this is where the 
theory flew most unreasonably in the face of reality and reached the limits 
of their toleration. But what was a stumbling block to the unfaithful 

362 
Peter Kennealy 
appeared to the disciples as a springboard to future developments in which 
not only the theoretical problems would be cleared up but also in their 
wake the practical implications of the theory would become evident. 
These questions can be dealt with in two sections: 
1. What do we mean by equating the autonomy of law to the autonomy 
of an autopoietic system? 
2. How can we theoretically conceive of the interaction of autopoietic 
systems? 
1. Autonomy 
It is on the question of the autonomy of law that the greatest contrast 
emerged between our everyday, common-sense conception of law and the 
autopoietic vision. The discussion of Lempert's paper by Nelken brought 
out the main points of contrast. 
On Nelken's reading, everyday folk use the notion of autonomy as an 
empirically ascertainable, scalar concept that functions both as an ideal and 
an ideal type. As such it is not a theory but a central concept in our way 
of looking at the law — and not with the aspects of law that haunt the 
autopoieticists: its unity, its identity and its self-reproduction but with the 
undeniable relations that exist between law and society. From this point of 
view, legislation as carried out in parliaments is very definitely a political 
activity that centrally affects the law whereas in autopoietic terms only law 
can make law and so is autonomous by definition. 
It cannot be hoped that an illuminating argument will emerge between 
two parties who, using radically different approaches, claim to be talking 
about the same phenomenon of autonomy. There is no disagreement that 
the word "autonomy" means autonomy in anybody's world. However, an 
apparent difference of opinion emerged because the unspecified autonomy 
being spoken of was the autonomy of two different things: very simply, 
Lempert's legal system was not congruent with Luhmann's legal system. 
Lempert speaks of a legal system because he is dealing with a whole whose 
parts are not only in constant interaction with each other but with things 
that are not part of the system. This is both the strength of law — 
systematic and hierarchical interaction between its parts — and its purpose, 
viz., to interfere in a systematic manner in the operation of other parts of 
society through the direction of human behavior. 
Autopoietic theory, on the other hand, is focused not on interaction but 
on self-production. And as by definition only the law can make law we 
have a condition of complete autonomy. In a legislature an autopoieticist 
does not see politicians representing various points of view, interests, 
parties, etc. He only sees legal communications occurring within a structure 
of legal norms that refer to other legal communications and norms. 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
363 
These differences are made possible by what is probably the single most 
important characteristic of the autopoietic discourse: it is entirely formal. 
It has little interest in the content of a legal norm. Therefore, the criteria 
for the application of the autopoietic concept are quite entirely different 
than those to be found in a viewpoint that is heavily concerned with the 
substance of laws. The occurrence of events which to the Anglo-American 
point of view make all the difference to our assessment of the degree of 
autonomy of law have no bearing whatsoever on the autonomy in the 
mind of the autopoieticist. 
To take an example: a moral pressure group decides that the law on 
abortion should be tightened up because in their view it constitutes legalized 
murder. In order to achieve this they mount a publicity campaign, lobby 
legislators, hold demonstrations to display the strength of their support 
and commitment, make contributions to political parties that support their 
viewpoint and generally maintain pressure until the law has been changed 
in accordance with their values. From the point of view of people like 
Lempert the autonomy of law has been diminished and the legal system 
shown to be vulnerable to the pressure that small, determined groups can 
exercise on the political system. Not so for the autopoieticist. For him, the 
law has changed; but the law is always changing and in changing reproduces 
itself. The only conditions under which a loss of the autonomy of the law 
could possibly be imagined in an autopoietic world would be if moral 
communications directly brought about a change in legal norms. And if 
this were to happen there would no longer exist the legal system as we 
know it (and could not happen by definition if we accept Hart's definition 
of law as the union of primary and secondary norms). The relative autono-
mist is interested in how moral norms influence legal norms. The autopoie-
ticist is only keen to show that it was legal communications and legal acts 
that brought about legal change. For him, there is no minimum content 
of natural law in the legal system: it is irrelevant whether theft is legal or 
illegal because either conditioning is a successful instance of the binary 
code at work. Even the attributed function of the system — the maintenance 
of the stability of expectations — is indifferent between which sets of 
expectations are stabilized. 
This contrast was brought out clearly by Luhmann in his reply to 
Lempert. According to Lempert, autonomy was like a zero-sum game 
between the system and the environment: the more the environment 
influences law, the less autonomous law becomes. In Luhmann's view there 
can be a simultaneous increase of dependence and independence in system-
environment relations: the legal system can have more and varied relations 
with its environment — and to that degree become more dependent; 
however, to the extent that its organization has complexified and powers 
of self-reproduction increased the system has become more independent of 
its environment (i.e., becomes better able to deal with external perturba-

364 
Peter Kennealy 
tions). The two approaches can be contrasted as follows: for a relative 
autonomist, that a moral issue should bring about changes in legal commu-
nications that bring about changes in legal norms is a blow to legal 
autonomy; for the autopoieticist, it is a demonstration of legal autonomy 
because it shows that for anything to cross the boundary of law it must 
first become part of it. 
But here we come to a problem about the boundaries of the system. 
What is it that constitutes a communication as a legal communication? The 
standard definition is that a legal communication is one designed to have 
legal effect ("communicative actions that engender legal consequences") 
and it is by no means clear how strictly and unequivocally this separates 
legal from other social communications. Does it include any communication 
about law and the possibility of changing it including arguments about 
what the law should be? 
2. Interaction? 
The foregoing questions are relevant to the problem of the interaction of 
autopoietic systems. The problem can be formulated in the following 
manner: in an autopoietic account we can provide solid theoretical ground-
ing for the autonomy and unity of law. It also helps to account for the 
puzzling phenomenon of the failure of autopoietic systems to interact in 
the intended manner (the explanation being that the attempted interference 
by one system in the working of another fails to break through its filter 
mechanism and succeeds only in creating disturbing noise in the object 
system's environment — and with possible rebound effects on the active 
system). 
This has two undesirable consequences, one methodological and one 
practical. The practical one is that this means that systems are — as Teubner 
put it — like windowless monads, closed to and oblivious of each other with 
the result that any attempted communication between them is guaranteed 
misunderstanding. The scientific disadvantage is that this absoluteness of 
closure and guaranteed autonomy of autopoietic systems fails to make sense 
of those instances of the successful interaction of autopoietic systems. 
The question posed for the autopoieticist, then, is how to develop the 
vocabulary of autopoietic concepts in order to make sense of the diversity 
of interaction between systems. And resolving these questions will also 
help resolve the practical question of how to identify opportunities and 
means for the accurate manipulation of one system by another. 
Nearly all of the disciples were engaged upon this enterprise (not being 
the kind of social theorists who like to leave things alone). 
Hutter's suggestion was that systems can successfully interact by using 
conversation circles. His example was taken from the area of patent law — 
an area of obvious concern to the economy and which in this case was 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
365 
concerned with what could or could not be patented. The strategy for 
tackling the problem of mutual opacity is that on a particular issue represen-
tatives of the various sub-systems involved get together in a conversation 
circle and make each other aware of the problems that each would have 
in the light of any proposed solution. 
Unfortunately this idea of a sort of parliament of subsystems seemed to 
create as many problems theoretically as it appeared to have solved practi-
cally for the parties involved. Firstly, this approach involves conceptualizing 
the law and the economy as collective actors seeing them as psychic systems 
capable of intentionalistic actions. However, subsystems are not psychic 
systems and in autopoietic terms do not even interact with them. Secondly, 
it was pointed out, it is not legitimate to think of a firm in one of the 
conversation circles as representing the economic system. Firms tend to 
represent nobody but themselves and their own interests. Because of this 
it would be a matter of luck if a firm in a conversation circle was 
representative of the relevant conditions in the economic system. But perhaps 
the most difficult point for those interested in the theoretical issues was 
that the approach complicated unnecessarily the path of interaction between 
the two systems. Not only was another system placed between the law and 
the economy — with the possibility that it too might be autopoietic — 
but also between this and each of the subsystems there was postulated a 
specialized boundary position for the maintenance of contact. Again it was 
stressed that this was a problem of the conceptualisation of the interaction 
of systems seeing, as in this case at least, the procedure appeared to have 
overcome its theoretical deficiencies and worked in practice. 
Willke approached the autopoietic barrier to the interaction of systems 
with more respect. Reflecting on the paradox that in a modern functionally 
differentiated society social sub-systems simultaneously become more interde-
pendent — in the sense that the survival of each sub-system depends on 
the others performing their function for the overall society — and more 
independent of each other through their operative closure and increasing 
internal complexity. This creates the odd situation that although locked 
together into a wider whole to which each contributes its necessary function 
they are yet capable of creating negative externalities for each other because 
of their mutual blindness. Willke's concern was to discover ways of making 
each system sensitive to its environment in the sense of creating an 
awareness of its disturbing effects on other systems. Or, in other words, 
how might the self-guidance capacities of the various systems, including 
the legal system, be activated. (It was suggested by Braten that certain 
systems — if one could regard organized crime as an autopoietic subsys-
tem — might be prima facie resistant to the stimulation of their self-guidance 
capacities, if they had any.) 
Willke's term for this form of non-intrusive regulation was societal 
guidance. The precise mechanism involved was "a grammar of transforma-

366 
Peter Kennealy 
tional rules which allow for the transfer of external conditions into the 
internally determined operational cycles of an acting unit." In essence the 
role of law in this approach is "indirect rule" and, according to Willke, 
this suggested solution overcomes the paradox of interdependence and 
independence by strengthening "... the autonomy and operative closure of 
the guided system in order to increase its responsiveness and sensitivity to 
specific external conditions". 
There were some objections to this treatment of the problem. Ladeur 
found the conception of guidance too abstract while Clune was skeptical 
about the coaxing capacity of law and the potential for the sort of self-
guidance looked for being present in the sub-systems. Teubner objected that 
the strategy suggested was not in agreement with the central assumptions of 
self-referentiality which is that there is no direct contact with the environ-
ment and communication systems only interact with self-constructed real-
ities. 
For himself, Teubner's preferred line of development was to investigate 
the possibility of the self-identification of the law as one autopoietic system 
in a world of autopoietic systems. Law regulates society through regulating 
itself was the motto for this approach. But in view of the fact that in the 
autopoietic vision there is no output of law from the system, how is the 
control of others made possible through the control of self? 
The difficulty of this was illustrated with an autopoietically interpreted 
example of a price-freeze imposed by law on the economy. Autopoietically 
speaking, this is not an intervention by the law in the economy but a mere 
act of observation by the law — and, moreover, not even a direct observa-
tion of the economy but a self-observation: "through a price-control norm 
the law merely observes its own operation". The reason for this is that 
observation is "to be understood as a procedure strictly within the system 
that neither leads into reality 'out there' nor from the outside in. Observing 
means that a system introduces distinctions into internal operations and 
indicates something on the basis of these distinctions". Now the same 
holds for the economic system so that neither does it have any knowledge 
of a price-control "out there." If any observation does take place, it is 
in terms of the distinctions and indications intrinsic to the economy. 
Consequently, legal norms are not considered in virtue of their normative 
validity — as they are in the legal system — but as items in cost-
benefit calculations. Clearly, in this world, there is no possibility of direct 
intervention. (What is also clear is that the motto "law regulates the world 
through regulating itself' loses its pleasant and rather hazy aura of the 
harmony of the spheres because in the light of the view expressed above 
it no longer means that through ordering itself the law attunes the world 
to its order. It must now be interpreted as meaning that even if the law 
tries directly to regulate the world it will only succeed in regulating itself. 
Law, according to the autopoietic canon, only operates on law.) 

Talking About Autopoiesis — Order From Noise? 
367 
How then did Teubner think the harmony of the spheres might be 
attained? In contrast to linking up systems through conversation circles 
and boundary positions, or trying to connect the cognitive opennesses of 
the various systems using transformational grammers, Teubner advocated 
the interference of similar autopoietic systems at the level of communication. 
There were three reasons for this. In the first place, social sub-systems as 
social communication systems possess the same raw material of meaning; 
secondly, they each use communications, albeit thematized differently, as 
the elements of their systems; thirdly, any communication in any sub-system 
is at one and the same time sub-system and general societal communication. 
Taking communication as a synthesis of information, utterance and 
understanding it is clear that at the informational level a legal communica-
tion, for example, is thematized according to the legal code of right and 
wrong. However, not only is it possible for one legal communication to 
link up to other legal communications (as when a fine leads to an appeal) 
but also to wider social communication circuits; and this social communica-
tion can, in turn, link up to other specialized communicative circuits such 
as the economy or politics. In this manner interfering systems can make 
their complexity available for each other. However, a problem with these 
communicative links was the loss of motivation and information that they 
were considered to cause in the interacting systems. 
A mode of more direct interference lies in institutions like contract 
where the legal, moral and economic actions occur in the same single act 
(though with three different system perspectives). 
Finally, in the same genre there is the same possibility of communication 
through organization. This refers to the formal organizations that exist in 
social sub-systems (for instance, in the economy, firms and trades unions) 
and whose own system elements (organization decisions) can link. 
Teubner indicates some of the neo-corporatist negotiation systems as 
instances of this and one where the role of the law might be expanded. 
3. Conclusion 
Throughout the discussion of these and other suggestions for incorporating 
possible modes of system interaction into autopoietic theory, there regularly 
sounded a note of exasperation from the critics and the empiricists. Why 
suggest coaxing systems when we know how recalcitrant they are? Why 
say the law operates only on the law when we know that it operates on 
the economy? Why point to the economic code as one of the reasons for 
the flaunting of the law in the economic system when we know that it is 
due to acts of individual evasion caused by the profit motive? 
These and similar questions demonstrated just what a twist of perspective 
is involved in the autopoietic approach. Whether it is possible to speak in 
a pure autopoietic manner is itself debatable, so radically different is that 

368 
Peter Kennealy 
point of view from our normal ways of thinking. Even the committed 
autopoieticists' accounts of things are riddled with anthropomorphic and 
intentionalistic features though this is excused, they claim, by the fact that 
even a theory that tries to abandon the subject-object distinction must 
operate in a language into whose very structure that distinction is built. 
The veil of language is opaque and conceals from us the true order of 
things — despite the fact that systems, both observing and observed, are 
themselves linguistically constituted. It is not surprising that by the end 
of the conference there were few new converts prepared to make, as they 
saw it, a leap into faith. It seems, to this neutral observer at least, that the 
autopoieticists, if they are seriously interested in spreading the good news, 
must make the effort to be more accessible. It is not the case that their 
writings are obscure and, some would say, perverse; but it is true that, to 
the uninitiated outsider, they seem like this. On the other hand, appreciation 
of this unique point of view is an intellectual effort and, considering that 
the autopoietic approach is among the most interesting challenges in current 
legal theory, one worth making. 
Bibliography 
MATURANA, HUMBERTO R. (1980) "Autopoiesis: Reproduction, Heredity and Evolution" 
in M. Zeleny (ed.) (1908 b). 
ZELENY, MILAN (1980 a) "Autopoiesis: a Paradigm Lost?" in M . Zeleny (ed.) (1980 b),. 
— (ed.) (1980 b) Autopoiesis, Dissipative Structures, and Spontaneous Social Orders. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Pr. 

Authors' Biographical Sketches 
HANS-GEORG DEGGAU, Assistant Professor of Law; bom 1949; Dr. iur., 
University of Hannover, 1981; Lawyer, 1981 — 83; Jean Monnet Fellow, 
European University Institute, Florence, 1984—85; Assistant Professor of 
Law, University of Hannover, 1985 —. Author. Die Aporien der Rechtslehre 
Kants, 1983; various articles in academic and professional journals. 
JEAN-PIERRE DUPUY, Director of Research, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique; born 1941; graduate of l'Ecole Polytechnique, Paris; Professor 
of Economics, Ecole Polytechnique, 1977 —; Director, Centre de Recherche 
Epistemologie et Autonomie, Ecole Polytechnique, 1982 —; Professor 
of French philosophy, Stanford University, 1986 —. Author, 
(with P. 
Dumouchel) L'Enfer des choses, 1979; Ordres et desordres, 1982; Editor 
(with P. Dumouchel): L'Auto-organisation, 1983; various articles in eco-
nomics, political philosophy, sociology, and philosophy in professional 
journals and collective publications. 
FRANCOIS EWALD, Charge de recherche, Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique; born 1946; diplome en philosophic et en droit, University of 
Paris; Assistant at College de France, Chaire d'Histoire des Systemes de 
Pensee (Professor: Michel Foucault), 1977 — 1984: Author. L'accident nous 
attend au coin de la rue, 1982; L'Etat-providence, 1985. Various articles on 
social legislation and history of social security in professional journals. 
THOMAS CHARLES HELLER, Professor of Law; born 1944; B.A., Princeton, 
1965; L. L. B., Yale, 1968; Attorney: Bogota, Colombia, Santiago, Chile, 
1968 — 72; Professor of Law, Stanford Law School, 1978 —; Director 
of Overseas Studies, Stanford University, 1985 —; Visiting Professor at 
European University Institute, Florence, University of Barcelona, Free 
University of Berlin. Author, various publications in professional books 
and journals including "Structuralism and Critique", 1984; "The Legal 
Economics of American Federalism", 1985. 
PETER KENNEALY, University assistant, Department of Political and Social 
Sciences, European University Institute, Florence; born 1958; B.A., Univer-
sity College Dublin (NUI), 1978; M.A., 1982. Author, various articles in 
professional books and journals in the field of political and moral theory. 

3 7 0 
Authors' Biographical Sketches 
Translator and editor of Norberto Bobbio's State, Government and Society 
(1988). 
KARL-HEINZ LADEUR, Professor of Law, born 1943, Dr. jur., Habilitation, 
University of Bremen, Professor of Law, University of Bremen, 1983. 
Author, (with H. Ridder) Das sogenannte politische Mandat von Universität 
und Studentenschaft, 1973; Rechtssubjekt und Rechtsstruktur, 1978; (with 
F. Hase) Verfassungsgerichtsbarkeit 
und politisches System, 
1980; 
"Abwägung" — ein neues Paradigma des Verwaltungsrechts, 1984; Editor. 
(with D. Deiseroth/F. Hase) Ordnungsmacht — zum Verhältnis von Lega-
lität, Legitimität und Konsens, 1981; various articles in professional books 
and journals on legal theory, constitutional law, environment law and media 
law. 
RICHARD O. LEMPERT, Professor of Law and Sociology, born 1942; J. D., 
Ph. D., University of Michigan, 1968, 1971; Assistant, Associate and Full 
Professor of Law, University of Michigan Law School, 1968 —; Mason 
Ladd Visiting Distinguished Professor of Law, University of Iowa Law 
School, Fall 1981; Visiting Fellow, Centre for Socio-Legal Research, Wolf-
son College, Oxford, 1982; Professor of Sociology, University of Michigan, 
1985 —; Member, Vice-Chair and Chair, National Research Council Com-
mittee on Research on Law Enforcement and the Administration of Justice, 
1982 — 88. Author. A Modern Approach to Evidence (with Stephen Salz-
burg), 1977, 3rd ed. 1982; An Invitation to Law and Social Science: Desert, 
Disputes and Distribution (with Joseph Sanders), 1986. Editor: Law & 
Society Review, 1982—85; Editorial Board, Violence and Victims, 1985 —; 
Board of Advisors, Law in Social Context Series, 1985— (K. Hawkins and 
J. M. Thomas, eds.). 
NIKLAS LUHMANN, Professor of Sociology, born 1927; Dr. sc. pol., Habilita-
tion, University of Münster, 1966; Professor of Sociology, University of 
Bielefeld, 1968 —; Member, Rheinisch-Westfälische Akademie der Wis-
senschaften, 1974 —; Dr. jur. h.c. University of Gent, 1984. Author, (with 
F. Becker) Verwaltungsfehler und Vertrauensschutz, 1963; Funktionen und 
Folgen formaler Organisation, 1964; öffentlich-rechtliche Entschädigung 
rechtspolitisch betrachtet, 1965; Grundrechte als Institution, 1965; Recht 
und Automation in der öffentlichen Verwaltung, 1966; Theorie der Verwal-
tungswissenschaft, 1966; Vertrauen, 1968; Zweckbegriff und Systemratio-
nalität, 
1968; 
Legitimation 
durch 
Verfahren, 
1969; 
Soziologische 
Aufklärung, 1970; Politische Planung, 1971; (with J. Habermas) Theorie 
der Gesellschaft oder Sozialtechnologie, 1971; (with W. Dahm and D. 
Stoodt) Religion — System und Sozialisation, 1972; Rechtssoziologie, 1972; 
(with R. Mayntz) Personal im öffentlichen Dienst, 1973; Rechtssystem und 
Rechtsdogmatik, 1974; Macht, 1975; Funktion der Religion, 1977; (with 

Authors' Biographical Sketches 
3 7 1 
S. Pfürtner) Theorientechnik und Moral, 1978; (with Κ. E. Schorr) Re-
flexionsprobleme im Erziehungssystem, 1979; Gesellschaftsstruktur und 
Semantik I, 1980; II, 1981, Politische Theorien im Wohlfahrtsstaat, 1981; 
Soziale Systeme, 1984; Ökologische Kommunikation, 1986. Articles in 
various fields of sociological and legal theory. 
D A V I D NELKEN, Lecturer in Law; born 1 9 4 9 ; 
B . A . , Cambridge, 
1 9 7 2 ; 
Dip. Crim., Cambridge, 1973; Ph. D., Cambridge, 1981; Supervisor at 
Cambridge, 1974—76; Lecturer at Edinburgh University, 1976 — 84, and 
University College, London, 1984 —; Americal Sociological Association 
Distinguished Scholar, 1985; George Lurcey Lecturer, Amherst University, 
1986; Jean Monnet Fellow, European University Institute, Florence, 
1 9 8 7 - 8 8 ; Forchheimer Fellow, Hebrew University, 1 9 8 8 : Author. The 
Limits of the Legal Process: A Study of Landlords, Law and Crime, 1983: 
Various articles on sociology of law, criminology, philosophy of law, 
criminal justice and criminal law. 
PATRICK NERHOT, Department of Law of the European University Institute 
since 1983; born 1953; specialized in legal theory, he gives seminars in 
hermeneutic and legal epistemology. In preparation: general editing on 
Elements of Legal Theory (papers on "legal reality" and "narrative coher-
ence and legal interpretation"). 
FRANCOIS OST, Professor of Constitutional Law and Legal Theory; born 
1952; Dean of the Faculty of Law, Facultes universitaires Saint-Louis; in 
charge of the Revue interdisciplinaire d'etudes juridiques and member of 
the executive committee of the Revue Droit et Societe. Author·, (with J. 
Lenoble) Droit, mythe et raison, 1980; (with Μ. van de Kerchove) Bonnes 
moeurs, discours penal et rationalite juridique, 1981; (with M. van de 
Kerchove) Jalons pour une theorie critique du droit, 1987. Editor, 
(with 
Ph. Gerard and M. van de Kerchove) Fonction de juger et pouvoir 
judiciaire, 1983; (with Ph. Gerard and M. van de Kerchove) Actualite de 
la pensee juridique de J. Bentham, 1987. 
HUBERT ROTTLEUTHNER, Professor of Sociology of Law; born 1944; Dr. 
phil., University of Frankfurt, 1972; Professor of Sociology of Law, Free 
University of Berlin, 1975 —; Member, Editorial Board of the journal 
Zeitschrift für Rechtssoziologie, 1980: Author. Richterliches Handeln, 1973; 
Rechtswissenschaft als Sozialwissenschaft, 1973; Rechtstheorie und Rechts-
soziologie, 1981 (Italian transl. 1983); Einführung in die Rechtssoziologie, 
1987. Editor. 
Probleme der marxistischen Rechtstheorie, 1975; (with Ε. 
Blankenburg, Ε. Klausa) Alternative Rechtsformen und Alternativen zum 
Recht, Jahrbuch für Rechtssoziologie und Rechtstheorie, vol. 6, 1980; 
(with R. Ellermann, H. Russig) Kündigungspraxis, Kündigungsschutz und 

372 
Authors' Biographical Sketches 
Probleme der Arbeitsgerichtsbarkeit, 1983; Recht, Rechtsphilosophie und 
Nationalsozialismus, 1983; Rechtssoziologische Studien zur Arbeitsge-
richtsbarkeit, 1984. Various articles on sociology of law and legal theory, 
labor courts, theories of legal development, history of sociology of law, 
Nazi law. 
GUNTHER TEUBNER, Professor of Private Law and Legal Sociology; born 
1944; Referendar, University of Tübingen, 1967; Dr. iur., University of 
Tübingen, 1970; Assessor, Stuttgart 1971; Μ. Α., Sociology of Law, Berke-
ley, 1974; Habilitation in law, University of Tübingen, 1977; Privatdozent, 
University of Frankfurt, 1977; Professor of Law, University of Bremen, 
1977 —; Visiting Professor, University of California at Berkeley, 1980—81; 
Professor of Law, European University Institute, Florence, 1981 —; Head 
of Law Department, 1984; Visiting Professor, University of Michigan, 
Stanford University, 1987 — 88. Author. Standards und Direktiven in Gener-
alklauseln, 1971; Public Status of Private Associations, 1974; Gegenseitige 
Vertragsuntreue, 1975; Organisationsdemokratie und Verbandsverfassung, 
1978; (co-author): Alternativ-Kommentar zum BGB, 1979 — 81. 
Editor. 
(with Κ. Hopt) Corporate Governance and Directors' Liabilities, 1984; 
Dilemmas of Law in the Welfare State, 1985; (with Τ. Daintith) Contract 
and Organisation, 1986; Juridification of Social Spheres, 1987. Various 
articles in professional journals and collective publications. 

Name Index 
Aarnio, A. 242 
Abel, R. 30, 207, 233 
Albrow, M. 207 
Alexy, R. 1, 242 
Allen, P. M. 247, 263, 273 
Althusser, L. 36, 212 
Amselek, P. 319 
Aristotle, 36, 40, 44, 47-48, 100 
Arnaud, A.-J. 53, 89 
Ashby, W. 5, 20, 23, 55-57, 71, 80, 82 
Adas, C. 273, 316-318 
Atlan, H. 5, 52, 56, 57, 71, 80-83, 89, 250, 
251, 253, 262, 263 
Aubert, V. 13, 31 
Bachelard, G. 314, 332 
Balbus, I. 152, 163 
Ballauf, T. 99, 100, 104 
Ballmer, T. 220 
Barel, Y. 262, 267 
Barry, B. 59 
Bartalanffy, L. v. 53, 259 
Bastian, A. 108, 
Beer, S. 221 
Bendix, L. 108 
Bercusson, B. 217 
Beringer, C. C. 108 
Blankenburg, Ε. 225, 226, 233 
Bloch, Μ. 23 
Blumenbach, J. C. 104 
Böckenförde, E.-W. 102, 111, 116, 243, 
244 
Bohannan, P. 157, 159 
Bourdieu, P. 87, 91 
Bourguignon, A. 259 
Buckley, W. 218 
Bühl, W. 225, 229, 230 
Bühler, Ο. 266 
Burdach, C. F. 99 
Bredemeier, Η. 213 
Broca, P. 109 
Broekman, J. M. 243, 277, 248 
Brown, S. 133 
Brubaker, R. 231 
Brüggemeier, G. 225 
Caillois, R. 85 
Calvino, I. 266 
Cameron, S. 14 
Campbell, D. T. 228, 230 
Canguilhem, G. 101, 102 
Carbonnier, J. 324 
Castoriadis, C. 71, 82, 83 
Cerroni, U. 112 
Ceruti, M. 251 
Changeux, J.-P. 261 
Clune, W. H. 191, 366 
Coing, H. 12, 249 
Costa, P. 273 
Costa de Beauregard, O. 250, 267 
Comte, A. 99, 100, 102, 318 
Cotterell, R. 208 
Coulter, W. A. 272 
C.R.E.A. 51, 52 
Crozier, M. 84, 87, 88, 267 
Cuvier, 108 
Dalloz, 316 
Darwin, C. 97, 99, 101, 102, 107, 108, 109, 
338 
Dawkins, R. 229 
Debray, R. 57 
Deggau, H.-G. 6, 54, 198 
Derrida, J. 86, 268 
Descartes, 62, 65 
Dias, R. W. M. 15 
Dilthey, W. 325 
Dohrn van Rossum, G. 100 
Donzelot, J. 269 
Duguit, L. 12, 45 
Dumouchel, P. 51, 80, 262 
Dunne, Ε P. 181 
Dupuy, J.-P. 5, 51, 53, 80, 82, 192, 261, 
262 

374 
Name Index 
Duster, T. 28 
Dürkheim, Ε. 12, 67, 200, 212 
Dworkin, R. 90, 91, 92 
Eckhoff, Τ. 21 
Eco, U. 266, 268 
Eder, Κ. 225 
Ehrmann, J. 86 
Eigen, Μ. 8, 218, 220, 261 
Ellul, J. 68, 332 
Engels, Ε 112 
Englisch, Κ. 12 
Esser, J. 1, 29 
Etzioni, Α. 217 
Ewald, F. 4, 5, 38, 43, 326, 333 
Fagen, R. E. 15 
Fasso, G. 333 
Febbrajo, A. 84, 85 
Ferguson, A. 65 
Feyerabend, P. 247 
Fichte, J. G. 100, 111, 112, 129 
Fischer, R. 262 
Fitzpatrick, P. 214 
Fletcher, G. P. 1 
Foerster, Η. v. 1, 14-16, 22, 52, 53, 56, 
117, 250, 254, 259, 262-263, 337, 344 
Fogelman, F. 263 
Fornari, F. 261 
Foucoult, M. 214 
Frankl, V. 56 
Frantz, C. 102 
Friedberg, E. 84, 87, 88, 267 
Friedman, L. 6, 13, 225 
Fuchs, E. 108 
Fuller, L. 329 
Gadamer, H.-G. 86 
Galanter, M. 166 
Gans, E. 107 
Garland, D. 214 
Gautier, E. 109 
Genovese, E. 152 
Geny, F. 317, 329, 330, 331 
Gerber, C.-F. v. 102, 245 
Gierke, Ο. v. 104, 105, 106, 107, 111, 113, 
114, 115, 122 
Godard, Ο. 267 
Gödel, 56, 57, 62, 80 
Goldstein, G. D. 14 
Gondek, H. D. 242, 248 
Goodman, N. 321 
Gordon, R. 192, 208, 211, 212, 225, 226, 
227, 229 
Görlitz, A. 219 
Gould, S. J. 254 
Green, A. 261 
Griffiths, J. 199 
Grimm, J. and W. 12 
Grotius 44, 315 
Guiloff, G. D. 270 
Gumplowicz, L. 110 
Günther, G. 348 
Gutsatz, Μ. 70 
Habermas, J. 28, 84, 219, 225, 229-230, 
234, 268 
Häberle, P. 243, 244 
Hadley, J. L. 261 
Haeckel, E. 110 
Haefner, K. 273 
Haferkamp, Η. 221 
Haken, Η. 264 
Hall, Α. D. 15 
Haller, A. v. 104 
Hamilton, W. D. 229 
Hauriou, M. 44 
Hart, H. L. A. 6, 22, 92, 93, 119, 158, 224, 
354, 357, 363 
Hay, D. 153 
Hayek, F. A. v. 5, 53, 55-58, 60, 62, 
64-68, 226, 232, 217, 317 
Hegel, G. W. F. 101, 104, 107, 112, 
113 
Hejl, P. M. 2, 15, 51, 129, 221, 249 
Heller, T. 8 - 9 , 214, 233, 284, 354 
Henrich, D. 14 
Hesse, K. 243 
Hesse, M. 247 
Hildebrand, R. 108 
Hirshleifer, J. 225, 232 
Hirst, P. Q. 101 
Hjelmslev, L. 266 
Hobbes, 68 
Hoffmann-Riem, W. 273 
Hofstaedter, D. R. 1, 56, 80 
Holloway, J. 200 
Hubel, D. H. 259 
Huizinga, J. 85 
Husson, L. 321, 322, 326, 327 
Hutter, M. 214, 344, 364 
Hyde, A. 153 

Name Index 
375 
Jacobi, T. 14 
Jacquemin, A. 84 
Jameson, R. 99 
Jantsch, E. 14, 219, 236, 264 
Jessop, R. 200 
Jhering, R. 103, 104, 109, 314 
Kant, I. 6, 36, 39, 44, 99, 100, 104, 108, 
116-117, 335 
Kaufmann, Ε. 102 
Kelsen, Η. 4, 6, 36, 39-40, 45, 66, 71, 
77-79, 90-94, 118-120, 210-211, 
249, 322, 354 
Kesselring, Τ. 265 
King-Utz, Ε. 207 
Kielmeyer, F. 104 
Kitschelt, Η. 248 
Koestler, Α. 53 
Kohler, J. 108 
Krawietz, W. 12, 242, 243, 244, 247, 248 
Krippendorff, K. 273 
Kübler, F. 219 
Kuhn, T. 316, 321, 325, 346 
Kuhlenbeck, L. 110 
Kundera, M. 266 
Lacan, J. 43 
Lacroix, G. 259, 260 
Ladeur, K.-H. 8, 67, 221, 242, 246, 271, 
275-6, 337, 366 
Ladriere, J. 74 
Lanzara, G. F. 267 
Lawrence, P. R. 218 
Lefevre, W. 99, 104 
Legendre, P. 275 
Leist, B. W. 108 
Le Moigne, J. L. 261, 263, 264, 265, 273 
Lempert, R. 7, 5 6 - 7 , 
67, 155, 186, 
191-195, 197-209, 212-13, 215, 345, 
3 6 2 - 3 
Lenin, V. I. 112 
Lenoble, J. 79 
Lepenies, W. 99, 101, 108 
Lewontin, R. C. 254 
Liebert, A. 12 
Linotte, D. 317 
Livet, P. 70, 94 
Llewelyn, Κ. 160 
Lloyd, G. E. R. 25 
Locke, J. 60 
Locker, A. 272 
Loeck, G. 246 
Losano, M. G. 245 
Lorsch, J. W. 218 
Lübbe-Wolff, G. 246 
Luhmann, N. 2 - 4 , 7 - 1 0 , 16, 19, 21, 24, 
2 7 - 8 , 40, 42, 51, 5 3 - 6 , 60, 64, 6 6 - 8 , 
7 1 - 7 , 82, 84, 101, 112, 115-20, 123, 
129-135,137,141,143-6,150,152-3, 
155-7, 171-189, 191-5, 
198-209, 
211-15, 217, 221-2, 
225-8, 
230, 
248-264, 266-9, 272, 274-5, 312-3, 
320, 325, 329-31,346, 349, 352-4,359, 
3 6 2 - 3 
Lyell, C. 108, 109 
Lyotard, J.-F. 242, 247 
Macaulay, S. 207, 208 
MacCormick, N. 94 
Maine, H. S. 108, 109 
Malinvaud, E. 63 
Malthus, T. 109 
Mann, G. 100 
Mannheim, K. 102 
Marten, H.-G. 110 
Maturana, H. 2, 8,14, 5 1 - 3 , 7 1 - 3 , 81 - 2 , 
114-5, 129, 220-1, 224, 229, 231, 233, 
252, 254, 267, 270, 312, 338, 353, 3 5 5 - 6 
Marty, G. 315 
Marx, K. 111, 112, 119 
Masuch, M. 272, 273, 275 
Merkl, H. 21 
Merleau-Ponty, M. 348 
Meyer, A. 101, 102 
Meyer, P. 229 
Milgram, M. 262 
Moles, Α. Α. 16 
Morin, Ε. 2, 273, 319 
Motulsky, Β. 260, 267, 270 
Motulsky, Η. 318, 319, 321, 323-5, 327 
Muratori, L. 29 
Müller, A. 102 
Müller, F. 243, 247 
Murphy, T. 205, 214 
Murphy, J. W. 268 
Nagel, E. 109, 115 
Nahamowitz, P. 217 
Naroll, R. 26 
Nelken, D. 7, 191, 199, 207, 209, 214, 362 
Nerhot, P. 9, 51 
Neukamp, E. 108 

376 
Name Index 
Neumann, J. v. 54, 55, 57, 62, 81, 307-8 
Nicolis, G. 52 
Nielsen, G. M. 266 
Nietzsche, F. 86, 117 
Nocke, J. 217 
Nonet, 155, 161, 164, 225 
Nörr, D. 29 
Nozick, R. 5, 53,57,58,59,60-65,68,226 
Oertzen, P. v. 247 
Ohlinger, Τ. 21, 25 
Olbrechts-Tyteka, L. 242 
O'Neil, W. 314, 318, 326 
Ost, F. 5, 42, 79, 89, 92, 93, 94, 351 
Osterberg, D. 17 
Orlean, A. 273 
Paillard, J. 263, 265 
Parain-Vial, J. 325 
Pardi, F. 259, 267 
Parsons, T. 15, 200, 212, 213 
Pascal, 39 
Pascot, D. 261, 265 
Pashukanis, E. 152 
Pattee, H. 262 
Pawlowski, Η. M. 12 
Paz, O. 287, 288 
Peczenik, A. 242 
Perelman, C. 92, 242 
Petitot, J. 275 
Piaget, J. 230, 265, 291 
Picciotto, S. 200 
Pierre, N. 221 
Pitts, W. H. 53 
Pizzorno, A. 265, 269 
Plato, 25, 100 
Pleister, W. 109 
Ploetz, A. 109 
Podgorecki, A. 204 
Poggi, G. 201, 205 
Popper, K. 58 
Portmann, A. 104 
Posner, R. 232 
Post, A. H. 108 
Preuss, U. K. 272 
Prigogine, I. 52, 53, 251, 263, 264 
Priest, G. L. 225, 232 
Probst, G. j. B. 221, 262 
Querner, Η. 99 
Quine, W. V. 1 
Radi, E. 99, 104 
Rappaport, R. A. 23 
Rasehorn, 108 
Rawls, J. 59, 60 
Raz, J. 92, 354 
Reich, N. 217 
Reidel, M. 167 
Riedl, R. 247, 261, 264, 276 
Renner, 210 
Ricoeur, P. 86 
Rigaux, F. 325 
Rohmer, E. 16 
Rosenblatt, F. 53 
Rosenstiehl, P. 275 
Rositi, F. 268 
Rosnay, J. de 250 
Rorty, R. 247, 249 
Roth, G. 2, 21, 220, 231, 232 
Rottleuthner, H. 6, 107, 112, 156, 188, 225, 
226, 233, 336 
Rousseau, J.-J. 36, 58, 68 
Roux, W. 104 
Rubin, P. H. 225, 232 
Saint-Simon, 100 
Saleilles, R. 45 
Salomon, J. 263 
Sanders, J. 155, 186 
Sato, K. 266 
Saussure, F. de 36 
Savigny, F. C. v. 102, 103, 112, 113, 116, 
117, 245, 246 
Schelling, 103, 104 
Schelsky, H. 248 
Schleiermacher, F. 12 
Schlick, Μ. 115 
Schlink, Η. 242, 243, 247, 275 
Schmid, Μ. 221 
Schneider, J. 267, 268 
Schopenhauer, 108 
Schröder, R. 109 
Schulze-Fielitz, H. 271 
Schuster, P. 8, 218, 220 
Schwann, T. 102 
Schwartz, D. G. 267 
Schwegler, H. 2, 220 
Scudder, C. L. 251 
Searle, J. 87 
Seidler, Ε. 109 
Seitz, Κ. J. 110 
Selznick, P. 161, 164, 225 

Name Index 
377 
Simon, H. 264 
Smith, A. 58, 273 
De Sousa Santos, B. 212 
Spencer, H. 101, 109, 113 
Spencer Brown, G. 250, 267, 339 
St. Thomas Aquinas 45 
Stahl, G. E. 100 
Stein, P. 107 
Steinmetz, S. R. 109 
Stengers, I. 263, 264 
Stock, M. 273 
Stone, A. 152 
Suhr, D. 275 
Sunby, N. 21 
Taraby, J. C. 263 
Teubner, G. 2, 5, 8, 28, 5 5 - 6 , 74, 76-77, 
84, 113-114, 118, 119, 121-123, 146, 
152-155, 157, 176, 198, 206, 208-211, 
214, 219, 221, 225-227, 235-237, 246, 
251, 271, 313, 332, 340, 344, 349, 
366-367 
Thompson, E. P. 152-153, 163 
Tombrink, C. 103 
Toulmin, S. 225 
Touraine, A. 275 
Trubek, D. 152, 192 
Treviranus, G. R. 99 
Tugendhat, Ε. 225 
Turing, A. 62 
Tushnet, M. 152 
Ulrich, Η. 221 
Unger, R. M. 24, 225 
Uribe, R. B. 114 
Van Parijs, P. 225, 261, 265 
Van de Kerchove, M. 89, 93, 94. 
Van Krieken, A. 100, 102, 104, 115 
Varela, F. J. 2, 14, 5 1 - 3 , 54, 55, 57, 
71_76, 81-83, 114, 217, 220-2, 229, 
251, 254, 260, 262-263, 265, 267, 270, 
275, 312-313, 329, 332, 353 
Veyne, P. 314, 327 
Villa, V. 94 
Villey, M. 47, 315 
Voigt, R. 217, 219 
Waddington, C. H. 53 
Waitz, T. 108 
Wake, D. B. 229, 231. 
Waldenfels, B. 268 
Wallace, A. 23 
Watson, 210, 225 
Watzlawick, P. 321 
Weber, M. 31, 155, 158, 200, 212, 213, 319 
Weinert, F. 250 
Weisbuch, G. v. 263 
Weiss, P. 53, 54 
Weizsäcker, Ε. v. 220, 249, 250, 254 
Werner, 108 
Wersig, G. 266 
Wesel, U. 107, 225 
Wieacker, F. 109 
Weyand, K. 101, 
Weiland, W. 101 
Wiethölter, R. 233 
Willke, H. 2,113,119, 123, 208, 211-212, 
221, 233, 251, 271, 365, 366 
Wiesel, Τ. Ν. 259 
Wilson, Ε. 229 
Winkler, R. 261 
Winograd, I. 262 
Wolf, C. F. 101 
Wolf, E. 25 
Wolfgang, M. 167 
Wormell, C. P. 1 
Yovits, M. 14 
Yssa, S. G. 317 
Zeleny, M. 2, 114, 220, 221, 223, 356 
Zemen, H. 225 
Zesen, P. v. 101 
Ziegert, K. 28 
Zimmermann, W. 101 
Zolo, D. 221, 330, 336, 347, 348 

Subject Index 
Abortion law 363 — 364 
Action 141-143 
Alternative to Legal Doctrine 274—276 
American 
Liberalism: 
education 
and 
284-286 
American Uniform Commercial Code 181 
Autonomy: 
abstract law and 39 
Anglo-American version of 10 
autopoiesis and 171-189, 
193-199, 
203-207, 
221-224, 
312-333, 
362-367 
continental version 5 
law and 152-189, 312-333 
legal competence and 166 
legal counsel and 166 — 167 
legal system and 57, 157-159, 270 
legislative process and 169—171 
marxism and 152 
status neutrality and 167—168 
system and 345 — 347 
Autopoiesis: 
autonomy and 72, 82-88, 152—189, 
193-199, 203-207, 362-367 
biculturalism and 305 — 311 
bilingualism and 294—305 
biology and 64, 68, 97, 127, 153 
biological models and 52 — 53 
bootstrapping and 57 
closure and 2, 5, 9, 26, 55, 360-361 (see 
Normative Closure) 
cognitive expectations and 20,145 — 146, 
148, 341 
constructivism and 9 
control and 120-122 
court practice and 201, 256 
cybernetics and 1, 53 — 55 
empirical work and 208—209 
environment and 153, 360—361 
evolution 
and 
225-228, 
231-234, 
249-252 
evolutionary differentiation and 8, 26 
extra-legal values and 66, 173 — 175 
historical research and 113—114 
idea of fact and 328—333 
interpretation and 330—333 
legal change and 5 
legal system and 355 — 356 
legislative process and 207 
liberalism and 273-274, 307 et seq 
neurophysiology and 265—269 
political 
consequences of 231—235, 
347-348 
reality and 352-354 
religion and 349 
social law and 47—48 (see Welfare State) 
social organization and 73 — 79 
society and 134—135 
sociology and 39 et seq 
systems theory and 191-193, 205—207, 
218-221, 335 
theoretical utility of 176-178, 351-352 
Biculturalism 283-211 
autopoiesis and 305 — 311 
bilingualism and 294 — 305 
economic change and 297—300 
legal change and 297 — 300 
liberalism and 292-294 
post structuralism and 294—6 
Binary systems 25, 76, 120, 253-255 
Biology 98-99, 112-123, 228, 249-252, 
261-262, 307-308, 336, 351-352 (see 
also Autopoiesis) 
Chain novel 90-92 
Civil Code 24, 37 
Closure see Normative Closure 
Cognitive Expectations 20, 145 — 146, 148, 
341 
Communication: 
autopoiesis and 16, 18 — 19, 74—75, 
128-151, 257-258, 367 
society 
as 
communication 
system 
132-134 

Subject Index 
379 
Conditioning systems 23 
Control through self control 366 — 368 
Conversational circles 364—365 
Coordination 271—272 
Coupling of episodes 235 
Critical Legal Studies 202-203, 211-217 
Darwinism 
99, 
101, 
218, 
228-230, 
231-232, 338 
racism and 111 — 112 
Declaration of Rights 46 
Delegalization 30-31, 188-189 
Deontic Logic 38 
Deregulation 217-218 
Differentiation of social systems 19 ιit seq 
31-32, 130, 211, 260, 134-147, (see 
Autopoiesis and evolutionary differen-
tiation) 
Discrimination 165 
Dobbert v. Wainwright 162 
Education 283-311 
Enlightenement 315 
Entitlement 
Theory 
59 — 64 (see also 
Hayek and Nozick) 
Expectations see Normative Expectations, 
Legal System and expectations 
Evolution: 5, 8, 130, 135, 217-218, 
332-333 
autopoiesis and 225-228, 
231-234, 
249-252 
development and 101 — 102 
economic model and 232—233 
critique of 226—228 (see also Gordon) 
Facts: 
interpretation and 321—325 
law and 316 
legal rules and 321-325 
Legal positivism and 314 — 320 
Finding the facts 321-325 
Forms of Life 242-243 
Functionalism 213-215, 227 
Function of law 27—28 
autopoiesis and 183 — 185 
Fundamental norm 4, 36, 91-92, 249 (see 
also Kelsen) 
Game: 
analogy of 83 — 84 
concept of 85 — 88 
law and 88-94 
self organization and 87—88 
Gödel's Theorem 80 
Grundnorm see Fundamental Norm 
Guiding difference 135—137 
Hard Cases 92-93 
Historical school: 
biological metaphor and 104—104, 115 
interest jurisprudence and 103—104 
organic metaphor and 102 — 107 
Identity 129 et seq 
Individualism 308-311 
Input/output system 355 
Instrumentalism 253 
Interaction 
of 
autopoietic 
systems 
364-367 
Interest Jurisprudence 346—347 (see His-
torical School) 
Interpretation 89-94, 244-245, 326-327 
(see Autopoiesis, Facts and interpreta-
tion, Law and interpretation) 
Judicial Formalism 161 — 165 
Juridification 30, 219, 
Jury Trial 163 
Justice, see Entitlement Theory, Hayek, 
Nozick 
Kosmos 65 — 66 see Hayek, Entitlement 
Theory 
Language in liberal discourse 285 — 286 
Law: 
communication and 17 
democratization and 29 
economy and 366 — 367 
expectation and 145—147 
generality and 160—161 
interpretation and 160 
reality and 341—344 
regulatory problems and 149—151 
systems theory and 313 
welfare state and 28 
Law and Society Review Association 207 
Legal Categories 
Legal Dogmatics 274—276, 314-315 
fact/law distinction and 314—316 
Legal Coding 10, 15-16 
Legal/Illegal Distinction 25, 137, 146, 253, 
255, 360-361 

380 
Subject Index 
Legal Proof 327 
Legal 
Reasoning 
1, 
13, 
242—245, 
266-269, 323 
Legal System: 
autopoiesis and 117—118, 356 — 358 
expectation and 147 — 151, 180 et seq (see 
also Normative Expectations) 
legislation and 183 — 185 
social system and 340 — 341 et seq 
unity of 12, 13, 16-18, 249-250 
Legitimacy 154, 157-158 
Materialization of law 272 — 273 
Marxism 152, 209, 212-213, 283-311 
autopoiesis and 152, 155 — 157, 306 
biculturalism and 283—311 
Meaning Processing 
Metaphor 97-98,155-157, 351-355 (see 
Historical School) 
race and 104-110 
Mexico 287-290, 300-301 
Metastructuralism 290—294 
Natural Law 32, 44-46, 65, 233, 330, 
318-320 
Nature of Things 320-328 
New Dogmatics 246-249, 275-276 
Normative Closure 20, 75-76, 178-182, 
193, 313 
Normative 
Expectations 
27, 
135, 
143—147, 252 (see also Cognitive Ex-
pectations) 
Nuremberg Tribunal 46 
Ockham's Razor 157, 183 
Organic Conceptions 100, 110-112, 115, 
116 — 117 (see also Biology, Autopoiesis 
and biology, Metaphor) 
Organization 80-82, 93-94, 219, 257, 
271-272, 356 
Paradigm change 15, 208-215 
Patterned Theories 61 (see Nozick, Hayek, 
Entitlement Theory) 
Person in law 329 — 330 
Pornography 164 
Post instrumental law 202 
Post structuralism: 
autopoiesis and 294-296, 306, 309-311 
biculturalism and 294—6 
Primary 
and 
Secondary 
Rules 
158, 
223-224, 357-358 (see Hart) 
autopoiesis and 22, 119 
Proceduralization 59-60, 161-165, 173, 
272-273 
Pure Theory of Law 36, 45, 66, 211, 322 
(see Kelsen) 
autopoiesis and 39—42, 66, 77 — 79, 
118-119 
Regulatory trilemma 236—237 
Relative Autonomy 159 — 161 see Auton-
omy 
Roman Law 315 
Self description 135, 139-143 
Self determination: 
autopoiesis and 199 
autonomy and 199—202 
Self organization see Organization 
Self reference 1, 36-37, 49, 129-134, 
206 - 207, 
220 - 221, 
221 - 224, 
266-268 
Self reproduction 182-183, 
254-256, 
322, 328, 355-356 
Self Transcendence 56, 65 
Social Contract 36—37, 44 
Social Engineering see Interest Jurisprud-
ence 
Social Law 5, 43, 106 (see Welfare State) 
Socialist Law 48 
Structuralism 268 see Poststructuralism, 
Metastructuralism 
Systems theory 12—15, 256—262 (see Au-
topoiesis and systems theory) 
Tort Law 181 
Turing machine 54 
Welfare State 326 see Social Law 

