AUTOPOIESIS AND COGNITION 

BOSTON STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE 
EDITED BY ROBERT S. COHEN AND MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
VOLUME 42 

HUMBERTO R. MATURANA and FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
AUTOPOIESIS 
AND 
COGNITION 
The Realization of the Living 
With a preface to 'Autopoiesis' 
by 
Sir Stafford Beer 
D. REIDEL PUBLISHING COMPANY 
DORDRECHT: HOLLAND I BOSTON: U.S.A. 
LONDON: ENGLAND 

Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 
Maturana, Humberto R. 
1928-
Autopoiesis and cognition. 
(Boston studies in the philosophy of science; v. 42) 
Bibliography: p. 
Includes indexes. 
1. 
Biology -Philosophy. 
I. Varela, Francisco J., 1945-
Q174.B67 
vol. 42 
[QH331] 
2. 
Cognition. 
3. 
Life (Biology) 
joint author. 
II. 
Title. 
III. Series. 
SOls 
[574'.01] 
79-24724 
ISBN-\3: 978-90-277-1016-1 
e-ISBN-\3: 978-94-009-8947-4 
DOl: 10.1007/978-94-009-8947-4 
Published by D. Reidel Publishing Company, 
P.O. Box 17, 3300 AA Dordrecht, Holland 
Sold and distributed in the U.S.A. and Canada 
by Kluwer Boston Inc., Lincoln Building, 
160 Old Derby Street, Hingham, MA 02043, U.S.A. 
In all other countries, sold and distributed 
by Kluwer Academic Publishers Group, 
P.O. Box 322, 3300 AH Dordrecht, Holland 
D. Reidel Publishing Company is a member of the Kluwer Group 
Autopoiesis: The Organization of the Living was originally published in Chile 
under the title De Maquinas y Seres Vivos, © 1972 by 
Editorial Universitaria S.A. 
All Rights Reserved 
Copyright © 1980 by D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht, Holland 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any informational storage and 
retrieval system, without written permission from the copyright owner 

EDITORIAL PREFACE 
This is a bold, brilliant, provocative and puzzling work. It demands a radical 
shift in standpoint, an almost paradoxical posture in which living systems are 
described in terms of what lies outside the domain of descriptions. Professor 
Humberto Maturana, with his colleague Francisco Varela, have undertaken the 
construction of a systematic theoretical biology which attempts to define living 
systems not as they are objects of observation and description, nor even as in-
teracting systems, but as self-contained unities whose only reference is to them-
selves. Thus, the standpoint of description of such unities from the 'outside', 
i.e., by an observer, already seems to violate the fundamental requirement 
which Maturana and Varela posit for the characterization of such systems -
namely, that they are autonomous, self-referring and self-constructing closed 
systems - in short, autopoietic systems in their terms. Yet, on the basis of such 
a conceptual method, and such a theory of living systems, Maturana goes on to 
define cognition as a biological phenomenon; as, in effect, the very nature of 
all living systems. And on this basis, to generate the very domains of interac-
tion among such systems which constitute language, description and thinking. 
The radical shift in standpoint here requires an imaginative leap and the 
abandonment at the outset of the standard characterizations of living systems 
in terms of function or purpose, or of organism-environment relations, or of 
causal interactions with an external world, or even in terms of information, 
coding and transmission. In effect, Maturana and Varela propose a theoretical 
biology which is topological, and a topology in which elements and their 
relations constitute a closed system, or more radically still, one which from 
the 'point of view' of the system itself, is entirely self-referential and has no 
'outside', Leibnizian for our day. 
The work demands and deserves careful reading. It is technical, formal, 
difficult, philosophical and boldly imaginative. It is rigorously constructed, 
and insofar as it is a theoretical biology, it remains uncompromisingly abstract 
and formal. Yet it smells of the medical laboratory and of the working do-
main of the neurophysiologist. Where the interpretation of the formal theory 
maps it into the domain of the nervous system, the insights and suggestions 
for further interpretation are exciting indeed. And we expect nothing less, 
here and to come. 
v 

vi 
EDITORIAL PREFACE 
Maturana is perhaps best known to the philosopher and the scientific 
nonspecialist as a co-author of the classic 1959 paper 'What the Frog's Eye 
Tells the Frog's Brain' (with Lettvin, McCulloch and Pitts). Since then, he 
has worked on the anatomy and neurophysiology of vision, especially on 
color vision. He has also been teaching medical students. The problems and 
puzzles which emerged in his research and teaching led Maturana to develop 
a distinctively alternative theoretical framework in order to answer the ques-
tions, 'What is a Living System?' and 'What is Cognition?' The consequence 
of his investigations, and of his construction of living systems as self-making, 
self-referring autonomous unities, is that he discovered that the two questions 
have a common answer. He writes, "Living systems are cognitive systems, and 
living as a process is a process of cognition." 
We are very pleased to introduce this major theoretical work in the Boston 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science. The integration of biological theory, 
fonnal construction, epistemology (and, further, Maturana's suggestions of 
the nature of interacting systems as a kind of biological sociology, and his 
sketch of the ethical implications of such a construction) - all mark these 
two studies as among the most original attempts at a systematic biology in 
decades, and as a profoundly philosophical work. 
Center for Philosophy and History of Science 
Boston University 
July, 1979. 
ROBERT S. COHEN 
MARX W. WARTOFSKY 

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 
EDITORIAL PREFACE 
v 
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 
vii 
FOREWORD 
ix 
INTRODUCTION (by Professor Maturana) 
xi 
BIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
Dedication 
2 
Table of Contents 
3 
I. Introduction 
5 
II. The Problem 
7 
III. Cognitive Function in General 
8 
A. The Observer 
8 
B. 
The Living System 
9 
C. 
Evolution 
11 
D. The Cognitive Process 
13 
IV. Cognitive Function in Particular 
15 
A. Nerve Cells 
15 
B. 
Architecture 
19 
C. 
Function 
21 
D. Representation 
22 
E. 
Description 
26 
F. Thinking 
29 
G. Natural Language 
30 
H. Memory and Learning 
35 
I. 
The Observer 
38 
V. Problems in the Neurophysiology of Cognition 
41 
VI. Conclusions 
48 
VII. Post Scriptum 
57 

viii 
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 
AUTOPOIESIS: THE ORGANIZATION OF THE LIVING 
Preface (by Sir Stafford Beer) 
Introduction 
I. 
On Machines, Living and Otherwise 
1. 
Machines 
2. 
Living Machines 
II. 
Dispensability of Teleonomy 
1. 
Purposelessness 
2. 
Individuality 
III. 
Embodiments of Autopoiesis 
1. 
Descriptive and Causal Notions 
2. 
Molecular Embodiments 
3. Origin 
IV. 
Diversity of Autopoiesis 
1. 
Subordination to the Condition of Unity 
2. 
Plasticity of Ontogeny 
3. 
Reproduction, a Complication of the Unity 
4. 
Evolution, a Historical Network 
5. 
Second and Third Order Autopoietic Systems 
V. 
Presence of Autopoiesis 
1. 
Biological Implications 
2. 
Epistemological Implications 
3. Cognitive Implications 
Appendix: The Nervous System 
Glossary 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
INDEX OF NAMES 
63 
73 
77 
77 
78 
85 
85 
87 
88 
88 
90 
93 
96 
96 
98 
100 
102 
107 
112 
112 
115 
118 
124 
135 
139 
141 

FOREWORD 
Everything that I say in the introduction is my exclusive responsibility. 
Francisco Varela has been generous enough to grant me this freedom in what 
concerns the essay that we wrote together. His views about it he expresses 
fully and independently in his book Principles of Biological Autonomy, 
published by Elsevier-North Holland, New York, 1979. 
Also, I wish to acknowledge the subtle debt which the contents of this 
book owe to the many illuminating conversations about all the topics here 
contained that I have had over more than fourteen years with my dear friend 
Professor Felix Schwartzmann, of the University of Chile. 
ix 

Representation of the cellular autopoietic network. 
All arrows that do not cross the boundary of the represented unity indicate production 
relations. The uniformly shaded areas, including the boundary line and the wedges, 
together with the names, indicate constitutive relations. The ge?eral form of closure with 
respect to production and constitution in a recursive network realized as a concrete 
unity through the preferential relations of the components within the network, indicate 
order relations and the consequent cleavage of the network as a simple unity from its 
medium. The whole represents a closed network of productions, but the arrows across 
the depicted constitutive boundary of the network indicate the necessary material 
openness of the system as it realizes the physical space. 

INTRODUCTION 
In this introduction I wish to make some comments in relation to the two 
essays that make this book, but in order to do so I must, at least in part, write 
about how they came into being. 
HISTORY 
Since my childhood I have been interested in animals and plants, and I fre-
quently asked myself what made them living. Thus, in 1948, in my first year 
as a medical student, I wrote a poem whose first stanza was: 
"i,Que es la muerte para el que la mira? 
i,Que es la muerte para el que la siente? 
Pesadez ignota, incomprensible, 
dolor que el egoismo trae, para ese; 
silencio, paz y nada, para este. 
Sin embargo el uno siente 
que su orgullo se rebela, que su mente 
no soporta que tras la muerte nada quede, 
que tras la muerte este la muerte. 
El otro, en su paz, en su silencio, 
en su majestad inconsciente siente, 
nada siente, nada sabe, 
porque la muerte es la muerte 
y tras la muerte esta la vida 
que sin la muerte solo es muerte." 
What is death for the beholder? / What is death for the dying? / A weight 
beyond knowledge or understanding, / A pain for the self-asserting ego, for 
the one; / For the other, silence, peace, and nothingness. II Yet the one feels 
his pride in anger / And in his mind he does not accept / That beyond death 
nothing should arise, / And that beyond death / There should be only death. 
/ / The other, in his silence, / In his unknowing majesty feels, / He feels noth-
ing, he knows nothing, / Because death is death / And life without death is 
only emptiness. II 
xi 

xii 
INTRODUCTION 
The poem is not a very good one, yet it contains the implicit question: 'What 
kind of systems are living systems that they may die, and how come that they 
cognize?' 
In 1954 I went to study biology in England and the U.S.A., and when I 
returned to Chile in 1960, after six years of study and research abroad, I 
began to work at the Medical School of the University of Chile in Santiago as 
a research associate in the Department of Biology. There I was involved in 
two kinds of activities; I collaborated in teaching a course in general biology 
for the medical students, and I did research in the fields of neurophysiology 
and neuroanatomy. In my teaching my responsibility was to convey to the 
medical students some understanding of the organization of living systems as 
autonomous entities, as well as some understanding of their possible origin 
on earth. In my research I wanted to apply to the study of form and color 
vision in birds the same approach that J. Y. Lettvin and I had used in the 
study of form vision in the frog. 
I soon discovered through my teaching that the central question that the 
students would always ask was: 'What is proper to living systems that had its 
origin when they originated, and has remained invariant since then in the 
succession of their generations?' At the same time I soon realized in my 
research that my central purpose in the study of color vision could not be 
the study of a mapping of a colorful world on the nervous system, but rather 
that it had to be the understanding of the participation of the retina (or 
nervous system) in the generation of the color space of the observer. 
As a result of these different activities I entered a situation in which my 
academic life was divided, and I oriented myself in search of the answers to 
two questions that seemed to lead in opposite directions, namely: 'What is 
the organization of the living?' and 'What takes place in the phenomenon of 
perception? ' 
Let me speak about how I faced them. 
First Question: What is the organization of the living? 
When this question was first asked by the students, although it was the same 
question that had been lurking in my mind for many years, I could not answer 
it. I had prepared myself for this moment, but when ~t came and I tried to 
answer it in a manner satisfactory for the students I realized that I had to 
think everything anew. I could speak about form and function and astonish 
my students and myself at the harmony of nature, exalting the fitness of the 
environment and the fitness of the individual. I could claim that the question 
was a very difficult one and that it could not yet be answered due to our 

INTRODUCTION 
xiii 
insufficient knowledge. We had to accept that we could recognize living 
systems when we encountered them, but that we could not yet say what they 
were. I could enumerate features of living systems such as reproduction, 
heredity, growth, irritability, and so on; but, how long a list was necessary?; 
when would the list be completed? In order to know when the list was com-
pleted I had to know what a living system was, which was, in fact, the question 
that I wanted to answer in the first place by producing such a list. I could 
speak about adaptation and evolution, about development and differentiation, 
and show how all these phenomena were tied together by the phenomenon of 
natural selection; but the question: 'What was the invariant feature of living 
systems around which natural selection operated?', remained unanswered. 
Every approach that I could attempt and that I did attempt left me at the 
starting point. 
Yet I obviously had some inkling of what was the correct answere, because 
I rejected the unsatisfactory ones. After several years of these various at-
tempts I realized that the difficulty was both epistemological and linguistic, 
and that both my wife and myoid professor, J. Z. Young, were right: one can 
only say with a given language what the language permits. I had to stop look-
ing at living systems as open systems defined in an environment, and I needed 
a language that would permit me to describe an autonomous system in a 
manner that retained autonomy as a feature of the system or entity specified 
by the description. In other words, any attempt to characterize living systems 
with notions of purpose or function was doomed to fail because these notions 
are intrinsically referential and cannot be operationally used to characterize 
,any system as an autonomous entity. Therefore, notions of purpose, goal, use 
or function, had to be rejected, but initially I did not know how. Accordingly, 
I tried in my lectures several approaches in order to fmd a way of speaking 
about living systems in a manner that would grasp their autonomy as a phe-
nomenon of their operation as unitary systems. Thus, eventually, I made a 
distinction between what I called self-referred and aHo-referred systems, a 
distinction that separated systems that could only be characterized with 
reference to themselves, such as living systems, from systems that could only 
be characterized with reference to a context. I did this in order to emphasize 
that whatever took place in living systems as living systems, took place as 
necessarily and constitutively determined in relation to themselves because 
their being defmed as unities through self-reference was their manner of 
autonomy; and that whatever took place in other systems took place as 
constitutively determined in relation to the context with respect to which 
they were defined as unities. This way of speaking was not fuHy satisfactory 

xiv 
INTRODUCTION 
but led me to realize that what was indeed needed was the characterization of 
a kind of system which, if allowed to operate, would operate in a manner 
indistinguishable from the operation of living systems, and that one should 
do so using only neighborhood relations realized through the properties of 
the components of the system. It was with such aim that I spoke for the first 
time in 1969 of living systems as systems defined as unities through the basic 
circularity of their production of their components. 
Second question: What takes place in the phenomenon of perception? 
When Jerry Y. Lettvin and I wrote our several articles on frog vision [Lettvin, 
J. Y., H. R. Maturana, W. S. McCulloch and W. H. Pitts 1959; Maturana, 
H. R., J. Y. Lettvin, W. S. McCulloch and W. H. Pitts 1960], we did it with 
the implicit assumption that we were handling a clearly defined cognitive 
situation: there was an objective (absolute) reality, external to the animal, and 
independent of it (not determined by it), which it could perceive (cognize), 
and the animal could use the information obtained in its perception to com-
pute a behavior adequate to the perceived situation. This assumption of ours 
appeared clearly in our language. We described the various kinds of retinal 
ganglion cells as feature detectors, and we spoke about the detection of prey 
and enemy. We knew that was not the whole neurophysiological story, as 
was apparent particularly in the discussion of the article called 'Anatomy 
and Physiology of Vision in the Frog (Rana pipiens)'. But even there the 
epistemology that guided our thinking and writing was that of an objective 
reality independent of the observer. Thus, when Samy Frenk and I began 
to work with pigeons in 1961, first studying form vision, we approached 
that study with the same fundamental view. No problem arose then and 
without any difficulty we could characterize many classes of retinal ganglion 
cells. Yet, when Gabriela Uribe joined us and we in fact began to study color 
vision in 1964, it soon became apparent to us that that approach leads to 
deep trouble. Neurophysiologically we did not see anything fundamentally 
different from what other scholars had already seen. We found the classic 
types of ganglion cells with separate, concentric or overlapping opponent 
spectral preferences. But we also found: (a) that although the geometry 
of the receptive fields of the ganglion cells with opponent spectral prefer-
ences had nothing to do with the geometry of the visual object, the geome-
try of the visual object had to do with the response of those cells; and (b) 
that we could not account for the manifold chromatic experiences of the 
observer by mapping the visible colorful world upon the activity of the 
nervous system, because the nervous system seemed to use geometric relations 

INTRODUCTION 
xv 
to specify color distinctions. A different approach and a different epistem-
ology were necessary. 
There are many visual configurations, with uniform and variegated spectral 
compositions, in simple and complex geometrical forms, that give rise to 
indistinguishable color experiences. How should one, then, look for the 
invariances in the activity of the nervous system, if any, in relation to the 
perception of color? After we realized that the mapping of the external world 
was an inadequate approach, we found that the very formulation of the ques-
tion gave us the clue. What if, instead of attempting to correlate the activity 
in the retina with the physical stimuli external to the organism, we did other-
wise, and tried to correlate the activity in the retina with the color experience 
of the subject? 
Such a step entailed two difficulties. On the one hand it required the 
definition of a reference which would permit the characterization of the 
activity of the retinal ganglion cells independently of the stimulus as such; 
on the other hand it required us to close the nervous system and treat the 
report of the color experience as if it represented the state of the nervous 
system as a whole. In other words, the new approach required us to treat 
seriously the activity of the nervous system as determined by the nervous 
system itself, and not by the external world; thus the external world would 
only have a triggering role in the release of the internally-determined activity 
of the nervous system. We did this rigorously, and showed that such an 
approach did indeed permit us to generate the whole color space of the 
observer. That was a very fundamental result that we published in a very 
.unknown article [Maturana, H. R., G. Uribe, and S. Frenk, 1968]. 
But what was still more fundamental was the discovery that one had to 
close off the nervous system to account for its operation, and that perception 
should not be viewed as a grasping of an external reality, but rather as the 
specification of one, because no distinction was possible between perception 
and hallucination in the operation of the nervous system as a closed network. 
Although we arrived at this conclusion through the study of color vision, 
there are many earlier experimental studies (such as those of Stone on the 
rotation of the eye of the salamander in the early 'forties) that could also 
have led to an understanding of the nervous system as a closed network of 
interacting neurons. Whether they did or not, I do not know; but if they 
did it seems that the implications were not pursued to their ultimate conse-
quences. 
Whatever the case, for me this finding had great significance and plunged 
me into the study of cognition as a legitimate biological problem. Two 

xvi 
INTRODUCTION 
inmediate consequences arose from this: the first one was that in my neuro-
physiological studies I had to take seriously the indistinguishability in the 
operation of the nervous system between perception and hallucination; the 
second one was that I needed a new language to talk about the phenomena of 
perception and cognition. The first consequence required that the question: 
'How does the organism obtain information about its environment?' be 
changed to: 'How does it happen that the organism has the structure that 
permits it to operate adequately in the medium in which it exists?' A seman-
tic question had to be changed into a structural question. The second ques-
tion required the actual attempt to describe the phenomena that take place 
in the organism during the occurrence of the phenomena of perception and 
cognition in a language that retained them as phenomena proper to a closed 
nervous system. 
A Congress in Anthropology 
Early in May of 1968 the University of Chile entered a state of revolution. 
The students took over the University in an attempt to reformulate the 
philosophy that had inspired its organization. I joined them. All standard 
academic activities stopped and students and some members of the faculty 
tried to say something new. It was not easy. Language was a trap, but the 
whole experience was a wonderful school in which one could discover how 
mute, deaf and blind one was. It was easy to be caught in one's own ego, but 
if one succeeded in attaining at least some degree of freedom from it, one 
began to listen and one's language began to change; and then, but only then, 
new things could be said. This lasted for several months. 
In September of that year, I accepted an invitation to go to the University 
of Illinois at Urbana to the Biological Computer Laboratory of Professor 
Heinz von Foerster. Furthermore, Professor von Foerster invited me to 
participate in a symposium sponsored by the Wenner-Gren Foundation for 
Anthropological Research to be held during March 1969 in Chicago, with the 
purpose of considering the anthropology of cognition. The invitation was 
to speak on 'The state of the art of the neurophysiology of cognition'. I 
accepted this invitation and decided not to speak about neuronal circuits, 
nerve impulses or synapses, but rather I decided to consider what should take 
place in the organism during cognition by considering cognition as a biological 
phenomenon. In doing this I found that my two apparently contradictory 
academic activities were not contradictory, and that they were, in fact, ad-
dressed to the same phenomenon: cognition and the operation of the living 

INTRODUCTION 
xvii 
system - its nervous system included when present - were the same thing. 
From this understanding the essay 'Biology of Cognition' arose as an expan-
sion of my presentation in that symposium. 
The Word 'Autopoiesis' 
The second essay included in this book was written in 1972, as an expansion 
of the section on 'Living Systems' in the 'Biology of Cognition'. The writing 
of this essay was in fact triggered by a conversation that Francisco Varela and 
I had in which he said: "If indeed the circular organizaton is sufficient to 
characterize living systems as unities, then one should be able to put it in 
more formal terms". I agreed, but said that a formalization could only come 
after a complete linguistic description, and we immediately began to work on 
the complete description. Yet we were unhappy with the expression 'circular 
organization', and we wanted a word that would by itself convey the central 
feature of the organization of the living, which is autonomy. It was in these 
circumstances that one day, while talking with a friend (Jose Bulnes) about 
an essay of his on Don Quixote de la Mancha, in which he analyzed Don 
Quixote's dilemma of whether to follow the path of arms (praxis, action) or 
the path of letters (poiesis, creation, production), and his eventual choice 
of the path of praxis deferring any attempt at poiesis, I understood for the 
first time the power of the word 'poiesis' and invented the word that we 
needed: autopoiesis. This was a word without a history, a word that could 
directly mean what takes place in the dynamics of the autonomy proper to 
living systems. Curiously, but not surprisingly, the invention of this word 
proved of great value. It simplified enormously the task of talking about the 
organization of the living without falling into the always gaping trap of not 
saying anything new because the language does not permit it. We could not 
escape being immersed in a tradition, but with an adequate language we could 
orient ourselves differently and, perhaps, from the new perspective generate a 
new tradition. 
Let me now say something about the essays themselves. 
BIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
When I wrote this essay I did not yet have the word 'autopoiesis', nor had I 
come to the more formal expression of the living organization given in the 
next essay. Yet, these shortcomings do not detract from what is said because 
the basic relations embodied in the notion of autopoiesis are fully implied, 

xviii 
INTRODUCTION 
although cumbersomely said, by expressions such as 'circular organization' and 
'self-referential systems'. Furthermore, when I wrote the essay I decided not 
to make any concession to existing notions that I considered inadequate or 
misleading, even if this seemed to make the text particularly obscure. How-
ever, I made a concession which I have always regretted. I submitted to the 
pressure of my friends and talked about causal relations when speaking about 
the circular organization of living systems. To do this was both inadequate 
and misleading. It was inadequate because the notion of causality is a notion 
that pertains to the domain of descriptions, and as such it is relevant only in 
the metadomain in which the observer makes his commentaries and cannot 
be deemed to be operative in the phenomenal domain, the object of the 
description. It was misleading because it obscured the actual appreciation of 
the sufficiency of the notion of property as defined by the distinctive opera-
tion performed by the observer when specifying a unity, for the description of 
the phenomenal domains generated by the specified unities. It was misleading 
because it obscured the understanding of the dependency of the identity of 
the unity on the distinctive operation that specified it. It was misleading 
because it obscured both the understanding of the phenomenal domains as 
determined by the properties of the unities that generate them, and the 
non-intersection of the phenomenal domains generated by the operation of 
a composite unity as a simple unity in a medium and by the operation of its 
components as components. 
There is nothing else that I wish to add as a commentary to this essay. It 
is a cosmology and as such it is complete. Finally I wish to say that I find it 
pervading my views and understanding of everything. In a sense it has been 
my way to transcendental experience: to the discovery that matter, meta-
phorically speaking, is the creation of the spirit (the mode of existence of the 
observer in a domain of discourse), and that the spirit is the creation of the 
matter it creates. This is not a paradox, but it is the expression of our exist-
ence in a domain of cognition in which the content of cognition is cognition 
itself. Beyond that nothing can be said. 
AUTOPOIESIS 
This article was written as an expansion of two pages of the 'Biology of 
Cognition', in an attempt to show that autopoiesis is necessary and sufficient 
to characterize the organization of living systems, and that given the proper 
historical contingencies one can derive all the biological phenomenology from 
the characterization of living systems as autopoietic systems in the physical 

INTRODUCTION 
xix 
space. Notions of purpose, function or goal are unnecessary and misleading. 
This the essay does, and in this respect no commentary is needed; the essay 
stands by itself. Yet, when we wrote it we were just beginning to realize the 
fundamental distinction between organization and structure, and we do not 
separate the terms with complete rigor. Also, because it was not written 
under the supposition that the reader had read the 'Biology of Cognition', the 
essay is not fully clear concerning the validity of the statement "Everything 
said is said by an observer" in relation to the distinction between characteri-
zation and description of a system. I shall make some comments about these 
themes. 
Unity, Organization and Structure 
Unity. The basic cognitive operation that we perform as observers is the 
operation of distinction. By means of this operation we specify a unity as an 
entity distinct from a background, characterize both unity and background 
with the properties with which this operation endows them, and specify their 
separability. A unity thus specified is a simple unity that defines through its 
properties the space in which it exists and the phenomenal domain which it 
may generate in its interactions with other unities. 
If we recursively apply the operation of distinction to a unity, so that we 
distinguish components in it, we respecify it as a composite unity that exists 
in the space that its components define because it is through the specified 
properties of its components that we observers distinguish it. Yet we can 
always treat a composite unity as a simple unity that does not exist in the 
space of its components, but which exists in a space that it defines through 
the properties that characterize it as a simple unity. Accordingly, if an auto-
poietic system is treated as a composite unity, it exists in the space defined 
by its components, but if it is treated as a simple unity the distinctions that 
specify it as a simple unity characterize its properties as a simple unity, and 
define the space in which it exists as such a simple unity. 
Organization and Structure. The relations between components that define 
a composite unity (system) as a composite unity of a particular kind, con-
stitute its organization. In this definition of organization the components are 
viewed only in relation to their participation in the constitution of the unity 
(whole) that they integrate. This is why nothing is said in it about the proper-
ties that the components of a particular unity may have other than those 
required by the realization of the organization of the unity. 

xx 
INTRODUCTION 
The actual components (all their properties included) and the actual rela-
tions holding between them that concretely realize a system as a particular 
member of the class (kind) of composite unities to which it belongs by its 
organization, constitute its structure. Therefore, the organization of a system 
as the set of relations between its components that define it as a system of a 
particular class, is a subset of the relations included in its structure. It follows 
that any given organization may be realized through many different struc-
tures, and that different subsets of relations included in the structure of a 
given entity, may be abstracted by an observer (or its operational equivalent) 
as organizations that define different classes of composite unities. 
The organization of a system, then, specifies the class identity of a system, 
and must remain invariant for the class identity of the system to remain 
invariant: if the organization of a system changes, then its identity changes 
and it becomes a unity of another kind. Yet, since a particular organization 
can be realized by systems with otherwise different structures, the identity of 
a system may stay invariant while its st~ucture changes within limits deter-
mined by its organization. If these limits are overstepped, that is, if the 
structure of the system changes so that its organization cannot any more be 
realized, the system loses its identity and the entity becomes something else, 
a unity defined by another organization. 
It is apparent that only a composite unity has structure and organization, 
a simple unity does not. A simple unity only has the properties with which 
it is endowed by the operations of distinction through which it becomes 
separated from a background. It is also apparent that as soon as a composite 
unity is treated as a simple unity, any question about the origin of its proper-
ties becomes inadequate because the properties of a simple unity are given 
through its distinction as a simple unity. It is also apparent that although the 
properties of a composite unity as a simple unity arise from its organization, 
they are realized through the properties of its components. Accordingly, while 
two simple unities interact through the simple interplay of their properties, 
two composite unities interact in a manner determined by their organization 
and structure through the interplay of the properties of their components. 
Structural Coupling 
In the history of interactions of a composite unity in its medium, both unity 
and medium operate in each interaction as independent systems that, by 
triggering in each other a structural change, select in each other a structural 
change. If the organization of a composite unity remains invariant while it 

INTRODUCTION 
xxi 
undergoes structural changes triggered and selected through its recurrent inter-
actions in its medium, that is, its adaptation is conserved, then the outcome 
of this history of interactions is the selection, by the recurrent or changing 
structural configuration of the medium, of a sequence of structural changes in 
the composite unity, which results in that the changing structure of the organ-
ism follows the changing structure of the medium through a continued struc-
tural coupling to it. If organization or adaptation are not conserved, then the 
outcome for the composite unity is disintegration. In other words, if a com-
posite unity is structurally plastic its conservation of adaptation results in its 
maintained structural coupling to the medium that selects its path of structural 
change. In this process, the configuration of constitutive relations that remain 
invariant in the adapted composite unity, determines the matrix of possible 
perturbations that the composite unity admits at any instant, and, hence, 
operates as a reference for the selection of the path of structural changes that 
take place in it in its history of interactions. Defined in this manner, structural 
coupling (conservation of adaptation) is not peculiar to living systems. It is a 
phenomenon that takes place whenever a plastic composite unity undergoes 
recurrent interactions with structural change but without loss of organization, 
which may follow any changing or recurrent structural configuration of its 
domain of interactions (medium). Therefore, all that is unique with respect 
to adaptation in living systems is that in them the autopoietic organization 
constitutes the invariant configuration of relations around which the selection 
of their structural changes takes place during their history of interactions. 
Epistemology 
As soon as a unity is specified, a phenomenal domain is defined. Accordingly, 
if a composite unity operates as a simple unity, it operates in a phenomenal 
domain that it defmes as a simple unity that is necessarily different from 
the phenomenal domain in which its components operate. Therefore, the 
emergence of a phenomenal domain as the result of the operational distinc-
tion of a composite unity as a simple unity, makes phenomenal reductionism 
(and, hence, explanatory reductionism) impossible. Furthermore, the dy-
namics of the establishment of unities through operational distinctions that 
specify their properties, have the result that all phenomenal domains are 
necessarily realized through the operation (interplay) of the properties of 
the unities that generate them, that is, through relations of contiguity. If a 
component 'A' through its interaction with a component 'B' triggers an 
interaction of 'B' with 'C' that triggers a reduction in the production of 'D', 

xxii 
INTRODUCTION 
an observer may say by considering the whole that 'A' controls the produc-
tion of 'D'. 'A', 'B', 'C' and 'D', interact through relations of contiguity in 
the phenomenal domain that the components define. Relations such as 
regulation, control or function, therefore, are not relations of contiguity; 
they are referential relations specified by the observer who puts himself in a 
metadomain of descriptions by using his view of the whole as a reference for 
his description of the participation of the components that he describes in 
the constitution of the composite unity. 
"Everything said is said by an observer." This I say in the 'Biology of 
Cognition'. The fundamental cognitive operation that an observer performs 
is the operation of distinction. By means of this operation the observer spec-
ifies a unity as an entity distinct from a background and a background as the 
domain in which an entity is distinguished. An operation of distinction, how-
ever, is also a prescription of a procedure which, if carried out, severs a unity 
from a background, regardless of the procedure of distinction and regardless 
of whether the procedure is carried out by an observer or by another entity. 
Furthermore, the prescriptiveness of an operation of distinction implies a 
universal phenomenalism of distinctions which, through the specification of 
new procedures of distinction or through their recursive application in the 
reordering of the distinguished entities, can, in principle, endlessly give rise 
to new simple and composite unities, and, hence, to new non-intersecting 
phenomenal domains. Thus, although a distinction performed by an observer 
is a cognitive distinction and, strictly, the unity thus specified exists in his 
cognitive domain as a description, the observer in his discourse specifies a 
metadomain of descriptions from the perspective of which he establishes a 
reference that allows him to speak as if a unity, simple or composite, existed 
as a separate entity that he can characterize by denoting or connoting the 
operations that must be performed to distinguish it. 
In the perspective of a descriptive metadomain the distinction between the 
characterization of a unity and the observer's knowledge of it that permits 
him to describe it in a context, should be clear. In fact, knowledge always 
implies a concrete or conceptual action in some domain, and the recognition 
of knowledge always implies an observer that beholds the action from a meta-
domain. Therefore, when an observer claims knowledge of a system, he claims 
that he can define a metadomain from the perspective of which he can simul-
taneously behold the system as a simple unity, describing its interactions and 
relations as a simple unity, and its components as components, describing 
their interactions and relations as components. In these circumstances it is 
legitimate to distinguish between the characterization that an observer makes 

INTRODUCTION 
xxiii 
of a unity, either by pointing to its properties if it is a simple unity, or by 
pointing to its organization if it is a composite one, from the knowledge 
about a unity that he reveals, either by describing its operation as a simple 
unity if it is a simple unity, or by describing both its operation as a simple 
unity and the operation of its components if it is a composite entity. In either 
case, however, the knowledge that an observer claims of the unities that he 
distinguishes consists in his handling of them in a metadomain of descrip-
tions with respect to the domain in which he characterizes them. Or, in other 
words, an observer characterizes a unity by stating the conditions in which it 
exists as a distinguishable entity, but he cognizes it only to the extent that 
he defines a metadomain in which he can operate with the entity that he 
characterized. 
Thus, autopoiesis in the physical space characterizes living systems because 
it determines the distinctions that we can perform in our interactions when 
we specify them, but we know them only as long as we can both operate with 
their internal dynamics of states as composite unities and interact with them 
as simple unities in the environment in which we behold them. The fact that 
the characterization of an entity is also a description made by the observer, 
and as such also belongs to his descriptive domain ('Biology of Cognition'), 
does not invalidate the operational effectiveness of the distinctions upon 
distinctions that constitutes the metadomain of descriptions in which the 
cognitive statements are made. The entity characterized is a cognitive entity, 
but once it is characterized the characterization is also subject to cognitive 
distinctions valid in the metadomain in which they are made by treating the 
characterization as an independent entity subject to contextual descriptions. 
Therefore, the complementarities system/environment, autonomy/control, 
totality/composition, etc., are complementarities only in our cognition of a 
system that we observe in a context that allows us to establish such relations, 
but they are not constitutive features of the referred system because they do 
not participate in its constitution through the interplay of the properties of 
its components. Accordingly, that one should not be able to account for or 
deduce all actual biological phenomena from the notion of autopoiesis with-
out resorting to historical contingencies, is not a shortcoming of such a notion. 
On the contrary, it is to be expected because the notion of autopoiesis only 
characterizes living systems as autonomous entities that can be distinguished 
as composite unities realized through neighborhood relations. 
Finally, I would like to add some sociological and ethical comments that 
I consider follow from the understanding of the autopoietic organization 
of living systems. The essay on autopoiesis was supposed to have a second 

xxiv 
INTRODUCTION 
appendix on social and ethical implications. This appendix, however, was 
never included because Francisco Varela and I never agreed about its con-
tents. Now I shall use the privilege that I have by writing this introduction in 
order to present the notions that I would have included in that appendix. 
SOCIETY AND ETHICS 
The central feature of human existence is its occurrence in a linguistic cogni-
tive domain. This domain is constitutively social. Yet, what is a social system? 
how is a social system characterized? how do living systems in general, and 
human beings in particular, participate in the constitution of the social system 
that they integrate? The answers to these questions are central for the under-
standing of social dynamics and the process of social change. The following 
considerations state the essence of my answers to these questions: 
(1) It is apparent that natural social systems as systems constituted by living 
systems require these for their actual realization. What is not apparent, how-
ever, is the extent to which the coupling of living systems in the integration 
of a social system entails the realization of their autopoiesis. If the realization 
of a social system were to entail the autopoiesis of its components, then the 
realization of the autopoiesis of the components of a social system would be 
intrinsically indispensable and constitutive of its operation as such, and not a 
mere contingency. Accordingly, any particular feature, cultural or otherwise, 
of the manner in which the autopoiesis of the components is realized and 
their individuality and autonomy is restricted, would be a feature of the pecul-
iar social system (society) in question, and not intrinsic to it as a social system. 
If, however, the autopoiesis of the components of a natural social system were 
not involved in its constitution because the relations that defme a system as 
social do not entail them, then the autopoiesis of the components (and hence 
their autonomy and individuality) would be intrinsically dispensable. 
(2) The question, 'What is a social system?' cannot be answered by simply 
describing a particular one because we do not know the significant relations 
that we must abstract when characterizing its organization. The question 
must be answered by proposing a system which, if allowed to operate, would 
generate a phenomenal domain indistinguishable from the phenomenal 
domain proper to a natural social system. Accordingly, I propose that a 
collection of autopoietic systems that, through the realization of their auto-
poiesis, interact with each other constituting and integrating a system that 
operates as the (or as a) medium in which they realize their autopoiesis, is 
indistinguishable from a natural social system. Or, in other words, I propose 

INTRODUCTION 
xxv 
that the relations stated above characterize the organization of a social system 
as a system, and that all the phenomena proper to social systems arise from 
this organization. If one accepts this proposition, and I shall henceforth pro-
ceed as if it were accepted, then one has to accept the following implications: 
(i) The realization of the autopoiesis of the components of a social sys-
tem is constitutive to the realization of the social system itself. This cannot be 
ignored in any consideration about the operation of a social system without 
negating it. 
(ii) A collection of living systems integrating a composite unity through 
relations that do not involve their autopoiesis is not a social system, and the 
phenomena proper to its operation as such a composite unity are not social 
phenomena. Since the operational coupling of an organism integrating a com-
posite unity does not necessarily involve all its properties, an observer may 
see an organism as integrating simultaneously several composite unities that 
mayor may not all be social systems. 
(iii) The structure of a society as a particular social system is deter-
mined both by the structure of its autopoietic components and by the actual 
relations that hold between them while they integrate it. Therefore, the do-
main of social phenomena, defined as the domain of the interactions and the 
relations that an observer sees taking place between the components of a 
society, results from the autopoietic operation of the components of the 
society while they realize it in the interplay of their properties. 
(iv) In a society, at any instance of observation, the structures of the 
components determine the properties of the components, the properties of 
the components realize the structure of the society, and the structure of the 
society operates as a selector of the structure of its components by being a 
medium in which they realize their ontogeny. 
(v) An autopoietic system participates in the constitution of a social 
system only to the extent that it participates in it, that is, only as it realizes 
the relations proper to a component of the social system. Accordingly, in 
principle, an autopoietic system may enter or leave a social system at any 
moment by just satisfying or not satisfying the proper relations, and may 
participate simultaneously or in succession in many different ones. 
In what follows I shall pursue the consequences of these notions, and 
whenever I speak of a social system or of a society as a social system of a 
particular kind, I speak of a system defmed as a system by the organization 
proposed above. 
(3) A society defines the domain in which it is realized as a unity. Such a 
domain mayor may not include the components of the society itself, and 

xxvi 
INTRODUCTION 
mayor may not include other societies, but in any case it constitutes an 
operationally independent medium that operates as: (a) a selector of the path 
of structural change that the society follows in its individual history, and 
(b), if stable, a historical stabilizer of the structures that realize the selected 
invariant relations that define the society as a particular social system. The 
more varied the medium of selection, the greater the domain of stabilized 
relations in the society and, hence, the more fixed the structure of its com-
ponents. If the society is a human society this takes place in a language-
centered culture, and the stabilization of the structure of the human com-
ponents is realized through a cultural stabilization of the relations that they 
must satisfy as social entities. 
(4) To the extent that human beings are autopoietic systems, all their 
activities as social organisms must satisfy their autopoiesis. This they do in 
the social domain through the fulfilment of the basic biological preferences 
(states of pleasure) and rejections (states of displeasure) that constitute the 
inmediate experiential domain in which they, as components of a society, 
necessarily realize their individual worlds and contribute to the determination 
of the individual worlds of others. In man as a social being, therefore, all 
actions, however individual as expressions of preferences or rejections, con-
stitutively affect the lives of other human beings and, hence, have ethical 
significance. 
(5) What determines the constitution of a social system are the recurrent 
interactions of the same autopoietic systems. In other words, any biological 
stabilization of the structures of the interacting organisms that results in the 
recurrence of their interactions, may generate a social system. Among human 
beings the basic stabilizing factor in the constitution of a social system is the 
phenomenon of love, the seeing of the other as a partner in some or all the 
dimensions of living. In these circumstances, when a human being makes the 
choice of a particular way of living, apparent in his realization of a particular 
set of social relations, he makes a basic ethical choice in which he validates a 
world for himself and for others that he has explicitly or implicitly accepted 
as partners in living. Accordingly, the fundamental ethical problem that a 
man faces as an observer-member of a society is the ethical justification of 
the particular relations of surrender of autonomy and individuality that he 
demands from himself and from other members of the society that he gen-
erates and validates with his conduct. 
(6) A social system is essentially a conservative system. This is so because 
it is generated through the interactions of structure-determined autopoietic 
systems and operates as a medium that selects the path of ontogenic structural 

INTRODUCTION 
xxvii 
change of its components, which, thus, become structurally coupled to it. In 
our case, we as social beings generate, through our structure-determined 
properties, our societies as the cultural media that select our individual paths 
of ontogenic change in a manner that leads each one of us to the structure 
that makes us generate the particular societies to which we belong. A society, 
therefore, operates as a homeostatic system that stabilizes the relations that 
define it as a social system of a particular kind. 
(7) In general, the domain of states of a system as a composite unity is 
determined by the properties of its components that realize its organization. 
If some of these properties change because the structure of some of the com-
ponents changes, then, while the system either changes its properties without 
change of organization or disintegrates becoming something else, the changed 
components either integrate the system in a different manner or uncouple 
from it. This also applies to social systems, including human societies, because 
it is the actual interplay of the properties of the components that constitutes 
a social system as an actual system in the space in which these exist. In these 
circumstances, a change in the relations that define a society as a particular 
social system can only take place through a change in the properties of the 
components that realize it. It follows that in a human society a social change 
can only take place if the individual properties, and, hence, conduct, of its 
members change. 
(8) All that matters for the realization of a society is that the component 
autopoietic systems should satisfy certain relations regardless of the actual 
structures (internal processes) through which they realize them. Accordingly, 
hypocrisy plays an important role in the realization of human societies, per-
mitting human beings under stress to feign having certain properties which 
they abandon as soon as the stress is removed. This is why in a human society 
a social change takes place as a permanent phenomenon only to the extent 
that it is a cultural change: a revolution is a revolution only if it is an ethical 
revolution. 
(9) Interactions within a society are necessarily confirmatory of the rela-
tions that define it as a particular social system; if not, the organisms that 
interact do not interact as components of the society which they otherwise 
integrate. It is only through interactions operationally not defmed within 
the society that a component organism can undergo interactions that lead 
to the selection, in its ontogeny, of a path of structural change not confirma-
tory of the society that it integrates. This is why social creativity, as the 
generation of novel social relations, always entails interactions operationally 
outside the society, and necessarily leads to the generation, by the creative 

xxviii 
INTRODUCTION 
individuals, of modes of conduct that either change the defining relations of 
the society as a particular social system, or separate them from it. Social 
creativity is necessarily antisocial in the social domain in which it takes place. 
(10) In general any organism, and in particular any human being, can be 
simultaneously a member of many social systems, such as a family, a club, 
an army, a political party, a religion or a nation, and can operate in one or 
another without necessarily being in internal contradiction. A human being 
operating as an observer, however, can always define a metadomain from the 
perspective of which he may see his participation in the various social systems 
that he integrates, and find it contradictory. Conduct as observer by a human 
being implies that he stands operationally as if outside the various social 
systems that he otherwise integrates, and that he may undergo in this manner 
interactions that do not confirm them. An observer always is potentially 
antisocial. 
(11) To grow as a member of a society consists in becoming structurally 
coupled to it; to be structurally coupled to a society consists in having the 
structures that lead to the behavioral confirmation of the society. The spon-
taneous course of historical structural transformation of a society as a unity is 
toward its structural coupling to the medium in which it exists, and, there-
fore, toward the stabilization of the mechanisms that generate its defining 
relations through the stabilization of the properties of its components. In the 
domain of human societies this means the stabilization of human conduct. 
But, the stabilization of human conduct always entails a restriction of crea-
tivity through a restriction of the possible interactions of the individual 
human beings outside those prescribed by the society that they integrate. 
The extreme case of this, of course, takes place in a totalitarian society of any 
kind. Or, in other words, the spontaneous course of the historical transforma-
tion of a human society as a unity is towards totalitarianism; this is so because 
the relations that undergo historical stabilization are those that have to do 
with the stability of the society as a unity in a given medium, and not with 
the well-being of its component human beings that may operate as observers. 
Any other course requires an ethical choice; it would not be spontaneous, it 
would be a work of art, a product of human aesthetic design. If human beings 
were not observers, or capable of being so, the stabilization of their properties 
would not appear to matter because they would not be able to desire some-
thing else. 
(12) We as human beings exist in a network of social systems and move 
from one to another in our daily activities. Yet, not all human beings caught 
in the mesh of relations generated in this network of social systems parti-

INTRODUCTION 
xxix 
cipate in it as social beings. A human being that through his interactions with 
other human beings participates in interactions proper to their social system in 
a manner that does not in,:;olve his autopoiesis as a constitutive feature of it, 
is being used by the social system but is not one of its members. If the human 
being cannot escape from this situation because his life is at stake, he is under 
social abuse. 
(13) An kinds of societies are biologically legitimate. Yet not all are 
equally desirable as systems in which an observer human being may wish to 
live. The capacity that man has as a language-centered social being of becom-
ing an observer, and thus of operating as if he were external to the situation 
in which he finds himself, allows him, if he has the proper experiences, to 
contemplate the societies that he integrates and to like or dislike them. If 
the observer human being defines a metadomain from the perspective of 
which some of the defining relations of the society are undesirable, he dislikes 
it, and if he acts accordingly he becomes antisocial and may come to validate 
another society with his conduct. A totalitarian society restricts this possi-
bility either by specifying the experiences that its components may have, so 
that they do not operate as observers, or by uncoupling the dissidents so that 
they may not seduce others to be observers as themselves. However, there are 
certain experiences that cannot be fully specified in a human society without 
destroying the basic individual structural plasticity needed for the establish-
ment of consensual domains and the generation of language and, hence, for 
human creativity in general. Love is one of these experiences, and as long as 
man has a language he can become an observer through the experience of 
love. 
(14) When a human being 'A' encounters another human being 'B' and 
loves him or her, he sees 'B' in a social context and becomes an observer 
of the society that 'B' integrates. 'A' may like or may not like what he sees 
in reference to 'B' and act accordingly, becoming antisocial if he does not 
like what he sees. An absolute totalitarian society must negate love as an 
individual experience because love, sooner or later, leads to an ethical evalua-
tion of the society that the loved one integrates. 
(15) A human society in which to see all human beings as equivalent to 
oneself, and to love them, is operationally legitimate without demanding 
from them a larger surrender of individuality and autonomy than the measure 
that one is willing to accept for oneself while integrating it as an observer, is a 
product of human art, that is, an artificial society that admits change and 
accepts every human being as not dispensable. Such a society is necessarily a 
non-hierarchical society for which all relations of order are constitutively 

xxx 
INTRODUCTION 
transitory and circumstantial to the creation of relations that continuously 
negate the institutionalization of human abuse. Such a society is in its essence 
an anarchist society, a society made for and by observers that would not 
surrender their condition of observers as their only claim to social freedom 
and mutual respect. 
At this point there is either much more to say, or nothing - therefore, let us 
let the reader judge. Thank you. 

BIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
(1970) 
By 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 

I dedicate this book to my wife, Maria 
Montanez Luna. I could not have written 
it if I had not lived as I have lived, and for 
the most part of my existence the thread of 
my being has been and is braided with hers. 
Therefore, strictly, although I wrote this 
book, she is, in every respect, as much its 
author as I am. This I wish both to acknowl-
edge and to thank with deep love. 

T ABLE OF CONTENTS 
DEDICATION 
2 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
5 
II. 
THE PROBLEM 
7 
III. 
COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN GENERAL 
8 
A. 
The Observer 
8 
B. 
The Living System 
9 
C. 
Evolution 
11 
D. 
The Cognitive Process 
13 
IV. 
COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
15 
A. 
Nerve Cells 
15 
B. 
Architecture 
19 
C. 
Function 
21 
D. 
Representation 
22 
E. 
Description 
26 
F. 
Thinking 
29 
G. 
Natural Language 
30 
H. 
Memory and Learning 
35 
I. 
The Observer 
39 
V. 
PROBLEMS IN THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
41 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
48 
VII. 
POST SCRIPTUM 
57 

HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
BIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Man knows and his capacity to know depends on his biological integrity; 
furthermore, he knows that he knows. As a basic psychological and, hence, 
biological function cognition guides his handling of the universe and know-
ledge gives certainty to his acts; objective knowledge seems possible and 
through objective knowledge the universe appears systematic and predictable. 
Yet knowledge as an experience is something personal and private that cannot 
be transferred, and that which one believes to be transferable, objective 
knowledge, must always be created by the listener: the listener understands, 
and objective knowledge appears transferred, only if he is prepared to under-
stand. Thus cognition as a biological function is such that the answer to the 
question, 'What is cognition?' must arise from understanding knowledge and 
the knower through the latter's capacity to know. 
Such is my endeavor. 
Epistemology 
The basic claim of science is objectivity: it attempts, through the application 
of a well defined methodology, to make statements about the universe. At 
the very root of this claim, however, lies its weakness: the a priori assumption 
that objective knowledge constitutes a description of that which is known. 
Such assumption begs the questions, 'What is it to know?' and 'How do we 
know?'. 
Biology 
(a) The greatest hindrance in the understanding of the living organization lies 
in the impossibility of accounting for it by the enumeration ofits properties; 
it must be understood as a unity. But if the organism is a unity, in what sense 
are its component properties it parts? The organismic approach does not an-
swer this question, it merely restates it by insisting that there are elements of 
organization that subordinate each part to the whole and make the organism 
5 

6 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
a unity [Cf. Bertalanffy, 1960]. The questions 'How does this unity arise?' 
and 'To what extent must it be considered a property of the organization 
of the organism, as opposed to a property emerging from its mode of life?' 
remain open. A similar difficulty exists for the understanding of the func-
tional organization of the nervous system, particularly if one considers the 
higher functions of man. Enumeration of the transfer functions of all nerve 
cells would leave us with a list, but not with a system capable of abstract 
thinking, description, and self-description. Such an approach would beg the 
question, 'How does the living organization give rise to cognition in general 
and to selfcognition in particular?' 
(b) Organisms are adapted to their environments, and it has appeared ad-
equate to say of them that their organization represents the 'environment' 
in which they live, and that through evolution they have accumulated in-
formation about it, coded in their nervous systems. Similarly it has been said 
that the sense organs gather information about the 'environment', and through 
learning this information is coded in the nervous system [Cf. Young, 1967]. 
Yet this general view begs the questions, 'What does it mean to "gather 
information"?' and 'What is coded in the genetic and nervous systems?'. 
A successful theory of cognition would answer both the epistemological 
and the biological questions. This I propose to do, and the purpose of this 
essay is to put forward a theory of cognition that should provide an epis-
temological insight into the phenomenon of cognition, and an adequate view 
of the functional organization of the cognizant organism that gives rise to 
such phenomena as conceptual thinking, language, and self-consciousness. 
In what follows I shall not offer any formal definitions for the various 
terms used, such as 'cognition', 'life', or 'interaction', but I shall let their 
meaning appear through their usage. This I shall do because I am confident 
that the internal consistency of the theory will show that these terms indeed 
adequately refer to the phenomena I am trying to account for, and because 
I speak as an observer, and the validity of what I say at any moment has its 
foundation in the validity of the whole theory, which, I assert, explains why 
I can say it. Accordingly, I expect the complete work to give foundation to 
each of its parts, which thus appear justified only in the perspective of the 
whole. 
Note: I shall be speaking of the organism as a unity, but when I wrote this essay I was 
not aware that the word unit did not always quite mean unity. Since I cannot now 
correct this. I beg the reader to bear this in mind. 

II. THE PROBLEM 
(1) Cognition is a biological phenomenon and can only be understood as 
such; any epistemological insight into the domain of knowledge 
requires this understanding. 
(2) If such an insight is to be attained, two questions must be considered: 
What is cognition as a function? 
What is cognition as a process? 
What follows should answer these two questions. 
7 

III. COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN GENERAL 
THE OBSERVER 
(1) Anything said is said by an observer. In his discourse the observer speaks 
to another observer, who could be himself; whatever applies to the one 
applies to the other as well. The observer is a human being, that is, a living 
system, and whatever applies to living systems applies also to him. 
(2) The observer beholds simultaneously the entity that he considers 
(an organism, in our case) and the universe in which it lies (the organism's 
environment). This allows him to interact independently with both and to 
have interactions that are necessarily outside the domain of interactions of 
the observed entity. 
(3) It is an attribute of the observer to be able to interact independently 
with the observed entity and with its relations; for him both are units of 
interaction (entities). 
(4) For the observer an entity is an entity when he can describe it. To 
describe is to enumerate the actual or potential interactions and relations of 
the described entity. Accordingly, the observer can describe an entity only if 
there is at least one other entity from which he can distinguish it and with 
which he can observe it to interact or relate. This second entity that serves 
as a reference for the description can be any entity, but the ultimate reference 
for any description is the observer himself. 
(5) The set of all interactions into which an entity can enter is its domain 
of interactions. The set of all relations (interactions through the observer) in 
which an entity can be observed is its domain of relations. This latter domain 
lies within the cognitive domain of the observer. An entity is an entity if it 
has a domain of interactions, and if this domain includes interactions with the 
observer who can specify for it a domain of relations. The observer can define 
an entity by specifying its domain of interactions; thus part of an entity, a 
group of entities, or their relations, can be made units of interactions (entities) 
by the observer. 
(6) The observer can define himself as an entity by specifying his own 
domain of interactions; he can always remain an observer of these interact-
ions, which he can treat as independent entities. 
8 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN GENERAL 
9 
(7) The observer is a living system and an understanding of cognition as a 
biological phenomenon must account for the observer and his role in it. 
THE LIVING SYSTEM 
(1) Living systems are units of interactions; they exist in an ambience. From a 
purely biological point of view they cannot be understood independently of 
that part of the ambience with which they interact: the niche; nor can the 
niche be defmed independently of the living system that specifies it. 
(2) Living systems as they exist on earth today are characterized by 
exergonic metabolism, growth and internal molecular replication, all organized 
in a closed causal circular process that allows for evolutionary change in the 
way the circularity is maintained, but not for the loss of the circularity itself. 
Exergonic metabolism is required to provide energy for the endergonic 
synthesis of specific polymers (proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, polysaccharides) 
from the corresponding monomers, that is, for growth and replication; special 
replication procedures secure that the polymers synthesized be specific, that 
they should have the monomeric sequence proper to their class; specific 
polymers ( enzymes) are required for the exergonic metabolism and the 
synthesis of specific polymers (proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, polysaccharides) 
[Cf. Commoner, 1965]. 
This circular organization constitutes a homeostatic system whose function 
is to produce and maintain this very same circular organization by determin-
ing that the components that specify it be those whose synthesis or 
maintenance it secures. Furthermore, this circular organization defmes a 
living system as a unit of interactions and is essential for its maintenance 
as a unit; that which is not in it is external to it or does not exist. The circular 
organization in which the components that specify it are those whose syn-
thesis or maintenance it secures in a manner such that the product of their 
functioning is the same functioning organization that produces them, is the 
living organization. 
(3) It is the circularity of its organization that makes a living system a unit 
of interactions, and it is this circularity that it must maintain in order to 
remain a living system and to retain its identity through different interactions. 
All the peculiar aspects of the different kinds of organisms are superimposed 
on this basic circularity and are subservient to it, securing its continuance 
through successive interactions in an always changing environment. A living 
system defines through its organization the domain of all interactions into 
which it can possibly enter without losing its identity, and it maintains 
its identity only as long as the basic circularity that defines it as a unit of 

10 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
interactions remains unbroken. Strictly, the identity of a unit of interactions 
that otherwise changes continuously is maintained only with respect to the 
observer, for whom its character as a unit of interactions remains unchanged. 
(4) Due to the circular nature of its organization a living system has a self-
referring domain of interactions (it is a self-referring system), and its condition 
of being a unit of interactions is maintained because its organization has 
functional significance only in relation to the maintenance of its circularity 
and defines its domain of interactions accordingly. 
(5) Living systems as units of interactions specified by their condition of 
being living systems cannot enter into interactions that are not specified by 
their organization. The circularity of their organization continuously brings 
them back to the same internal state (same with respect to the cyclic process). 
Each internal state requires that certain conditions (interactions with the 
environment) be satisfied in order to proceed to the next state. Thus, the 
circular organization implies the prediction that an interaction that took 
place once will take place again. If this does not happen the system dis-
integrates; if the predicted interaction does take place, the system maintains 
its integrity (identity with respect to the observer) and enters into a new 
prediction. In a continuously changing environment these predictions can 
only be successful if the environement does not change in that which is 
predicted. Accordingly, the predictions implied in the organization of the 
living system are not predictions of particular events, but of classes of inter-
actions. Every interaction is a particular interaction, but every prediction is a 
prediction of a class of interactions that is defined by those features of its 
elements that will allow the living system to retain its circular organization 
after the interaction, and thus, to interact again. This makes living systems 
inferential systems, and their domain of interactions a cognitive domain. 
(6) The niche is defined by the classes of interactions into which an 
organism can enter. The environment is defined by the classes of interactions 
into which the observer can enter and which he treats as a context for his 
interactions with the observed organism. The observer beholds organism and 
environment simultaneously and he considers as the niche of the organism 
that part of the environment which he observes to lie in its domain of inter-
actions. Accordingly, as for the observer the niche appears as part of the 
environment, for the observed organism the niche constitutes its entire 
domain of interactions, and as such it cannot be part of the environment 
that lies exclusively in the cognitive domain of the observer. Niche and 
environment, then, intersect only to the extent that the observer (including 
instruments) and the organism have comparable organizations, but even then 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN GENERAL 
11 
there are always parts of the environment that lie beyond any possibility 
of intersection with the domain of interactions of the organism, and there 
are parts of the niche that lie beyond any possibility of intersection with 
the domain of interactions of the observer. Thus for every living system its 
organization implies a prediction of a niche, and the niche thus predicted as 
a domain of classes of interactions constitutes its entire cognitive reality. 
If an organism interacts in a manner not prescribed by its organization, it 
does so as something different from the unit of interactions defined by its 
basic circularity, and this interaction remains outside its cognitive domain, 
although it may well lie within the cognitive domain of the observer. 
(7) Every unit of interactions can participate in interactions relevant to 
other, more encompassing units of interactions. If in doing this a living 
system does not lose its identity, its niche may evolve to be contained by the 
larger unit of interactions and thus be subservient to it. If this larger unit of 
interactions is (or becomes) in turn also a self-referring system in which 
its components (themselves self-referring systems) are subservient to its 
maintenance as a unit of interactions, then it must itself be (or become) 
subservient to the maintenance of the circular organization of its components. 
Thus, a particular self-referring system may have the circular organization 
of a living system or partake functionally of the circular organization of its 
components, or both. The society of bees (the honey producing bees) is an 
example of a third order self-referring system of this kind; it has a circular 
organization superimposed on the second order self-referring systems that 
are the bees, which in turn have a circular organization superimposed on 
the first order living systems that are the cells; all three systems with their 
domains of interactions are subordinated both to the maintenance of them-
selves and to the maintenance of the others. 
EVOLUTION 
(1) Evolutionary change in living systems is the result of that aspect of their 
circular organization which secures the maintenance of their basic circularity, 
allowing in each reproductive step for changes in the way this circularity is 
maintained. Reproduction and evolution are not essential for the living 
organization, but they have been essential for the historical transformation 
of the cognitive domains of the living systems on earth. 
(2) For a change to occur in the domain of interactions of a unit of 
interactions without its losing its identity with respect to the obsewer it must 
suffer an internal change. Conversely, if an internal change occurs in a unit of 

12 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
interactions, without its losing its identity, its domain of interactions changes. 
A living system suffers an internal change without loss of identity if the 
predictions brought forth by the internal change are predictions which do not 
interfere with its fundamental circular organization. A system changes only if 
its domain of interactions changes. 
(3) After reproduction the new unit of interactions has the same domain 
of interactions as the parental one only if it has the same organization. 
Conversely, the new unit of interactions has a different domain of interactions 
only if its organizaticn is different, and hence, implies different predictions 
about the niche. 
(4) Predictions about the niche are inferences about classes of interactions. 
Consequently, particular interactions which are indistinguishable for an 
organism may be different for an observer if he has a different cognitive 
domain and can describe them as different elements of a class defined by the 
conduct of the organism. The same applies to interactions that are identical 
for the organism but different for (have different effects) its different internal 
parts. Such interactions may result in different modifications of the internal 
states of the organism and, hence, determine different paths of change in its 
domain of interactions without loss of identity. These changes may bring 
about the production of offspring having domains of interactions different 
from the parental ones. If this is the case and a new system thus produced 
predicts a niche that cannot be actualized, it disintegrates; otherwise it main-
tains its identity and a new cycle begins. 
(5) What changes from generation to generation in the evolution of living 
systems are those aspects of their organization which are subservient to the 
maintenance of their basic circularity but do not determine it, and which 
allow them to retain their identity through interactions; that is, what changes 
is the way in which the basic circularity is maintained, and not this basic 
circularity in itself. The manner in which a living system is compounded as a 
unit of interactions, whether by a single basic unit, or through the aggregation 
of numerous such units (themselves living systems) that together constitute a 
larger one (multicellular organisms), or still through the aggregation of these 
compound units that form self-referring systems of even higher order (insect 
societies, nations) is of no significance; what evolves is always a unit of inter-
actions defined by the way in which it maintains its identity. The evolution 
of the living systems is the evolution of the niches of the units of interactions 
defined by their self-referring circular organization, hence, the evolution of 
the cognitive domains. 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN GENERAL 
13 
THE COGNITIVE PROCESS 
(1) A cognitive system is a system whose organization defines a domain of 
interactions in which it can act with relevance to the maintenance of itself, 
and the process of cognition is the actual (inductive) acting or behaving in 
this domain. Living systems are cognitive systems, and living as a process is a 
process of cognition. This statement is valid for all organisms, with and 
without a nervous system. 
(2) If a living system enters into a cognitive interaction, its internal state is 
changed in a manner relevant to its maintenance, and it enters into a new 
interaction without loss of its identity. In an organism without a nervous 
system (or its functional equivalent) its interactions are of a chemical or 
physical nature (a molecule is absorbed and an enzymatic process is initiated; 
a photon is captured and a step in photosynthesis is carried out). For such an 
organism the relations holding between the physical events remain outside 
its domain of interactions. The nervous system enlarges the domain of inter-
actions of the organism by making its internal states also modifiable in a 
relevant manner by 'pure relations', not only by physical events; the observer 
sees that the sensors of an animal (say, a cat) are modified by light, and that 
the animal (the cat) is modified by a visible entity (say, a bird). The sensors 
change through physical interactions: the absorption of light quanta; the 
animal is modified through its interactions with the relations that hold 
between the activated sensors that absorbed the light quanta at the sensory 
surface. The nervous system expands the cognitive domain of the living 
system by making possible interactions with 'pure relations'; it does not 
create cognition. 
(3) Although the nervous system expands the domain of interactions of 
the organism by bringing into this domain interactions with 'pure relations', 
the function of the nervous system is subservient to the necessary circularity 
of the living organization. 
(4) The nervous system, by expanding the domain of interactions of the 
organism, has transformed the unit of interactions and has subjected acting 
and interacting in the domain of 'pure relations' to the process of evolution. 
As a consequence, there are organisms that include as a subset of their possible 
interactions, interactions with their own internal states (as states resulting 
from external and internal interactions) as if these were independent entities, 
generating the apparent paradox of including their cognitive domain within 
their cognitive domain. In us this paradox is resolved by what we call 'abstract 
thinking', another expansion of the cognitive domain. 

14 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
(5) Furthermore, the expansion of the cognitive domain into the domain 
of 'pure relations' by means of a nervous system allows for non-physical 
interactions between organisms such that the interacting organisms orient 
each other toward interactions within their respective cognitive domains. 
Herein lies the basis for communication: the orienting behavior becomes a 
representation of the interactions toward which it orients, and a unit of 
interactions in its own terms. But this very process generates another apparent 
paradox: there are organisms that generate representations of their own 
interactions by specifying entities with which they interact as if these be-
longed to an independent domain, while as representations they only map 
their own interactions. In us this paradox is resolved simultaneously in two 
ways: 
(a) We become observers through recursively generating representations 
of our interactions, and by interacting with several representations simul-
taneously we generate relations with the representations of which we can 
then interact and repeat this process recursively, thus remaining in a domain 
of interactions always larger than that of the representations. 
(b) We become selfconscious through self-observation; by making 
descriptions of ourselves (representations), and by interacting with our 
descriptions we can describe ourselves describing ourselves, in an endless 
recursive process. 

IV. COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
NERVE CELLS 
(1) The neuron is the anatomical unit of the nervous system because it is a 
cell, and as such it is an independent integrated self-referring metabolic and 
genetic unit (a living system indeed). 
(2) Anatomically and functionally a neuron is formed by a collector area 
(dendrites, and in some cases, also the cell body and part of the axon) united 
via a distributive element (the axon, and in some cases, also the cell body 
and main dendrites), capable of conducting propagated spikes to an effector 
area formed by the terminal branching of the axon. The functional state of 
the collector area depends on both its internal state (reference state) and on 
the state of activity of the effector areas synapsing on it. Correspondingly, 
the state of activity of the effector area depends on both the train of impulses 
generated at the corresponding collector area and on the pre-synaptic and 
non-synaptic interactions with distributive elements and other effector areas 
that may take place in the neuropil and in the immediate vicinity of the next 
collector areas. This is true even in the case of amacrine cells, in which the 
collector and effector areas may be intermingled. The distributive element 
determines where the effector exerts its influence. 
(3) Whether one or two branches of a bifurcating axon are invaded by a 
nerve impulse propagating along it depends on their relative diameter and on 
the state of polarization of their membranes at their origin in the bifurcation 
zone. As a result, the pattern of effector activity, that is, the pattern of 
branch invasion which a train of impulses determines in the branches of the 
distributive element and effector area of a neuron, depends (i) on the spike 
interval distribution of the train of impulses, which determines the time that 
the axonal membrane at the branching zone has for recovery before the 
arrival of the next spike, and (ii) on the non-synaptic influences which, in the 
form of local water and ion movements caused by the electrical activity of 
neighboring elements, may produce diameter and polarization changes at the 
branching zones, and thus modify the invasibility of the branches by the 
arriving spikes. 
(4) At any moment the state of activity of a nerve cell, as represented by 
15 

16 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
the pattern of impulses travelling along its distributive element, is a function 
of the spatio-temporal configuration of its input, as determined by the 
relative activity holding between the afferent neurons, that modulates the 
reference state proper of the collector area. It is known that in many neurons 
the recurrence of a given afferent spatio-temporal configuration results in 
the recurrence of the same state of activity, independently of the way in 
which such a spatio-temporal configuration is generated [Cf. Maturana and 
Frenk, 1963; Morrell, 1967]. [This is so in the understanding that two states 
of activity in a given cell are the 'same' (equivalent) if they belong to the 
same class, as defined by the pattern of impulses that they generate, and not 
because they are a one-to-one mapping of each otheL] Also, the spatio-
temporal configuration of the input to a neuron that causes in it the re-
currence of a given state of activity is a class of afferent influences defmed 
by a pattern in the relations holding between the active afferents and the 
collector; a given class of responses is elicited by a given class of afferent 
influences. 
(5) For every nerve cell, at any moment, its transfer function at its collec-
tor area is a well-defmed deterministic process [Cf. Segundo and Perkel, 
1969] . Many neurons have several transfer functions, and different classes of 
afferent influences change their activity differently, causing them to generate 
different classes of activity in their effector areas. Because every nerve cell 
participates in the generation of the spatio-temporal configuration of afferent 
influences on the other nerve cells, all their states of activity must be con-
sidered as significant for their next states of activity. Thus there are two 
aspects to consider with respect to the activity of any given neuron: (i) its 
genesis, which must be considered in reference to the neuron itself and to the 
afferents to it; (li) its participation in the generation of activity in other 
neurons for which it is an afferent influence, which must be considered in 
reference to those other neurous. In both cases the interactions between the 
neurons involved are strictly deterministic, although what is cause in one is 
not necessarily cause in another. 
(6) The nerve impulses that travel along the distributive element originate 
at the point where this element emerges from the collector area. Each nerve 
impulse is the result of the state of excitation of the collector area at a 
given moment (as determined by the spatio-temporal configuration of the 
afferent excitatory and inhibitatory influences acting upon it, and on its 
own internal generating mechanisms, if any) that spreads reaching a given 
threshold at the point of emergence of the distributor. Excitatory and in-
hibitory influences, however, do not superimpose linearly; their relative 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
17 
participation in determining the production of nerve impulses, and hence, the 
state of activity of the neuron, depends on their relative spatial distribution on 
the collector area. Inhibition works by shunting off the spreading excitatory 
processes; as a result the relative contributions of a point of excitation and a 
point of inhibition in the generation of a nerve impulse depend on where, on 
the collector, they stand with respect to each other and with respect to the 
point of emergence of the distributive element. Excitation and inhibition 
must be seen as integral parts in the defmition of the spatio-temporal con-
figuration of afferent influences, not as independent processes. The shape of 
the collector area (its geometry) determines the class or classes of spatio-
temporal configurations of afferent influences to which the cell responds. 
(7) The neuropil is the site where the distributive elements and effector 
areas of many different neurons intermingle with each other and with the 
collector areas of the post-synaptic cells. Here non-synaptic interactions take 
place between neighboring elements which may cause in each other, as a result 
of the local movements of water and ions produced by their independent 
electrical activity, changes in diameter and polarization at their branching 
points. Depending on the time constant of these local changes, and on the 
capacity of the axons to homeostatically maintain their diameter at the new 
values, the pattern of branch invasion produced in a given effector area by a 
given train of impulses may be modified in a more or less permanent manner 
by these non-synaptic interactions. Something similar may happen during 
synaptic concomitances at the collector areas if synapses also affect each 
other non-synaptically, due to their spatial contiguity, causing each other 
,more or less permanent changes in size (increase or decrease) and polarization 
(with the corresponding changes in effectiveness) as a result of their inde-
pendent electrical activities. Thus, the neuropil may have to be seen as 
constituting a plastic system through which acquired self-addressing states of 
activity attain their functional significance as they become specified by the 
non-synaptic and synaptic concomitances generated by the interactions of the 
organism. It is not the repetition of the same state of activity which can cause 
neuronal changes of behavioral significance subordinated to the evolving 
domain of interactions of an organism, but rather it is the occurrence of 
local concomitant states of activity produced by seemingly unrelated inter-
actions which can cause such subordinated changes in the reactive capacity of 
neurons. 
(8) It follows that one should expect in a significant number of neurons, 
which may vary in different classes of animals according to the organization 
of their different neuropils, a continuous change in their transfer functions 

18 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
(from collector to effector area), or in the circumstances under which they 
are activated, as a result of the past history of the organism. However, for the 
understanding of the functional organization of the nervous system it is 
necessary to consider that nerve cells respond at any moment with definite 
transfer functions to classes of afferent spatio-temporal configurations in 
their input, generating definite states of effector activity, and not to particular 
afferent states. Furthermore: 
(a) Any interaction is represented in the nervous system by the se-
quence of states of relative neuronal activity leading to the conduct which it 
generates; this conduct should be repeatable to the extent that the interaction 
(sequence of states of relative activity) is reproducible, that is, as long as the 
historical transformation of the nervous system (learning) does not make it 
impossible. 
(b) The nervous system always functions in the present, and it can only 
be understood as a system functioning in the present. The present is the time 
interval necessary for an interaction to take place; past, future and time exist 
only for the observer. Although many nerve cells may change continuously, 
their mode of operation and their past history can explain to the observer 
how their present mode of operation was reached, but not how it is realized 
now, or what their present participation in the determination of behavior is. 
(c) Any behavior is defined through a sequence of states in the receptor 
surfaces (external and internal) that satisfy its direct or indirect subordination 
to the maintenance of the basic circularity of the living system. Since the 
nervous system is continuously changing through experience, what occurs 
when the observer sees a given behavior reenacted is a sequence of interactions 
that satisfy this subordination independently of the neuronal process which 
generated them. The more complex the domain of interactions of an organism, 
the more indirect is this subordination (an adequate mode of behavior sub-
ordinated to another), but not the less strict. 
(d) An organism is a unit to the extent that its conduct results in the 
maintenance of its basic circularity (and hence identity), and two modes of 
conduct are equivalent if they satisfy the same class of requirements for this 
maintenance. For this reason an organism, as a self-regulated homeostatic 
organization, does not require a constant behavior in its deterministic com-
ponent elements (in this case, neurons) if their changes become specified 
through the generation of conduct, and sameness of conduct is defined with 
respect to an observer or a function that must be satisfied. 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
19 
Thus although at any moment every neuron functions deterministically 
with a definite transfer function, and generates a definite pattern of activity 
in its effector area, the transfer functions and the patterns of effector activity 
in many of them may change from one moment to another and the organism 
still will give rise to what the observer would call 'the same behavior'. The 
converse is also the case, and through what the observer would call 'different 
behaviors' the organism may satisfy its subordination to the same aspect of 
the maintenance of its basic circularity. 
(9) From these notions it is apparent that the neuron cannot be considered 
as the functional unit of the nervous system; no neuron can have a fixed 
functional role in the generation of conduct if it must be continuously 
changing its participation in it. For the same reason a fixed collection of cells 
also cannot be considered as a functional unit of the nervous system. Only 
conduct itself can be considered as the functional unit of the nervous system. 
(10) If nerve cells respond to classes of afferent configurations and not to 
particular afferent states, they must necessarily treat as equivalent particular 
afferent configurations that arise through interactions which for the observer 
are otherwise unrelated. 
ARCHITECTURE 
(1) In any given nervous system the great majority (and perhaps the totality) 
of its neurons can be assigned to well-defined morphological classes, each 
characterized by a given pattern of distribution of the collector and effector 
areas of its elements. As a result, the elements of the same class hold similar 
relations with each other and with other classes of neurons; the shapes of the 
nerve cells (collector area, distributive element, and effector area) specify 
their connectivity. These shapes are genetically determined and have been 
attained through evolution; the whole architecture of the brain is genetically 
determined and has been attained through evolution. The following implica-
tions are significant for the understanding of the nervous system: 
(a) There is a necessary genetic variability in the shape of nerve cells 
as well as a variability that results from interactions of the organism with 
independent events during its development. The functional organization of 
the nervous system must be such as to tolerate this double variability. 
(b) Due to the genetic and somatic variability no two nervous systems 
of animals of the same species (particularly if they have many cells) are 
identical, and they resemble each other only to the extent that they are 

20 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
organized according to the same general pattern. It is the organization defining 
the class, and not any particular connectivity, which determines the mode of 
functioning of any given kind of nervous system. 
(2) The shapes of nerve cells and their packing are such that there is in 
general a great overlapping in the collector and effector areas of neurons of 
the same class. Also, the spatial distribution and the interconnections between 
different classes of neurons is such that any particular part of the nervous 
system is in general simultaneously related to many other parts; the parts 
interconnected, however, differ in different species, and as a result these have 
different interacting capabilities. 
(3) The organism ends at the boundary that its self-referring organization 
defines in the maintenance of its identity. At this boundary there are sensors 
(the sensory surfaces) through which the organism interacts in the domain of 
relations and effectors (the effector surfaces) through which the nervous 
system modifies the posture of the organism in this domain. The sensory 
surfaces are in general constituted by collections of sensory elements (cells) 
with similar, though not identical, properties (classes of properties) which in 
their mode of interaction with the nervous system share the characteristics 
of neurons in general. As a result, whenever the organism enters into an 
interaction within the physical domain of interactions of the sensors, as a 
rule not one but many sensory elements are excited. The effectors are also 
multifarious and differ from each other in the manner in which they change 
the receptor surfaces of the organism during the interactions: action always 
leads to a change in the state of activity of the receptor surfaces. 
(4) The architectural organization of the nervous system is subordinated 
to the order of the sensory and effector surfaces. This subordination has two 
aspects: (i) the receptor and effector surfaces project to the central nervous 
system retaining their proper topological relations; (li) the topological rela-
tions specified by the receptor and effector surfaces in their projection 
constitute the basis for all the architectural order of the central nervous 
system. As a consequence, this architectural organization constitutes a system 
that interconnects these surfaces in a manner that permits the occurrence of 
certain concomitances of activity and not others in the different neuropils, 
and thus secures well-defined functional relations between these surfaces, 
specifying how they modify each other. Truism: the nervous system cannot 
give rise to a conduct that implies the concomitance of states of activity 
for which there is no anatomical basis. As a result of its architectural organ-
ization every point in the central nervous system constitutes an anatomical 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
21 
localization with respect to the possibility of establishing certain functional 
concomitances. From this it follows that any localized lesion in the n~rvous 
system must necessarily interfere in a localized manner with the possibility 
of synthesizing some specific conduct (state of neural activity). 
FUNCTION 
(1) The way the nervous system functions is bound to its anatomical organi-
zation. The functioning of the nervous system has two aspects: one which 
refers to the domain of interactions defined by the nervous system (relations 
in general); the other which refers to the particular part of that domain used 
by a given species (particular classes of relations): Different species interact 
with different sets of relations (have different niches). 
(2) The nervous system only interacts with relations. However, since the 
functioning of the nervous system is anatomy bound, these interactions are 
necessarily mediated by physical interactions; for an animal to discriminate 
objects visually the receptors in its eyes must absorb light quanta and be 
activated; yet, the objects that the animal sees are determined not by the 
quantity of light absorbed, but by the relations holding between the receptor-
induced states of activity within the retina, in a manner determined by the 
connectivity of its various types of cells. Therefore, the nervous system 
defmes through the relative weights of the patterns of interactions of its 
various components, both innate and acquired through experience, which 
relations will modify it at any given interaction [Cf. Maturana, 1965]. Or, 
in general, the organization and structure of a living system (its nervous 
system included) define in it a 'point of view', a bias or posture from the 
perspective of which it interacts, determining at any instant the possible 
relations accessible to its nervous system. Moreover, since the domain of 
interactions of the organism is defmed by its structure, and since this struc-
ture implies a prediction of a niche, the relations with which the nervous 
system interacts are defmed by this prediction and arise in the domain of 
interactions of the organism. 
(3) Due to the properties of neurons, and due to the architecture of the 
nervous system, interactions within the nervous system give rise to activity 
in aggregates of cells. Also, for the same reasons, any given cell may assume 
the same state of activity under many different circumstances of interactions 
of the organism. Thus, under no circumstances is it possible to associate the 
activity of any particular cell with any particular interaction of the living 

22 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
system. When any particular interaction takes place at the level of the sensors, 
the relations accessible to the nervous system are given at this level in a 
certain state of relative activity of the sensing elements and not in the state of 
activity of any particular one [Cf. Maturana, Uribe, and Frenk, 1968]. At the 
same time, although operational localizations can be established in the 
nervous system [Cf. Geschwind, 1965], these localizations are to be viewed 
in terms of areas where certain modalities of interactions converge, and not 
as localizations of faculties or functions. As a result of the mode of organiza-
tion of the nervous system that I have emphasized, localized lesions should 
produce discrete functional deficiencies by impeding the convergence of 
activities necessary for the synthesis of a particular conduct (state of activity). 
The anatomical and functional organization of the nervous system secures the 
synthesis of behavior, not a representation of the world; hence, it is only 
with the synthesis of behavior that one can interfere. The nervous system is 
localized in terms of the organism's surfaces of interaction, but not in terms 
of representations of the interactions it can generate. 
REPRESENTATION 
(l) The fundamental anatomical and functional organization of the nervous 
system is basically uniform; the same functions and operations (excitation, 
inhibition, lateral interaction, recursive inhibition, etc.) are performed in its 
various parts, although in different contexts, and integrated in different 
manners. A partial destruction of the nervous system does not alter this 
basic uniformity, and, although the parts left untouched cannot do the same 
things that the whole did, they appear in their mode of operations identical 
to the untouched whole. To the observer, once the boundary of the sensors 
is passed, the nervous system, as a mode of organization, seems to begin at any 
arbitrary point that he may choose to consider; the answer to the question, 
'What is the input to the nervous system?' depends entirely on the chosen 
point of observation. This basic uniformity of organization can best be 
expressed by saying: all that is accessible to the nervous system at any point 
are states of relative activity holding between nerve cells, and all that to 
which any given state of relative activity can give rise are further states of 
relative activity in other nerve cells by forming those states of relative activity 
to which they respond. The effector neurons are not an exception to this 
since they, by causing an effector activity and generating an interaction, cause 
a change in the state of relative activity of the receptor elements at the 
receptor surfaces. This has a fundamental consequence: unless they imply 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
23 
their origin (through concomitant events, their locations, or through the 
consequences of the new interactions which they originate) there is no 
possible distinction between internally and externally generated states of 
nervous activity. 
(2) The relations with which the nervous system interacts are relations 
given by the physical interactions of the organism, and, hence, depend on its 
anatomical organization. For the observer the organism interacts with a given 
entity that he can describe in his cognitive domain. Yet, what modifies the 
nervous system of the observed organism are the changes in activity of the 
nerve cells associated with the sensing elements, changes that henceforth 
constitute an embodiment of the relations that arise through the interaction. 
These relations are not those that the observer can describe as holding between 
component properties of the entity in his cognitive domain; they are relations 
generated in the interaction itself and depend on both the structural organiza-
tion of the organism and the properties of the universe that match the domain 
of interactions that this organization defines. Whenever such a relation recurs 
at the sensory surface, the same state of relative activity arises among the 
neurons in contact with the sensing elements. Two interactions that produce 
the same state of relative activity are identical for the nervous system, no 
matter how different they may be in the cognitive domain of the observer. 
(3) Every relation is embodied in a state of relative activity of nerve cells, 
but also every state of relative activity acts to modify the relative activity of 
other nerve cells. Thus, relations through their embodiment in states of 
relative activity become units of internal interactions and generate additional 
relations, again embodied in states of relative activity which in turn may also 
become units of internal interactions, and so on, recursively. 
(4) If an external interaction takes place, the state of activity of the 
nervous system is modified by the change in relative activity of the neurons, 
which in close association with the sensing elements embody the relations 
given in the interaction. Accordingly, that which the different states of 
activity thus generated can be said to represent are the relations given at the 
sensory surfaces by the interaction of the organism, and not an independent 
medium, least of all a description of an environment necessarily made in 
terms of entities that lie exclusively in the cognitive domain of the observer. 
If an internal interaction takes place, the state of activity of the nervous 
system is modified by one of its own substates of relative activity that em-
bodies one set of relations. However, that which the new state of relative 
activity represents is the relations given in the internal interaction, and not 
an independent set of relations or their description, in terms of some kind of 

24 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
entities, such as thoughts, that lie only within the cognitive domain of the 
observer. 
(5) The classes of relations that can be embodied have been defined: (i) 
through the evolution of the general structural organization of the organism, 
and particularly, of the sensors, that has defined the classes of relation that 
are accessible to the nervous system; and (ii) through the evolution of a 
particular organization of the nervous system that defines for each class of 
animals (species) the specific mode of how these relations generate a behavior 
relevant to their maintenance. 
(6) For any class of relations, the particular relations given as a result of 
a present interaction are embodied in a set of particular states of activity 
occurring in the present. This is the case independently of the history of the 
system. However, the relevance of the behavior generated by those states of 
activity for the maintenance of the living system is a function of history, and 
may depend both on the evolutionary history of the species and on the past 
experiences of the organism as an individual. In the first case I would speak of 
instinctive behavior, and in the second case of learned behavior. The descrip-
tion of learning in terms of past and present behavior lies in the cognitive 
domain of the observer; the organism always behaves in the present. The ob-
server, however, by interacting with descriptions that he generates can treat 
interactions which do not recur as if they were in the present. This apparent 
paradox is resolved by generating the notion of time, past, present, and future, 
as a new expansion of the domain of interactions. Whenever an interaction 
takes place which is an element of a class experienced for the first time, it is 
sufficient that the state of activity which it generates be followed by the 
suppression of a peculiar concomitant internal state of activity (that is 
apparent in what the observer calls the emotion of anxiety or uncertainty) for 
the organism to experience the recurrence of an interaction of the same class, 
which takes place without such a concomitant state, as not new (in the sense 
that it can generate an established conduct as is apparent in the absence of 
anxiety) and, hence known. Any experience without anxiety can be described 
as known, and thus serve as a basis for the functional notion of time. 
(7) There is no difference in the nature of the embodiment of the relations 
generated through either external or internal interactions; both are sets of 
states of neuronal activity that can be said to represent the interactions. In a 
nervous system capable of interacting with some of its own internal states as 
if they were independent entities, there are two consequences: 
(a) The distinction between externally and internally generated inter-

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
25 
actions can only arise through a concomitance of events that indicates the 
source (sensory surface or not) of the state of activity caused by them, or 
through the outcome of new interactions which they initiate. A nervous 
system that is capable of treating its internally generated states of activity 
as different from its externally generated states, that is, of distinguishing 
their origin, is capable of abstract thinking. 
(b) The nervous system can interact with the representations of its 
interactions (and hence, of the organism) in an endless recursive manner. 
(8) Four comments: 
(a) Notions such as embodiment of representation express the corres-
pondence that the observer sees between relations, or sets of relations, and 
different states of activity of the nervous system, and, as such, lie in his 
cognitive domain. They describe the functional organization of the nervous 
system in the cognitive domain of the observer, and point to the ability of 
the nervous system to treat some of its own states as independent entities 
with which it can interact, but they do not characterize the nature of the 
functional subordination of the nervous system to its own states. This sub-
ordination is that of a functionally closed, state determined, ultrastable 
system, modulated by interactions [Cf. Ashby, 1960]. 
(b) The closed nature of the functional organization of the nervous 
system is a consequence of the self-referring domain of interactions of the 
living organization; every change of state of the organism must bring forth 
another change of state, and so on, recursively, always maintaining its basic 
circularity. Anatomically and functionally the nervous system is organized 
to maintain constant certain relations between the receptor and effector 
surfaces of the organism, which can only in that way retain its identity as it 
moves through its domain of interactions. Thus all conduct, as controlled 
through the nervous system, must (necessarily, due to the latter's architectural 
organization) lead through changes in the effector surfaces to specific changes 
in the receptor surfaces that in turn must generate changes in the effector 
surfaces that again ... and so on, recursively. Conduct is thus a functional 
continuum that gives unity to the life of the organism through its transforma-
tions in the latter's self-referring domain of interactions. The evolutionary 
subordination of the architecture of the central nervous system to the topo-
logy of the sensory and effector surfaces appears as an obvious necessity. 
(c) The ability of the nervous system to interact with its own internal 

26 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
states, as if these were independent entities, enters these internal states as 
modulating factors in the continuum of behavior. This requires an anatomical 
and functional internal reflection so that the internal organization of the 
nervous system can project itself onto itself retaining its morphological and 
functional topological relations, as the receptor and effector surfaces do in 
their own projection. This seems to have acquired an autonomous evolutionary 
course with the development of the neo-cortex in mammals, which arises as a 
center of internal anatomical projection, and whose evolution in this line is 
accompanied by an increased dependency of the organism on its own states 
of nervous activity. 
(d) The closed nature of the functional organization of the nervous 
system (open only to modulations through interactions) is particularly evi-
dent in systematic observations that explicitly show the subordination of 
conduct to the correlation of activity between the receptor and effector 
surfaces [Cf. Held and Hein, 1963] . Experiments such as those of Held and 
Hein show that a cat does not learn to control its environment visually if 
raised in darkness and carried about only passively, by another cat, when 
under light. From these observations, it is apparent that the 'visual handling' 
of an environment is no handling of an environment, but the establishment of 
a set of correlations between effector (muscular) and receptor (proprioceptor 
and visual) surfaces, such that a particular state in the receptor surfaces may 
cause a particular state in the effector surfaces that brings forth a new state 
in the receptor surfaces ... and so on. Behavior is like an instrumental flight 
in which the effectors (engines, flaps, etc.) vary their state to maintain 
constant, or to change, the readings of the sensing instruments according to a 
specified sequence of variations, which either is fixed (specified through 
evolution) or can be varied during the flight as a result of the state of the flight 
(learning). The same is apparent in the experiments with innate perception 
of depth [Cf. Gibson, 1950] that show that there is an innate system of 
correlations between certain states of the receptor and effector surfaces. The 
reference to a pre-established perception of depth is a description that lies in 
the cognitive domain of the observer, and as such only alludes to relations, 
through the observer, between elements that lie in his cognitive domain; but, 
as a process, this innate behavior obviously corresponds to one of optimization 
of sensory states. 
DESCRIPTION 
(1) A living system, due to its circular organization, is an inductive system 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
27 
and functions always in a predictive manner: what happened once will occur 
again. Its organization, (genetic and otherwise) is conservative and repeats 
only that which works. For this same reason living systems are historical 
systems; the relevance of a given conduct or mode of behavior is always 
determined in the past. The goal state (in the language of the observer) that 
controls the development of an organism is, except for mutations, determined 
by the genome of the parent organism. The same is true for behavior in 
general; the present state is always specified from the previous state that 
restricts the field of possible modulations by independent concomitances. If 
a given state of relative activity in the nerve cells originates a given behavior, 
a recurrence of the 'same state' of relative activity should give rise to the 
'same behavior' no matter how the recurrence originates. The relevance of 
such a behavior is determined by the significance that it has for the main-
tenance of the living organization, and it is in relation to this relevance that 
any subsequent behaviors are the same. With the expansion of the cognitive 
domain during evolution, the types of behavior have changed as well as how 
their relevance is implemented; different kinds of behavior are relevant to the 
maintenance of the basic circularity of the living organization through dif-
ferent domains of interactions, and hence, different fields of causal relations. 
(2) Since the niche of an organism is the set of all classes of interactions 
into which it can enter, and the observer beholds the organism in an environ-
ment that he defines, for him anyone of the organism's behaviors appears 
as an actualization of the niche, that is, as a first order description of the 
environment (henceforth denoted by a capital D: Description). This Descrip-
tion, however, is a description in terms of behavior (interactions) of the 
observed organism, not of representations of environmental states, and the 
relation between behavior and niche lies exclusively in the cognitive domain 
of the observer. 
(3) An organism can modify the behavior of another organism in two 
basic ways: 
(a) By interaction with it in a manner that directs both organisms toward 
each other in such a way that the ensuing behavior of each of them depends 
strictly on the following behavior of the other, e.g.: courtship and fight. A 
chain of interlocked behavior can thus be generated by the two organisms. 
(b) By orienting the behavior of the other organism to some part of its 
domain of interactions different from the present irtteraction, but comparable 
to the orientation of that of the orienting organism. This can take place only 
if the domains of interactions of the two organisms are widely coincident; in 

28 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
this case no interlocked chain of behavior is elicited because the subsequent 
conduct of the two organisms depends on the outcome of independent, 
although parallel, interactions. 
In the ftrst case it can be said that the two organisms interact; in the 
second case that they communicate. The second case is the basis for any 
linguistic behavior; the first organism generates (as is apparent for the ob-
server) a Description of its niche that, in addition to its own significance as a 
behavior (within the cognitive domain of the first organism, and independently 
of it), orients the second organism within its cognitive domain to an inter-
action from which ensues a conduct parallel to that of the first one, but 
unrelated to it. The conduct thus elicited by the orienting behavior is denota-
tive: it points to a feature of the environment that the second organism 
encounters in its niche and Describes by the appropriate conduct, and that he 
can treat as an independent entity. The orienting behavior is, for the observer, 
a second order description (henceforth denoted by italics: description) that 
represents that which he considers it to denote. By contrast, the orienting 
behavior of the first organism is connotative for the second one, and implies 
for it an interaction within its cognitive domain which,if actualized, originates 
a behavior that Describes a particular aspect of its niche; that which an 
orienting behavior connotes is a function of the cognitive domain of the 
orientee, not the orienter. 
(4) In an orienting interaction the behavior of the ftrst organism, as a 
communicative description causes in the nervous system of the second one a 
specific state of activity; this state of activity embodies the relations generated 
in the interaction and represents the behavior of the second organism (De-
scription of its niche) connoted by the orienting behavior of the ftrst one. 
This representation, as a state of neuronal activity, can in principle be treated 
by the nervous system as a unit of interactions, and the second organism, if 
capable of doing so, can thus interact with representations of its own Descrip-
tions of its niche as if these were independent entities. This generates yet 
another domain of interactions (and hence, another dimension in the cognitive 
domain), the domian of interactions with representations of behavior (inter-
actions), orienting interactions included, as if these representations were 
independent entities within the niche: the linguistic domain. 
(5) If an organism can generate a communicative description and then 
interact with its own state of activity that represents this description, generat-
ing another such description that orients towards this representation ... , 
the process can in principle be carried on in a potentially infinite recursive 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
29 
manner, and the organism becomes an observer: it generates discourse as a 
domain of interactions with representations of communciative descriptions 
(orienting behaviors). 
Furthermore: if such an observer through orienting behavior can orient 
himself towards himself, and then generate communicative descriptions that 
orient him towards his description of this self-orientation, he can, by doing so 
recursively, describe himself describing himself ... endlessly. Thus discourse 
through communicative description originates the apparent paradox of self-
description: self-consciousness, a new domain of interactions. 
(6) A nervous system capable of recursively interacting with its own states 
as if these were independent entities can do so regardless of how these states 
are generated, and in principle can repeat these recursive interactions endlessly. 
Its only limitation lies in the need that the progressive transformation of its 
actual and potential behavior, which in such a system is a necessary con-
comitant to behavior itself, be directly or indirectly subservient to the basic 
circularity of the living organization. The linguistic domain, the observer, and 
self-conciousness are each possible because they result as different domains 
of interactions of the nervous system with its own states in circumstances 
in which these states represent different modalities of interactions of the 
organism. 
THINKING 
(1) I consider that in a state-determined nervous system, the neurophysio-
logical process that consists in its interacting with some of its own internal 
states as if these were independent entities corresponds to what we call 
thinking. Such internal states of nervous activity, otherwise similar to other 
states of nervous activity that participate in the specification of behavior, as 
in reflex mechanisms, cause conduct by determining specific changes of state 
in the nervous system. Thinking thus conceived, and reflex mechanisms, are 
both neurophysiological processes through which behavior emerges in a 
deterministic manner; they differ, however, in that in a reflex action we can, 
in our description, trace a chain of nervous interactions that begins with a 
specific state of activity at the sensory surfaces; while in thinking, the chain 
of nervous interactions that leads to a given conduct (change in the effector 
surfaces) begins with a distinguishable state of activity of the nervous system 
itself, whichever way it may have originated. Accordingly, thinking is a mode 
of operation of the nervous system that reflects functionally its internal 
anatomical projection (possibly multiply) onto itself. 

30 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
(2) The process of thinking as characterized above is necessarily inde-
pendent of language. That this is so even for what we call 'abstract thinking' 
in man is apparent from the observations of humans with split brains [Cf. 
Gazzaniga, Bogen and Sperry, 1965]. These observations show that the 
inability of the non-speaking hemisphere to speak does not preclude in it 
operations that the observer would call abstract thinking, and that the lack 
of language only implies that it cannot generate discourse. When we talk 
about concepts or ideas we describe our interactions with representations of 
our descriptions, and we think through our operation in the linguistic domain. 
The difficulty arises from our considering thinking through our description of 
it in terms or concepts as if it were something peculiar to man, and in some 
way isomorphic with the notions embodied in the descriptions, instead of 
attending to the functional process that makes these descriptions possible. 
NATURAL LANGUAGE 
(1) Linguistic behavior is orienting behavior; it orients the orientee within his 
cognitive domain to interactions that are independent of the nature of the 
orienting interactions themselves. To the extent that the part of its cognitive 
domain toward which the orientee is thus oriented is not genetically deter-
mined and becomes specified through interactions, one organism can in 
principle orient another to any part of its cognitive domain by means of 
arbitrary modes of conduct also specified through interactions. However, 
only if the domains of interactions of the two organisms are to some extent 
comparable, are such consensual orienting interactions possible and are the 
two organisms able to develop some conventional, but specific, system of 
communicative descriptions to orient each other to cooperative classes of 
interactions that are relevant for both. 
(2) The understanding of the evolutionary origin of natural languages 
requires the recognition in them of a basic biological function which, properly 
selected, could originate them. So far this understanding has been impossible 
because language has been considered as a denotative symbolic system for the 
transmission of information. In fact, if such were the biological function of 
language, its evolutionary origin would demand the pre-existence of the 
function of denotation as necessary to develop the symbolic system for the 
transmission of information, but this function is the very one whose evolu-
tionary origin should be explained. Conversely, if it is recognized that language 
is connotative and not denotative and that its function is to orient the orientee 
within his cognitive domain, and not to point to independent entities, it 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
31 
becomes apparent that learned orienting interactions embody a function of 
non-linguistic origin that, under a selective pressure for recursive application, 
can originate through evolution the system of cooperative consensual inter-
actions between organisms that is natural language. Particular orienting 
interactions, like any other learned conduct, arise from the substitution of 
one type of interaction for another as a cause for a given behavior, and their 
origin as a function of the general learning capacity of the nervous system is 
completely independent of the complexities of the system of cooperative 
interactions to which their recursive application gives rise. Widespread among 
animals other than man-orienting interactions are particularly evident in 
primates, in which it is easy to see how the audible and visible behavior of 
one individual orients others within their respective cognitive domains [Cf. 
Jay, 1968], and in dolphins which seem to have evolved a rich and efficient 
system of auditive cooperative interactions [Cf. Lilly, 1967]. In accordance 
with all this I maintain that learned orienting interactions, coupled with some 
mode of behavior that allowed for an independent recursive expansion of the 
domain of interactions of the organism, such as social life [Cf. Gardner and 
Gardner, 1969] and/or tool making and use, must have offered a selective 
basis for the evolution of the orienting behavior that in hominids led to our 
present-day languages. 
(3) Behavior (function) depends on the anatomical organization (structure) 
of the living system, hence anatomy and conduct cannot legitimately be 
separated and the evolution of behavior is the evolution of anatomy and vice 
versa; anatomy provides the basis for behavior and hence for its variability; 
behavior provides the ground for the action of natural selection and hence for 
the historical anatomical transformations of the organism. Structure and 
function are, however, both relative to the perspective of interactions of the 
system and cannot be considered independently of the conditions that defme 
it as a unit of interactions, for what is from one perspective a unit of inter-
actions, from another may only be a component of a larger one, or may be 
several independent units. It is the dynamics of this process of individuation, 
as an historical process in which every state of a changing system can become 
a unit of interactions if the proper circumstances are given, what makes the 
evolution of living systems a deterministic process of necessarily increasing 
complication. Thus, in the evolution of language, natural selection, by acting 
upon orienting behavior as a function that if enhanced strongly increases the 
cooperation between social animals, has led to anatomical transformations 
which provide the basis for the increased complexity of the orienting conduct 
and the diversity of the interactions toward which man can be oriented in his 

32 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
cognitive domain. The complexity of the orienting conduct has increased 
through an increase in the complexity and variety of motor behavior, parti-
cularly through vocalization and tool making. The diversity of the interactions 
toward which man can be oriented has increased through a concomitant 
expansion of the internal projection of the brain onto itself, by means of new 
interconnections between different cortical areas (as compared with other 
primates), between cortical areas and subcortical nuclei [Cf. Geschwind, 
1964], and possibly also between different cortical layers and cellular sys-
tems within the cortex itself. 
(4) So long as language is considered to be denotative it will be necessary 
to look at it as a means for the transmission of information, as if something 
were transmitted from organism to organism, in a manner such that the 
domain of uncertainties of the 'receiver' should be reduced according to the 
specifications of the 'sender'. However, when it is recognized that language 
is connotative and not denotative, and that its function is to orient the 
orientee within his cognitive domain without regard for the cognitive domain 
of the orienter, it becomes apparent that there is no transmission of informa-
tion through language. It behooves the orientee, as a result of an independent 
internal operation upon his own state, to choose where to orient his cognitive 
domain; the choice is caused by the 'message', but the orientation thus 
produced is independent of what the 'message' represents for the orienter. In 
a strict sense then, there is no transfer of thought from the speaker to his 
interlocutor; the listener creates information by reducing his uncertainty 
through his interactions in his cognitive domain. Consensus arises only through 
cooperative interactions in which the resulting behavior of each organism 
becomes subservient to the maintenance of both. An observer beholding a 
communicative interaction between two organisms who have already de-
veloped a consensual linguistic domain, can describe the interaction as de-
notative; for him, a message (sign) appears as de notating the object which the 
conduct of the orientee Describes (specifies), and the conduct of the orientee 
appears determined by the message. However, because the outcome of the 
interaction is determined in the cognitive domain of the orientee regardless 
of the significance of the message in the cognitive domain of the orienter, 
the denotative function of the message lies only in the cognitive domain of 
the observer and not in the operative effectiveness of the communicative 
interaction. The cooperative conduct that may develop between the inter-
acting organisms from these communicative interactions is a secondary 
process independent of their operative effectiveness. If it appears acceptable 
to talk about transmission of information in ordinary parlance, this is so 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
33 
because the speaker tacitly assumes the listener to be identical with him and 
hence as having the same cognitive domain which he has (which never is the 
case), marvelling when a 'misunderstanding' arises. Such an approach is valid, 
for man created systems of communication where the identity of sender and 
receiver is implicitly or explicitly specified by the designer, and a message, 
unless disturbed during transmission, necessarily selects at the reception the 
same set of states that it represents at the emission, but not for natural 
languages. 
(5) It behooves the interlocutor to choose where to orient in his cognitive 
domain as a result of a linguistic interaction. Since the mechanism of choice, 
as in every neuronal process, is state·dependent, the state of activity from 
which the choice (new state of neuronal activity) must arise restricts the 
possible choices and constitutes a reference background in the orientee. 
The same is valid for the speaker; the state of activity from which his com-
municative description (linguistic utterance) arises constitutes the reference 
background that specifies his choice. All the interactions that independently 
specify the reference background of each interlocutor constitute the context 
in which a given linguistic interaction takes place. Every linguistic interaction 
is thus necessarily context-dependent, and this dependency is strictly deter-
ministic for both orienter and orientee, notwithstanding the different back-
grounds of the two processes. It is only for the observer that there is any 
ambiguity in a linguistic interaction that he observes; this is because he has no 
access to the context in which it occurs. The sentence, 'They are flying 
planes,' is unambiguious for both interlocutors, regardless of the subsequent 
behavior which it originates in each of them; for the observer , however, who 
wants to predict the course of the ensuing interactions, it is ambiguous. 
(6) If one considers linguistic interactions as orienting interactions it is 
apparent that it is not possible to separate, functionally, semantics and syntax, 
however separable they may seem in their description by the observer. This 
is true for two reasons: 
(a) A sequence of communicative descriptions (words in our case) must 
be expected to cause in the orientee a sequence of successive orientations in 
his cognitive domain, each arising from the state left by the previous one. 
'They are flying planes' clearly illustrates this; each successive word orients 
the listener to a particular interaction in his cognitive domain that is relevant 
in a particular manner (apparent in the conduct it generates) that depends on 
the previous orientation. The fact that it seems that the observer can more 
easily describe the word are (or any word) by referring to its grammatical and 

34 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
lexical functions, rather than by specifying the nature of the orientation 
that it causes (in terms of conduct or interactions), should not obscure the 
problem. The observer speaks, and any explanation of the word are that he 
may give lies in the descriptive domain, while the orientation caused by the 
word itself, as a change of state of the listener, is an internal interaction in his 
cognitive domain. 
(b) An entire series of communicative descriptions can itself be a 
communicative description; the whole sequence once completed may orient 
the listener from the perspective of the state to which the sequence itself has 
led him. The limit to such complications lies exclusively in the capacity of the 
nervous system to discriminate between its own discriminable internal states, 
and to interact with them as if with independent entities. 
(7) Linguistic behavior is an historical process of continuous orientation. 
As such, the new state in which the system finds itself after a linguistic 
interaction emerges from the linguistic behavior. The rules of syntax and 
generative grammar [Cf. Chomsky, 1968] refer to regularities that the 
observer sees in the linguistic behavior (as he would see in any behavior) 
which, arising from the functional organization of the system, specify the 
interactions that are possible at any given moment. Such rules, as rules, lie 
exclusively in the cognitive domain of the observer, in the realm of descrip-
tions, because the transitions from state to state as internal processes in 
any system are unrelated to the nature of the interactions to which they 
give rise. Any correlation between different domains of interactions lies 
exclusively in the cognitive domain of the observer, as relations emerging 
from his simultaneous interactions with both. 
(8) The coordinated states of neuronal activity which specify a conduct as 
a series of effector and receptor states whose significance arises in a consensual 
domain, does not differ in its neurophysiological generation from other 
coordinated states of neuronal activity which specify other conducts of innate 
or acquired significance (walking, flying, playing a musical instrument). Thus, 
however complex the motor and sensory coordinations of speech may be, the 
peculiarity of linguistic behavior does not lie in the complexity or nature of 
the series of effector and receptor states that constitute it, but in the relevance 
that such behavior acquires for the maintenance of the basic circularity of the 
interacting organisms through the development of the consensual domain of 
orienting interactions. Speaking, walking, or music-making do not differ in 
the nature of the coordinated neuronal processes which specify them but in 
the sub-domains of interactions in which they acquire their relevance. 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
35 
(9) Orienting behavior in an organism with a nervous system capable of 
interacting recursively with its own states expands its cognitive domain by 
enabling it to interact recursively with descriptions of its interactions. As a 
result: 
(a) Natural language has emerged as a new domain of interactions 
in which the organism is modified by its descriptions of its interactions, 
as they become embodied in states of activity of its nervous system, sub-
jecting its evolution to its interactions in the domains of observation and 
self-consciousness. 
(b) Natural language is necessarily generative because it results from 
the recursive application of the same operation (as a neurophysiological 
process) on the results of this application. 
(c) New sequences of orienting interactions (new sentences) within the 
consensual domain are necessarily understandable by the interlocutor (orient 
him), because each one of their components has definite orienting functions 
as a member of the consensual domain that it contributes to define. 
MEMORY AND LEARNING 
(1) Learning as a process consists in the transformation through experience 
of the behavior of an organism in a manner that is directly or indirectly 
subservient to the maintenance of its basic circularity. Due to the state 
determined organization of the living system in general, and of the nervous 
system in particular, this transformation is an historical process such that 
each mode of behavior constitutes the basis over which a new behavior 
develops, either through changes in the possible states that may arise in it as 
a result of an interaction, or through changes in the transition rules from 
state to state. The organism is thus in a continuous process of becoming that 
is specified through an endless sequence of interactions with independent 
entities that select its changes of state but do not specify them. 
(2) Learning occurs in a manner such that, for the observer, the learned 
behavior of the organism appears justified from the past, through the in-
corporation of a representation of the environment that acts, modifying its 
present behavior by recall; notwithstanding this, the system itself functions 
in the present, and for it learning occurs as an atemporal process of trans-
formation. An organism cannot determine in advance when to change and 
when not to change during its flow of experience, nor can it determine in 

36 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
advance which is the optimal functional state that it must reach; both the 
advantage of any particular behavior and the mode of behavior itself can only 
be determined a posteriori, as a result of the actual behaving of the organism 
subservient to the maintenance of its basic circularity. 
(3) The learning nervous system is a deterministic system with a relativistic 
self-regulating organization that defines its domain of interactions in terms of 
the states of neuronal activity that it maintains constant, both internally and 
at its sensory surfaces, and that specifies these states at any moment through 
its functioning, and through the learning (historical transformation) itself. 
Consequently, it must be able to undergo a continuous transformation, both 
in the states it maintains constant, and in the way it attains them, so that 
every interaction in which new classes of concomitances occur effectively 
modifies it (learning curves) in one direction or the other. Since this trans-
formation must occur as a continuous process of becoming without the 
previous specification of an end state, the final specification and optimization 
of a new behavior can only arise through the cumulative effect of many 
equally directed interactions, each of which selects, from the domain of struc-
tural changes possible to the nervous system in its structural dynamism, that 
which at that moment is congruent with its continued operation subservient 
to the basic circularity of the organism. Otherwise the organism disintegrates. 
(4) The analysis of the nervous system made earlier indicated that the 
states of neuronal activity that arise in it through each interaction embody 
the relations given in the interaction, and not representations of the niche 
or the environment as the observer would describe them. This analysis also 
indicated that functionally such embodiments constitute changes in the reac-
tivity of the nervous system, as a system closed on itself, to the modulating 
influences of further interactions. Consequently what the observer calls 'recall' 
and 'memory' cannot be a process through which the organism confronts 
each new experience with a stored representation of the niche before making 
a decision, but the expression of a modified system capable of synthesizing a 
new behavior relevant to its present state of activity. 
(5) It is known that many neurons change their transfer functions as a 
result of the different concornitances of activity that occur in the neuropils 
of their collector and effector areas. Although it is not known what these 
changes are (development of new synapses or changes ill their size, membrane 
changes, or changes in the pattern of spike invasion at the branching points of 
the axons), it can be expected from the relativistic organization of the nervous 
system that they should result in local morphological and functional changes 
that do not represent any particular interaction, but which permanently alter 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
37 
the reactivity of the system. This anatomical and functional transformation 
of the nervous system must necessarily be occurring continuously as changes 
that the cells are able to stabilize with a permanency that lasts until the 
next modification, which can occur in any direction with respect to the 
previous one, or that subside by themselves after a certain number of inter-
actions, but which are being locally triggered and selected through the actual 
concomitances of activity taking place in the neuropil itself. 
(6) All changes in the nervous system during learning must occur without 
interference with its continued functioning as a self-regulating system; the 
unity that the observer sees in a living system throughout its continuous 
transformation is a strictly functional one. Accordingly, what appears constant 
for the observer when he ascertains that the same behavior is reenacted on a 
different occasion, is a set of relations that he defines as characterizing it, 
regardless of any change in the neurophysiological process through which it is 
attained, or any other unconsidered aspect of the conduct itself. Learning, as 
a relation between successive different modes of conduct of an organism such 
that the present conduct appears as a transformation of a past conduct arising 
from the recall of a specifiable past event, lies in the cognitive domain of the 
observer as a description of his ordered experiences. Likewise, memory as an 
allusion to a representation in the learning organism of its past experiences, 
is also a description by the observer of his ordered interactions with the 
observed organism; memory as a storage of representations of the environment 
to be used on different occasions in recall does not exist as a neurophysio-
logical function. 
(7) It is sufficient for a system to change its state after an interaction 
in a manner such that whenever a similar interaction recurs some internally 
determined concomitant state does not recur, although the same overt 
behavior is reenacted for it to treat two otherwise equivalent interactions as 
different elements of the same class. Such a peculiar state could be described 
as representing the emotional connotation of uncertainty which, present 
whenever a class of interactions is experienced for the first time, is suppressed 
after such an experience; the absence of such a concomitant state would 
suffice henceforth to treat differently (as known) all recurrent interactions of 
the same class. I maintain that modifications of this sort in the reactivity of 
the nervous system constitute the basis for the unidirectional ordering of 
experiences in a living system through 'recognition' without any storage of 
representations of the niche. First interactions that by error of the system 
are not accompanied by the above mentioned concomitant internal state 
(emotional connotation of uncertainty) would be treated as if known, as 

38 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
occurs in the deja vu. Conversely, interference with the suppression of the 
concomitant state of activity corresponding to this emotional connotation 
would result in the treatment of any recurrent interaction as if new (loss of 
recent memory). 
(8) If such a system is capable of discourse, it will generate the temporal 
domain through the ascription of a unidirectional order to its experiences as 
they differ in their emotional connotations, and although it will continue to 
function in the present as an atemporal system, it will interact through its 
descriptions in the temporal domain. Past, present, and future, and time in 
general belong exclusively to the cognitive domain of the observer. 
THE OBSERVER 
Epistemological and Ontological Implications 
(1) The cognitive domain is the entire domain of interactions of the organism. 
The cognitive domain can be enlarged if new modes of interactions are 
generated. Instruments enlarge our cognitive domain. 
(2) The possibility of enlargement of the cognitive domain is unlimited; 
it is a historical process. Our brain, the brain of the observer, has specialized 
during evolution as an instrument for the discrimination of relations, both 
internally and externally generated relations, but relations given through and 
by interactions and embodied in the states of relative activity of its neurons. 
Furthermore, this occurs under circumstances in which the discriminations 
between states of relative activity - that for an observer represent the inter-
actions of the organism, for the nervous system, that operate as a closed 
network - constitute only changes of relations of activity that arise between 
its components while it generates the internal and the sensory motor correla-
tions that the states of the organism select. This has two aspects: one refers 
to the functional organization of the nerve cells which, with their responses, 
discriminate between different states of relative activity impinging upon 
them; the other refers to the ability of the nervous system, as a neuronal 
organization, to discriminate between its own states as these are distinguished 
and specified by the further states of activity that they generate. From this 
capacity of the nervous system to interact discriminately with its own states 
in a continuous process of self-transformation, regardless of how these states 
are generated, behavior emerges as a continuum of self-referred functional 
transformation. We cannot say in absolute terms what constitutes an input 
to our nervous system (the nervous system of the observer), because every 

COGNITIVE FUNCTION IN PARTICULAR 
39 
one of its states can be its input and can modify it as an interacting unit. We 
can say that every internal interaction changes us because it modifies our 
internal state, changing our posture or perspective (as a functional state) 
from which we enter into a new interaction. As a result new relations are 
necessarily created in each interaction and, embodied in new states of activ-
ity, we interact with them in a process that repeats itself as a historical and' 
unlimited transformation. 
(3) The observer generates a spoken description of his cognitive domain 
(which includes his interactions with and through instruments). Whatever 
description he makes, however, that description corresponds to a set of 
permitted states of relative activity in his nervous system embodying the 
relations given in his interactions. These permitted states of relative activity 
and those recursively generated by them are made possible by the anatomical 
and functional organization of the nervous system through its capacity to 
interact with its own states. The nervous system in turn has evolved as a 
system structurally and functionally subservient to the basic circularity of the 
living organization, and hence, embodies an inescapable logic: that logic 
which allows for a match between the organization of the living system and 
the interactions into which it can enter without losing its identity. 
(4) The observer can describe a system that gives rise to a system that 
can describe, hence, to an observer. A spoken explanation is a paraphrase, a 
description of the synthesis of that which is to be explained; the observer 
explains the observer. A spoken explanation, however, lies in the domain of 
discourse. Only a full reproduction is a full explanation. 
(5) The domain of discourse is a closed domain, and it is not possible to 
step outside of it through discourse. Because the domain of discourse is a 
closed domain it is possible to make the following ontological statement: 
the logic of the description is the logic of the describing (living) system (and 
his cognitive domain). 
(6) This logic demands a substratum for the occurrence of the discourse. 
We cannot talk about this substratum in absolute terms, however, because 
we would have to describe it, and a description is a set of interactions into 
which the describer and the listener can enter, and their discourse about these 
interactions will be another set of descriptive interactions that will remain in 
the same domain. Thus, although this substratum is required for epistemologi-
cal reasons, nothing can be said about it other than what is meant in the 
ontological statement above. 
(7) We as observers live in a domain of discourse interacting with descrip-
tions of our descriptions in a recursive manner, and thus continuously generate 

40 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
new elements of interaction. As living systems, however, we are closed 
systems modulated by interactions through which we defme independent 
entities whose only reality lies in the interactions that specify them (their 
Description). 
(8) For epistemological reasons we can say: there are properties which 
are manifold and remain constant through interactions. The invariance of 
properties through interactions provides a functional origin to entities or 
units of interactions; since entities are generated through the interactions 
that defme them (properties), entities with different classes of properties 
generate independent domains of interactions: no reductionism is possible. 

V. PROBLEMS IN THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF 
COGNITION 
(I) The observer can always remain in a domain of interactions encompassing 
his own interactions; he has a nervous system capable of interacting with its 
own states, which, by doing so in a functional context that defines these 
states as representations of the interactions from which they arise, allows him 
to interact recursively with representations of his interactions. This is possible 
because due to the general mode of organization of the nervous system there 
is no intrinsic difference between its internally and externally generated states 
of activity, and because each one of its specific states of activity is specifiable 
only in reference to other states of activity of the system itself. 
(2) An organism with a nervous system capable of interacting with its own 
states is capable of descriptions and of being an observer if its states arise 
from learned orienting interactions in a consensual domain: it can describe 
its describing [Cf. Gardner and Gardner, 1969]. Through describing itself 
in a recursive manner, such an organism becomes a self-observing system 
that generates the domain of self-consciousness as a domain of self-observa-
tion. Self-consciousness then is not a neurophysiological phenomenon, it 
is a consensual phenomenon emerging in an independent domain of inter-
actions from self-orienting behavior and lies entirely in the linguistic domain. 
The implications are twofold: 
(a) The linguistic domain as a domain of orienting behavior requires at 
least two interacting organisms with comparable domains of interactions, so 
that a cooperative system of consensual interactions may be developed in 
which the emerging conduct of the two organisms is relevant for both. The 
specifiability through learning of the orienting interactions allows for a 
purely consensual (cultural) evolution in this domain, without it necessarily 
involving any further evolution of the nervous system; for this reason the 
linguistic domain in general, and the domain of self-consciousness in partic-
ular, are, in principle, independent of the biological substratum that generates 
them. However, in the actual becoming of the living system this independence 
is incomplete, on the one hand because the anatomical and neurophysiological 
organization of the brain, by determining the actual possibilities of confluence 
of different states of activity in it, specifies both the domain of possible 
41 

42 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
interactions of the organism with relations and the complexity of the patterns 
of orienting interactions that it can distinguish, and on the other hand because 
the necessary subservience of the linguistic domain to the maintenance of 
the basic circularity of the organism through the generation of modes of 
behavior that directly or indirectly satisfy it limits the type of conduct that 
the organism can have without an immediate or eventual disintegration, or, of 
course, reduced rate of reproduction. Consequently, then, although the 
purely consensual aspects of the cultural evolution are independent of a 
simultaneous evolution of the nervous system, those aspects of the cultural 
evolution which depend on the possibility of establishing new classes of 
concomitances of activity in the nervous system, and generate new relations 
between otherwise independent domains, are not thus independent. Accord-
ingly, once a cultural domain is established, the subsequent evolution of the 
nervous system is necessarily subordinated to it in the measure that it deter-
mines the functional validity of the new kinds of concomitances of activity 
that may arise in the nervous system through genetic variability. 
(b) Since self-consciousness and the linguistic domain in general are not 
neurophysiological phenomena, it is impossible to account for them in terms 
of excitation, inhibition, networks, coding, or whatever else is the stuff of 
neurophysiology. In fact, the linguistic domain is fully explained only by 
showing how it emerges from the recursive application of orienting inter-
actions on the results of their applications without being restricted as a do-
main by the neurophysiological substratum; what indeed is the problem is the 
need to account in purely physiological terms, without reference to meaning, 
for the synthesis of behavior in general, and for the synthesis of orienting 
behavior in particular. Accordingly, the fundamental quest in this respect 
should be to understand and explain 
(i) how does the nervous system interact with its own states, and 
is modified by them as if they were independent entities?; 
(ii) how are these states specified neurophysiologically if they 
are defined by their own effectiveness in bringing forth certain 
internal or sensory states in the system?; 
(iii) how is a given effector performance synthesized that is 
defined by the relative states of activity that it generates in the 
sensory surfaces and in the system itself?; and 
(iv) how do the double or triple internal anatomical projections 

PROBLEMS IN THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
43 
of the nervous system onto itself determine its capacity to single 
out some of its own states and interact with them independently? 
(3) At any moment each nerve cell responds in a deterministic manner, 
and according to well defined transfer functions to classes of spatio-temporal 
activity caused at its collector area by the afferent influences impinging upon 
it; this occurs independently of how these afferent influences arise. This 
mode of cellular operation constitutes the basis for an associative process in 
which, whenever a given state of activity is produced in the nervous system, 
all neurons for which this state generates the proper classes of afferent 
influences enter into activity. Association thus conceived neurophysiologically 
is an inevitable process that calls into activity all cells that can be activated 
at any moment by a given state of the nervous system. No consideration of 
meaning enters into such a notion, since meaning, as a description by the 
observer, refers to the relevance that a mode of behavior has in the main-
tenance of the basic circularity of the organism as a consequence of self-
regulation, and not in the mechanisms of the genesis of conduct. Association 
in terms of representations related by meaning lies in the cognitive domain 
of the observer exclusively. The nervous system is a system that functions 
maintaining constant certain states of relative activity, both internally and 
at the sensory surfaces, with reference only to some of its other states of 
relative activity. In this context the following considerations about its func-
tional organization are significant: 
(a) The nervous system can be described as a system that has evolved 
to specialize in the discrimination between states of neuronal relative activity 
(particularly in man) each of which is defined by the behavior it generates. 
This is valid for innate and learned behavior in circumstances in which every 
behavior is defined either by a set of states of activity maintained constant, 
or by their path of variation, both internally and at the sensory surfaces. 
(b) The basic connectivity of the nervous system, and the original 
reactive capacity of the nerve cells, with which any animal is endowed by 
development, secures a basic pattern of flow for the nervous activity origi-
nating at any point in it. Thus, development specifies and determines both an 
initial repertoire of behavior over which all new conduct is built in a historical 
process of transformation, and an initial structurally specified set of possible 
associations that changes in an integrated manner with the historical trans-
formation of behavior [Cf. Lorenz, 1966]. 
(c) Any modification of the transfer function of a nerve cell, resulting 

44 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
from new concomitances of activity, occurs modifying a preexisting behavio~ 
in a system that operates through maintaining invariant its definitory internal 
relations. In fact, any local change that would lead to the synthesis of a modi-
fied conduct by the organism, must be immediately accompanied by other 
changes arising through the adjustments that this must undergo in the process 
of maintaining constant its internal relations under its changed behavior. This 
is why it is the immediate relevance of a conduct for the maintenance of the 
organism in the present which at any moment selects the changes that take 
place during learning, and not the possible value of the conduct for future 
action. 
(d) It is apparent that the nervous system cannot determine in advance 
the concomitances of activity under which it should change in a permanent 
manner; for it to satisfy future needs of the organism, it must operate under 
non-predictive changes continuously selected by the concomitances of activ-
ity arising in it. For this the nervous system must be capable of successful 
operation under the continuous transformation of its capacity to synthesize 
behavior, which necessarily results from a continuous change of the neuro-
physiological concomitances that determine the effective spatio-temporal 
configuration of activity impinging on the collector areas of its component 
neurons. Accordingly, it would seem of fundamental importance for the 
functional transformation of the system that many of its neurons should be 
able to change their relative participation in the synthesis of behavior as 
elements of different states of relative neuronal activity, independently of 
whether or not this is accompanied by any change in their transfer functions. 
In these circumstances the actual problem for the successful operation of the 
nervous system is the generation at any moment of the optimal configuration 
of activity necessary to synthesize a given behavior. However, since this 
continuous transformation of the functional capacity of the nervous system 
necessarily occurs under continuously successful behavior, such optimization 
requires no other specification than its attainment through the converging 
transformation of behavior itself. 
(e) Since the nervous system is an inferential system, that is, since it 
functions as if any state that occurred once will occur again, a significant 
feature of its organization must be its necessary and continuous transformation 
as a function of the new concomitances of activity occurring in it. This 
functional requirement could be satisfied, for example, if any new local 
concomitance of activity in the neuropils changes the nerve cells in a deter-
ministic and specific manner which does not represent any entity or event, 
but which modifies the neurophysiological circumstances under which the 

PROBLEMS IN THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
45 
corresponding postsynaptic neurons are activated. Such can occur if the 
probability of spike invasion at the branching points of the afferent axons in 
the neuropils is permanently modified in one direction or another by the 
coincident novel activity in the neighboring structures, which, in the absence 
of synaptic interactions, cause, through local currents, local processes of 
growth or ungrowth in the branching zones of these axons. If this were the 
case four things would occur: 
(i) The state of the nervous system would change, and hence, also its 
conduct, according to the new concomitances of activity produced in the 
neuropils through its different interactions. 
(ii) Each state of activity of the system (as a state of relative neuronal 
activity) would be defined by the concomitances of activity in the neuropil 
that generate it, such that if they recur, it recurs. 
(iii) Each new functional state of the neuropils would necessarily 
constitute the basis for their further modification, in such a manner that 
their morphological and functional organization would be under continuous 
historical transformation. 
(iv) These changes in the neuropils would change the participation of 
the different neurons in the synthesis of behavior, independently of whether 
or not there are also changes in their transfer functions, by changing the 
circumstances of their activation. Accordingly, if an interaction (as described 
by the observer) recurs, no past conduct could be strictly reenacted by the 
,organism, but this would have to synthesize a new adequate behavior that 
generates, in the context of its present interaction and in a manner that be-
came specified through its structural transformation along its history of inter-
actions, the internal and sensory motor correlations that maintain its identity. 
(4) Learning is not a process of accumulation of representations of the 
environment; it is a continuous process of transformation of behavior through 
continuous change in the capacity of the nervous system to synthesize it. 
Recall does not depend on the indefinite retention of a structural invariant 
that represents an entity (an idea, image, or symbol), but on the functional 
ability of the system to create, when certain recurrent conditions are given, 
a behavior that satisfies the recurrent demands or that the observer would 
class as a reenacting of a previous one. As a consequence, the quest in the 
study of the learning process must answer two basic questions: 
'What changes can a neuron undergo (in any of its component 
parts) which it can maintain constant for a certain time, and 

46 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
which modify in a definite manner its possible participation in 
different configurations of relative neuronal activity?'; and 
'What organization of the nervous system would permit continu-
ous changes in the relative activity of its anatomical components, 
as a result of different concomitances in their activity, and still 
permit the synthesis of a conduct that is defined only by the 
states of relative neuronal activity that it generates, and not by 
the compGnents used?'. 
(5) The nervous system is a strictly deterministic system whose structure 
specifies the possible modes of conduct that may emerge (be synthesized) 
from its functioning in a manner that varies according to the species, and the 
reactive perspective from which these modes of conduct may emerge. The 
reactive perspective, which the observer would call the emotional tone, does 
not specify a particular conduct, but determines the nature (aggressive, fearful, 
timid, etc.) of the course of the interaction [Cf. Kilmer, McCulloch and 
Blum, 1968]. Changes during development, maturation, hormonal action, 
drugs, or learning, do not modify the deterministic character of this organiza-
tion but change the capacity that the system has at any moment to synthesize 
behavior. Furthermore, although any conduct or functional state always 
arises through a process of historical transformation from pre-existing modes 
of conduct or functional states, the nervous system functions in the present, 
and past history does not participate as an operant neurophysiological factor 
in the synthesis of conduct; nor does meaning, the relevance that a particular 
mode of conduct has, participate in it either. Time and meaning are effective 
factors in the linguistic domain, but as relational entities do not have neuro-
physiological correlates in the operation of the nervous system. Nor is the 
functional unity of the nervous system attained through a specific feature 
of its organization, but emerges from the functioning of its components 
(whatever these may be), each one to its own accord, under circumstances 
that defme the ensemble as a unit of interactions in a particular domain [Cf. 
Lindauer, 1967, as an example in a social organism], and has no reality 
independent of these circumstances. Thus there is no peculiar neurophysio-
logical process that could be shown to be responsible for this unity and to 
explain it. Furthermore, in a strict sense, although the nervous system has 
anatomical components it does not have functional parts since any mutilation 
leaves a functioning unit, with different properties as expressed by its possible 
interactions, but a unit in the corresponding domain. It appears incomplete 
only for the observer who beholds it as an entity from the perspective of 

PROBLEMS IN THE NEUROPHYSIOLOGY OF COGNITION 
47 
what he thinks it should be. Each component of the nervous system that the 
observer describes is defmed in the domain of interactions of his observations, 
and as such is alien to the system which it is supposed to integrate. Every 
function has a structure which embodies it and makes it possible, but this 
structure is defmed by the function in the domain of its operation as a set of 
relations between elements also defined in this domain. Neurons are the 
anatomical units of the nervous system, but are not the structural elements 
of its functioning. The structural elements of the functioning nervous system 
have not yet been defined, and it will probably be apparent when they are 
defined that they must be expressed in terms of invariants of relative activities 
between neurons, in some manner embodied in invariants of relations of 
interconnections, and not in terms of separate anatomical entities. In man-
made systems this conceptual difficulty has not been so apparent because the 
system of relations (the theory) that integrates the parts that the describer 
(the observer) defines is provided by him, and is specified in his domain of 
interactions; as a consequence, these relations appear so obvious to the 
observer that he treats them as arising from the observation of the parts, and 
deludes himself, denying that he provides the unformulated theory that 
embodies the structure of the system which he projects onto them. In a self-
referring system like a living system the situation is different: the observer 
can only make a description of his interactions with parts that he defines 
through interactions, but these parts lie in his cognitive domain only. Unless 
he explicitly or implicitly provides a theory that embodies the relational 
structure of the system, and conceptually supersedes his description of the 
components, he can never understand it. Accordingly, the full explanation of 
the organization of the nervous system (and of the organism) will not arise 
from any particular observation or detailed description and enumeration of 
its parts, but rather like any explanation, from the synthesis, conceptual or 
concrete, of a system that does what the nervous system (or the organism) 
does. 

VI. CONCLUSIONS 
The aim set forth in the introduction has been accomplished. Through the 
description of the self-referring circular organization of the living system, and 
through the analysis d the domains of interactions that such an organization 
specifies, I have shown the emergence of a self-referring system capable of 
making descriptions and of generating, through orienting interactions with 
other, similar, systems and with itself, both a consensual linguistic domain 
and a domain of self-consciousness, that is: I have shown the emergence of 
the observer. This result alone satisfies the fundamental demand put forth at 
the outset: 'The observer is a living system and any understanding of cognition 
as a biological phenomenon must account for the observer and his role in it', 
and proves the validity of this analysis. 
Although the answers to the various questions posed in the introduction 
and the fundamental implications of the analysis are to be found in the text 
itself to the extent that the theory adequately founds its whole development, 
there are several conclusions that I would like to state explicitly: 
(i) The living organization is a circular organization which secures the 
production or maintenance of the components that specify it in such a 
manner that the product of their functioning is the very same organization 
that produces them. Accordingly, a living system is an homeostatic system 
whose homeostatic organization has its own organization as the variable 
that it maintains constant through the production and functioning of the 
components that specify it, and is defined as a unit of interactions by this 
very organization. It follows that living systems are a subclass of the class of 
circular and homeostatic systems. Also, it is apparent that the components 
referred to above cannot be specified as parts of the living system by the 
observer who can only subdivide a system in parts that he defines through his 
interactions, and which, necessarily, lie exclusively in his cognitive domain 
and are operationally determined by his mode of analysis. Furthermore, the 
relations through which the observer claims that these parts constitute a 
unitary system are relations that arise only through him by his simultaneous 
interactions with the parts and the intact system, and, hence, belong ex-
clusively to his cognitive domain. Thus, although the observer can decompose 
48 

CONCLUSIONS 
49 
a living system into parts that he defines, the description of these parts does 
not and cannot represent a living system. In principle a part should be de-
finable through its relations within the unit that it contributes to form by its 
operation and interactions with other parts; this, however, cannot be attained 
because the analysis of a unit into parts by the observer destroys the very 
relations that would be significant for their characterization as effective 
components of the unit. Furthermore, these relations cannot be recovered 
through a description which lies in the cognitive domain of the observer and 
reflects only his interactions with the new units that he creates through his 
analysis. Accordingly, in a strict sense a unit does not have parts, and a unit 
is a unit only to the extent that it has a domain of interactions that defines 
it as different from that with respect to which it is a unit, and can be referred 
to only, as done above with the living system, by characterizing its organiza-
tion through the domain of interactions which specify this distinction. In 
this context, the notion of component is necessary only for epistemological 
reasons in order to refer to the genesis of the organization of the unit through 
our description, but this use does not reflect the nature of its composition. 
(li) For every living system its particular case of self-referring circular 
organization specifies a closed domain of interactions that is its cognitive 
domain, and no interaction is possible for it which is not prescribed by this 
organization. Accordingly, for every living system the process of cognition 
consists in the creation of a field of behavior through its actual conduct in its 
closed domain of interactions, and not in the apprehension or the description 
of an independent universe. Our cognitive process (the cognitive process of 
the observer) differs from the cognitive processes of other organisms only in 
the kinds of interactions into which we can enter, such as linguistic inter-
actions, and not in the nature of the cognitive process itself. In this strictly 
subject-dependent creative process, inductive inference is a necessary function 
(mode of conduct) that emerges as a result of the self-referring circular 
organization which treats every interaction and the internal state that it 
generates as if it were to be repeated, and as if an element of a class. Hence, 
functionally, for a living system every experience is the experience of a 
general case, and it is the particular case, not the general one, which requires 
many independent experiences in order that it be specified through the 
intersection of various classes of interactions. Consequently, although due 
to the historical transformation they have caused in organisms, or in their 
nervous systems, past interactions determine the inductive inferences that 
these make in the present, they do not participate in the inductive process 

50 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
itself. Inductive inference as a structural property of the living organization 
and of the thinking process, is independent of history, or of the relations 
between past and present that belong only to the domain of the observer. 
(iii) Linguistic interactions orient the listener within his cognitive 
domain, but do not specify the course of his ensuing conduct. The basic 
function of language as a system of orienting behavior is not the transmission 
of information or the description of an independent universe about which 
we can talk, but the creation of a consensual domain of behavior between 
linguistically interacting systems through the development of a cooperative 
domain of interactions. 
(iv) Through language we interact in a domain of descriptions within 
which we necessarily remain even when we make assertions about the universe 
or about our knowledge of it. This domain is both bounded and infinite; 
bounded because everything we say is a description, and infinite because 
every description constitutes in us the basis for new orienting interactions, 
and hence, for new descriptions. From this process of recursive application of 
descriptions self-consciousness emerges as a new phenomenon in a domain 
of self-description, with no other neurophysiological substratum than the 
neurophysiological substratum of orienting behavior itself. The domain of 
self-consciousness as a domain of recursive self-descriptions is thus also 
bounded and infinite. 
(v) A living system is not a goal-directed system; it is, like the nervous 
system, a stable state-determined and strictly deterministic system closed on 
itself and modulated by interactions not specified through its conduct. These 
modulations, however, are apparent as modulations only for the observer 
who beholds the organism or the nervous system externally, from his own 
conceptual (descriptive) perspective, as lying in an environment and as 
elements in his domain of interactions. Contrariwise, for the functioning of 
the self-referring system itself all that there is is the sequence of its own self-
subservient states. If this distinction is not made, one is liable to fail by 
including in the explanation of the organism and the nervous system features 
of interactions (descriptions) that belong exclusively to the cognitive domain 
of the observer. 
(vi) It is tempting to talk about the nervous system as one would talk 
about a stable system with input. This I reject because it misses entirely the 
point by introducing the distortion of our participation as observers into the 
explanation of systems whose organization must be understood as entirely 

CONCLUSIONS 
51 
self-referring. What occurs in a living system is analogous to what occurs in an 
instrumental flight where the pilot does not have access to the outside world 
and must function only as a controller of the values shown in his flight 
instruments. His task is to secure a path of variations in the readings of his 
instruments, either according to a prescribed plan, or to one that becomes 
specified by these readings. When the pilot steps out of the plane he is be-
wildered by the congratulations of his friends on account of the perfect flight 
and landing that he performed in absolute darkness. He is perplexed because 
to his knowledge all that he did at any moment was to maintain the readings 
of his instruments within certain specified limits, a task which is in no way re-
presented by the description that his friends (observers) make of his conduct. 
In terms of their functional organization living systems do not have inputs 
and outputs, although under perturbations they maintain constant their set 
states, and it is only in our descriptions, when we include them as parts of 
larger systems which we define, that we can say that they do. When we adopt 
this descriptive approach in our analysis of the living organization we cannot 
but subordinate our understanding of it to notions valid only for man-made 
(allo-referring) systems, where indeed input and output functions are all 
important through the purposeful design of their role in the larger systems 
in which they are included, and this is misleading. In the organization of the 
living systems the role of the effector surfaces is only to maintain constant 
the set states of the receptor surfaces, not to act upon an environment, no 
matter how adequate such a description may seem to be for the analysis 
of adaptation, or other processes; a grasp of this is fundamental for the under-
standing of the organization ofliving systems. 
(vii) The cognitive domain of the observer is bounded but unlimited; 
he can in an endless recursive manner interact with representations of his 
interactions and generate through himself relations between otherwise in-
dependent domains. These relations are novelties which, arising through the 
observer, have no other (and no less) effectiveness than that given to them by 
his behavior. Thus,he both creates (invents) relations and generates (specifies) 
the world (domain of interactions) in which he lives by continuously expand-
ing his cognitive domain through recursive descriptions and representations 
of his interactions. The new, then, is a necessary result of the historical 
organization of the observer that makes of every attained state the starting 
point for the specification of the next one, which thus cannot be a strict 
repetition of any previous state; creativity is the cultural expression of this 
unavoidable feature. 

52 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
(viii) The logic of the description and, hence, of behavior in general is, 
necessarily, the logic of the describing system; given behavior as a referential 
and deterministic sequence of states of nervous activity in which each state 
determines the next one within the same frame of reference, no contradiction 
can possibly arise in it as long as the latter remains unchanged by intercurrent 
interactions. If a change in the frame of reference takes place while a given 
behavior develops, a new one appears, such that the states following the 
change are determined with respect to it. If the new sequence of states 
(behavior) appears to an observer as contradicting the previous ones, this is 
so because he provides an independent and constant frame of reference in 
relation to which the successive sequences of states (behaviors) are contradic-
tory. Such contradiction, however, lies exclusively in the cognitive domain of 
the observer, or of whatever provides the independent constant frame of 
reference. Contradictions (inconsistencies) then, do not arise in the generation 
of behavior but pertain to a domain in which the different behaviors acquire 
their significance by confronting an encompassing frame of reference through 
the interactions of the organism. Accordingly, thinking and discourse as 
modes of behavior are necessarily logically consistent in their generation, 
and that which the observer calls rational in them because they appear as 
concatenations of non-contradictory sequence dependent descriptions, is an 
expression of this necessary logical consistency. It follows that inconsistencies 
(irrationalities) in thinking and discourse as they appear to the observer arise 
from contextual changes in the circumstances that generate them while the 
independent frame of reference provided by the observer remains unchanged. 
(ix) Due to the nature of the cognitive process and the function 
of the linguistic interactions, we cannot say anything about that which is 
independent of us and with which we cannot interact; to do that would imply 
a description and a description as a mode of conduct represents only relations 
given in interactions. Because the logic of the description is the same as the 
logic of the describing system we can assert the epistemological need for a 
substratum for the interactions to occur, but we cannot characterize this 
substratum in terms of properties independent of the observer. From this it 
follows that reality as a universe of independent entities about which we can 
talk is, necessarily, a fiction of the purely descriptive domain, and that we 
should in fact apply the notion of reality to this very domain of descriptions 
in which we, the describing system, interact with our descriptions as if with 
independent entities. This change in the notion of reality must be properly 
understood. We are used to talking about reality orienting each other through 

CONCLUSIONS 
53 
linguistic interactions to what we deem are sensory experiences of concrete 
entities, but which have turned out to be, as are thoughts and descriptions, 
states of relative activity between neurons that generate new descriptions. 
The question, 'What is the object of knowledge?' becomes meaningless. There 
is no object of knowledge. To know is to be able to operate adequately in an 
individual or cooperative situation. We cannot speak about the substratum in 
which our cognitive behavior is given, and about that of which we cannot 
speak, we must remain silent, as indicated by Wittgenstein. This silence, 
however, does not mean that we fall into solipsism or any sort of metaphysical 
idealism. It means that we recognize that we, as thinking systems, live in a 
domain of descriptions, as has already been indicated by Berkeley, and that 
through descriptions we can indefinitely increase the complexity of our 
cognitive domain. Our view of the universe and of the questions we ask must 
change accordingly. Furthermore, this re-emergence of reality as a domain 
of descriptions does not contradict determinism and predictability in the 
different domains of interactions; on the contrary, it gives them foundation 
by showing that they are a necessary consequence of the isomorphism be-
tween the logic of the description and the logic of the describing system. It 
also shows that determinism and predictability are valid only within the field 
of this isomorphism; that is, they are valid only for the interactions that 
define a domain. 
(x) The genetic and nervous systems are said to code information 
about the environment and to represent it in their functional organization. 
This is untenable; the genetic and nervous systems code processes that specify 
series of transformations from intial states, which can be decoded only 
through their actual implementation, not descriptions that the observer 
makes of an environment which lies exclusively in his cognitive domain [Cf. 
Bernal, 1965] . The following is an illustration of the problem: 
Let us suppose that we want to build two houses. For such a purpose we 
hire two groups of thirteen workers each. We name one of the workers of the 
first group as the group leader and give him a book which contains all the 
plans of the house showing in a standard way the layout of walls, water pipes, 
electric connections, windows, etc., plus several views in perspective of the 
finished house. The workers study the plans and under the guidance of the 
leader construct the house, approximating continuously the final state 
prescribed by the description. In the second group we do not name a leader, 
we only arrange the workers in a starting line in the field and give each 
of them a book, the same book for all, containing only neighborhood in-

54 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
structions. These instructions do not contain words such as house, pipes, 
or windows, nor do they contain drawings or plans of the house to be con-
structed; they contain only instructions of what a worker should do in the 
different positions and in the different relations in which he finds himself as 
his position and relations change. 
Although these books are all identical the workers read and apply different 
instructions because they start from different positions and follow different 
paths of change. The end result in both cases is the same, namely, a house. 
The workers of the first group, however, construct something whose final 
appearance they know all the time, while the workers of the second group 
have no views of what they are building, nor do they need to have obtained 
them even when they are finished. For the observer both groups are building 
a house, and he knows it from the start, but the house that the second group 
builds lies only in his cognitive domain; the house built by the first group, 
however, is also in the cognitive domains of the workers. The coding is 
obviously different in the two cases. In fact, the instructions contained in the 
book given to the first group clearly code the house as the observer would 
describe it, and the decoding task of the workers consists in purposefully 
doing things that will approximate to the construction of the described fmal 
state; this is why the house must be in their cognitive domain. In the second 
case, the instructions contained in each one of the thirteen identical books 
do not code a house. They code a process that constitutes a path of changing 
relationships which, if carried through under certain conditions, results in a 
system with a domain of interactions which has no intrinsic relationship with 
the beholding observer. That the observer should call this system a house is 
a feature of his cognitive domain, not of the system itself. In the first case 
the coding is isomorphic with a description of the house by the observer, and 
in fact constitutes a representation of it; in the second case it is not. The first 
case is typical of the way in which the observer codes the systems that he 
builds; the second corresponds to the way that the genome and nervous 
system constitute codes for the organism and for behavior, respectively, and 
one would never find in these codes any isomorphism with the description 
that the observer would make of the resultant systems with which he inter-
acts. In what sense could one then say that the genetic and nervous systems 
code information about the environment? The notion of information refers 
to the observer's degree of uncertainty in his behavior within a domain of 
alternatives defined by him, hence the notion of information only applies 
within his cognitive domain. Accordingly, what one could at most say is 
that the genetic and nervous systems generate information through their 

CONCLUSIONS 
55 
self-specification when witnessed by the observer as if in their progressive self-
decoding into growth and behavior. 
(xi) There are different domains of interactions, and these different 
domains cannot explain each other because it is not possible to generate the 
phenomena of one domain with the elements of another; one remains in the 
same domain. One domain may generate the elements of another domain, but 
not its phenomenology, which in each domain is specified by the interactions 
of its elements, and the elements of a domain become defmed only through 
the domain that they generate. Any nexus between different domains is 
provided by the observer who can interact as if with a single entity with the 
conjoined states of nervous activity generated in his brain by his concomitant 
interactions in several domains, or with independent descriptions of these 
interactions. Through these concomitant interactions in different domains (or 
with several descriptions within the descriptive domain) the observer generates 
relations between different domains (or between different descriptions) as 
states of neuronal activity that in him lead to definite modes of conduct 
(descriptions) that represent these conjoined interactions as singular in-
dependent entities. The number and kinds of relations the observer can 
generate in this manner is potentially infinite due to his recursive interactions 
with descriptions. Thus, relations, as states of neuronal activity arising from 
the concurrent interactions of the observer in different domains (physical and 
relational) constitute the elements of a new domain in which the observer 
interacts as a thinking system, but do not reduce one phenomenological 
domain into another. It is the simultaneous logical isomorphism of the new 
element (relations) with their source systems through their mode of origin 
(class intersection) that gives the new domain thus generated (descriptions) 
its explanatory capacity. An explanation is always a reproduction, either a 
concrete one through the synthesis of an equivalent physical system, or a 
conceptual one through a description from which emerges a system logically 
isomorphic to the original one, but never a reduction of one phenomenologi-
cal domain into another. An adequate understanding of this irreducibility is 
essential for the comprehension of the biological phenomena, the consensual 
domains that living systems generate, and their conjoined evolution. 
Many conclusions about self·consciousness and knowledge which arise 
from this mode of analysis have been proposed in one way or another by 
scientists and philosophers from their intuitive understanding, but never, to 
my knowledge, with an adequate biological and epistemological foundation. 
This I have done through the distinction between what pertains to the domain 

56 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
of the observer, and what pertains to the domain of the organism, and through 
carrying to their ultima·te consequences the implications of the circular 
self-referring organization of the living systems: the implications of the 
functionally closed nature of the relativistic organization of the nervous 
system as a system under continuous transformation determined by relations 
of neuronal activity without the system ever stepping outside itself; and 
the implications of the non-informative orienting function of linguistic 
interactions. It is only after this has been done that the functional complexity 
of the living and linguistically interacting system can be properly grasped 
without its being concealed through such magic words as consciousness, 
symbolization, or information. Most of the detailed work is yet to be done, 
of course, but the fundamental first step of defining the perspective from 
which to look has here been taken. As a final remark, one could say what 
appears to be another paradox, but which points to the conceptual problem: 
Living systems in general, and their nervous system in particular, 
are not made to handle a medium, although it has been through 
the evolution of their handling of their medium that they have 
become what they are, such that we can say what we can say 
about them. 

POST SCRIPTUM 
No scientific work should be done without recognizing its ethical implications; 
in the present case the following deserve special attention: 
(i) Man is a deterministic and relativistic self-referring autonomous system 
whose life acquires its peculiar dimension through self-consciousness; ethic 
and morality arise as commentaries that he makes on his behavior through 
self-observation. He lives in a continuously changing domain of descriptions 
that he generates through recursive interactions within that domain, and 
which has no other constant element in its historical transformation than his 
maintained identity as an interacting system. That is, man changes and lives in 
a changing frame of reference in a world continuously created and transformed 
by him. Successful interactions directly or indirectly subservient to the 
maintenance of his living organization constitute his only fmal source of 
reference for valid behavior within the domain of descriptions, and, hence, 
for truth; but, since living systems are self-referential systems, any final frame 
of reference is, necessarily, relative. Accordingly, no absolute system of values 
is possible and all truth and falsehood in the cultural domain are necessarily 
relative. 
(ii) Language does not transmit information and its functional role is the 
creation of a cooperative domain of interactions between speakers through 
the development of a common frame of reference, although each speaker acts 
exclusively within his cognitive domain where all ultimate truth is contingent 
to personal experience. Since a frame of reference is defined by the classes of 
choices which it specifies, linguistic behavior cannot but be rational, that is, 
determined by relations of necessity within the frame of reference within 
which it develops. Consequently, no one can ever be rationally convinced 
of a truth which he did not have already implicitly in his ultimate body of 
beliefs. 
(iii) Man is a rational animal that constructs his rational systems as all 
rational systems are constructed, that is, based on arbitrarily accepted truths 
(premises); being himself a relativistic self-referring deterministic system this 
cannot be otherwise. But if only a relative, arbitrarily chosen system of 
reference is possible, the unavoidable task of man as a self-conscious animal 
that can be an observer of its own cognitive processes is to explicitly choose a 
57 

58 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
frame of reference for his system of values. This task he has always avoided 
by resorting to god as an absolute source of truth, or to self-delusion through 
reason, which can be used to justify anything by confusing the frames of 
reference and arguing in one domain with relations valid in another. The 
ultimate truth on which a man bases his rational conduct is necessarily 
subordinated to his personal experience and appears as an act of choice 
expressing a preference that cannot be transferred rationally; accordingly, 
the alternative to reason, as a source for a universal system of values, is 
aesthetic seduction in favor of a frame of reference specifically designed to 
comply with his desires (and not his needs) and defining the functions to be 
satisfied by the world (cultural and material) in which he wants to live. 

AUTOPOIESIS 
The Organization a/the Living 
1973 
by 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA 
and 
FRANCISCO J . VARELA 

T ABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREF ACE by Sir Stafford Beer 
INTRODUCTION 
1. 
ON MACHINES, LIVING AND OTHERWISE 
1. 
Machines 
2. 
Living Machines 
II. 
DISPENSABILITY OF TELEONOMY 
1. 
Purposelessness 
2. 
Individuality 
III. 
EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
1. 
Descriptive and Causal Notions 
2. 
Molecular Embodiments 
3. 
Origin 
IV. 
DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
1. 
Subordination to the Condition of Unity 
2. 
Plasticity of Ontogeny 
3. 
Reproduction, a Complication of the Unity 
4. 
Evolution, a Historical Network 
5. 
Second and Third Order Autopoietic Systems 
V. 
PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
1. 
Biological Implications 
2. 
Epistemological Implications 
3. 
Cognitive Implications 
APPENDIX: The Nervous System 
GLOSSARY 
63 
73 
77 
77 
78 
85 
85 
87 
88 
88 
90 
93 
96 
96 
98 
100 
102 
107 
112 
112 
115 
118 
124 
135 

STAFFORD BEER 
PREFACE 
This small book is very large: it contains the living universe. It is a privilege 
to be asked to write this preface, and a delight to do so. That is because I 
recognize here a really important book, both in general and specifically. 
Before talking about the specific contents at all, I would like to explain why 
this is in general so. 
IN GENERAL 
We are the inheritors 'of categorized knowledge; therefore we inherit also a 
world view that consists of parts strung together, rather than of wholes 
regarded through different sets of filters. Historically, synthesis seems to have 
been too much for the human mind - where pratical affairs were concerned. 
The descent of the synthetic method from Plato through Augustine took 
men's perception into literature, art and mysticism. The modern world of 
science and technology is bred from Aristotle and Aquinas by analysis. The 
categorization that took hold of medieval scholasticism has really lasted it 
out. We may see with hindsight that the historic revolts against the scholastics 
did not shake free from the shackles of their reductionism. 
The revolt of the rationalists - Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz - began from 
a principle of 'methodical doubt'. But they became lost in mechanism, 
dualism, more and more categorization; and they ended in denying relation 
altogether. But relation is the stuff of system. Relation is the essence of 
synthesis. The revolt of the empiricists -
Locke, Berkeley, Hume - began 
from the nature of understanding about the environment. But analysis was 
still the method, and categorization still the practical tool of advance. In the 
bizarre outcome, whereby it was the empiricists who denied the very existence 
of the empirical world, relation survived - but only through the concept of 
mental association between mental events. The system 'out there', which we 
call nature, had been annihilated in the process. 
By the time Kant was devoting his prodigious mind to sorting all this out, 
the battle was lost. If the, quoting him, unconscious understanding organizes 
sensory experience into schemata, while conscious understanding organizes it 
into categories, the notion of identity remains for Kant forever transcendental. 
63 
Reproduced by kind permission of Sir Stafford Beer 

64 
ST AFFORD BEER 
Now the individual has vanished, in practical terms; as to the assemblage 
of individuals called society, that too has vanished into a transcendental 
construct. We have no need to legislate through any consensus of actual 
people, but only to meet needs that might have arisen from the noumenal 
will. 
And what of science itself? Science is ordered knowledge. It began with 
classification. From Galen in the second century through to Linnaeus in the 
eighteenth, analysis and categorization provided the natural instrumentality 
of scientific progress. Ally this fact with the background of philosophical 
thought, and the scene is set for the inexorable development of the world 
view that is so difficult to challenge today. It is a world view in which real 
systems are annihilated in trying to understand them, in which relations are 
lost because they are not categorized, in which synthesis is relegated to 
poetry and mysticism, in which identity is a political inference. We may 
inspect the result in the structure and organization of the contemporary 
uni ve rsity . 
It is an iron maiden, in whose secure embrace scholarship is trapped. For 
many, this is an entirely satisfactory situation, just because the embrace is 
secure. A man who can lay claim to knowledge about some categorized bit of 
the world, however tiny, which is greater than anyone else's knowledge of 
that bit, is safe for life: reputation grows, paranoia deepens. The number of 
papers increases exponentially, knowledge grows by infinitesimals, but 
understanding of the world actually recedes, because the world really is an 
interacting system. And since the world, in many of its aspects, is changing 
at an exponential rate, this kind of scholarship, rooted in the historical search 
of its own sanctified categories, is in large part unavailing to the needs of 
mankind. 
There has been some recognition of this, and inter·disciplinary studies are 
by now commonplace in every university. But will this deal with the problem? 
Unfortunately, it will not. We still say that a graduate must have his 'basic 
discipline', and this he is solemnly taught - as if such a thing had a precise 
environmental correlate, and as if we know that God knew the difference 
between physics and chemistry. He learns also the academic mores, catches 
the institutional paranoia, and proceeds to propagate the whole business. 
Thus it is that an 'interdisciplinary study' often consists of a group of dis· 
ciplinarians holding hands in a ring for mutual comfort. The ostensible topic 
has slipped down the hole in the middle. Among those who recognize this 
too, a natural enough debate has ensued on the subject: can an undergraduate 
be taught 'interdisciplinary studies' as his basic subject? But there is no such 

PREFACE 
65 
subject; there is no agreement on what it would be like; and we are rather 
short of anyone qualified to do the teaching. Those who resist the whole idea, 
in my view correctly, say that it would endanger the norms of good scholar-
ship. There is a deadlock. 
Against this background, let us consider Autopoiesis, and try to answer the 
question: 'What is it?' The authors say: "Our purpose is to understand the 
organization of living systems in relation to their unitary character". If the 
book deals with living systems, then it must be about biology. If it says 
anything scientific about organization, it must be about cybernetics. If it can 
recognize the nature of unitary character, it must be about epistemology -
and also (remembering the first author's massive contribution to the under-
standing of perception) it will be about psychology too. Yes, it is indeed 
about all these things. Will you then call this an interdisciplinary study in the 
field of psychocyberbioepistemics? Do so only if you wish to insult the 
authors. Because their topic has not slipped down the hole in the middle. 
Therefore it is not an interdisciplinary study of the kind defined. It is not 
about analysis, but synthesis. It does not play the Game of the Categories. 
And it does not interrelate disciplines; it transcends them. If, because of my 
remarks about Kant, this seems to say that it annihilates them, then we are 
getting somewhere. 
For there resides my belief in the book's general importance. The dissolu-
tion of the deadlock 'within the disciplinary system that I described above has 
got to be metasystemic, not merely interdisciplinary. We are not interested in 
forming a league of disciplinary paranoids, but (as Hegel could have told us) in 
a higher synthesis of disciplines. What emerges in this book is not classifiable 
under the old categories. Therefore it is predictable that no university could 
contain it, although all universities can and now do contain interdisciplinary 
institutions -
because, in that very word, suitable obeisance is paid to the 
hallowed categories, and no one cares if the answers slip down the hole in the 
middle. As to the prediction that universities cannot contain this kind of 
work, I have often see it fulfilled. In the present case it is falsified, and I offer 
heartfelt congratulations to the University of Chile. 
I say 'heartfelt' for this reason. In the mounting pile of new books printed 
every year that are properly called scientific, one may take hold of one's 
candle and search like a veritable Diogenes for a single one answering to the 
honest criteria I have proposed for a metasystemic utterance. There is only a 
handful in existence at all, which is not surprising in view of the way both 
knowledge and academia are organized. And yet, as I have also proposed, 
herein lies the world's real need. If we are to understand a newer and still 

66 
STAFFORD BEER 
evolving world; if we are to educate people to live in that world; if we are to 
legislate for that world; if we are to abandon categories and institutions that 
belong to a vanished world, as it is well-nigh desparate that we should; then 
knowledge must be rewritten. Autopoiesis belongs to the new library. 
IN PARTICULAR 
The authors first of all say that an autopoietic system is a homeostat. We 
already know what that is: a device for holding a critical systemic variable 
within physiological limits. They go on to the definitive point: in the case of 
autopoietic homeostasis, the critical variable is the system's own organization. 
It does not matter, it seems, whether every measurable property of that 
organizational structure changes utterly in the system's process of continuing 
adaptation. It survives. 
This is a very exciting idea to me for two reasons. In the first place it 
solves the problem of identity which two thousand years of philosophy have 
succeeded only in further confounding. The search for the 'it' has led farther 
and farther away from anything that common sense could call reality. The 'it' 
of scholasticism is a mythological substance in which anything attested by the 
senses or testable by science inheres as a mere accident - its existence is a 
matter of faith. The 'it' of rationalism is unrealistically schizophrenic, because 
it is uncompromising in its duality - extended substance and thinking sub-
stance. The 'it' of empiricism is unrealistically insubstantial and ephemeral at 
the same time - esse est percipi is by no means the verdict of any experiencing 
human being. 
The 'it' of Kant is the transcendental 'thing-in-itself' -
an untestable 
inference, an intellectual gewgaw. As to the 'it' of science and technology in 
the twentieth century world of conspicuous consumption ... 'it' seems to be 
no more than the collection of epiphenomena which mark 'it' as consumer 
or consumed. In this way hardheaded materialism seems to make 'it' as 
insubstantial as subjective idealism made it at the turn of the seventeenth 
century. And this, the very latest, the most down-to-earth, interpretation of 
'it' the authors explicitly refute. 
Their 'it' is notified precisely by its survival in a real world. You cannot 
find it by analysis, because its categories may all have changed since you last 
looked. There is no need to postulate a mystical something which ensures the 
preservation of identity despite appearances. The very continuation is 'it'. At 
least, that is my understanding of the authors' thesis - and I note with some 
glee that this means that Bishop Berkeley got the precisely right argument 

PREFACE 
67 
precisely wrong. He contended that something not being observed goes out of 
existence. Autopoiesis says that something that exists may turn out to be 
unrecognizable when you next observe it. This brings us back to reality, for 
that is surely true. 
The second reason why the concept of autopoiesis excites me so much is 
that it involves the destruction of teleology. When this notion is fully worked 
out and debated, I suspect it will prove to be as important in the history of 
the philosophy of science as was David Hume's attack on causality. Hume 
considered that causation is a mental construct projected onto changing 
events which have, as we would say today, associated probabilities of mutual 
occurrence. I myself have for a long time been convinced that purpose is a 
mental construct imported by the observer to explain what is really an 
equilibrial phenomenon of polystable systems. The arguments in Chapter II 
appear to me to justify this view completely, and I leave the reader to engen-
der his own excitement in the discovery of a 'purposelessness' that nonetheless 
makes good sense to a human being - just because he is allowed to keep his 
identity, which alone is his 'purpose'. It is enough. 
But that salute to the authors is also self-congratulation, and I turn quickly 
aside. If a book is important, if at any time and from any source information 
is received, then something is changed - not merely confirmed. There are two 
arguments in this book that have changed me, and one of them effected its 
change after a profound inward struggle. Perhaps this part of the Preface 
should be printed as an epilogue: if I am not saying enough to be understood 
in advance of the reading, then I am sorry. It is too much to hope that the 
reader will return. 
People who work with systems-theoretic concepts have often drawn atten-
tion to the subjective nature of 'the system'. A system is not something 
presented to the observer, it is something recognized by him. One of the 
consequences of this is that the labelling of connections between the system 
and its environment as either inputs or outputs is a process of arbitrary 
distinction. This is not very satisfatory. For example, a motor car in action is 
evidently a system. Suppose that it is recognized as 'a system for going from 
A to B'; then the water in the radiator is evidently an input, and displacement 
is evidently an output. Now consider the following scenario. Two men 
approach a motor car, and push it towards a second motor car. They then 
connect the batteries of the two cars with a pair of leads, and the engine of 
the first car fires. They disconnect the leads, and run the engine hard in 
neutral gear. We can guess what they are doing; but how is the objective 
scientist going to describe that system? Displacement is evidently an input, 

68 
STAFFORD BEER 
and one output is the rise in temperature of the water in the radiator. In case 
my example sounds too transparent, note that Aristotle thought that the 
brain was a 'human radiator', namely an apparatus for cooling the blood. 
Note also that he was right. 
The fact is that we need a theoretical framework for any empirical in-
vestigation. This is the raison d'etre of epistemology, and the authors make 
that point. In the trivial example I have just given, we need to know 'all about 
motor cars' before we can make sense of the empirical data. But it often 
happens in science that we know nothing at all about our 'motor cars', and sit 
there scratching our heads over data that relate to we know not what. There 
is a prime example of this in current scientific work, which is so embarrasssing 
that scientists in general pretend that it is not there. I am referring to the 
whole field of parapsychology -
to the mass of data which seems to say: 
precognition, telepathy, telekinesis exist. But we flounder among statistical 
artifacts, and lack the theoretical framework for interpretation. This is made 
clear in the very name of ESP - 'extrasensory perception' which, if one 
thinks about it, constitutes an internal contradiction of terms. 
Autopoiesis as a concept propounds a theoretical framework within which 
to cope with the confusion that arises from the subjective recognition of 'the 
system' and the arbitrary classification of its inputs and outputs. For the 
authors explain how we may treat autopoietic systems as if they were not 
autopoietic (that is, they are allopoietic) when the boundaries of the system 
are enlarged. Moreover, autopoietic systems may have allopoietic components. 
These ideas are immensely helpful, because our recognition of the circum-
stances in which a system should be regarded as either auto- or allo-poietic 
enables us to define 'the system' in an appropriate context. That is to say 
that the context is the recursion of systems within which the system we study 
is embedded, instead of being the cloud of statistical epiphenomena generated 
by our attempt to study it. 
Understanding this changed me. The second change involved the intellec-
tual struggle I mentioned earlier, and it concerns the authors' views on the 
information flowing within a viable system. In the numbered Paragraph (iv) 
of Section I of Chapter III they say: 'The notion of coding is a cognitive 
notion which represents the interactions of the observer, not a phenomenon 
operative in the physical domain. The same applies to the notion of regula-
tion'. On first reading, this seemed to me plainly wrong. In the numbered 
Paragraph (v) of Section 3 of Chapter IV they say: "Notions such as coding, 
message or information are not applicable to the phenomenon of self-re-
production". Wrong again, I considered; indeed, outrageous - especially when 

PREFACE 
69 
taken with this remark from the first sentence of Section 3: 'reproduction 
... cannot enter as a defining feature of the organization of living systems'. 
Finally, in the numbered Paragraph (ii) of Section 3 of Chapter V, the authors 
say; 'A linguistic domain ... is intrinsically non-informative'. Surely that is 
finally absurd? 
All of this is totally alien to what we (most of us working in cybernetics) 
have believed. Information, including codes and messages and mappings, 
was indeed for us the whole story of the viable system. If one thinks of 
reproduction, for example, as the process of passing on a DNA code from an 
aging set of tissues to an embryonic set of tissues, then the survival of the 
code itself is what matters. The tissues of each generation are subject to aging 
and finally death, but the code is transmitted. The individual becomes 
insignificant, because the species is in the code. And that is why identity 
vanishes in an ageless computer program of bits - a program that specifies 
the hydrogen-bonded base pairs that link the sugar-phosphate backbones of 
the DNA molecule. 
The whole outlook turns out to be wrong, and the book must speak for 
itself on this score. But it is an extraordinarily condensed book, which is 
why this preface is inordinately long. I do not know whether the authors' 
arguments about information led me to understand their concept of auto-
poiesis, or vice versa. What I am now sure about is that they are right. Nature 
is not about codes: we observers invent the codes in order to codify what 
nature is about. These discoveries are very profound. 
What is less profound but equally important is the political consequence 
of this crisis about identity. The subordination of the individual to the 
species cannot be supported. "Biology cannot be used any more to justify 
the dispensability of the individual for the benefit of the species, society or 
mankind, under the pretense that its role is to perpetuate them. " After that, 
the world is a different place. 
IN CONTENTION 
The authors know it, and they draw the immediate inference. It is to say that 
scientists can no longer claim to be outside the social milieu within which 
they operate, invoking objectivity and disinterest; and in truth we have 
known this, or ought to have known it, ever since Hiroshima. But again this 
book gives us the theoretical basis for a view that might otherwise shroud 
something fundamental in a cloak of mere prudence. "No position or view 
that has any relevance in the domain of human relations can be deemed free 

70 
STAFFORD BEER 
from ethical and political implications, nor can a scientist consider himself 
alien to these implications". However, the authors go on to say that they do 
not fully agree between themselves on the questions this poses from the 
vantage point of their own work on autopoiesis - and they refuse to discuss 
them further (numbered Paragraph (iv) of Section 2 of Chapter V). 
This seems to be because they do not resolve the question (posed a little 
earlier) whether human societies are or are not themselves biological systems. 
At this point, then, I ask to be relieved of the tasks of comment and inter-
pretation; I ask for permission actively to enter this arena of discussion -
where the angels fear to tread. For I am quite sure of the answer: yes, human 
societies are biological systems. Moreover, I claim that this book conclusively 
proves the point. This is a delicate matter, because presumably at least one 
of the originators of autopoietic theory disagrees, or is less than sure ... 
Nonetheless, I have read the book many times; and one of those readings was 
exclusively devoted to validating this contention against the authors' own 
criteria of autopoiesis at every point. 
The outcome, to which I was admittedly predisposed because of my own 
work, says that any cohesive social institution is an autopoietic system -
because it survives, because its method of survival answers the autopoietic 
criteria, and because it may well change its entire appearance and its apparent 
purpose in the process. As examples I list: firms and industries, schools and 
universities, clinics and hospitals, professional bodies, departments of state, 
and whole countries. 
If this view is valid, it has extremely important consequences. In the first 
place it means that every social institution (in several of which anyone 
individual is embedded at the intersect) is embedded in a larger social institu-
tion, and so on recursively -
and that all of them are autopoietic. This 
immediately explains why the process of change at any level of recursion 
(from the individual to the state) is not only difficult to accomplish but 
actually impossible - in the full sense of the intention: 'I am going completely 
to change myself'. The reason is that the 'I', that self-contained autopoietic 
'it', is a component of another autopoietic system. Now we already know 
that the first can be considered as allopoietic with respect to the second, and 
that is what makes the second a viable autopoietic system. But this is in turn 
means that the larger system perceives the embedded system as diminished -
as less than fully autopoietic. That perception will be an illusion; but it does 
have consequences for the contained system. For now its own autopoiesis 
must respond to a special kind of constraint: treatment which attempts to 
deny its own autopoiesis. 

PREFACE 
71 
Consider this argument at whatever level of recursion you please. An 
individual attempting to reform his own life within an autopoietic family 
cannot fully be his new self because the family insists that he is actually his 
old self. A country attempting to become a socialist state cannot fully become 
socialist; because there exists an international autopoietic capitalism in which 
it is embedded, by which the revolutionary country is deemed allopoietic. 
These conclusions derive from entailments of premises which the authors 
have placed in our hands. I think they are most valuable. 
Then let me try to answer the obvious question: why do not the authors 
follow this line of development themselves, and write the second half of the 
book (as I hope they eventually will) - which would be about the nature and 
adaptation of social institutions, and the evolution of society itself? Well, to 
quote their sentence again: "Our purpose is to understand the organization of 
living systems in relation to their unitary character". This formulation of the 
problem begs the question as to what is allowed to be a called a living system, 
as they themselves admit. "Unless one knows which is the living organization, 
one cannot know which organization is living". They quickly reach the 
conclusion however (Subsection (b) of Section 2 of Chapter 1) that "auto-
poiesis is necessary and sufficient to characterize the organization of living 
systems". Then they display some unease, quoting the popular belief: " ... 
and no synthetic system is accepted as living". 
The fact is that if a social institution is autopoietic (and many seem to 
answer to the proper criteria) then, on the authors' own showing, it is neces-
sarily alive. That certainly sounds odd, but it cannot be helped. It seems to 
me that the authors are holding at arms length their own tremendously 
important discovery. It does not matter about this mere word 'alive'; what 
does matter is that the social institution has identity in the biological sense; 
it is not just the random assemblage of interested parties that it is thought 
to be. 
When it comes to social evolution then, when it comes to political change: 
we are not dealing with institutions and societies that will be different to-
morrow because of the legislation we passed today. The legislation - even 
the revolution - with which we confront them does not alter them at all; it 
proposes a new challenge to their autopoietic adaptation. The behavior they 
exhibit may have to be very different if they are to survive: the point is that 
they have not lost their identities. 
The interesting consequence is, however, that the wayan autopoietic 
system will respond to a gross environmental challenge is highly predictable -
once the nature of its autopoiesis is understood. Clever politicians intuit those 

72 
STAFFORD BEER 
adaptations; and they can be helped by good scientists using systems-theoretic 
models. Stupid politicians do not understand why social institutions do not 
lose their identities overnight when they are presented with perfectly logical 
reasons why they should; and these are helped by bad scientists who devote 
their effort to developing that irrelevant logic. 
In an era when rapid institutional change is a prerequisite of peaceful 
survival in the face of every kind of exponentially rising threat, it seems to 
me that the architects of change are making the same mistake allover the 
world. It is that they perceive the system at their own level of recursion to be 
autopoietic, which is because they identify themselves with that system and 
know themselves to be so; but they insist on treating the systems their system 
contains, and those within which their system is contained, as allopoietic. 
This is allowable in terms of scientific description, when the input and output 
surfaces are correctly defined. Nonetheless it is politically blind to react 
towards the container and contained systems in a way which makes such a 
model evident, because at these other levels of recursion the relevant systems 
perceive themselves as autopoietic too. 
This statement seems to be worth making. I could not have made it so 
succinctly without the language developed in this book. I could not have 
formulated it at all without the new concepts that Humberto Maturana and 
Francisco Varela have taught me. I thank them both very much, on behalf 
of everyone. 
STAFFORD BEER 

HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
So long as ideas of the nature of living things 
remain vague and ill-defined, it is clearly impossible, 
as a rule, to distinguish between an adaptation of 
the organism to the environment and a case of 
fitness of the environment for life, in the very most 
general sense. Evidently to answer such questions 
we must possess clear and precise ideas and defini-
tions of living things. Life must by arbitrary 
process of logic be changed from the varying thing 
which it is into an independent variable or an 
invariant, shorn of many of its most interesting 
qualities to be sure, but no longer inviting fallacy 
through our inability to perceive clearly the 
questions involved. 
Henderson, The Fitness of the Environment 
AUTOPOIESIS 
The Organization of the Living 
INTRODUCTION 
A universe comes into being when a space is severed into two. A unity is 
defined. The description, invention and manipulation of unities is at the base 
of all scientific inquiry. 
In our common experience we encounter living systems as unities that 
appear to us as autonomous entities of bewildering diversity endowed with 
the capacity to reproduce. In these encounters autonomy apears so obviously 
an essential feature of living systems that whenever something is observed 
that seems to have it, the naive approach is to deem it alive. Yet, autonomy, 
although continuously revealed in the self-asserting capacity of living systems 
to maintain their identity through the active compensation of deformations, 
seems so far to be the most elusive of their properties. 
Autonomy and diversity, the maintenance of identity and the origin of 
variation in the mode in which this identity is maintained, are the basic 
challenges presented by the phenomenology of living systems to which men 
have for centuries addressed their curiosity about life. 
73 

74 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
In the search for an understanding of autonomy classic thought, dominated 
by Aristotle, created vitalism by endowing living systems with a non-material 
purposeful driving component that attained expression through the realization 
of their forms. After Aristotle, and as variations of his fundamental notions, 
the history of biology records many theories which attempt in one way or 
another to encompass all the phenomenology of living systems under some 
peculiar organizing force. However, the more biologists looked for the explicit 
formulation of one or other of these special organizing forces, the more they 
were disappointed by finding only what they could find anywhere else in the 
physical world: molecules, potentials and blind material interactions governed 
by aimless physical laws. Thence, under the pressure of unavoidable experience 
and the definite thrust of Cartesian thought a different outlook emerged, 
and mechanicism gradually gained the biological world by insisting that the 
only factors operating in the organization of living systems were physical 
factors, and that no non-matieral vital organizing force was necessary. In fact, 
it seems now apparent that any biological phenomenon, once properly 
defined, can be described as arising from the interplay of physicochemical 
processes whose relations are specified by the context of its definition. 
Diversity has been removed as a source of bewilderment in the under-
standing of the phenomenology of living systems by Darwinian thought and 
particulate genetics which have succeeded in providing an explanation for it 
and its origin without resorting to any peculiar directing force. Yet, the 
influence of these notions through their explanation of evolutionary change, 
has gone beyond the mere accounting for diversity: it has shifted completely 
the emphasis in the evaluation of the biological phenomenology from the 
individual to the species, from the unity to the origin of its parts, from the 
present organization of living systems to their ancestral determination. 
Today the two streams of thought represented by the physicochemical 
and the evolutionary explanations, are braided together. The molecular 
analysis seems to allow for the understanding of reproduction and variation, 
the evolutionary analysis seems to account for how these processes might 
have come into being. Apparently we are at a point in the history of biology 
where the basic difficulties have been removed. Biologists, however, are 
uncomfortable when they look at the phenomenology pf living systems as a 
whole. Many manifest this discomfort by refusing to say what a living system 
is. Others attempt to encompass present ideas under comprehensive theories 
governed by organizing notions, like cybernetic principles, that require from 
the biologists the very understanding that they want to provide. The ever 
present question is: 'What is common to all living systems that we qualify 

A UTOPOIESIS 
75 
them as living'; if not a vital force, if not an organizing principle of some 
kind, what then? To take only a notable recent example let us mention J. 
Monod's book Le hasard et la necessite. He tries to answer this question but, 
following the emphasis of evolutionary thought, he postulates a teleonomic 
organization of molecular nature and the subordination of the organization 
of the individual to a plan dermed by the species, in which the invariance of 
reproduction is determinant. Yet, teleonomic and evolutionary notions leave 
the question of the nature of the organization of the living unity essentially 
untouched. 
Our endeavor is to disclose the nature of the living organization. However, 
in our approach we make a starting point of the unitary character of a living 
system, and maintain that the evolutionary thought through its emphasis on 
diversity, reproduction and the species in order to explain the dynamics of 
change has obscured the necessity of looking at the autonomous nature of 
living unities for the understanding of the biological phenomenology. Also 
we think that the maintenance of identity and the invariance of defining 
relations in the living unities are at the base of all possible ontogenic and 
evolutionary transformation in biological systems, and this we intend to 
explore. Thus, our purpose is: to understand the organization of living 
systems in relation to their unitary character. 
Our approach will be mechanistic: no forces or principles will be adduced 
which are not found in the physical universe. Yet, our problem is the living 
organization and therefore our interest will not be in properties of com-
ponents, but in processes and relations between processes realized through 
components. This is to be clearly understood. An explanation is always a 
reformulation of a phenomenon showing how its components generate it 
through their interactions and relations. Furthermore, an explanation is always 
given by us as observers, and it is central to distinguish in it what pertains to 
the system as constitutive of its phenomenology from what pertains to our 
domain of description, and hence to our interactions with it, its components 
and the context in which it is observed . .since our descriptive domain arises 
because we simultaneously behold the unity and its interactions in the domain 
of observation, notions arising in the domain of description do not pertain to 
the constitutive organization of the unity (phenomenon) to be explained. 
Furthermore, an explanation may take different forms according to the 
nature of the phenomenon explained. Thus, to explain the movement of a 
falling body one resorts to properties of matter, and to laws that describe 
the conduct of material bodies according to these properties (kinetic and 
gravitational laws), while to explain the organization of a control plant one 

76 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
resorts to relations and laws that describe the conduct of relations. In the first 
case, the elements used in the explanation are bodies and their properties; in 
the second case, they are relations and their relations, independently of 
the nature of the bodies that satisfy them. As in this latter case, in our 
explanation of the organization of living systems, we shall be dealing with 
the relations which the actual physical components must satisfy to constitute 
one, not with the identification of these components. It is our assumption 
that there is an organization that is common to all living systems, whichever 
the nature of their components. Since our subject is this organization, not the 
particular ways in which it may be realized, we shall not make distinctions 
between classes or types of living systems. 
This mode of thinking is not new, and is explicitly related to the very 
name of mechanicism. We maintain that living systems are machines and by 
doing this we point at several notions which should be made explicit. First, 
we imply a non-animistic view which it should be unnecessary to discuss any 
further. Second, we are emphasizing that a living system is defined by its 
organization and, hence, that it can be explained as any organization is 
explained, that is, in terms of relations, not of component properties. Finally, 
we are pointing out from the start the dynamism apparent in living systems 
and which the word 'machine' connotes. 
We are asking, then, a fundamental question: 'What is the organization 
of living systems, what kind of machines are they, and how is their phenome-
nology, including reproduction and evolution, determined by their unitary 
organization?' 

CHAPTER I 
ON MACHINES, LIVING AND OTHERWISE 
1. MACHINES 
Machines are usually viewed as concrete hardware systems, defined by the 
nature of their components and by the purpose that they fulfill in their 
operations as man-made artifacts. This view however is obviously naive 
because it says nothing about how they are constituted. That machines are 
unities is apparent; that they are made of components that are characterized 
by certain properties capable of satisfying certain relations that determine in 
the unity the interactions and transformations of these same components 
is also apparent. What is not so apparent is that the actual nature of the 
components, and the particular properties that these may possess other than 
those participating in the interactions and transformations which constitute 
the system, are irrelevant and can be any. In fact, the significant properties 
of the components must be taken in terms of relations, as the network of 
interactions and transformations into which they can enter in the working 
of the machine which they integrate and constitute as a unity. 
The relations that define a machine as a unity, and determine the dynamics 
of interactions and transformations which it may undergo as such a unity, 
constitute the organization of the machine. The actual relations which hold 
'among the components which integrate a concrete machine in a given space, 
constitute its structure. The organization of a machine (or system) does not 
specify the properties of the components which realize the machine as a 
concrete system, it only specifies the relations which these must generate to 
constitute the machine or system as a unity. Therefore, the organization of 
a machine is independent of the properties of its components which can be 
any, and a given machine can be realized in many different manners by many 
different kinds of components. In other words, although a given machine can 
be realized by many different structures, for it to constitute a concrete entity 
in a given space its actual components must be defined in that space, and have 
the properties which allow them to generate the relations which define it. 
The use to which a machine can be put by man is not a feature of the or-
ganization of the machine, but of the domain in which the machine operates, 
and belongs to our description of the machine in a context wider than the 
77 

78 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
machine itself. This is a significant notion. Man made machines are all made 
with some purpose, practical or not, but with some aim (even if it is only to 
amuse) that man specifies. This aim usually appears expressed in the product 
of the operation of the machine, but not necessarily so. However, we use the 
notion of purpose when talking of machines because it calls into play the 
imagination of the listener and reduces the explanatory task in the effort of 
conveying to him the organization of a particular machine. In other words, 
with the notion of purpose we induce the listener to invent the machine we 
are talking about. This, however, should not lead us to believe that purpose, 
or aim, or function, are constitutive properties of the machine which we 
describe with them; such notions are intrinsic to the domain of observation, 
and cannot be used to characterize any particular type of machine organiza-
tion. The product of the operations of a machine, however, can be used to 
this end in a non-trivial manner in the domain of descriptions generated by 
the observer. 
2. LIVING MACHINES 
That living systems are machines cannot be shown by pointing to their 
components. Rather, one must show their organization in a manner such that 
the way in which all their peculiar properties arise, becomes obvious. In order 
to do this, we shall first characterize the kind of machines that living systems 
are, and then show how the peculiar properties of living systems may arise as 
consequences of the organization of this kind of machines. 
a. Autopoietic machines 
There are machines which maintain constant, or within a limited range of 
values, some of their variables. The way this is expressed in the organization 
of these machines must be such as to define the process as occurring com-
pletely within the boundaries of the machine which the very same organization 
specifies. Such machines are homeostatic machines and all feedback is internal 
to them. If one says that there is a machine M, in which there is a feedback 
loop through the environment so that the effects of its output affect its 
input, one is in fact talking about a larger machine M' which includes the 
environment and the feedback loop in its defining organization. 
Autopoietic machines are homeostatic machines. Their peculiarity, how-
ever, does not lie in this but in the fundamental variable which they maintain 
constant. An autopoietic machine is a machine organized (defined as a unity) 

ON MACHINES, LIVING AND OTHERWISE 
79 
as a network of processes of production (transfonnation and destruction) of 
components that produces the components which: (i) through their inter-
actions and transformations continuously regenerate and realize the network 
of processes (relations) that produced them; and (ii) constitute it (the ma-
chine) as a concrete unity in the space in which they (the components) exist 
by specifying the topological domain of its realization as such a network. It 
follows that an autopoietic machine continuously generates and specifies its 
own organization through its operation as a system of production of its own 
components, and does this in an endless turnover of components under 
conditions of continuous perturbations and compensation of perturbations. 
Therefore, an autopoietic machine is an homeostatic (or rather a relations-
static) system which has its own organization (defining network of relations) 
as the fundamental variable which it maintains constant. This is to be clearly 
understood. Every unity has an organization specifiable in terms of static or 
dynamic relations between elements, processes, or both. Among these possible 
cases, autopoietic machines are unities whose organization is defined by a 
particular network of processes (relations) of production of components, 
the autopoietic network, not by the components themselves or their static 
relations. Since the relations of production of components are given only as 
processes, if the processes stop, the relations of production vanish; as a result, 
for a machine to be autopoietic, its defining relations of production must be 
continuously regenerated by the components which they produce. Further-
more, the network of processes which constitute an autopoietic machine is a 
unitary system in the space of the components that it produces and which 
generate the network through their interactions. The autopoietic network of 
processes, then, differentiates autopoietic machines from any other kind of 
unit. In fact: (i) in a man-made machine in the physical space, say a car, 
there is an organization given in terms of a concatenation of processes, yet, 
these processes are not processes of production of the components which 
specify the car as a unity since the components of a car are produced by 
other processes which are independent of the organization of the car and its 
operation. Machines of this kind are non-autopoietic dynamic systems. (ii) 
In a natural physical unity like a crystal, the spatial relations among the 
components specify a lattice organization which defines it as a member of a 
class (a crystal of a particular kind), while the kinds of components which 
constitute it specify it as a particular case in that class. Thus, the organization 
of a crystal is specified by the spatial relations which define the relative 
position of its components, while these specify its unity in the space in which 
they exist - the physical space. This is not so with an autopoietic machine. In 

80 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
fact, although we find spatial relations among its components whenever we 
actually or conceptually freeze it for an observation, the observed spatial 
relations do not (and cannot) define it as autopoietic. This is so because the 
spatial relations between the components of an autopoietic machine are 
specified by the network of processes of production of components which 
constitute its organization and they are therefore necessarily in continuous 
change. A crystal organization then, lies in a different domain than the 
autopoietic organization: a domain of relations between components, not of 
relations between pr:JCesses of production of components; a domain of 
processes, not of concatenation of processes. We normally acknowledge this 
by saying that crystals are static. 
It is important to realize that we are not using the term organization in the 
defmition of an autopoietic machine in a mystical or transcendental sense, 
pretending that it has any explanatory value of its own. We are using it only 
to refer to the specific relations that define an autopoietic system. Thus, 
autopoietic organization simply means processes interlaced in the specific 
form of a network of productions of components which realizing the network 
that produced them constitute it as a unity. It is for this reason that we can 
say that every time that this organization is actually realized as a concrete 
system in a given space, the domain of the deformations which this system 
can withstand without loss of identity while maintaining constant its organiza-
tion, is the domain of changes in which it exists as a unity. It is thus clear that 
the fact that autopoietic systems are homeostatic systems which have their 
own organization as the variable that they maintain constant, is a necessary 
consequence of the autopoietic organization. 
The consequences of this autopoietic organization are paramount: 
(i) Autopoietic machines are autonomous; that is, they subordinate all 
changes to the maintenance of their own organization, independently of 
how profoundly they may otherwise be transformed in the process. Other 
machines, henceforth called allopoietic machines, have as the product of their 
functioning something different from themselves (as in the car example). 
Since the changes that allopoietic machines may suffer without losing their 
definitory organization are necessarily subordinated to the production of 
something different from themselves, they are not autonomous. 
(ii) Autopoietic machines have individuality; that is, by keeping their 
organization as an invariant through its continuous production they actively 
maintain an identity which is independent of their interactions with an 
observer. Allopoietic machines have an identity that depends on the observer 

ON MACHINES, LIVING AND OTHERWISE 
81 
and is not determined through their operation, because its product is different 
from themselves; allopoietic machines do not have individuality. 
(iii) Autopoietic machines are unities because, and only because, of 
their specific autopoietic organization: their operations specify their own 
boundaries in the processes of self-production. This is not the case with an 
allopoietic machine whose boundaries are defined by the observer, who by 
specifying its input and output surfaces, specifies what pertains to it in its 
operations. 
(iv) Autopoietic machines do not have inputs or outputs. They can be 
perturbated by independent events and undergo internal structural changes 
which compensate these perturbations. If the perturbations are repeated, 
the machine may undergo repeated series of internal changes which may 
or may not be identical. Whichever series of internal changes takes place, 
however, they are always subordinated to the maintenance of the machine 
organization, condition which is definitory of the autopoietic machines. Thus 
any relation between these changes and the course of perturbations to which 
we may point to, pertains to the domain in which the machine is observed, 
but not to its organization. Thus, although an autopoietic machine can be 
treated as an allopoietic machine, this treatment does not reveal its organiza-
tion as an autopoietic machine. 
An organization may remain constant by being static, by maintaining its 
components constant, or by maintaining constant certain relations between 
components otherwise in continuous flow or change. Autopoietic machines 
are organizations of the latter kind: they maintain constant the relations that 
define them as autopoietic. The actual way in which such an organization may 
in fact be implemented in the physical space, that is, the physical structure 
of the machine, varies according to the nature (properties) of the physical 
materials which embody it. Therefore there may be many different kinds of 
autopoietic machines in the physical space (physical autopoietic machines); 
all of them, however, will be organized in such a manner that any physical 
interference with their operation outside their domain of compensations will 
result in their disintegration: that is, in the loss of autopoiesis. It also follows 
that the actual way in which the autopoietic organization is realized in one of 
these machines (its structure) determines the particular perturbations it can 
suffer without disintegration, and hence, the domain of interactions in which 
it can be observed. These features of the actual concreteness of autopoietic 
machines embodied in physical systems allow us to talk about particular 

82 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
cases, to put them in our domain of manipulation and description, and hence, 
to observe them in the context of a domain of interactions which is external 
to their organization. This has two kinds of fundamental consequence: 
(i) We can describe physical autopoietic machines, and also manipulate 
them, as parts of a larger system that defines the independent events which 
perturb them. Thus, as noted above, we can view these perturbing independent 
events as inputs, and the changes of the machine that compensate these 
perturbations as outputs. To do this, however, amounts to treating an auto-
poietic machine as an allopoietic one, and to recognize that if the independent 
perturbing events are regular in their nature and occurrence, an autopoietic 
machine can in fact, be integrated into a larger system as a component 
allopoietic machine, without any alteration in its autopoietic organization. 
(ii) We can analyze a physical autopoietic machine in its physical parts, 
and treat all its partial homeostatic and regulatory mechanisms as allopoietic 
machines (sub-machines) by defming their input and output surfaces. Accord-
ingly, these sub-machines are not necessarily components of an autopoietic 
machine because the relations that defme such a machine need not be those 
that they generate through the input-output relations that defme them. 
The fact that we can divide physical autopoietic machines into parts 
does not reveal the nature of the domain of interactions that they define as 
concrete entities operating in the physical universe. 
b. Living systems 
If living systems are machines, that they are physical autopoietic machines is 
trivially obvious: they transform matter into themselves in a manner such 
that the product of their operation is their own organization. However we 
deem the converse is also true: a physical system if autopoietic, is living. 
In other words, we claim that the notion of autopoiesis is necessary and 
sufficient to characterize the organization of living systems. This equivalence 
may not be apparent for some observers due to several reasons which do not 
pertain to the domain of the organization of autopoietic machines, but 
which are proper within the domain of description and evaluation of the 
observers who adopt such reasons, and lead them to its a priori negation. The 
following are some of these reasons: 
(i) Machines are generally viewed as human made artifacts with completely 
known deterministic properties which make them, at least conceptually, 

ON MACHINES, LIVING AND OTHERWISE 
83 
perfectly predictable. Contrariwise, living systems are a priori frequently 
viewed as autonomous, ultimately unpredictable systems, with purposeful 
behavior similar to ours. If living systems were machines, they could be made 
by man and, according to the view mentioned above, it seems unbelievable 
that man could manufacture a living system. This view can be easily dis-
qualified, because it either implies the belief that living systems cannot be 
understood because they are too complex for our meager intellect and 
will remain so, or that the principles which generate them are intrinsically 
unknowable; either implication would have to be accepted a priori without 
proper demonstration. There seems to be an intimate fear that the awe with 
respect to life and the living would disappear if a living system could be not 
only reproduced, but designed by man. This is nonsense. The beauty of life 
is not a gift of its inaccessibility to our understanding. 
(ii) To the extent that the nature of the living organization is unknown, 
it is not possible to recognize when one has at hand, either as a concrete 
synthetic system or as a description, a system that exhibits it. Unless one 
knows which is the living organization, one cannot know which organization 
is living. In practice, it is accepted that plants and animals are living but 
their characterization as living is done through the enumeration of their 
properties. Among these, reproduction and evolution appear as determinant, 
and for many observers the condition of living appears subordinated to 
the possession of these properties. However, when these properties are 
incorporated in a concrete or conceptual man-made system, those who do not 
accept emotionally that the nature of life can be understood, immediately 
conceive of other properties as relevant, and do not accept any synthetic 
system as living by continuously specifying new requirements. 
(iii) It is very often assumed that observation and experimentation are 
alone sufficient to reveal the nature of living systems and no theoretical 
analysis is expected to be necessary and least of all sufficient for a charac-
terization of the living organization. It would be long to state why we depart 
from this radical empiricism. Let us simply say that we believe that epistemo-
logical and historical arguments more than justify the contrary view: every 
experimentation and observation implies a theoretical perspective, and no 
experimentation or observation has significance or can be interpreted outside 
the theoretical framework in which it took place. 
Our aim was to propose the characterization of living systems that explains 
the generation of all the phenomena proper to them. We have done this by 

84 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
pointing at autopoiesis, in the physical space as a necessary and sufficient 
condition for a system to be a living one. 
To know that a given aim has been attained, is not always easy. In the case 
at hand, the only possible indication that we have attained our aim is the 
reader's agreement that all the phenomenology of living systems, including 
reproduction and evolution, indeed requires and depends on autopoiesis. 
The following chapters are devoted to show this. 

CHAPTER II 
DISPENSABILITY OF TELEONOMY 
Teleology and teleonomy are notions employed in discourse, descriptive and 
explanatory, about living systems, and although it is claimed that they do not 
necessarily enter as causal elements in their functioning, it is asserted that 
they are essential definitory features of.their organization. Our present aim 
is to show that in the light of the preceding discussion, these notions are 
unnecessary for the understanding of the living organization. 
1. PURPOSELESSNESS 
It is usually maintained that the most remarkable feature of living systems is 
a purposeful organization, or what is the same, the possession of an internal 
project or program represented and realized in and through their structural 
organization. Thus, ontogeny is generally considered as an integrated process 
of development towards an adult state, through which certain structures are 
attained that allow the organism to perform certain functions according to 
the innate project which defines it in relation to the environment. Also, 
phylogeny is viewed as the history of adaptive transformations through 
reproductive processes aimed at satisfying the project of the species, with 
complete subordination of the individual to this end. Furthermore, it is 
apparent that there are organisms that may even appear capable of specifying 
some purpose in advance (as the authors of this book) and conduct all their 
activities towards this attainment (heteropoiesis). This element of apparent 
purpose or the possession of a project or program in the organization of living 
systems, which has been called teleonomy without implying any vitalistic 
connotations, is frequently considered as a necessary, if not as a sufficient, 
definitory feature for their characterization. Purpose or aims, however, as we 
saw in the first chapter, are not features of the organization of any machine 
(allo- or autopoietic): these notions belong to the domain of our discourse 
about our actions, that is, they belong to the domain of descriptions, and 
when applied to a machine, or any system independent from us, they reflect 
our considering the machine or system in some encompasssing context. In 
general, the observer puts the machines either conceptually or concretely to 
some ~se, and thus defines a set of circumstances that lead the machine to 
85 

86 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
change, following a certain path of variations in its output. The connection 
between these outputs, the corresponding inputs, and their relation with the 
context in which the observer includes them, determine what we call the aim 
or purpose of the machine; this aim necessarily lies in the domain of the 
observer that defines the context and establishes the nexuses. Similarly the 
notion of function arises in the description made by the observer of the 
components of a machine or system in reference to an encompassing entity, 
which may be the whole machine or part of it, and whose states constitute 
the goal that the changes in the components are to bring about. Here again, 
no matter how direct the causal connections may be between the changes of 
state of the components and the state which they originate in the total 
system, the implications in terms of design alluded to by the notion of 
function are established by the observer and belong exclusively to his domain 
of description. Accordingly, since the relations implied in the notion of 
function are not constitutive of the organization of an autopoietic system, 
they cannot be used to explain its operation. 
The organization of a machine, be it autopoietic or allopoietic, only 
states relations between components and rules for their interactions and 
transformations, in a manner that specifies the conditions of emergence of 
the different states of the machine which, then, arise as a necessary outcome 
whenever such conditions occur. Thus, the notions of purpose and function 
have no explanatory value in the phenomenological domain which they 
pretend to illuminate, because they do not refer to processes indeed operat· 
ing in the generation of any of its phenomena. This does not preclude their 
being adequate for the orientation of the listener towards a given domain of 
thought. Accordingly, a prediction of a future state of a machine consists 
only in the accelerated realization in the mind of an observer of its succeeding 
states, and any reference to an early state to explain a later one in functional 
or purposeful terms, is an artifice of his description, made in the perspective 
of his simultaneous mental observation of the two states, that induces in the 
mind of the listener an abbreviated realization of the machine. Therefore any 
machine, a part of one or a process that follows a predictable course, can be 
described by an observer as endowed with a project, a purpose or a function, 
if properly handled by him with respect to an encompassing context. 
Accordingly, if living systems are physical autopoietic machines, teleonomy 
becomes only an artifice of their description which does not reveal any feature 
of their organization, but which reveals the consistency in their operation 
within the domain of observation. Living systems, as physical autopoietic 
machines, are purposeless systems. 

DISPENSABILITY OF TELEONOMY 
87 
2. INDIVIDUALITY 
The elimination of the notion of teleonomy as a defining feature of living 
systems changes the outlook of the problem completely, and forces us to 
consider the organization of the individual as the central question for the 
understanding of the organization of living systems. 
In fact, a living system is specified as an individual, asa unitary element of 
interactions, by its autopoietic organization which determines that any change 
in it should take place subordinated to its maintenance, and thus sets the 
boundary conditions that specify what pertains to it and what does not 
pertain to it in the concreteness of its realization. If the subordination of all 
changes in a living system to the maintenance of its autopoietic organization 
did not take place (directly or indirectly), it would lose that aspect of its 
organization which defines it as a unity, and hence it would disintegrate. Of 
course it is true for every unity, whichever way it is defined, that the loss of 
its defming organization results in its disintegration; the peculiarity of living 
systems, however, is that they disintegrate whenever their autopoietic or-
ganization is lost, not that they can disintegrate. As a consequence, all change 
must occur in each living system without interference with its functioning as 
a unity in a history of structural change in which the autopoietic organization 
remains invariant. Thus ontogeny is both an expression of the individuality of 
living systems and the way through which this individuality is realized. As a 
process, ontogeny, then, is the expression of the becoming of a system that at 
each moment is the unity in its fullness, and does not constitute a transit 
from an incomplete (embryonic) state to a more complete or final one (adult). 
The notion of development arises, like the notion of purpose, in the 
context of observation, and thus belongs to a different domain other than 
the domain of the autopoietic organization of the living system. Similarly, 
the conduct of an autopoietic machine that an observer can witness, is the 
reflection of the paths of changes that it undergoes in the process of main-
taining constant its organization through the control of the variables that can 
be displaced by perturbations, and through the specification in this same 
process of the values around which these variables are maintained at any 
moment. Since the autopoietic machine has no inputs or outputs, any cor-
relation between regularly occurring independent events that perturb it, and 
the state to state transitions that arise from these perturbations, which the 
observer may pretend to reveal, pertain to the history of the machine in 
the context of the observation, and not to the operation of its autopoietic 
organization. 

CHAPTER III 
EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
The assertion that physical autopoietic systems are living systems requires 
the proof that all the phenomenology of a living system can be either reduced 
or subordinated to its autopoiesis. This proof, obviously, cannot consist in 
enumerating all biological phenomena and presenting cases of autopoietic 
systems that exhibit them; rather it must consist in showing that autopoiesis 
either constitutes or is necessary and sufficient for the occurrence of all 
biological phenomena, if the proper non-determinant contingencies are given. 
1. DESCRIPTIVE AND C' AUSAL NOTIONS 
An autopoietic system is defined as a unity by its autopoietic organization. 
The realization of this organization in a physical system requires components 
which are defined by their role in the autopoiesis and which can only be 
described in relation to this. Furthermore these components can only be 
realized by material elements which can exhibit the necessary properties 
under the conditions specified by the autopoietic organization, and must be 
produced in the proper topological relation within this organization, by the 
particular instance (structural realization) of the autopoietic system that they 
constitute. Accordingly, an autopoietic organization constitutes a closed 
domain of relations specified only with respect to the autopoietic organization 
that these relations constitute, and, thus, it defines a 'space' in which it can 
be realized as a concrete system; a space whose dimensions are the relations 
of production of the components that realize it: 
(i) Relations of constitution that determine that the components produced 
constitute the topology in which the autopoiesis is realized. 
(ii) Relations of specificity that determine that the components produced 
be the specific ones defined by their participation in the autopoiesis. 
(iii) Relations of order that determine that the concatenation of the 
components in the relations of specification, constitution and order be the 
ones specified by the autopoiesis. 
How these relations of production are embodied in a physical system of 
88 

EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
89 
course depends on the particular way in which the autopoiesis is realized, that 
is, on the actual structure of their realization. There are, however, certain 
general notions which apply to any particular concrete autopoietic system 
that we must mention at the outset: 
(i) Although indeed energetic and thermodynamic considerations would 
necessarily enter in the analysis of how the components are physically con-
stituted, and in the description of their proper ties in a specific domain of 
interactions, such that they may satisfy the requirements of their participation 
in an autopoietic system, these considerations do not enter in the characteri-
zation of the autopoietic organization. If the components can be materialized, 
the organization can be realized; the s~tisfaction of all thermodynamic and 
energetic relations is implicit. Thus, for example, in the concrete case of the 
cell, that we shall consider in the next section, energetic relations that make 
possible certain reactions with the participation of ATP are not constitutive 
of the autopoietic organization. However, it is constitutive of the structure 
through which the autopoietic organization is realized, that the molecules 
which participate in it should have among their properties the property of 
entering into the interactions which generate the autopoietic processes and, 
hence, of holding the required energy relations. 
(ii) Notions such as specification and order are referential notions; that is, 
they do not have meaning outside the context in which they are defined. 
Thus, when we speak about relations of specification we refer to the specifi-
cation of components in the context of that which defines the system as 
autopoietic. Any other element of specificity that may enter, however 
necessary it may be for the factibility [factual characterization] of the 
components, but which is not defined through the autopoietic organization, 
we take for granted. Similarly with the notion of order. Relations of order 
refer to the establishment of processes that secure the presence of the compo-
nents in the concatenation that results in autopoiesis. No other reference is 
meant,however conceivable it may be within other perspectives of description. 
(iii) An autopoietic organization acquires topological unity by its em-
bodiment in a concrete autopoietic system which retains its identity as long 
as it remains autopoietic. Furthermore, the space defmed by an autopoietic 
system is self-contained and cannot be described by using dimensions that 
define another space. When we refer to our interactions with a concrete 
autopoietic system, however, we project this system upon the space of our 
manipulations and make a description of this projection. This we can do 
because we interact with the components of the autopoietic system through 

90 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
the properties of their constituting elements that do not lie in the autopoietic 
space, and thus, we modify the structure of the autopoietic system by modi-
fying its components. Our description, however, follows the ensuing change 
of the projection of the autopoietic system in the space of our description, 
not in the autopoietic space. 
(iv) Notions such as coding and transmission of information do not enter 
in the realization of a concrete autopoietic system because they do not 
refer to actual processes in it. Thus, the notion of specificity does not imply 
coding, information or instructions; it only describes certain relations, deter-
mined by and dependent on the autopoietic organization, which result in 
the production of the specific components. The proper dimension is that 
of relations of specificity. To say that the system or part of it, codes for 
specificity, is not only a misnomer but also misleading; this is so, because 
such an expression represents a mapping of a process that occurs in the space 
of autopoiesis onto a process that occurs in the space of human design 
(heteropoiesis), and it is not a reformulation of the phenomenon. The notion 
of coding is a cognitive notion which represents the interactions of the 
observer, not a phenomenon operative in the observed domain. The same 
applies to the notion of regulation. This notion is valid in the domain of 
description of heteropoiesis, and it reflects the simultaneous observation 
and description made by the designer (or his equivalent) of interdependent 
transitions of the system that occur in a specified order and at specified 
speeds. The corresponding dimension in an autopoietic system is that of 
relations of production of order, but here again only in the context of the 
autopoiesis and not of any particular state of the system as it would appear 
projected on our domain of descriptions. The notion of regulation, then, 
can enter in the description, but does not refer to an actual process in the 
autopoietic organization. 
2. MOLECULAR EMBODIMENTS 
That a cell is an autopoietic system is trivially apparent in its life cycle. What 
is not trivial is how the cell is a molecular embodiment of autopoiesis, as it 
should be apparent in its analysis in terms of the dimensions of its autopoietic 
space: 
(i) Production of Constitutive Relations 
Constitutive relations are relations that determine the topology of the 

EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
91 
autopoietic organization, and hence its physical boundaries. The production 
of constitutive relations through the production of the components that hold 
these relations is one of the defining dimensions of an autopoietic system. In 
the cell such constitutive relations are established through the production of 
molecules (proteins, lipids, carbohydrates and nucleic acids) which determine 
the topology of the relations of production in general; that is, molecules 
which determine the relations of physical neighborhood necessary for the 
components to hold the relations that define them. The cell defines its physi-
cal boundaries through its dimension of production of constitutive relations 
that specify its topology. There is no specification in the cell of what it is not. 
(ii) Production of Relations of Specifications 
Relations of specifications are relations that determine the identity (proper-
ties) of the components of the autopoietic organization, and hence, in the 
case of the cells, its physical factibility. The establishment of relations of 
specification through the production of components that can hold these 
relations is another of the defining dimensions of an autopoietic system. In 
the cell such relations of specification are produced mainly through the 
production of nucleic acids and proteins that determine the identity of the 
relations of production in general. In the cell this is obviously obtained, on 
the one hand, by relations of specificity between DNA, RNA and proteins, 
and on the other hand, by relations of specificity between enzymes and 
substrates. Such production of relations of specification holds only within the 
topological substrate defmed by the production of relations of constitution. 
There is no production in the cell as an autopoietic system of relations of 
specification that do not pertain to it. 
(iii) Production of Relations of Order 
Relations of order are those that determine the dynamics of the autopoietic 
organization by determining the concatenation of the production of relations 
of constitution, specification and order, and hence its actual realization. The 
establishment of relations of order through the production of components 
that realize the production of relations of constitution, specification and 
order, constitute the third dimension of the autopoietic space. In the cell, 
relations of order are established mainly by the production of components 
(metabolites, nucleic acids and proteins) that control the speed of production 
of relations of constitution, specification and order. Relations of order, thus, 

92 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
conform a network of parallel and sequential relations of constitution, speci-
fication and order that constitute the cell as a system in which the relations 
of production that specify this network as a dynamic physical topological 
unity, are maintained constant. There is no ordering through the autopoietic 
organization of the cell of processes that do not belong to it. 
If one examines a cell it is apparent that: 
DNA participates in the specification of polypeptides, and hence, or proteins, 
enzymatic and structural, which specifically participate in the production of 
proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, glucides and metabolites. Metabolites (which 
include all small molecules, monomers or not, produced in the cell) participate 
in the determination of the speed of the various processes and reactions that 
constitute the cell, establishing a network of interrelated speeds in parallel 
and sequentially interconnected processes, both by gating and by constitutive 
participation, in a way such that every reaction is a function of the state of 
the transforming network that they integrate. All processes occur bound to a 
topology determined by their participation in the processes of production of 
relations of constitution. 
We as observers can project all cellular processes upon a system of three 
orthogonal coordinates, and legitimately say, as valid in the projection, that 
specification is mostly produced by nucleic acids, constitution by proteins, 
and order (regulation) by metabolites. The autopoietic space, however, is 
curved and closed in the sense that it is entirely specified by itself, and 
such a projection represents our cognitive relation with it, but does not 
reproduce it. In it, specification takes place at all points where its organization 
determines a specific process (protein synthesis, enzymatic action, selective 
permeability); ordering takes place at all points where two or more processes 
meet (changes of speed or sequence, allosteric effects, competitive and non-
competitive inhibition, facilitation, inactivation, etc.) determined by the 
structure of the participating components; constitution occurs at all places 
where the structure of the components determines physical neighborhood 
relations (membranes, particles, active site in enzymes). What makes this 
system a unity with identity and individuality is that all the relations of 
production are coordinated in a system describable as an homeostatic system 
that has its own unitary character as the variable that it maintains constant 
through the production of its components. In such a system any deformation 
at any place is not compensated by bringing the system back to an identical 
state of its components as it would be described by projecting it upon a three-
dimensional Cartesian space; rather it is compensated by keeping its organiza-
tion constant as defmed by the relation of the relations of production of rela-

EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
93 
tions of constitution, specification and order which constitutes autopoiesis. 
In other words, compensation of deformation keeps the autopoietic system in 
the autopoietic space. 
That all the biological features of the cell as a unity are determined by its 
autopoiesis, is henceforth obvious. In fact, the only thing that defmes the cell 
as a unity (as an individual) is its autopoiesis, and thus the only restriction 
placed on the existence of the cell is the maintenance of autopoiesis. All the 
rest - that is, its structure - can vary: relations of topology, specificity and 
order can vary as long as they constitute a network in an autopoietic space. 
3. ORIGIN 
The production of relations of constitution, specification and order, are not 
exclusive to autopoietic systems. They are inherent to unitary interactions 
in general, and to molecular interactions in particular; they depend on the 
properties of the units or molecules as expressed in the geometric and en-
ergetic relationships which they may adopt. Thus, the geometric properties of 
the molecules determine the relations of constitution, that is, the topology, 
the physical neighborhoods or spatial relations in which they may enter. The 
chemical properties of the molecules determine their possible interactions, 
and, hence, the relations of specificity which are a dimension orthogonal 
to relations of constitution. Both together, they determine sequence and 
concatenation of molecular interactions, that is, relations of order. According-
ly, autopoiesis may arise in a molecular system if the relations of production 
are concatenated in such a way that they produce components that specify 
the system as a unity which exists only while it is actively produced by 
such concatenation of processes. This is to say that autopoiesis arises in a 
molecular system only when the relation that concatenates these relations is 
produced and maintained constant through the production of the molecular 
components that constitute the system through this concatenation. Thus, in 
general, the question of the origin of an autopoietic system is a question 
about the conditions that must be satisfied for the establishment of an 
autopoietic space. This problem, then, is not a chemical one, in terms of what 
molecules took or can take part in the process, but a general one of what 
relations the molecules or any constitutive units should satisfy. This deserves 
the following considerations: 
(i) An autopoietic system is defined as a unity by and through its auto-
poietic organization. This unity is, thus, a topological unity in the space in 

94 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
which the components have existence as entities that may interact and have 
relations. For living systems such a space is the physical space. Without unity 
in some space an autopoietic system is not different from the background in 
which it is supposed to lie, and, hence, can only be a system in the space of 
our description where its unity is conceptually stipulated. Without unity in 
the physical space a living system would lack the dynamics of production 
relations which constitute it as a concrete entity in that space. 
(ii) The establishment of an autopoietic system cannot be a gradual 
process; either a system is an autopoietic system or it is not. In fact, its 
establishment cannot be a gradual process because an autopoietic system is 
defined as a system; that is, it is defined as a topological unity by its organiza-
tion. Thus, either a topological unity is formed through its autopoietic 
organization, and the autopoietic system is there and remains, or there is no 
topological unity, or a topological unity is formed in a different manner and 
there is no autopoietic system but there is something else. Accordingly, there 
are not and there cannot be intermediate systems. We can describe a system 
and talk about it as if it were a system which, with a little transformation, 
would become an autopoietic system because we can imagine different sys-
tems with which we compare it, but such a system would be intermediate 
only in our description, and in no organizational sense would it be a transi· 
tion system. 
(iii) Autocatalytic processes do not constitute autopoietic systems because 
among other things, they do not determine their topology. Their topology is 
determined by a container that is part of the specification of the system, but 
which is independent of the operation of the autocatalysis. Processes of this 
or similar kind are abundant in the physical space. Coupling of independent 
processes into larger systems is also the rule; these mayor may not constitute 
unities defmed by the circumstances of their constitution in a given space, 
be this space physical or otherwise. They, however, will not constitute or 
participate in the constitution of an autopoietic system unless the system 
they conform becomes defined as a topological unity through its embodiment 
of an autopoietic organization. A unity is defmed by an operation of distinc-
tion; in an autopoietic system its autopoiesis constitutes the operation of 
distinction that defines it, and its origin is cocircumstantial with the establish-
ment of this operation. 
(iv) The problem of the origin of autopoietic systems has two aspects; 
one refers to their factibility, and the other to the possibility of their spon-
taneous occurrence. The first aspect can be stated in the following manner: 

EMBODIMENTS OF AUTOPOIESIS 
95 
the establishment of any system depends on the presence of the components 
that constitute it, and on the kinds of interactions in which they may enter; 
thus, given the proper components and the proper concatenation of their 
interactions, the system is realized. The concrete question about the factibi-
lity of a molecular autopoietic system is, then, the question of the conditions 
in which different chemical processes can be concatenated to form topological 
unities that constitute relational networks in the autopoietic space. The 
second aspect can be stated in the following manner: given the factibility of 
autopoietic systems, and given the existence of terrestrial autopoietic systems, 
there are natural conditions under which these may be spontaneously gen-
erated. Concretely the question would be, 'What were or are the natural 
conditions under which the components of the autopoietic systems arose 
or arise spontaneously on the earth, and concatenate to form them?' This 
question cannot be answered independently of the manner in which the 
factibility question is answered, particularly in what refers to the factibility 
of one or several different kinds of molecular autopoietic systems. The 
presence today of one mode of autopoietic organization on the earth (the 
nucleic acid protein system), cannot be taken to imply that the factibility 
question has only one answer. 
The notions that we have discussed are valid for the origin (constitution) 
of autopoietic systems at any level of physical embodiment, molecular or 
supramolecular. We shall not dwell on the particular circumstances of the 
establishment of any of these embodiments. We shall leave this matter for 
another inquiry, accepting the existence of living systems as an existential 
proof of the factibility of the spontaneous generation of autopoietic systems. 
We shall consider next the significance of the conditions of topological unity 
for the diversity of autopoietic systems. 

CHAPTER IV 
DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
living systems embody the living organization. living systems are autopoietic 
systems in the physical space. The diversity of living systems is apparent; it is 
also apparent that this diversity depends on reproduction and evolution. Yet, 
reproduction and evolution do not enter into the characterization of the living 
organization, and living systems are defined as unities by their autopoiesis. 
This is significant because it makes the phenomenology of living systems 
dependent on their being autopoietic unities. In fact, reproduction requires 
the existence of a unity to be reproduced, and it is necessarily secondary to 
the establishment of such a unity; evolution requires reproduction and the 
possibility of change, through reproduction of that which evolves, and it is 
necessarily secondary to the establishment of reproduction. It follows that 
the proper evaluation of the phenomenology of living systems, including 
reproduction and evolution, requires their proper evaluation as autopoietic 
unities. 
1. SUBORDINATION TO THE CONDITION OF UNITY 
Unity (distinguishability from a background, and, hence, from other unities), 
is the sole necessary condition for existence in any given domain. In fact, 
the nature of a unity and the domain in which it exists are specified by the 
process of its distinction and determination; this is so regardless of whether 
this process is conceptual (as when a unity is defined by an observer through 
an operation of distinction in his domain of discourse and description), or 
whether this process is physical (as when a unity becomes established through 
the actual working of its defining properties that assert its distinction from a 
background through their actual operation in the physical space). Accordingly, 
different kinds of unities necessarily differ in the domain in which they are 
established, and having different domains of existence they mayor may not 
interact according to whether these domains do or do not intersect. Unity 
distinction [the distinctiveness and distinguishing of unity] , then, is not an 
abstract notion of purely conceptual validity for descriptive or analytical 
purposes, but it is an operative notion referring to the process through 
which a unity becomes asserted or defined: the conditions which specify a 
96 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
97 
unity determine its phenomenology. In living systems, these conditions are 
determined by their autopoietic organization. In fact, autopoiesis implies 
the subordination of all change in the autopoietic system to the maintenance 
of its autopoietic organization, and since this organization dennes it as 
a unity, it implies total subordination of the phenomenology of the system 
to the maintenance of its unity. This subordination has the following con-
sequences: 
(i) The establishment of a unity dermes the domain of its phenomenology, 
but given the way the unity is constituted by its structure defines the kind of 
phenomenology that it generates in that domain. It follows that the particular 
form adopted by the phenomenology of each autopoietic (biological) unity 
depends on the particular way in which its individual autopoiesis is realized. 
It also follows that the domain of ontogenic transformations (including 
conduct) of each indIvidual is the domain of the homeostatic trajectories 
through which it can maintain its autopoiesis. 
(li) All the biological phenomenology is necessarily determined and 
realized through individual autopoietic unities in the physical space, and 
consists of all the paths of transformations that they undergo as homeostatic 
systems, singly or in groups, in the process of maintaining constant their 
denning individual relations. Whether in the process of their interactions the 
autopoietic unities do or do not unite to constitute additional unities, is 
irrelevant for the subordination of the biological phenomenology to the 
maintenance of the identity of the individual unities. If united they produce 
a new unity that is not autopoietic, its phenomenology, that will necessarily 
depend on its organization, will be biological or not according to its de-
pendence on the autopoiesis of its components, and will accordingly depend 
or not on the maintenance of these as autopoietic units. If the new unity is 
autopoietic, its phenomenology is directly biological and obviously depends 
on the maintenance of its autopoiesis, which in turn mayor may not depend 
on the autopoiesis of its components. 
(iii) The identity of an autopoietic unity is maintained as long as it 
remains autopoietic; that is, as long as it, as a unity in the physical space, 
remains a unity in the autopoietic space, regardless of how much it may 
otherwise be transformed in the process of maintaining its autopoiesis. 
(iv) Only after a unity has been constituted as an autopoietic unity 
(individual) can reproduction take place as a biological phenomenon. 

98 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
2. PLASTICITY OF ONTOGENY 
Ontogeny is the history of the structural transformation of a unity. Accord-
ingly, the ontogeny of a living system is the history of maintenance of its 
identity through continuous autopoiesis in the physical space. From the mere 
fact that a physical autopoietic system is a dynamic system, realized through 
relations of productions of components that imply concrete physical inter-
actions and transformations, it is a necessary consequence of the autopoietic 
organization of a living system that its ontogeny should take place in the 
physical space. There are several comments to this notion of ontogeny: 
(i) Since the wayan autopoietic system maintains its identity depends on 
its particular way of being autopoietic, that is, on its particular structure, 
different classes of autopoietic systems have different classes of ontogenies. 
(li) Since an autopoietic system does not have inputs or outputs, all the 
changes that it may undergo without loss of identity, and, hence, with 
maintenance of its defining relations, are necessarily determined by its 
homeostatic organization. Consequently, the phenomenology of an auto-
poietic system is necessarily always commensurate with the deformations that 
it suffers without loss of identity, and with the deforming ambience in which 
it lies. Otherwise it would disintegrate. 
(iii) As a consequence of the homeostatic nature of the autopoietic 
organization, the way the autopoiesis is realized in any given unity may 
change during its ontogeny, with the sole restriction that this should take 
place without loss of identity, that is, through uninterrupted autopoiesis. 
(iv) Although the changes that an autopoietic system may undergo without 
loss of identity while compensating its deformations under interactions are 
determined by its organization, the sequence of such changes is determined 
by the sequence of these deformations. There are two sources of deformations 
for an autopoietic system as they appear to be to an observer: one is con-
stituted by the external environment as a source of independent events in the 
sense that these are not determined by the organization of the system; the 
other is constituted by the system itself as a source of states which arise 
from compensations of deformations, but which themselves can constitute 
deformations that generate further compensatory changes. In the phenome-
nology of the autopoietic organization these two sources of perturbations are 
indistinguishable, and in each autopoietic system they braid together to form 
a single ontogeny. Thus, although in an autopoietic system all changes are 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
99 
internally determined, for an observer its ontogeny partly reflects its history 
of interactions with an independent ambience. Accordingly, two otherwise 
equivalent autopoietic systems may have different ontogenies. 
(v) An observer beholding an autopoietic system as a unity in a context 
that he also observes, and which he describes as its environment, may dis-
tinguish in it internally and externally generated perturbations, even though 
these are intrinsically indistinguishable for the autopoietic system itself. The 
observer can use these distinctions to make statements about the history of 
the autopoietic system which he observes, and he can use this history to 
describe an ambience (which he infers) as the domain in which the system 
exists. He cannot, however, infer from the observed correspondence between 
the ontogeny of the system and the ambience which this ontogeny describes, 
or from the environment in which he sees it, a constitutive representation 
of these in the organization of the autopoietic systems. The continuous 
correspondence between conduct and ambience revealed during ontogeny is 
the result of the homeostatic nature of the autopoietic organization, and not 
of the existence of any representation of the ambience in it; nor is it at all 
necessary that the autopoietic system should obtain or develop such a re-
presentation to persist in a changing ambience. To talk about a representation 
of the ambience, or the environment, in the organization of a living system 
may be metaphorically useful, but it is inadequate and misleading to reveal 
the organization of an autopoietic system. 
(vi) The compensatory changes that an autopoietic system may undergo 
while retaining its identity, may be of two possible kinds according to how its 
structure is affected by the perturbations: they may be (a) conservative 
changes in which only the relations between the components change; or 
they may be (b) innovative changes in which the components themselves 
change. In the first case, the internal or external interactions causing the 
deformations do not lead to any change in the way the autopoiesis is realized, 
and the system remains in the same point in the autopoietic space because its 
components are invariant; in the second case, on the contrary, the interac-
tions lead to a change in the way the autopoiesis is realized and, hence, to a 
displacement of the system in the autopoietic space because its components 
changed. Accordingly, while the fIrst case implies a conservative ontogeny, 
the second case implies an ontogeny which is also a process of specifIcation of 
a particular autopoiesis that in its determination is, necessarily, a function 
of both the plasticity of the components of the system and the history of its 
interactions. 

100 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
3. REPRODUCTION, A COMPLICATION OF THE UNITY 
Reproduction requires a unity to be reproduced; this is why reproduction is 
operationally secondary to the establishment of the unity, and it cannot enter 
as a defining feature of the organization of living systems. Furthermore, 
since living systems are characterized by their autopoietic organization, 
reproduction must necessarily have arisen as a complication of autopoiesis 
during autopoiesis, and its origin must be viewed and understood as secondary 
to, and independent from the origin of the living organization. The depen-
dence of reproduction upon the existence of the unity to be reproduced is not 
a trivial problem of precedence, but it is an operational problem in the origin 
of the reproduced system and its relations with the reproducing mechanism. 
Accordingly, in order to understand reproduction and its consequences in 
autopoietic systems we must analyze the operational nature of this process in 
relation to autopoiesis. 
(i) There are three phenomena that must be distinguished in relation to 
the notion of reproduction; these are replication, copy and self-reproduction. 
Replication. A system which successively generates unities different from 
itself, but in principle identical to each other, and with an organization which 
the system determines in the process of their production, is a replicating 
system. Replication, then, is not different from repetitive production. Any 
distinction between these processes arises as a matter of description in the 
emphasis that the observer puts on the origin of the equivalent organization 
of the successively produced unities, and on the relevance that this equivalence 
has in a domain different from that in which the repetitive production takes 
place. Thus, although all molecules are produced by specific molecular and 
atomic processes that can at least in principle be repeated, only when certain 
specific kinds of molecules are produced in relation to the cellular activities 
(proteins and nucleic acids) by certain repeatable molecular concatenations 
is their production called replication. Such a denomination then, strictly, 
makes reference only to the context in which the identity of the successively 
produced molecules is deemed necessary, not to a unique feature of that 
particular molecular synthesis. 
Copy. Copy takes place whenever a given object or phenomenon is 
mapped by means of some procedure upon a different system, so that an 
isomorphic object or phenomenon is realized in it. In the notion of copy the 
emphasis is put on the mapping process, regardless of how this is realized, 
even if the mapping operation is performed by the model unit itself. 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
101 
Selfreproduction. Self-reproduction takes place when a unity produces 
another one with a similar organization to its own, through a process that 
is coupled to the process of its own production. It is apparent that only 
autopoietic systems can self-reproduce because only they are realized through 
a process of self-production (autopoiesis). 
(ii) For an observer there is reproduction in all these three processes 
because he can recognize in each of them a unitary pattern of organization 
which is embodied in successively generated systems through the three well 
defined mechanisms. The three processes, however, are intrinsically different 
because their dynamics give rise to different phenomenologies which appear 
particularly distinct if one considers the network of systems generated under 
conditions in which change is allowed in the process of reproduction of 
the successively embodied pattern of organization. Thus, in replication and 
copy the mechanism of reproduction is necessarily external to the pattern 
reproduced, while in self-reproduction it is necessarily identical to it. Further-
more, only in self-copy and self-reproduction can changes in the unities 
produced which embody the pattern reproduced affect the reproducing 
mechanism. The consequences of this will be dealt with in the next section, 
but now it should be clear that the historical interconnections established 
between independent unities through reproduction varies with the mechanism 
through which reproduction is achieved. 
(iii) In living systems presently known on earth autopoiesis and reproduc-
tion are directly coupled and, hence, these systems are truly self-reproducing 
systems. In fact, in them reproduction is a moment in autopoiesis, and the 
same mechanism that constitutes one constitutes the other. The consequences 
of such a coupling are paramount: (a) Self-reproduction must take place 
during autopoiesis. Accordingly the network of individuals thus produced is 
necessarily self-contained in the sense that it does not require for its establish-
ment a mechanism independent of the autopoietic determination of the 
self-reproducing unities. Such would not be the case if reproduction were 
attained through external copy or replication. (b) Self-reproduction is a form 
of autopoiesis; therefore, variation and constancy in each reproductive step 
are not independent and both must occur as expressions of autopoiesis. (c) 
Variation through self-reproduction of the way the autopoiesis is realized 
can only arise as a modification during autopoiesis of a pre-existing function-
ing autopoietic structure; consequently, variation through self-reproduction 
can only arise from perturbations that require further homeostatic com-
plications to maintain autopoiesis constant. The history of self-reproductively 

102 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
connected autopoietic systems can only be one of continuous complication 
of autopoiesis. 
(iv) The nature of reproduction depends on the nature of the unity. The 
same goes for its origin. Replication takes place independently of autopoiesis. 
Copy takes place only in heteropoiesis, and can be deemed to take place in 
other situations solely as a description. Self-reproduction is exclusively 
associated to autopoiesis and its origin is bound to it as a historically secon-
dary phenomenon. The reason for this association will be dealt with in the 
next section. 
(v) Notions such as coding, message or information are not applicable to 
the phenomenon of self-reproduction; their use in the description of this 
phenomenon constitutes an attempt to represent it in the language of hetero-
poietic design. In fact, the notions of coding, message and transmission of 
information apply only to the reduction of uncertainties in the communica-
tive interactions between independent unities under conditions in which 
the messenger acts as an arbitrary non-participant link. Nucleic acids are 
constitutive components in the process of autopoiesis, not arbitrary links 
between independent entities. Thus, in self-reproduction there is no trans-
mission of information between independent entities; the reproducing and 
the reproduced unities are topologically independent entities produced 
through a single process of autopoiesis in which all components have a 
constitutive participation. 
4. EVOLUTION, A HISTORICAL NETWORK 
A historical phenomenon is a process of change in which each state of the 
successive states of a changing system arises as a modification of a previous 
state in a causal transformation, and not de novo as an independent occur-
rence. Accordingly, the notion of history may either be used to refer to the 
antecedents of a given phenomenon as the succession of events that gave 
rise to it, or it may be used to characterize the given phenomenon as a 
process. Therefore, since an explanation is always given in the present as 
a reformulation of the phenomenon to be explained in the domain of inter-
actions of its components (or of isomorphic elements), the history of a 
phenomenon as a description of its antecedents cannot contribute to its 
explanation because the antecedents are not components of the phenomenon 
which they precede or generate. Conversely, since history as a phenomenon is 
to be explained in the present as a changing network of sequentially produced 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
103 
events in which each event as a state of the network arises in it as a trans-
formation of the previous state, it follows that although history cannot 
contribute to explain any phenomenon, it can permit an observer to account 
for the origin of a phenomenon as a present state in a changing network. 
This he can do because he has observational (or descriptive) independent 
access to the different states of the historical process. It is in this context that 
the phenomenology of autopoietic systems must be considered when viewed 
in reference to evolution. Biological evolution is a historical phenomenon and 
as such it must be explained in the present by its reformulation as a historical 
network constituted through the causal interactions of coupled or inde-
pendent biological events. Furthermore, biological events depend on the 
autopoiesis of living systems; accordingly, our aim here is to understand how 
evolution is defined as a historical process by the autopoiesis of the biological 
unities. 
(i) If by evolution we refer to what has taken place in the history of 
transformation of terrestrial living systems, evolution is the history of change 
in the realization of an invariant organization embodied in independent 
unities sequentially generated through reproductive steps, in which the 
particular structural realization of each unity arises as a modification of the 
preceding one (or ones) which, thus, constitutes both its sequential and 
historical antecedent. Consequently, evolution requires sequential reproduc-
tion and change in each reproductive step. Without sequential reproduction as 
a reproductive process in which the structural realization of each unity in the 
sequence constitutes the antecedent for the structural realization of the next 
one, there is no history; without change in each sequential reproductive step, 
there is no evolution. In fact, sequential transformations in a unity without 
change of identity constitute its ontogeny, that is, its individual history if it is 
an autopoietic unity. 
(ii) Reproduction by replication or copy of a single unchanging model 
implies an intrinsic uncoupling between the organization of the unities 
produced and their producing mechanism. As a consequence, any change in 
the realization of the organization embodied in the unities successively 
produced by replication or copy from a single model, can only reflect the 
ontogenies of the reproducing systems or the independent ontogenies of the 
units themselves. The result is that under no circumstance in these non-
sequential reproductive cases does a change in the structure of a unity af-
fect the structure of the others yet to be produced, and, independently 
of whether they are autopoietic or not, they do not constitute a historical 

104 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
network, and no evolution takes place. The collection of unities thus produced 
constitutes a collection of independent ontogenies. In sequential reproduc-
tion, as it occurs in self-reproducing systems which attain reproduction 
through autopoiesis, or as it occurs in those copying systems in which each 
new unity produced constitutes the model for the next one, the converse is 
true. In these cases, there are aspects of the structural realization of each 
unity that determine the structure of the next one by their direct coupling 
with the reproductive process which is, thus, subordinated to the organization 
of the reproduced unities. Consequently, changes in these aspects of the 
structure of the unities sequentially generated, that occur either during 
their own ontogeny or in the process of their generation, necessarily result in 
the production of an historical network in which the unities successively 
produced embody an invariant organization in a changing structure as each 
unity arises as a modification of the previous one. In general, then, sequential 
reproduction with the possibility of change in each reproductive step neces-
sarily leads to evolution, and in particular, in autopoietic systems evolution 
is a consequence of self-reproduction. 
(iii) Ontogeny and evolution are completely different phenomena, both in 
their outlook and in their consequences. In ontogeny, as the history of trans-
formation of a unity, the identity of the unity, in whatever space it may 
exist, is never interrupted. In evolution, as a process of historical change there 
is a succession of identities generated through sequential reproduction which 
constitute a historical network, and that which changes (evolves), the pattern 
of realization of the successively generated unities exists in a different do-
main than the unities that embody it. A collection of successive ontogenies 
in whose structure an observer can see relations of maintained change, 
but which have not been generated through sequential reproduction, do 
not constitute an evolving system, not even if they reflect the continuous 
transformation (ontogeny) of the system that produced them. It is inadequate 
to talk about evolution in the history of change of a single unity in whatever 
space it may exist; unities only have ontogenies. Thus, it is inadequate to talk 
about the evolution of the universe, or the chemical evolution of the earth; 
one should only talk about the ontogeny of the universe or the chemical 
history of the earth. Also, there is biological evolution only since there is 
sequential reproduction of living systems; if there were non self-reproducing 
autopoietic systems before that, their different patterns of realization did 
not evolve, and there was only the history of their independent ontogenies. 
(iv) Selection, as a process in a population of unities, is a process of 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
105 
differential realization in a context that specifies the unitary structures 
that can be realized. In a population of autopoietic unities selection is a 
process of differential realization of autopoiesis, and, hence, if these are self-
reproducing autopoietic unities, of differential self-reproduction. Consequent-
ly, if there is sequential reproduction, and the possibility of change in each 
reproductive step, selection can make the transformation of the reproducible 
structural patterns realized in each successive unity a recursive function 
of the domain of interactions which that very same autopoietic unity specifies. 
If any system that is realized is necessarily adapted in the domain in which it 
is realized, and adaptation is the condition of possible realization for any 
system, evolution takes place only if adaptation is conserved by the unities 
that embody the invariant organization of the evolving lineage. Accordingly, 
different evolving systems would differ only in the domain in which they are 
realized, and, hence, in which selection takes place, not in whether they 
are adaptive or not. Thus, evolution in self-reproducing living systems that 
maintain their identity in the physical space (while the realization of their 
autopoietic organization is commensurate with the restrictions of the ambience 
in which they exist), is necessarily a process of continued adaptation because 
only those of them whose autopoiesis can be realized reproduce, regardless 
of how much the way they are autopoietic may otherwise change in each 
reproductive step. 
(v) For evolution to take place as a history of change in the realization 
of an invariant organization embodied in successively generated unities, 
reproduction must allow for structural change in the sequentially reproduced 
unities. In present living systems reproduction takes place as a modification 
of autopoiesis and is bound to it. This was to be expected. Originally many 
kinds of autopoietic unities were probably formed which would mutually 
compete for the precursors. If any class of them had any possibility of self-
reproduction, it is evident that it would immediately displace through selection 
the other non-reproducing forms. The onset of the history of self-reproduction 
need not have been complex; for example, in a system with distributed 
autopoiesis mechanical fragmentation is a form of self-reproduction. Evolution 
through selection would appear with the enhancement of those features of 
the autopoietic unities that facilitated their fragmentation (and hence the 
regularity and frequency of self-reproduction) to the extent of making it 
independent of external accidental forces. Once the most simple self-re-
producing process takes place in an autopoietic system, evolution is on its 
course and self-reproduction can enter in a history of change, with the ensuing 

106 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
total displacement of any co-existing non-self-reproducing autopoietic unities. 
Hence the linkage between autopoiesis and selfreproduction in terrestrial 
living systems. Of course it is not possible to say now what actually took 
place in the origin of biological evolution, but this does not seem to offer an 
insurmountable conceptual difficulty. The fact is that in present day living 
systems self-reproduction is crucially associated to nucleic acids and their role 
in protein specification. We think that this could not have been so if the 
nucleic acid-protein association were not a condition virtually constitutive of 
the original autopoietic process which was secondarily associated to reproduc-
tion and variation; and we think that this is so because only uncompensated 
changes at the level of the autopoietic process itself can be incorporated 
(through sequential reproduction) as reproducible changes of the autopoietic 
organizations of the next unity in a manner that allows for evolution to take 
place. What is not apparent, though, is whether or not there have been other 
modes of autopoietic realization, and other sources of variation, than those 
associated with the nucleic acid-protein system, in the history of terrestrial 
living systems. Whichever the case, once self-reproduction appears in auto-
poiesis, any perturbation which modifies the way in which the autopoiesis is 
realized, can, in principle, be reproduced in the next generation, and, thus, be 
the source of variations if the change affected those processes involved in 
reproduction. Accordingly the phenomenology of biological evolution and its 
origin rests on the inception of two processes: self-reproduction and variation. 
One refers to t>ossible forms of complication of the autopoiesis, the other to 
the introduction of perturbations which irreversibly modify the way the 
autopoiesis is realized. Both undergo historical transformations, which, 
though coupled, are not equivalent. 
(vi) Of the two possible mechanisms that can give rise to sequential 
reproduction, the only one which is accessible to autopoietic systems in the 
absence of an independent copying mechanism is self-reproduction, because 
of the coincidence between the reproducing mechanisms and the reproducing 
unity. Sequential reproduction through copy takes place at present only in 
relation to the operation of living systems in their domain of interactions, 
particularly in cultural learning; cultural evolution takes place through 
sequential copy of a changing model in the process of'social indoctrination 
generation after generation. 
(vii) A species is a population or collection of populations of reproduc-
tively interconnected individuals which are thus nodes in a historical network. 
Genetically these individuals share a genetic pool, that is, a fundamentally 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
107 
equivalent pattern of autopoietic realization under historical transforma-
tions. Historically, a species arises when a reproductive network of this kind 
develops an independent reproductive network as a branch which by being an 
independent historical network (reproductively separated) has an independent 
history. It is said that what evolves is the species and that the individuals in 
their historical existence are subordinated to this evolution. In a superficial 
descriptive sense this is meaningful because a particular species as an existing 
collection of individuals represents continuously the state of a particular 
historical network in its process of becoming one, and, if described as a 
state of a historical network, a species necessarily appears in a process of 
transformation. Yet, the species exists as a unity only in the historical domain, 
while the individuals that constitute the nodes of the historical network exist 
in the physical space. Strictly, a historical network is defmed by each and 
everyone of the individuals which constitute its nodes, but it is at any mo-
ment represented historically by the species as the collection of all the simul-
taneously existing nodes of the network; in fact, then, a species does not 
evolve because as a unity in the historical domain it only has a history of 
change. What evolves is a pattern of autopoietic realization embodied in many 
particular variations in a collection of transitory individuals that together 
defme a reproductive historical network. Thus, the individuals, though 
transitory, are essential, not dispensable, because they constitute a necessary 
condition for the existence of the historical network which they define. 
The species is only an abstract entity in the present, and although it repre-
sents a historical phenomenon it does not constitute a generative factor in the 
phenomenology of evolution, it is its result. 
5. SECOND AND THIRD ORDER AUTOPOIETIC SYSTEMS 
Whenever the conduct of two or more unities is such that there is a domain in 
which the conduct of each one is a function of the conduct of the others, it is 
said that they are coupled in that domain. Coupling arises as a result of the 
mutual modifications that interacting unities undergo in the course of their 
interactions without loss of identity. If the identity of the interacting unities 
is lost in the course of their interactions, a new unity may be generated as a 
result of it, but no coupling takes place. In general, however, coupling leads 
also to the generation of a new unity that may exist in a different domain 
from the domain in which the component-coupled unities retain their identity. 
The way in which this takes place, as well as the domain in which the new 
unity is realized, depend on the properties of the component unities. Coupling 

108 
HUMBERTO R. MA TURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
in living systems is a frequent occurrence; the following comments are meant 
to show that the nature of the coupling of living systems is determined by 
their autopoietic organization. 
(i) Autopoietic systems can interact with each other without loss of 
identity as long as their respective paths of autopoiesis constitute reciprocal 
sources of compensable disturbances. Furthermore, due to their homeostatic 
organization autopoietic systems can couple and constitute a new unity while 
their individual path! of autopoiesis become reciprocal sources of specification 
of each other's ambience, if their reciprocal deformations do not overstep 
their corresponding ranges of tolerance for variation without loss of auto-
poiesis. As a consequence the coupling remains invariant while the coupled 
systems undergo structural changes selected through the coupling and, 
hence, commensurate with it. These considerations also apply to the coupling 
of autopoietic and non-autopoietic unities with obvious modifications in 
relation to the retention of identity of the latter. In general, then, the coupling 
of autopoietic systems with other unities, autopoietic or not, is realized 
through their autopoiesis. That coupling may facilitate autopoiesis requires 
no further discussion, and that this facilitation may take place through the 
particular way in which the autopoiesis of the coupled unities is realized has 
already been said. It follows that selection for coupling is possible, and that 
through evolution under a selective pressure for coupling a composite system 
can be developed (evolved) in which the individual autopoiesis of everyone 
of its autopoietic components is subordinated to an ambience defined through 
the autopoiesis of all the other autopoietic components of the composite 
unity. Such a composite system will necessarily be defined as a unity by the 
coupling relations of its component autopoietic systems in a space that the 
nature of the coupling specifies, and will remain as a unity as long as the 
component systems retain their autopoiesis which allows them to enter into 
those coupling relations. 
A system generated through the coupling of autopoietic unities may, on a 
first approximation, be seen by an observer as autopoietic to the extent that 
its realization depends on the autopoiesis of the unities which integrate it. 
Yet, if such a system is not defined by relations of production of components 
that generate these relations and define it as a unity in a given space, but 
by other relations, either between components or processes, it is not an 
autopoietic system and the observer is mistaken. The apparent autopoiesis 
of such a system is incidental to the autopoiesis of the coupled unities which 
constitute it, and not intrinsic to its organization; the mistake of the observer, 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
109 
therefore, lies in that he sees the system of coupled autopoietic unities as 
a unity in his perceptive domain in terms other than those defined by its 
organization. In contrast, a system realized through the coupling of auto-
poietic unities and defined by relations of production of components that 
generate these relations and constitute it as a unity in some space, is an 
autopoietic system in that space regardless of whether the components 
produced coincide or not with the unities which generate it through their 
coupled autopoiesis. If the autopoietic system thus generated is a unity in the 
physical space it is a living system. An autopoietic system whose autopoiesis 
entails the autopoiesis of the coupled autopoietic unities which realize it, is 
an autopoietic system of higher order. 
In general, the actual recognition of an autopoietic system poses a cognitive 
problem that has both to do with the capacity of the observer to recognize 
the relations that define the system as a unity, and with his capacity to 
distinguish the boundaries which delimit this unity in the space in which it 
is realized. Since it is a defming feature of an autopoietic system that it 
should specify its own boundaries, a proper recognition of an autopoietic 
system as a unity requires that the observer performs an operation of distinc-
tion that defines the limits of the system in the same domain in which it 
specifies them through its autopoiesis. If this is not the case he does not 
observe the autopoietic system as a unity, even though he may conceive it. 
Thus, presently, the recognition of a cell as a molecular autopoietic unity 
offers no serious difficulty because we can identify the autopoietic nature of 
its organization, and interact visually, mechanically and chemically, with one 
'of the boundaries (membrane) which its autopoiesis generates as an interface 
which delimits it as a three dimensional physical unity. In addition the 
observer may have two kinds of difficulties in the identification of an auto-
poietic unity as an actually distinguishable system: on the one hand, he may 
treat the system as a unity by making an operation of distinction in a space 
different from the space in which it is realized because he has not yet properly 
recognized the relations of production of components that constitute it, 
and, hence, cannot recognize the topological relations which specify its 
unity in that space; on the other hand, due to his own mode of autopoietic 
organization (and, hence, cognitive structure) he may be unable to interact 
in the space in which the system is realized as a unity, and, hence, he may 
be unable to observe it as a unity because he cannot specify the proper 
perceptual dimensions. In the first case, the observer makes a unity distinction 
which is not commensurate with the autopoietic system, and he thus defmes 
and operates with a different unity; in the second case he makes no distinction 

110 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
at all, and he has no unity with which to operate. In either case the phenome-
nology of the autopoietic unity remains unobservable. However, if there is no 
misidentification of the system, even if its unity is not yet operationally 
observable, its phenomenology can be asserted by the recognition of the 
organization that constitutes it. 
(ii) An autopoietic system can become a component of another system if 
some aspects of its path of autopoietic change can participate in the realiza-
tion of this other system. As has been said, this can take place in the present 
through a coupling that makes use of the homeostatic resorts of the interacting 
systems, or through evolution by the recursive effect of a maintained selective 
pressure on the course of transformation of a reproductive historical network, 
which results in a subordination of the individual component autopoiesis 
(throUgh historical change in the way these are realized) to the ambience of 
reciprocal perturbations which they specify. Whichever the case, an observer 
can describe an autopoietic component of a composite system as playing an 
allopoietic role in the realization of the larger system which it contributes to 
realize through its autopoiesis. In other words, the autopoietic unity functions 
in the context of the composite system in a manner that the observer would 
describe as allopoietic. Yet, the allopoietic function is exclusively a feature of 
the description and pertains to a frame of reference defined by the observer. 
As we described in Chapter I, there are allopoietic machines whose organiza-
tion is intrinsically different from autopoietic machines, and can be described 
(with no reference to function) by pointing out that the product of their 
operation is different from themselves. Accordingly, when an autopoietic 
system is described as having an allopoietic role as a component in a larger 
system, the description makes reference only to its participation in the 
production of relations that adopt the form proper to an allopoietic system, 
but nothing is implied about function which is proper only in the domain of 
heteropoietic human design. 
(iii) If the autopoiesis of the component unities of a composite autopoietic 
system conforms to allopoietic roles that through the production of relations of 
constitution, specification and order defme an autopoietic space, the new 
system becomes in its own right an autopoietic unity of second order. This 
has actually happened on earth with the evolution of the multicellular pattern 
of organization. When this occurs, the component (living) autopoietic sys-
tems become necessarily subordinated, in the way they realize their auto-
poiesis, to the maintenance of the autopoiesis of the higher order autopoietic 
unity which, through their coupling, they defme topologically in the physical 

DIVERSITY OF AUTOPOIESIS 
111 
space. If the higher order autopoietic system undergoes self-reproduction 
(through the self-reproduction of one of its component autopoietic unities or 
otherwise), an evolutionary process begins in which the evolution of the 
manner of realization of the component autopoietic systems is necessarily 
subordinated to the evolution of the manner of realization of the composite 
unity. Furthermore, it is to be expected that if the proper contingencies are 
given, higher order autopoietic unities will be formed through selection. In 
fact, if coupling arises as a form of satisfying autopoiesis, a second order 
unity formed from previous autopoietic systems will be more stable, the more 
stable the coupling is. However, the most stable condition for coupling appears 
if the unity organization is precisely geared to maintain this organization, this 
is, if the unity becomes autopoietic. There is then an ever present selective 
pressure for the constitution of higher order autopoietic systems from the 
coupling of lower order autopoietic unities which on earth is apparent in the 
occurrence of multicellular systems, if not in that of the eucariotic cell itself. 
It seems that the only limit to the process of constitution of autopoietic 
unities of higher order is that imposed by the circumstances under which a 
unity can be specified in a given space. 

CHAPTER V 
PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
Autopoiesis in the physical space is necessary and sufficient to characterize a 
system as a living system. Reproduction and evolution as they occur in the 
known living systems, and all the phenomena derived from them, arise as 
secondary processes subordinated to their existence and operation as auto-
poietic unities. Hence, the biological phenomenology is the phenomenology 
of autopoietic systems in the physical space, and a phenomenon is a biological 
phenomenon only to the extent that it depends in one way or another on the 
autopoiesis of one or more physical autopoietic unities. 
1. BIOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS 
A living system is a living system because it is an autopoietic system in the 
physical space, and it is a unity in the physical space because it is defined 
as a unity in that space by and through its autopoiesis. Accordingly, any 
structural transformation that a living system may undergo maintaining its 
identity must take place in a manner determined by and subordinated to its 
defining autopoiesis; hence, in a living system loss of autopoiesis is disin-
tegration as a unity and loss of identity, that is, death. 
(i) The physical space is defined by components that can be determined 
by operations that characterize them in terms of properties such as masses, 
forces, accelerations, distances, fields, etc. Furthermore, such properties 
themselves are defined by the interactions of the components that they 
characterize. In the physical space two kinds of phenomenologies can take 
place according to the way the components participate in their generation, 
namely, statical and mechanical (machine like). The statical phenomenology 
is a phenomenology of relations between properties of components; the 
mechanical phenomenology is a phenomenology of relations between pro-
cesses realized through the properties of components. What about the bio-
logical phenomenology, that is, what about the phenomenology of autopoietic 
systems, which, as such, takes place in the physical space? Since a living 
system is defined as a system by the concatenation of processes of production 
of components that generate the processes that produce them and constitute 
112 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
113 
the system as a unity in the physical space, biological phenomena are neces-
sarily phenomena of relations between processes which satisfy the autopoiesis 
of the participant living systems. Accordingly, under no circumstances is a 
biological phenomenon defined by the properties of its component elements, 
but it is always defined and constituted by a concatenation of processes in 
relations subordinated to the autopoiesis of at least one living system. Thus, 
the accidental collision of two running animals, as a bodily encounter of living 
systems, is not a biological phenomenon (even though it may have biological 
consequences), but the bodily contact of two animals in courtship is. Strictly, 
then, although biological and statical phenomena are physical phenomena 
because they are realized through the properties of their physical components, 
they differ because statical phenomena are phenomena of relations between 
properties of components (as previously defined), while biological phenomena 
are phenomena of relations between processes. Therefore, biological phe-
nomena as phenomena of relations between processes are a subclass of the 
mechanical phenomena which constitute them, and are defined through the 
participation of these processes in the realization of at least one autopoietic 
system. The phenomenology of living systems, then, is the mechanical phe-
nomenology of physical autopoietic machines. 
(ii) As the mechanical phenomenology of physical autopoietic machines, 
the biological phenomenology is perfectly defmed, and, hence, amenable to 
theoretical treatment through the theory of autopoiesis. It follows that such 
a theory as a formal theory will be a theory of the concatenation of processes 
of production that constitute autopoietic systems, and not a theory of 
properties of components of living systems. It also follows that a theoretical 
biology would be possible as a theory of the biological phenomenology, and 
not as the application of physical or chemical notions, which pertain to 
a different phenomenological domain, to the analysis of the biological phe-
nomena. In fact, it should be apparent now that any attempt to explain a 
biological phenomenon in statical or non-autopoietic mechanical terms would 
be an attempt to reformulate it in terms of relations between properties of 
components, or relations between processes which do not involve an auto-
poietic unity in the physical space, and would fail to reformulate it. Since 
a biological phenomenon takes place through the operation of components, 
it is always possible to abstract from it component processes that can be 
adequately described in statical or non-autopoietic mechanical terms, because, 
as abstracted processes, they in fact correspond to statical or allopoietic 
mechanical phenomena. In such a case, any connection between the statical 

114 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
or non-autopoietic mechanical processes and the biological phenomenon from 
which the observer abstracts them, is provided by the observer who considers 
both simultaneously; the biological phenomenon, however, is not and cannot 
be captured by these explanations which, necessarily, remain a reformulation 
of a phenomenon in a non-autopoietical phenomenological domain. A biolo-
gical explanation must be a reformulation in terms of processes subordinated 
to autopoiesis, that is, a reformulation in the biological phenomenological 
domain. 
(iii) An adequate theory of the biological phenomena should permit the 
analysis of the dynamics of the concrete components of a system in order 
to determine whether or not they participate in processes that integrate a 
biological phenomenon. In fact, no matter how much we think we understand 
biological problems today, it is apparent that without an adequate theory 
of autopoiesis it will not be possible to answer questions such as: 'Given a 
dynamic system, what relations should I observe between its concrete com-
ponents to determine whether or not they participate in processes that 
make it a living system?'; or, 'Given a set of components with well-defined 
properties, in what processes of production can they participate so that the 
components can be concatenated to form an autopoietic system?' The answers 
to these questions are essential if one wants to solve the problem of the origin 
of living systems on earth. The same questions must be answered if one wants 
to design a living system. In particular, it should be possible to determine from 
biological theoretical considerations which relations should be satisfied by any 
set of components if these are to participate in processes that constitute an 
autopoietic unity. Whether one mayor may not want to make an autopoietic 
system is, of course, a problem that pertains to the ethical domain. However, 
if our characterization of living systems is adequate it is apparent that they 
could be made at will. What remains to be seen is whether such a system has 
already been made by man, although unwittingly, and with what consequences. 
(iv) The characterization of living systems as physical autopoietic systems 
must be understood as having universal value, that is, autopoiesis in the 
physical space must be viewed as defming living systems anywhere in the 
universe, however different they may otherwise be from terrestrial ones. This 
is not to be considered as a limitation of our imagination, nor as a denial that 
there might exist still unimagined complex systems. It is a statement about 
the nature of the biological phenomenology: the biological phenomenology 
is not less and not more than the phenomenology of autopoietic systems in 
the physical space. 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
115 
2. EPISTEMOLOGICAL IMPLICATIONS 
(i) The basic epistemological question in the domain of the biological pro-
blems is that which refers to the validity of the statements made about biolo-
gical systems. It is presently obvious that scientific statements made about the 
universe acquire their validity through their operative effectiveness in their 
application in the domain where they pretend validity . Yet any observation, 
even that one which permits us to recognize the operational validity of a 
scientific statement, implies an epistemology, a body of conceptual explicit 
or implicit notions that determines the perspective of the observations and, 
hence, what can and what cannot be observed, what can and what cannot 
be validated by its operative effectiveness, what can and what cannot be 
explained by a given body of theoretical concepts. This has been a fundamen-
tal problem in the conceptual and experimental handling of the biological 
phenomena, as it is apparent in the history of biology, which reveals a con-
tinuous search for the definition of the biological phenomenology in a manner 
such that would permit its complete explanation through well-defined notions, 
and, accordingly, its complete validation in the observational domain. In this 
respect, evolutionary and genetic notions have been the most successful. 
Yet these notions alone are insufficient because, although they provide a 
mechanism for historical change, they do not adequately define the domain 
of the biological phenomenology. In fact, evolutionary and genetic notions 
(by emphasizing generational change) treat the species as the source of all 
biological order, showing that the species evolves while the individuals are 
transient components whose organization is subordinated to its historical 
phenomenology. However, since the species is, concretely at any moment, 
a collection of individuals capable in principle of interbreeding, it turns out 
that what would define the organization of individuals is either an abstraction, 
or something that requires the existence of well-defmed individuals to begin 
with. Where does the organization of the individual come from? Which is the 
mechanism for its determination? This difficulty cannot be solved on purely 
evolutionary and genetic arguments, since it is apparent (even for evolutionists 
and geneticists) that any attempt to overcome it by resorting to other notions 
of comprehensive nature, is doomed to failure if it does not provide us with a 
mechanism to account for the phenomenology of the individual. Such is the 
case when some sort of preformism is introduced by applying informational 
notions at the molecular level (nucleic acids or proteins); or when organismic 
notions are used that emphasize the unitary character of living systems but do 
not provide a mechanism for the definition of the individual. These notions 

116 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
fail because they imply the validity of the same notion that they want to 
explain. 
As is apparent from all that has been said, the key to the understanding 
of the biological phenomenology is the understanding of the organization 
of the individual. We have shown this organization to be the autopoietic 
organization. Furthermore, we have shown that this organization and its 
origin are fully explainable with purely mechanistic notions which are valid 
for any mechanistic phenomenon in any space, and that once the autopoietic 
organization is established it determines an independent phenomenological 
sub domain of the mechanistic phenomenology, the domain of the biological 
phenomena. As a result, the biological domain is fully defmed and self· 
contained, no additional notions are necessary, and any adequate biological 
explanation has the same epistemological validity that any mechanistic 
explanation of any mechanistic phenomenon in the physical space has. 
(ii) A phenomenological domain is defined by the properties of the unity 
or unities that constitute it, either singly or collectively through their trans· 
formations or interactions. Thus, whenever a unity is defined, or a class or 
classes of unities are established which can undergo transformations or 
interactions, a phenomenological domain is defined. Two phenomenological 
domains intersect only to the extent that they have common generative 
unities, that is, only to the extent that the unities that specify them interact; 
otherwise they are completely independent and, obviously, they cannot 
generate each other without transgressing the domains of relations of their 
respective specifications. Conversely, one phenomenological domain can 
generate unities that define a different phenomenological domain, but such a 
domain is specified by the properties of the new different unities, not by 
the phenomenology that generates them. If this were not the case the new 
unities would not be in fact different unities, but they would be unities of the 
same class of units that generate the parental phenomenological domain, and 
they would generate a phenomenological domain identical to it. Autopoietic 
systems do generate different phenomenological domains by generating 
unities whose properties are different from the properties of the unities that 
generate them. These new phenomenological domains are subordinated to the 
phenomenology of the autopoietic unities because they depend on these for 
their actual realization, but they are not determined by them; they are only 
determined by the properties of their originating unities regardless of how 
these were originated. One phenomenological domain cannot be explained by 
relations which are valid for another domain; this is a general case which 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
117 
applies also to the different phenomenological domains generated through the 
operation of autopoietic systems. Accordingly, as an autopoietic system 
cannot be explained through statical or non-autopoietic mechanical relations 
in the space in which it exists, but it must be explained through autopoietic 
mechanical relations in the mechanical domain, the phenomena generated 
through interactions of autopoietic unities must be explained in the domain 
of interactions of the autopoietic unities through the relations that defme 
that domain. 
(iii) The development of the Darwinian notion of evolution with its 
emphasis on the species, natural selection and fitness, had an impact inhuman 
affairs that went beyond the explanation of diversity and its origin in living 
systems. It had sociological significance because it seemed to offer an ex-
planation of the social phenomenology in a competitive society, as well as a 
scientific justification for the subordination of the destiny of the individuals 
to the transcendental values supposedly embodied in notions such as mankind, 
the state, or society. In fact, the social history of man shows a continuous 
search for values that explain or justify human existence, as well as a con-
tinuous use of transcendental notions to justify social discrimination, slavery, 
economical subordination and political submission of the individuals, isolated 
or collectively, to the design or whim of those who pretend to represent 
the values contained in those notions. For a society based on economic 
discrimination, competitive ideas of power and subordination of the citizen 
to the state, the notions of evolution, natural selection and fitness (with their 
emphasis on the species as the perduring historical entity maintained through 
the dispensability of transient individuals) seemed to provide a biological 
(scientific) justification for its economic and social structure. It is true on 
biological grounds that what evolves is mankind as the species Homo sapiens. 
It is true on biological grounds that competition participates in the specifi-
cation of evolutionary change even in man. It is true that under the laws of 
natural selection the individuals most apt in the features which are favorably 
selected survive, or have reproductive advantages over the others, and that 
those which do not survive or are less successful in the reproductive sense 
do not contribute or contribute less to the historical destiny of the species. 
Thus, from the Darwinian perspective it seemed that the role of the individual 
was to contribute to the perpetuation of the species, and that all that one had 
to do for the well-being of mankind was to let the natural phenomena follow 
their course. Science, biology, appeared to justify the notion 'anything for 
the benefit of mankind', whatever the intention or purpose of whoever 

118 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
uttered it first. We have shown, however, that these arguments are not valid 
to justify the subordination of the individual to the species, because the 
biological phenomenology is determined by the phenomenology of the 
individuals, and without individuals there is no biological phenomenology 
whatsoever. The organization of the individual is autopoietic and upon this 
fact rests all its significance: it becomes defined through its existing, and its 
existing is autopoietic. Thus, biology cannot be used anymore to justify the 
dispensability of the individuals for the benefit of the species, society or 
mankind under the pretense that its role is to perpetuate them. Biologically 
the individuals are not dispensable. 
(iv) Biological phenomena depend upon the autopoiesis of the individuals 
involved; thus, there are biological systems that arise from the coupling of 
autopoietic unities, some of which may even constitute autopoietic systems 
of higher order. What about human societies, are they, as systems of coupled 
human beings, also biological systems? Or, in other words, to what extent do 
the relations which characterize a human society as a system constitutively 
depend on the autopoiesis of the individuals which integrate it? If human 
societies are biological systems the dynamics of a human society would be 
determined through the autopoiesis of its components. If human societies 
are not biological systems, the social dynamics would depend on laws and 
relations which are independent of the autopoiesis of the individuals which 
integrate them. The answer to this question is not trivial and requires con-
siderations which in addition to their biological significance have ethical and 
political implications. This is obviously the case, because such an answer 
requires the characterization of the relations which define a society as a unity 
(a system), and whatever we may say biologically will apply in the domain of 
human interactions directly, either by use or abuse, as we saw it happen 
with evolutionary notions. In fact no position or view that has any relevance 
in the domain of human relations can be deemed free from ethical and 
political implications nor can a scientist consider himself alien to these 
implications. This responsibility we are ready to take, yet since we - Maturana 
and Varela - do not fully agree on an answer to the question posed by the 
biological character of human societies from the vantage point of this charac-
terization of the biological organization, we have decided to postpone this 
discussion. 
3. COGNITIVE IMPLICATIONS 
The domain of interactions of an autopoietic unity is the domain of all the 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
119 
deformations that it may undergo without loss of autopoiesis. Such a domain 
is determined for each unity by the particular mode through which its auto· 
poiesis is realized in the space of its components, that is, by its structure. It 
follows that the domain of interactions of an autopoietic unity is necessarily 
bounded, and that autopoietic unities with different structures have different 
domains of interactions. Furthermore, an observer can consider the way in 
which an autopoietic system compensates its deformations as a description of 
the deforming agent that he sees acting upon it, and the deformation suffered 
by the system as a representation of the deforming agent. However, since the 
domain of interactions of an autopoietic system is bounded, an observer of an 
autopoietic system can describe entities external to it (by interacting with 
them) which it cannot describe because it cannot interact with them or it 
cannot compensate the deformations which these cause in it. The domain of 
all the interactions in which an autopoietic system can enter without loss of 
identity is its cognitive domain; or, in other words, the cognitive domain of 
an autopoietic system is the domain of all the descriptions which it can 
possibly make. Accordingly, for any autopoietic system its particular mode 
of autopoiesis determines its cognitive domain and hence its behavioral 
diversity, and it follows that the cognitive domain of an autopoietic system 
changes along its ontogeny only to the extent that its mode of autopoiesis 
changes. 
We shall not explore in this book all the implications that the proper 
characterization of the biological phenomenology has within the domain of 
cognition, but we shall make four remarks in order to show the dependence 
of this domain upon the autopoietic organization .of the individual. 
(i) For any autopoietic system its cognitive domain is necessarily relative 
to the particular way in which its autopoiesis is realized. Also, if knowledge 
is descriptive conduct, it is relative to the cognitive domain of the knower. 
Therefore, if the way in which the autopoiesis of an organism is realized 
changes during its ontogeny, the actual knowledge of the organism (its 
conduct repertoire) also changes; knowledge, then, is necessarily always a 
reflection of ontogeny of the knower because ontogeny as a process of 
continuous structural change without loss of autopoiesis is a process of 
continuous specification of the behavioral capacity of the organism, and, 
hence, of its actual domain of interactions. Intrinsically, then, no absolute 
knowledge is possible, and the validation of all possible relative knowledge is 
attained through successful autopoiesis. 
(ii) Autopoietic systems may interact with each other under conditions 

120 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
that result in behavioral cpupling. In this coupling, the autopoietic conduct of 
an organism A becomes a source of deformation for an organism B, and the 
compensatory behavior of organism B acts,in turn, as a source of deformation 
of organism A, whose compensatory behavior acts again as a source of de-
formation of B, and so on recursively until the coupling is interrupted. In this 
manner, a chain of interlocked interactions develops such that, although in 
each interaction the conduct of each organism is constitutively independent 
in its generation of the conduct of the other, because it is internally deter-
mined by the structure of the behaving organism only, it is for the other 
organism, while the chain lasts, a source of compensable deformations which 
can be described as meaningful in the context of the coupled behavior. These 
are communicative interactions. In other words, if the interacting organisms 
as dynamic systems have continuously changing structures, and if they 
reciprocally select in each other their respective paths of ontogenic structural 
changes through their interactions without loss of autopoiesis, then they 
generate, as a recursive or expanding domain of communicative interactions, 
interlocked ontogenies that together constitute a domain of mutually 
triggering consensual conducts that becomes specified during its generation. 
Such a consensual domain of communicative interactions in which the 
behaviorally coupled organisms orient each other with modes of behavior 
whose internal determination has become specified during their coupled 
ontogenies, is a linguistic domain. In such a consensual domain of interactions 
the conduct of each organism may be treated by an observer as constituting a 
connotative description of the conduct of the other, or, in his domain of 
description as an observer, as a consensual denotation of it. Communicative 
and linguistic interactions are intrinsically not informative; organism A does 
not and cannot determine the conduct of organism B because due to the 
nature of the autopoietic organization itself every change that an organism 
undergoes is necessarily and unavoidably determined by its own organization. 
A linguistic domain, then, as a consensual domain that arises from the coupling 
of the ontogenies of otherwise independent autopoietic systems, is intrin-
sically non-informative, even though an observer, by neglecting the internal 
determination of the autopoietic systems which generate it, may describe it 
as if it were so. Phenomenologically the linguistic domain and the domain of 
autopoiesis are different domains, and although one generates the elements of 
the other, they do not intersect. 
(iii) An autopoietic system capable of interacting with its own states (as 
an organism with a nervous system can do), and capable of developing with 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
121 
others a linguistic consensual domain, can treat its own linguistic states as a 
source of deformations and thus interact linguistically in a closed linguistic 
domain. Such a system has two remarkable properties: 
1. Through recursive interactions with its linguistically generated states 
it can treat some of these states as objects of further interactions, giving rise 
to a metadomain of consensual distinctions that appears to an observer as a 
domain of interactions with representations of interactions. When this hap-
pens the system operates as an observer. The domain of such recursive inter-
actions is, in principle, infinite because once the system has attained the 
mechanism for doing so there is no moment in which it will not be in the 
position of recursively interacting with· its own states, unless autopoiesis is 
lost. Whether an autopoietic system with this capacity does in fact generate 
an endless series of different states during its ontogeny depends, obviously, 
on whether its history oflinguistic interactions in the metadomain of descrip-
tions has significance for the circumstantial realization of the autopoiesis of 
the interacting organisms. 
2. A living system capable of being an observer can interact with those 
of its own descriptive states which are linguistic descriptions of itself. By 
doing so it generates the domain of self-linguistic descriptions within which 
it is an observer of itself as an observer, a process which can be necessarily 
repeated in an endless manner. We call this domain the domain of self-
observation and we consider that self-conscious behavior is self-observing 
behavior, that is, behavior within the domain of self-observation. The observer 
as an observer necessarily always remains in a descriptive domain, that is, in 
a relative cognitive domain. No description of an absolute reality is possible. 
Such a description would require an interaction with the absolute to be 
described, but the representation which would arise from such an interaction 
would necessarily be determined by the autopoietic organization of the 
observer, not by the deforming agent; hence, the cognitive reality that it 
would generate would unavoidably be relative to the knower. 
In every explanation, be this an actual concrete reproduction, a formal 
representation or a purely rational description, the reformulation of the 
phenomenon to be explained resorts to the same notions (identity, exclusion, 
succession, etc.). There is, then, a universal logic, valid for all phenomeno-
logical domains, that refers to the relations possible between the unities that 
generate these domains, and not to the particular properties of the generating 
unities. We have applied this logic (it could not have been otherwise) in this 

122 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
book, and the validity of our arguments, as the validity of any rational 
argument or concrete phenomenological realization, rests on its validity. 
Furthermore, we have in principle shown through its application that the 
phenomenology of autopoietic systems generates observers, and through 
them the phenomenology of description within which this logic is also valid. 
For epistemological reasons, in order to say all that we have said about living 
systems, we had to assume a space (the physical space) within which the 
phenomenology of autopoiesis of living systems takes place. To the extent 
that we have been successful (free from logical and experiential contradic-
tions), we can conclude that such a space is ontologically a space within 
which the logic that we have applied in our description is intrinsically valid. If 
this were not the case we could not have done what we have done in termsof 
characterizing living systems, or of showing how these may generate systems 
capable of their own description. We cannot characterize this space in absolute 
terms. In linguistic interactions, all that we can do is to describe through 
linguistic behavior and construct further descriptions based on these descrip-
tions which always remain in the same domain of operations defined in 
relation to the operating system. 
A prediction is a statement of a case within a relational matrix; it is a 
cognitive statement, and as such it takes place within a descriptive domain. 
Thus, unless mistakes are made, if all the relations that define the particular 
matrix within which the prediction is made are properly taken, the prediction 
is valid. Errors of interpretations may arise only by mis-application, that is, 
by pretending that the observer makes a prediction in one matrix when he 
is making it in another. In particular, predictions in the physical space are 
possible, because a description, as an actual behavior, exists in a matrix of 
interactions which (by constitution) has a logical matrix necessarily isomor-
phic with the substratum matrix within which it takes place, not because we 
have an absolute knowledge of the universe. These cognitive relations are 
valid for the possible cognitive phenomenology generated by any closed 
system. Living systems are an existential proof; they exist only to the extent 
that they can exist. The fantasy of our imagination cannot deny this. Living 
systems are concatenations of processes in a mechanistic domain; fantasies are 
concatenations of descriptions in a linguistic domain. In the first case, the 
concatenated unities are processes; in the second case, they are modes of 
linguistic behavior. 
Autopoiesis solves the problem of the biological phenomenology in general 
by defining it. New problems arise, and old ones appear in a different perspec-
tive; in particular, those which refer to the origin of living systems on earth 

PRESENCE OF AUTOPOIESIS 
123 
(eobiogenesis and neobiogenesis), and those which refer to the particular 
organization through which recursive descriptive interactions take place in 
animals (the nervous system). Autopoietic systems define the world in which 
they can exist in relation to their autopoiesis, and some interact recursively 
with this world through their descriptions, it being impossible for them to step 
out of this relative descriptive domain through descriptions. This demands an 
entirely new cognitive outlook: there is a space in which different phenome-
nologies can take place; one of these is autopoiesis; autopoiesis generates a 
phenomenological domain, this is cognition. 

APPENDIX 
THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 
The phenomenology of an organism as a unity is the phenomenology of its 
autopoiesis. The changes that an organism undergoes while maintaining its 
autopoiesis constitute its conduct. The conduct of an organism is revealed 
to an observer by the changes that it causes in the ambience (including the 
observer) in which it exists. Accordingly, the conduct which an observer 
beholds in any organism, however complex it may seem, is always an ex-
pression of the autopoiesis of the observed organism, and as such, it always 
arises through a phenomenology that takes places in the present because 
history is not a causal component in the mechanism of autopoiesis (see Chap-
ter IV). Yet it appears to us as subjects of self-observation and as observers of 
the conduct of other organisms that past experiences determine our and their 
conduct in the present as if, embodied in modifications of the nervous system, 
they were causal components in the mechanism which generates behavior. It 
appears, therefore, as if the operation of the organism as a state-determined 
system in which time is not a component were determined by temporal 
phenomena, and we speak of learning, memory and recall as embodiments of 
the past. We consider that this contradiction arises from not distinguishing 
what pertains to the phenomenology of the autopoiesis from what pertains 
to the domain of interactions of the organism as a unity, and, thus, from an 
inadequate evaluation of the coupling of the structure of the nervous system 
to the ontogeny of the organism. Accordingly, our purpose in this Appendix 
about the nervous system is to consider its organization as a neuronal network 
and to evaluate this coupling in which past and present arise as new dimensions 
from the recursive interactions of the organism with its own states. 
A. THE NERVOUS SYSTEM AS A SYSTEM 
The nervous system is a network of interacting neurons coupled in three ways 
to the organism of which it is a component: 
(i) The organism, including the nervous system, provides the physical and 
124 

APPENDIX 
125 
biochemical environment for the autopoiesis of the neurons as well as for 
all other cells, and, hence, is a possible source of physical and biochemical 
perturbations which may alter the properties of the neurons and thus lead 
to (ii) or (iii). 
(ii) There are states of the organism (physical and biochemical) which 
change the state of activity of the nervous system as a whole by acting upon 
the receptor surfaces of some of its component neurons, and thus lead to (iii). 
(iii) There are states of the nervous system which change the state of the 
organism (physical or biochemical) and lead recursively to (i) and (ii). 
Through this coupling the nervous system participates in the generation of 
the autopoietic relations which define the organism which it integrates, and, 
accordingly, its structure is subordinated to this participation. 
1. The Neuron 
Neurons determine their own boundaries through their autopoiesis; therefore 
they are the anatomical units of the nervous system. There are many classes 
of neurons that can be distinguished by their shapes, but all of them, regard-
less of the morphological class to which they belong, have branches which put 
them in direct or indirect operational relations with other otherwise separated 
neurons. Functionally, that is, viewed as an allopoietic component of the 
nervous system, a neuron has a collector surface, a conducting element, 
and an effector surface, whose relative positions, shapes and extensions are 
different in different classes of neurons. The collector surface is that part of 
the surface of a neuron where it receives afferent influences (synaptic or not) 
from the effector surfaces of other neurons or its own. The effector surface 
of a neuron is that part of its surface which either directly (by means of 
synaptic contacts) or indirectly (through its synaptic or nonsynaptic action 
on other kinds of cells) affects the collector surface of other neurons or its 
own. Depending on its kind, a neuron may have its collector and effector 
surfaces completely or partly separated by a conducting element (absence 
or presence of presynaptic inhibition), or it may have both collector and 
effector surfaces completely interspaced, with no conducting element be-
tween them (amacrine cells). The interactions between collector and effector 
surfaces may be excitatory or inhibitory according to the kinds of neurons 
involved. Excitatory afferent influences cause a change in the state of activity 
of the collector surface of the receiving neuron which may lead to a change in 

126 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
the state of activity of its effector surface, while the inhibitory influences 
impinging on it shunt off the effect of the afferent influences on its receptor 
surface so that this effect does not at all reach its effector surface, or reaches 
this surface with reduced effectiveness. 
Operationally the state of activity of a neuron, characterized by the state 
of activity of its effector surface, is determined by both its internal structure 
(membrane properties, relative thickness of branches, and in general all 
structural relations which determine its possible states) and the afferent 
influences impinging on its receptor surface. Conversely, the effectiveness of 
a neuron in changing the state of activity of other neurons depends both on 
the internal structure of these, and on the relative effectiveness of its action 
on their receptor surfaces with respect to the other afferent influences that 
these neurons receive. This is so because excitatory and inhibitory influences 
do not add linearly in the determination of the state of activity of a neuron, 
but rather have effects which depend on the relative position of their points 
of action with respect to each other and with respect to the effector surface 
of the receiving cell. Furthermore, the internal structure of a neuron changes 
along its life history, both as a result of its autonomous genetic determinations 
and as a result of the circumstances of its operations during the ontogeny of 
the organism. Thus, neurons are not static entities whose properties remain 
invariant. On the contrary, they change. This has three general consequences: 
(i) There are many configurations of afferent (input) influences on the 
receptor surface of a neuron which produce the same configuration of efferent 
(output) activity at its effector surface. 
(ii) Changes in the internal structure of a neuron (regardless of whether 
they arise selected by the autonomous transformation of the cell, or by its 
history of interactions in the neuronal network) by changing the domain of 
states of activity that the neuron can adopt, change its domain of input-output 
relations, that is, change its transfer function. 
(iii) No single cell or class of cells can alone determine the properties of 
the neural network which it integrates. 
Generally then, the structure of a neuron and its role in the neuronal 
network which it integrates does not stay invariant, but changes along its 
ontogeny in a manner subordinated to the ontogeny of the organism which 
is both a result and a source of the changes that the neuronal network and the 
organism undergo. 

APPENDIX 
127 
2. Organization: The Nervous System As a Closed System 
From the descriptive point of view it is possible to say that the properties of 
the neurons, their internal structure, shape and relative position, determine 
the connectivity of the nervous system and constitute it as a dynamic network 
of neuronal interactions. This connectivity, that is, the anatomical and 
operational relations which hold between the neurons which constitute the 
nervous system as a network of lateral, parallel, sequential and recursive 
inhibitory and excitatory interactions, determines its domain of possible 
dynamic states. Since the properties of the neurons change along the ontogeny 
of the organism, both due to their internal determination and as a result of 
their interactions as components of the nervous system, the connectivity of 
the nervous system changes along the ontogeny of the organism in a manner 
recursively selected during this ontogeny. Furthermore, since the ontogeny 
of the organism is the history of its autopoiesis, the connectivity of the 
nervous system, through the neurons which constitute it, is dynamically 
subordinated to the autopoiesis of the organism which it integrates. 
Operationally, the nervous system is a closed network of interacting 
neurons such that a change of activity in a neuron always leads to a change of 
activity in other neurons, either directly through synaptic action, or indirectly 
through the participation of some physical or chemical intervening element. 
Therefore, the organization of the nervous system as a finite neuronal network 
is defined by relations of closeness in the neuronal interactions generated in 
the network. Sensory and effector neurons, as they would be described by an 
observer who beholds an organism in an environment, are not an exception to 
this because all sensory activity in an organism leads to activity in its effector 
surfaces, and all effector activity in it leads to changes in its sensory surfaces. 
That at this point an observer should see environmental elements intervening 
between the effector and the sensory surfaces of the organism, is irrelevant 
because the nervous system is defined as a network of neuronal interactions by 
the interactions of its component neurons regardless of intervening elements. 
Therefore, as long as the neural network closes on itself, its phenomenology is 
the phenomenology of a closed system in which neuronal activity always 
leads to neuronal activity. This is so even though the ambience can perturb 
the nervous system and change its status by coupling to it as an independent 
agent at any neuronal receptor surface. The changes that the nervous system 
can undergo without disintegration (loss of defining relations as a closed 
neuronal network) as a result of these or any other perturbation are fully 
specified by its connectivity, and the perturbing agent only constitutes a 

128 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
historical determinant for the concurrence of these changes. As a closed 
neuronal network the nervous system has no input or output, and there is no 
intrinsic feature in its organization which would allow it to discriminate 
through the dynamics of its changes of state between possible internal or 
external causes for these changes of state. This has two fundamental con-
sequences: 
(i) The phenomenology of the changes of state of the nervous system is 
exclusively the phenomenology of the changes of state of a closed neuronal 
network; that is, for the nervous system as a neuronal network there is no 
inside or outside. 
(li) The distinction between internal and external causes in the origin of 
the changes of state of the nervous system can only be made by an observer 
that beholds the organism (the nervous system) as a unity, and defines its 
inside and outside by specifying its boundaries. 
It follows that it is only with respect to the domain of interactions of the 
organism as a unity that the changes of state of the nervous system may have 
an internal or an external origin, and, hence, that the history of the causes of 
the changes of state of the nervous system lies in a different phenomenological 
domain than the changes of state themselves. 
3. Change 
Any change in the structure of the nervous system arises from a change in the 
properties of its component neurons. What change in fact takes place, whether 
morphological or biochemical or both, is irrelevant for the present discussion. 
The significant point is that these changes arise in the coupling of the nervous 
system and the organism through their homeostatic operation subordinated 
to the autopoiesis of the latter. Some of the changes directly affect the 
operation of the nervous system because they take place through its working 
as a closed network; others affect it indirectly because they take place through 
the biochemical or genetic coupling of the neurons to the organism and 
change the properties of the neurons in a manner unrelated to the actual 
working of the network. The results are twofold: on the one hand, all changes 
lead to the same thing, that is, changes in the domain of possible states of 
the nervous system; on the other hand the nervous system is coupled to the 
organism both in its domain of interactions and in its domain of internal 
transformations. 

APPENDIX 
129 
4. Architecture 
The connectivity of the nervous system is determined by the shapes of 
its component neurons. Accordingly, every nervous system has a definite 
architecture determined by the kinds and the numbers of the neurons which 
compose it; therefore, members of the same species have nervous systems 
with similar architectures to the extent that they have similar kinds and 
numbers of neurons. Conversely, members of different species have nervous 
systems with different architectures according to their specific differences in 
neuronal composition. Therefore, the closed organization of the nervous 
system is realized in different species in different manners that have been 
determined through evolution; in all cases, however, the following conditions 
are satisfied: 
(i) Since, due to its constitution as a network of lateral, parallel, sequential 
and recursive interactions, the nervous system closes on itself at all levels, the 
mutilations that it may suffer generally leave a closed neuronal network with 
a changed architecture. Accordingly, the organization of the nervous system 
is essentially invariant under mutilations, while its domain of possible states, 
which depends on its structure, and, hence, on its architecture, is not. Yet, 
due to its closed organization, whatever is left of the neural network after 
a partial ablation necessarily operates as a different whole with different 
properties than the original, but not as a system to which some of its proper-
ties have been selectively subtracted. 
(ii) There is intrinsically no possibility of operational localization in the 
nervous system in the sense that no part of it can be deemed responsible for 
its operation as a closed network, or for the properties which an observer can 
detect in its operation as a unity. However, since every nervous system has 
a definite architecture, every localized lesion in it necessarily produces a 
specific disconnection between its parts and, hence, a specific change in its 
domain of possible states. 
(iii) The architecture of the nervous system is not static, but it becomes 
specified along the ontogeny of the organism to which it belongs, and its 
determination, although under genetic control, is bound to the morphogenesis 
of the whole organism. This has two implications: (a) the variability in the 
architecture of the nervous system of the members of a species is determined 
by individual differences in genetic constitution and ontogeny; (b) the range 
of permissible individual variations (compatible with the autopoiesis) is 

130 
HUMBER TO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
determined by the circumstances in which the autopoiesis of the organism is 
realized. 
(iv) The architecture of the nervous system and the morphology of the 
organism as a whole define the domain in which the ambience can possibly 
couple on the organism as a source of its deformations. Thus, as long as the 
architecture of the nervous system and the morphology of the organism 
remain invariant, or as long as there are aspects of them which remain un-
changed, there is the possibility of recurrent perturbations as recurrent 
configurations of the ambience which couple in the same way on the nervous 
system and the organism. 
5. Referential States 
There are states of the nervous system which, as referential states, define 
subdomains of the possible states that the nervous system (and the organism) 
can adopt under perturbations as matrices of possible internal relations. As a 
result when the nervous system is in different referential states it compensates 
the same perturbations (characterized as configuration of the ambience) 
following different characteristic modes of change. Emotions, sleep, wakeful-
ness, are referential states. In the dynamics of the nervous system, referential 
states are defined as are all other states of the nervous system, that is, by 
relations of neuronal activity, and as such are generated by change of neuronal 
activity and generate changes of neuronal activity. What is peculiar to them is 
that they constitute states on which other states can be inserted as sub states 
in the process of generating the autopoiesis of the organisms. Therefore, their 
distinction lies in the domain of observation because for the nervous system 
they are part of their dynamic of state to state operations, and in the domain 
of observation they constitute independent phenomenological dimensions. 
B. CONSEQUENCES 
1. Historical Coupling 
Due to its coupling with the organism the nervous system necessarily partici-
pates in the generation of the relations which constitute the organism as an 
autopoietic unity. Also due to this coupling the structure of the nervous 
system is necessarily continuously determined and realized through the 
generation of neuronal relations internally defined with respect to the nervous 

APPENDIX 
131 
system itself. As a consequence, the nervous system necessarily operates as an 
homeostatic system that maintains invariant the relations which define its 
participation in the autopoiesis of the organism, and does so by generating 
neuronal relations which are historically determined along the ontogeny of 
the organism through its participation in this ontogeny. This has the following 
implications: 
(i) The changes that the nervous system undergoes as an homeostatic 
system while compensating the deformations that it suffers as a result of 
the interactions of the organism (itself an homeostatic system), cannot be 
localized to any singular point in the nervous system, but must be distributed 
along it in a non-random manner because any localized change is itself a 
source of additional deformations that must be compensated with further 
changes. This process is potentially endless. As a result, the operation of the 
nervous system as a component of the organism is a continuous generation of 
significant neuronal relations, and all the transformations that it may undergo 
as a closed neuronal network are subordinated to this. If as a result of a 
perturbation the nervous system fails in the generation of the significant 
neuronal relations for its participation in the autopoiesis of the organism, the 
organism disintegrates. 
(ii) Although the organism and nervous system are closed atemporal 
systems, the fact that the structure of the nervous system is determined 
through its participation in the ontogeny of the organism makes this structure 
a function of the circumstances which determine this ontogeny, that is, of the 
history of interactions of the organism as well as of its genetic determination. 
Therefore, the domain of the possible states that the nervous system can 
adopt as an atemporal system is at any moment a function of this history of 
interactions and implies it. The result is the coupling of two constitutively 
different phenomenologies, the phenomenology of the nervous system (and 
the organism) as a closed homeostatic system, and the phenomenology of the 
ambience (including the organism and the nervous system) as an open non-
homeostatic system which thus braid together in a manner such that the 
domain of the possible states of the nervous system continuously becomes 
commensurate with the domain of the possible states of the ambience. 
Furthermore, since all states of the nervous system are internal states, and the 
nervous system cannot make a distinction in its process of transformation 
between its internally and externally generated changes, the nervous system 
is bound to couple its history of transformations to the history of its inter-
nally determined changes of state as much as to the history of its externally 

132 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
determined changes of state. Thus the transformations that the nervous system 
undergoes during its operation are a constitutive part ofits ambience. 
(iii) The historical coupling of the nervous system to the transformations 
of its ambience, however, is apparent only in the domain of observation, not 
in the domain of operation of the nervous system which remains a closed 
homeostatic system in which all states are equivalent to the extent that they 
all lead to the generation of the relations which define its participation in the 
autopoiesis of the organism. The observer can see that a given change in the 
structure of the nervous system arises as a result of a given interaction of 
the organism, and he can consider this change as a representation of the 
circumstances of the interaction. The representation, however, as a phe-
nomenon exists only in the domain of observation and has a validity that 
applies only in the domain generated by the observer as he maps the environ-
ment on the behaviors of the organism by treating it as an allopoietic system. 
The referred change in structure of the nervous system constitutes a change 
in the domain of its possible states under conditions in which the representa-
tion of the causing circumstances do not enter as a component. 
2. Learning as a Phenomenon 
If the connectivity structure of the nervous system changes as a result of 
some interactions of the organism, the domain of the possible states which it 
(and the organism) can henceforth adopt, changes; as a consequence, when 
the same or similar conditions of interaction recur, the dynamic states of the 
nervous system and, therefore, the way the organisms attains autopoiesis are 
necessarily different from what they would have otherwise been. Yet, that 
the conduct of the organism under the recurrent (or new) conditions of 
interaction should be autopoietic and, hence, appear adaptive to an observer, 
is a necessary outcome of the continuous homeostatic operation of both 
the nervous system and the organism. Since this homeostatic operation 
continuously subordinates the nervous system and the organism to the latter's 
autopoiesis in an internally determined manner, no change of connectivity 
in the nervous system can participate in the generation of behavior as a 
representation of the past interactions of the organism: representations 
belong to the domain of descriptions. The change in the domain of the 
possible states that the nervous system can adopt, which takes place along the 
ontogeny of the organism as a result of its interactions, constitutes learning. 
Thus, learning as a phenomenon of transformation of the nervous system 

APPENDIX 
l33 
associated to a behavioral change that takes place under maintained auto-
poiesis, occurs due to the continuous dynamic coupling of the state-deter-
mined phenomenology of the nervous system and the state-determined 
phenomenology of the ambient. The notions of acquisition of representations 
of the environment or of acquisition of information about the environment in 
relation to learning, do not represent any aspect of the operation of the 
nervous system. The same applies to notions such as memory and recall, 
which are descriptions made by the observer of phenomena that take place in 
his domain of observation, and not in the domain of operation of the nervous 
system, and, hence, have validity only in the domain of descriptions, where 
they are defined as causal components. 
3. Time as a Dimension 
Any mode of behavioral distinction between otherwise equivalent inter-
actions, in a domain that has to do with the states of the organism and not 
with the ambience features which define the interaction, gives rise to a 
referential dimension as a mode of conduct. This is the case with time. It is 
sufficient that as a result of an interaction (defined by an ambience con-
figuration) the nervous system should be modified with respect to the specific 
referential state (emotion of assuredness, for example) which the recurrence 
of the interaction (regardless of its nature) may generate for otherwise 
equivalent interactions to cause conducts which distinguish them in a dimen-
sion associated with their sequence, and, thus, give rise to a mode of behavior 
which constitutes the definition and characterization of this dimension. 
Therefore, sequence as a dimension is defined in the domain of interactions 
of the organism, not in the operation of the nervous system as a closed 
neuronal network. Similarly, the behavioral distinction by the observer of 
sequential states in his recurrent states of nervous activity, as he recursively 
interacts with them, constitutes the generation of time as a dimension of 
the descriptive domain. Accordingly, time is a dimension in the domain of 
descriptions, not a feature of the ambience. 
c. IMPLICATIONS 
Since history as a phenomenon is accessible to the observer only in the 
domain of descriptions, it is only in this domain that history may participate 
in the generation of the observer's behavior. This, in fact, takes place. Descrip-
tions as linguistic behavior constitute a source of deformations of the nervous 

134 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO 1. VARELA 
system and, hence, part of its ambience. Accordingly, the phenomenology of 
transformation of the nervous system discussed above also applies to the 
interactions of the organism in the domain of descriptions, and the structure 
of the nervous system is also a function of the history of interactions of the 
organism in this domain. The implications are obvious. The operation of 
the nervous system makes no distinction between its different sources of 
deformation, and, accordingly, it makes no difference with respect to this 
operation whether the deforming agents are physical environmental features 
or behavioral interactions with coupled organisms. Therefore, although the 
nervous system operates in a state-to-state fashion, time as a mode of behavior 
enters in the determination of its states through the descriptive domain as a 
component in the domain of behavior of the organism. The same occurs with 
any other component of the domain of descriptions which even though 
they do not represent states of the nervous system they act, as any behavior, 
as selectors of its path of structural change. This is so even with notions like 
beauty, freedom and dignity which, as descriptions arise in the domain of 
behavior of the organism through distinctions referred to it as a result of the 
coupling of the phenomenology of the nervous system as a closed neuronal 
network and the domain of interactions of the organism. 
We have not given a formal description of the nervous system in the 
language of anatomy or electrophysiology because our purpose was to disclose 
the organization of the nervous system as a closed neuronal network, and 
the languages of neurophysiology and anatomy through their references to 
function and input and output relations imply the notion of an open system. 
The distinction is significant because the disclosure of the organization of the 
nervous system as that of a closed neuronal network leads to a fundamental 
notion: 
The correspondence that the observer sees between the conduct of the 
organism and the environmental conditions with which this conduct appears 
to cope, reveals the structural coupling of the organism (nervous system 
included) to its ambience as this structural coupling is conserved through 
philogenic and ontogenic selection. This correspondence, therefore, does not 
reveal any particular feature or property of the connectivity of the nervous 
system that would permit it to operate with representations of the ambience 
in its computation of the adequate conduct of the organism. 

GLOSSARY 
This glossary only contains words that in this work are given a specific 
meaning or words that are new. All the definitions are direct quotations from 
the text. 
ALLOPOIETIC MACHINE: machines that have as product of their func-
tioning something different from themselves, as in a car. 
AUTONOMY: the condition of subordinating all changes to the maintenance 
of the organization. Self-asserting capacity of living systems to maintain 
their identity through the active compensation of deformations. 
AUTOPOIETIC MACHINE: a machine organized (defined as a unity) as a 
network of processes of production, transformation and destruction of 
components that produces the components which: (i) through their inter-
actions and transformations regenerate and realize the network of processes 
(relations) that produced them; and (ii) constitute it as a concrete unity in 
the space in which they exist by specifying the topological domain of its 
realization as such a network. 
AUTOPOIETIC SPACE: an autopoietic organization constitutes a closed 
domain of relations specified only with respect to the autopoietic or-
ganization that these relations constitute, and thus it defines a space in 
which it can be realized as a concrete system, a space whose dimensions 
are the relations of production of the components that realize it. 
BIOLOGICAL EXPLANATION: a reformulation in terms of processes 
subordinated to autopoiesis, that is, a reformulation in the biological 
phenomenological domain. 
BIOLOGICAL PHENOMENON: the biological phenomenology is the phe-
nomenology of autopoietic systems in the physical space and a phenomenon 
is a biological phenomenon only to the extent that it depends in one way 
or another on the autopoiesis of one or more physical autopoietic unities. 
CODING: A notion which represents the interactions of the observer, not a 
phenomenon operative in the observed domain. A mapping of a process 
that occurs in the space of autopoiesis onto a process that occurs in the 
space of human design (heteropoiesis) and, thus, not a reformulation of 
the phenomenon. 
135 

136 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
COGNITIVE DOMAIN: the domain of all the interactions in which an 
autopoietic system can enter without loss of identity. 
COMMUNICATIVE DOMAIN: a chain of interlocked interactions such that 
although the conduct of each organism in each interaction is internally 
determined by its autopoietic organization, this conduct is for the other 
organism a source of compensable deformations. 
COUPLING (OF UNITIES): whenever the conduct of two or more unities 
is such that the conduct of each one is a function of the conduct of the 
others. 
DIVERSITY: variations in the mode in which identity is maintained. 
EVOLUTION: history of change in the realization of an invariant organiza-
tion embodied in independent unities sequentially generated through 
reproductive steps, in which the particular structural realization of each 
unity arises as a modification of the preceding one (or ones) which, thus, 
constitutes both its sequential and historical antecedent. 
EXPLANATION: a reformulation of a phenomenon in such a way that its 
elements appear operationally connected in its generation. 
FUNCTION: notion that arises in the description made by the observer of 
the components of a machine or system in reference to an encompassing 
entity, which may be the whole machine or part of it and whose states 
constitute the goal that the changes in the components are to bring about. 
HETEROPOIESIS: the space of human design. 
HISTORICAL PHENOMENON: a process of change in which each state of 
the successive states of a changing system arises as a modification of a 
previous state in a causal transformation and not de novo as an independent 
occurrence. 
HOMEOSTATIC MACHINES: the condition of maintaining constant or 
within a limited range of values some of their variables. 
INDIVIDUALITY: maintenance of identity by an autopoietic machine 
independently from its interactions with an observer. 
LINGUISTIC DOMAIN: a consensual domain in which the coupled organisms 
orient each other in their internally determined behavior through inter-
actions that have been specified during their coupled ontogenies. 
MACHINE: a unity in the physical space, defmed by its organization, which 
connotes a non-animistic outlook, and whose dynamisms is apparent. 
MACHINE, PURPOSE OR AIM OF: the use to which a machine can be put 
by man, sometimes its product. A descriptive device to reduce the task of 
conveying to a listener the organization of a particular machine. 
MECHANICAL PHENOMENOLOGY: the phenomenology generated by 

GLOSSARY 
137 
relations between processes realized through the properties of components. 
MECHANICISM: a biological outlook which asserts that the only factors 
operating in the organization of living systems are physical factors, and 
that no non-material vital organizing force is necessary. 
OBSERVER: a system that through recursive interactions with its own 
linguistic states may always linguistically interact with its own states as if 
with representations of its interactions. 
ONTOGENY: the history of the structural transformations of a unity. 
ORGANIZATION: the relations that define a system as a unity, and deter-
mine the dynamics of interaction and transformations which it may 
undergo as such a unity, constitute the organization of the system. 
PHENOMENOLOGICAL DOMAIN: defined by the properties of the unity 
or unities that constitute it, either singly or collectively through their 
transformations or interactions. Thus whenever a unity is defined or a class 
of unities is established which can undergo transformations or interactions, 
a phenomenological domain is defined. 
PHYSICAL SPACE: the space within which the phenomenology ofautopoiesis 
of living systems takes place. 
PURPOSE: the possession of an internal project or program represented and 
realized through the components of a unity. 
REGULATION: a notion valid in the domain of description ofheteropoiesis, 
that reflects the simultaneous observation and description made by the 
designer (or its equivalent) of interdependent transitions of the system 
that occur in a specified order and at specified speeds. 
RELATIONS OF CONSTITUTION: determine that the components pro-
duced constitute the topology in which the autopoiesis is realized. 
RELATIONS OF ORDER: determine that the concatenation of the compo-
nents in the relations of constitution, specification and order be the ones 
specified by the autopoiesis. 
RELATIONS OF SPECIFICITY: determine that the components produced 
be the specific ones defmed by their participation in the autopoiesis. 
REPRODUCTION: any of the processes of replication, copying or self-
reproduction. 
SELECTION: a process of differential realization of a production of unities 
in a context that specifies the unitary organization that can be realized. In 
a population of autopoietic unities, selection is a process of differential 
realization of autopoiesis, and hence, of differential self-production. 
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS: the domain of self-observation. 
SELF-REPRODUCTION: when a unity produces another with a similar 

138 
HUMBERTO R. MATURANA AND FRANCISCO J. VARELA 
organization to its own, through a process that is coupled to the process 
of its own specifications. Only autopoietic systems can self-reproduce. 
SPECIES: a population or collection of populations of reproductively 
interconnected individuals which, thus, are nodes in a historical network. 
STATICAL PHENOMENOLOGY: the phenomenology generated by the 
relations between properties of components. 
STRUCTURE: the actual relations which hold between the components 
which integrate a concrete machine in a given space. 
SYSTEM: any definable set of components. 
TELEONOMY: the element of apparent purpose or possession of a project 
in the organization of living systems, without implying any vitalistic 
connotations. Frequently considered as a necessary if not sufficient 
definitory feature of the living organization. 
UNITY: that which is distinguishable from a background, the sole condition 
necessary for existence in a given domain. The nature of a unity and the 
domain in which the unity exists are specified by the process of its distinc-
tion and determination; this is so regardless of whether this process is 
conceptual or physical. 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Ashby, W. Ross [1960), Design for a Brain: The Origin of Adaptive Behavior (John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York), Second Edition. 
Berkeley, George [1709), An Essay Towrds a New Theory of Vision. 
Berkeley, George [1710], Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Understanding. 
Bernal, J. D. [1965), 'Molecular Matrices for Living Systems', in The Origins of Pre-
biological Systems and of Their Molecular Matrices (Academic Press, New York and 
London). 
von Bertalanffy, Ludwig [1960), Problems of Life: An Evaluation of Modern Biological 
and Scientific Thought (Harper Torchbooks, New York), First Edition. 
Chomsky, N. [1968), Language and Mind (Harcourt, Brace and World, New York). 
Commoner, B. [1965), 'Biochemical, Biological and Atmospheric Evolution', Proc. of 
the National Academy of Science, 53, pp. 1183-1194. 
Gardner, R. A. and B. T. Gardner [1969), 'Teaching Sign Language to a Chimpanzee', 
Science, 165, pp. 664-672. 
Gazzaniga, M. S., 1. E. Bogen, and R. W. Sperry [1965), 'Observations on Visual Per-
ception After Disconnection of the Cerebral Hemispheres in Man', Brain, 88, Part II, 
pp.221-236. 
Geschwind, N. [1964), 'The Development of the Brain and the Evolution of Language', 
Monograph Series on Languages and Linguistics, 17, C. I. J. M. Stuart (Georgetown 
University Press, Washington), pp. 155-169; reprinted in Selected Papers on Language 
and the Brain, Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science XVI, Robert S. Cohen 
and Marx W. Wartofsky, eds., (D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht and Boston, 
1974), pp. 86-104. 
Geschwind, N. [1965), 'Disconnexion Syndromes in Animals and Man', Brain, 88, 
pp. 237-294 and 585-644; reprinted in Selected Papers on Language and the Brain, 
Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science XVI, Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. 
Wartofsky, eds., (D. Reidel Publishing Company, Dordrecht and Boston, 1974), 
pp. 105-236. 
Gibson, J. J. [1950), The Perception of the Visual World (Allen and Unwin, London). 
Held, R. and A. Hein [1963], 'Movement-Produced Stimulation in the Development of 
the Visual Guided Behavior', J. Compo and Phys. Psychol. 56, No.5., pp. 872-876. 
Henderson, 1. J. [1913], The Fitness of the Environment (Macmillan, New York). 
Jay, P. C. (ed.) [1968], Primates; Studies in Adaptation and Variability (Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston, New York). 
Kilmer, W. 1., W. S. MuCulloch and J. Blum [1968), 'Towards a Theory of Reticular 
Formation' in The Mind: Biological Approaches to Its Function, W. C. Corning and 
John Balaban, eds., (John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York). 
Lettvin, J. Y., H. R. Maturana, W. S. McCulloch and W. H. Pitts [1959), 'What the 
Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain', Proceedings of the IRE 47, No. 11, pp. 1940-
1959. 
l39 

140 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Lilly, 1. G. [1967), The Mind of the Dolphin (Doubleday and Company, New York). 
Lindauer, M. [1967), Communication Among Social Bees (Harvard University Press, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts). 
Lorenz, K. [1966), Evolution and Modification of Behavior (Methuen and Co., Ltd., 
London). 
Maturana, H. R., 1. Y. Lettvin, W. S. McCulloch and W. H. Pitts [1960), 'Anatomy and 
Physiology of Vision in the Frog (Rana pipiens)', J. of Gen. Physiol. 43, No.6 Part 
2, pp. 129-175. 
Maturana, H. R. and S. Frenk [1963), 'Directional Movement and Horizontal Edge 
Detectors in the Pigeon Retina', Science 142, pp. 977-979. 
Maturana H. R. [1965), 'Especificidad versus Ambiguedad en la Retina de los Verte-
brados', Biologica 36, pp. 69ff. 
Maturana, H. R., G. Uribe and S. Frenk [1968), 'A Biological Theory of Relativistic 
Color Coding in the Primate Retina', Arch. Biologia y Med. Exp., Suplemento No.1 
(Santiago, Chile). 
Morrell, F. (1967), 'Electrical Signs of Sensory Coding', in The Neurosciences, A Study 
Program, Quarton, ed., (The Rockefeller University Press, New York), pp. 452-468. 
Segundo, J. P. and H. D. Perkel (1969) , 'The Nerve Cells as Analyzers of Spikes', in The 
Interneuron, M. A. B. Brazier, ed., (University of California Press, Berkeley and Los 
Angeles). 
Varela, F. [1979], Principles of Biological Autonomy, (Elsevier-North Holland, New 
York). 
Wittgenstein, 1. [1922], Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
London). 
Young, J. Z. [1967], 'On the Organization of Living Memory Systems', in Journeys 
In Science: Small Steps Great Strides, D. 1. Arm, ed., (The Twelfth A. F. D. S. R. 
Science Seminar). 

Aquinas 63 
Aristotle 63,68, 74 
Arm, D. L. 140 
Ashby, W. R. 25, 139 
Augustine 63 
Balaban, J. 139 
Beer, S. 63 
Berkeley, G. 53,63,66,139 
Bernal, J. D. 53,139 
Bertalanffy, L. v. 6, 139 
Blum, J. 46,139 
Bogen, J. E. 30, 139 
Brazie;;, M. A. B. 140 
Bulnes, J. xvii 
Chomsky, N. 34,139 
Cohen, R. S. vi, 139 
Commoner, B. 9,139 
Corning, W. C. 139 
Descartes, R. 63 
'Diogenes 65 
Foerster, H. v. xvi 
Frenk, S. xiv, xv, 16, 22, 140 
Galen 64 
Gardner, B. T. 31,41,139 
Gardner, R. A. 31,41, 139 
Gazzaniga, M. S. 30, 139 
Geschwind, N. 22,32,139 
Gibson, J. J. 26,139 
Hegel, G. W. F. 65 
Hein, A. 26,139 
Held, R. 26, 139 
Henderson, L. J. 73, 139 
Hume, D. 63,67 
INDEX OF NAMES 
141 
Jay, P. C. 31,139 
Kant, I. 63,65,66 
Kilmer, W. L. 46, 139 
Leibniz, G. W. 63 
Lettvin, J. Y. vi, xii, xiv, 139, 140 
Lilly, J. G. 31, 140 
Lindauer, M. 46, 140 
Linnaeus, C. 64 
Locke, J. 63 
Lorenz, K. 43,140 
Maturana, H. v, vi, xiv, xv, 16, 21, 22, 
72, 118, 139, 140 
McCulloch, W. S. vi, xiv, 46, 139, 140 
Monod, J. 75 
Morrell, F. 16,140 
Perkel, H. D. 16, 140 
Pitts, W. H. vi, xiv, 139, 140 
Plato 63 
Quarton 140 
Segundo, J. P. 16, 140 
Sperry, R. W. 30, 139 
Spinoza, B. 63 
Stone xv 
Stuart. G. I. 139 
Uribe, G. xiv, xv, 22, 140 
Varela, F. J. v, ix, xvii, xxiv, 72, 118 
Wartofsky, M. W. vi, 139 
Wittgenstein, L. 53, 140 
Young, J.Z. xiii, 6,140 

BOSTON STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF SCIENCE 
Editors: 
ROBERT S. COHEN and MARX W. WARTOFSKY 
(Boston University) 
1. Marx W. Wartofsky (ed.), Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium for the Philosophy 
of Science 1961-1962.1963. 
2. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), In Honor of Philipp Frank. 1965. 
3. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), Proceedings of the Boston Collo· 
quium for the Philosophy of Science 1964-1966. In Memory of Norwood Russell 
Hanson. 1967. 
4. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), Proceedings of the Boston Colla· 
quium for the Philosophy of Science 1966-1968. 1969. 
5. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), Proceedings of the Boston Collo· 
quium for the Philosophy of Science 1966-1968. 1969. 
6. Robert S. Cohen and Raymond J. Seeger (eds.), Ernst Mach: Physicist and Philos· 
opher. 1970. 
7. Milic Capek, Bergson and Modem Physics. 1971. 
8. Roger C. Buck and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), PSA 1970. In Memory of Rudolf 
Carnap. 1971. 
9. A. A. Zinov'ev, Foundations of the Logical Theory of Scientific Knowledge 
(Complex Logic). (Revised and enlarged English edition with an appendix by 
G. A. Smirnov, E. A. Sidorenka, A. M. Fedina, and L. A. Bobrova.) 1973. 
10. Ladislav Tondl, Scientific Procedures. 1973. 
11. R. J. Seeger and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), Philosophical Foundations of Science. 1974. 
12. Adolf Griinbaum, Philosophical Problems of Space and Time. (Second, enlarged 
edition.) 1973. 
13. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), Logical and Epistemological 
Studies in Contemporary Physics. 1973. 
14. Robert S. Cohen and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), Methodological and Historical 
Essays in the Natural and Social Sciences. Proceedings of the Boston Colloquium 
for the Philosophy of Science 1969-1972. 1974. 
15. Robert S. Cohen, J. J. Stachel and Marx W. Wartofsky (eds.), For Dirk Struik. 
Scientific, Historical and Political Essays in Honor of Dirk Struik. 1974. 
16. Norman Geschwind, Selected Papers on Language and the Brain. 1974. 
18. Peter Mittelstaedt, Philosophical Problems of Modern PhysiCS. 1976. 
19. Henry Mehlberg, Time, Causality, and the Quantum Theory: Vol. 1, Essays on 
the Causal Theory of Time. 1980. 
20. Kenneth F. Schaffner and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), Proceedings of the 1972 Biennial 
Meeting, Philosophy of Science Association. 1974. 
21. R. S. Cohen and J. J. Stachel (eds.), Selected Papers of Lt~on Rosenfeld. 1978. 
22. Milic Capek (ed.), The Concepts of Space and Time. Their Structure and Their 
Development. 1976. 

23. Marjorie Grene, The Understanding of Nature. Essays in the Philosophy of Biology. 
1974. 
24. Don Ihde, Technics and Praxis. A Philosophy of Technology. 1978. 
25. Jaakko Hintikka and Unto Remes, The Method of Analysis. Its Geometrical Origin 
and Its General Significance. 1974. 
26. John Emery Murdoch and Edith Dudley Sylla, The Cultural Context of Medieval 
Learning. 1975. 
27. Marjorie Grene and Everett Mendelsohn (eds.), Topics in the Philosophy of Biology. 
1976. 
28. Joseph Agassi, Science in Flux. 1975. 
29. Jerzy J. Wiatr (ed.), Polish Essays in the Methodology of the Social Sciences. 1979. 
32. R. S. Cohen, C. A. Hooker, A. C. Michalos, and J. W. van Evra (eds.), PSA 1974: 
Proceedings of the 1974 Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association. 
1976. 
33. Gerald Holton and William Blanpied (eds.), Science and Its Public: The Changing 
Relationship. 1976. 
34. Mirko Drazen Grmek, Robert S. Cohen and Guido Cimino (eds.), On Scientific 
Discovery. 1980. 
35. Stefan Amsterdamski, Between Experience and Metaphysics. Philosophical Problems 
of the Evolu tion of Science. 1975. 
36. Mihailo Markovic and Gajo Petrovic (eds.), Praxis. Yugoslav Essays in the Philosophy 
and Methodology of the Social Sciences. 1979. 
37. Hermann von Helmholtz: Epistemological Writings. The Paul Hertz/Moritz Schlick 
Centenary Edition of 1921 with Notes and Commentary by the Editors. (Newly 
translated by Malcolm F. Lowe. Edited, with an Introduction and Bibliography, 
by Robert S. Cohen and Yehuda Elkana.) 1977. 
38. R. M. Martin, Pragmatics, Truth, and Language. 1979. 
39. R. S. Cohen, P. K. Feyerabend, and M. W. Wartofsky (eds.), Essays in Memory 
of Imre Lakatos. 1976. 
42. Humberto R. Maturana and Francisco J. Varela, Autopoiesis and Cognition. 
The Realization of the Living. 1979. 
43. A. Kasher (ed.), Language in Focus: Foundations, Methods and Systems. Essays 
Dedicated to Yehoshua Bar-Hillel. 1976. 
46. Peter Leonidovich Kapitza, Experiment, Theory, Practice. 1980. 
47. Maria Luisa Dalla Chiara, Italian Studies in the Philosophy of Science. 1980. 
48. Marx W. Wartofsky, Models: Representation and the Scientific Understanding. 
1979. 
50. Yehuda Fried and Joseph Agassi, Paranoia: A Study in Diagnosis. 1976. 
51. Kurt H. Wolff, Surrender and Catch: Experience and Inquiry Today. 1976. 
52. Karel Kosik, Dialectics of the Concrete. 1976. 
53. Nelson Goodman, The Structure of Appearance. (Third edition.) 1977. 
54. Herbert A. Simon, Models of Discovery and Other Topics in the Methods of Science. 
1977. 
55. Morris Lazerowitz, The Language of Philosophy. Freud and Wittgenstein. 1977. 
56. Thomas Nickles, Scientific Discovery, Logic, and Rationality. 1980. 
57. Joseph Margolis, Persons and Minds. The Prospects of Nonreductive Materialism. 
1977. 

58. Gerard Radnitzky and Gunnar Andersson (eds.), Progress and Rationality in Science. 
1978. 
59. Gerard Radnitzky and Gunnar Andersson (eds.), The Structure and Development 
of Science. 1979. 
60. Thomas Nickles, Scientific Discovery: Case Studies. 1980. 
61. Maurice A. Finocchiaro, Cali/eo and the Art of Reasoning. 1980. 

